Story_ID: 14301
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe. I'm interviewer for The HistoryMakers. Our videographer is Matthew Hickey. Sir, could you please state your name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: My name is James Tilmon, J-A-M-E-S, T, as in Tango, I-L-M-O-N.  Oft, oft times I'm called Jim.
Speaker 1: And can you give us your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: 34th--[chuckle] the 31st of July, 1934.  I was born in Guthrie, Oklahoma.
Speaker 1: And Guthrie, is that an all-black town?  Was that one of those--
Speaker 2: No.  I did live in an all-black town for a while, in Boley [Oklahoma], but I was born in Guthrie.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  And what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: Well, that's a good question.  I've had a number of occupations through the years.  Right now, I'm CBS News Weather and Aviation Anchor.  And that's what I've been doing now for the past few months.
Speaker 1: And what is your--I'm sorry.  What is today's date?
Speaker 2: Today is the 28th of January, the year 2003.
Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: We're sitting in one of the rooms in the Studio for CBS, 2 New in Chicago [Illinois].
Story_ID: 14302
Speaker 1: What is your favorite food?
Speaker 2: Favorite food is sea bass.
Speaker 1: Okay, do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: Blue.
Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Summer.
Speaker 1: And do you have a favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Yes, Arizona.
Speaker 1: And do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: If I do, it's probably something like, "you got to believe".
Story_ID: 14303
Speaker 1: Tell us something about your family tree.  How far can you go back?  Do you have knowledge of what your family was doing in the 19th Century or any stories--
Speaker 2: I really don't.  I, I--it's sketchy at best.  On my father's [George William Tilmon, Sr.] side, his father was born and raised in Mississippi and moved to Oklahoma to marry my grandmother.  And they lived in Guthrie, Oklahoma.  On my mother's [Manila Hazel Tilmon] side, her family is originally from Florida and moved into Oklahoma where my grandfather [Bill Hazel] ran the--he was the Administrator for the boys correctional institution [State Training School for Negro Boys] in Boley, Oklahoma for African American boys.  Ethnically, I have a, a mix, which is not uncommon I suppose for our people.  I have Native American blood on both sides.  We did not learn until my grandfather on my mother's side was on his death bed that, in fact, he was not an African American.  He was 100 percent Italian.
Speaker 1: This is your grandfather?
Speaker 2: My grandfather on my mother's side.
Speaker 1: Is this the way that started, I mean that ran the home for the boys?
Speaker 2: Yes, it was.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: He was a very powerful man, and physically as well as politically, and a very, very sharp person.  And he was an Italian by--
Speaker 1: He was an Italian.
Speaker 2: By ancestry or was he actually from Italy?
Speaker 1: By ancestry.  I don't, I don't know that he was a first generation, but he called my mother over to the bedside and whispered in her ear to tell her because I don't suppose anybody knew it before then.
Speaker 2: And what was his name?
Speaker 1: Bill Hazel.
Speaker 2: Bill Hazel, H-A-Z-E-L?
Speaker 1: That's correct.
Speaker 2: And when was he born do you think?
Speaker 1: I don't really know.  I, I really don't have that information readily available.
Speaker 2: But he was Director of that--
Speaker 1: Of that institution, yes.
Speaker 2: During the '20s or--
Speaker 1: Yes, I would say during the '20s [1920s].  My--I'm trying to remember the exact year, but I'm thinking it would have been somewhere in the late '30s that--I remember he bought his-and-hers Oldsmobiles, himself and my grandmother.  And believe it or not, in the late '30s [1930s], Oldsmobiles, Oldsmobile did make an automatic transmission.  And nobody had ever seen one before.  It had the big spare tires on the front fenders, both sides, beautiful automobiles.  He was quite an interesting gentleman.  He built a tennis court for his daughters right next to his, his home.  It was a--it was the first tennis court I ever saw.  And it was beautiful.  It was, it had all the trimmings of, of a really beautiful, professional tennis court.  He was a great hunter and fisher, fisherman.  He did a lot of things like that, but more than anything else, he was a great orator.  And it is said that you could literally wake him up in the middle of the night and, I think give him a topic, and he could speak on it eloquently.  He was a guest and spoke many times at the Capitol of the State of Oklahoma [Oklahoma City] and was quite friendly with the Administration of the State [of Oklahoma].  So my grandfather, Bill Hazel, was a quite a, quite a man.
Speaker 2: Now, any--about your, now he came here--he came to Guthrie from Florida?
Speaker 1: No, he came to Boley from Florida.  But there's a lot I don't know about that whole business, about whether he was already there and my grandmother came up from Florida.  She was, now my grandmother on my mother's side was, I think, one-half Native American.  And my grandfather on my father's side was part Native American.  I don't know how much.
Speaker 2: Do you know what (unclear) [simultaneous]--
Speaker 1: I think it was Cherokee, but I'm not positive about that.
Story_ID: 14304
Speaker 1: Tell us about your father.  What's your father's name and can you spell it for us?
Speaker 2: Sure.  George William Tilmon, Sr., G-E-O-R-G-E, William, W-I-L-L-I-A-M, Tilmon, T-I-L-M-O-N, Sr.  And my dad was, as far as I'm concerned, the, the wisest man I've ever met.  He was an educator.  And he did not have it the easy way.  He was one of five children.  And there were 2 boys and 3 girls.  When he graduated from high school--
Speaker 1: Now, that's in Mississippi?
Speaker 2: No, this is in Oklahoma.
Speaker 1: Okay, but you said he was from Mississippi?
Speaker 2: No, I did not.  My, my father was born in Oklahoma.  And his father was from Mississippi, okay.  Anyway, my dad, when he graduated from high school, he graduated with honors and all that sort of thing.  And my grandfather worked in the oil mill.  And it was very, very hard work, and it was bloody work literally because they worked with a, in some fashion with the cotton and whatever else.  And you came home every night with your cuticles all bloody and all covered with oil.  So my grandfather was at work when my father went through his graduation ceremony.  And when my dad came home from the ceremony, he had a little card table-like thing.  And he had a, his, all the graduation gifts on the table.  He had a, a fountain pen and he had some stationery and some other kinds of little things like that, that were gifts.  And he said to his Dad when his father came in that, oh, look what I have.  I have these wonderful gifts and everything else.  And I graduated with honors and all that; aren't you proud of me?  My grandfather and my father for that matter, never really minced words a lot.  So my grandfather said to him, well, I want you to know that I've already paid for the last day of schooling that I'm able to pay for.  I can't do much for you now, but if you like, I can get you a job at the oil mill, which was pretty depressing news for my dad.  But, in fact, he did go to work at the oil mill for a while, and left there and went to work on the railroad.  And he worked in menial tasks, doing--9 months out of the year.  And his entire college education was in the summers.  He literally worked himself all the way through undergraduate and got his Master's Degree at Northwestern [University, Evanston, Illinois] in School Administration, going only in the summers.  From the first grade until he graduated with his Master's Degree, his lowest grade was a B and that was in physical education.  So my dad was a very accomplished educator and administrator.  But above all, I mean it was his, his wisdom that really had, made a great difference in my life and, and all in terms of passing on to me some thoughts that still serve today.
Speaker 1: Well, what are some of those kind of things?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, it's like growing up, he would sit me down from time to time and say, okay, I want you to remember this.  And oft times, I didn't even understand what he was saying at the moment, but I recorded it, and now it's become a resource.  When something happens, I can go back to that and use it as a means of making some critical decisions in my life.  I don't really have a laundry list of it I can give you, but when I need that information, it's there.  It's like having a library of information that I can go to when I need.  I don't remember all the books in the library, but I do know that there is something there that I can use if I need to have it.  And it has been, it has served me extremely well.  It, it's the kind of thing that, it means that he will never die because his wisdom lives with me.  And I have passed it on, as much as I could, to my children.  So I, I wish I could just give you a list of sayings and whatever else that he used to use, but perhaps before this interview is over I'll--if the occasion arises, I'll dig in there and find one of those.
Speaker 1: Okay, and just some housekeeping here, like when was he born approximately?
Speaker 2: Let's see.  My dad was born right around the turn of the century, and I don't know exactly what the date of birth was.  I can get that for you later, but I don't know the date of birth.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what school did he teach in?
Speaker 2: Well, let's see.  His first school--I'm trying to think where that would have been.  Oh, the first school that I remember was in Hominy, Oklahoma.  He was the School principal there.  I don't know that my dad taught and, as a classroom teacher very much because he was, he was Administrat--an Administrator most of his career.  I think he may have taught at Langston University [Langston, Oklahoma] for a little while, then became principal in Hominy.  Hominy, Oklahoma is in Osage County [Oklahoma].  That's Osage Indian Territory.  And he, he was the principal of the quote "Colored School" in that county.
Speaker 1: How do you spell Hominy [Oklahoma]?
Speaker 2: H-O-M-I-N-Y.
Speaker 1: Okay, that's like Hominy grits.
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Story_ID: 14305
Speaker 1: Tell us about your mother.  What was her full name and--
Speaker 2: Manila, like the, like the nation, Manila [the Philippines] or the country--I mean the city, Manila Hazel Tilmon.  And I don't know.  She might have had a middle name, but I never, I cannot think of what it was.  But that was her name.
Speaker 1: And when was she born?
Speaker 2: I don't know that either, but there was--she was about 3 to 5 years younger than my dad [George William Tilmon Sr.].
Speaker 1: Around 1905, I guess--
Speaker 2: Something like that.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what was she like and what did she do?
Speaker 2: My mother was the most gracious, kind, compassionate and loving person I've ever known; totally generous and unselfish to a fault.  In my entire life, I never heard her raise her voice, but she, she did have respect.  I mean people did respect her.  And it was interesting because she was so soft spoken, even if someone was disagreeing with her, the louder they got, the softer she spoke.  And eventually, they quieted down.  My mother, to the best of my knowledge, never had an argument with my father.  Not that they agreed on everything, but she had a means and a way of softening the issue so that it became a discussion that was intelligent and cordial and all that.  So I never, never heard anything like that in my entire life.  She became a principal as well.  She was the principal of the school there in Jenks, Oklahoma for a while.  She also had the credentials for that.  She was a classroom teacher much of her career, teaching the first grade.  My mother became Teacher of the Year in the State of Oklahoma.  And I don't know whether it was more than one year or not, but she had the ability to teach children to read that was uncanny.  Children who came from homes where no one in that household read anything, ended up reading before they left her first grade.
Story_ID: 14306
Speaker 1: It was interesting about her [his mother, Manila Hazel Tilmon] career because when integration came to Oklahoma, it was better defined as "get rid of all the black teachers".  And that's essentially what happened.  The closed the black schools and fired all the black teachers and administrators, regardless of what they had for credentials.  My dad [George William Tilmon Sr.] with his Master's Degree from Northwestern [University, Evanston, Illinois] in School Administration, was let go by a superintendent, a white superintendent, who had a Bachelor's Degree in physical education.  But that was life in those years.  But the interesting thing about it was some of that backfired a little bit because there was a group of, of parents, on the white side of town, who went to the superintendent and said, well, we know you're gonna bring Mrs. Tilmon up here to teach our first grade.  He said, no, I have no plans of doing that.  And they had several meetings with him and finally, it got down to, "it's Mrs. Tilmon or you".  So you make up your (unclear) in your mind whether or not you want the Board to consider you to be renewed or not.  And if you do want to be renewed, you'll hire Mrs. Tilmon right now.  Well, that's what he did.  And being the chauvinist that he was, he was not able to put up with the fact that my mother was working and my father wasn't.  So he hired my dad who had many years of school administration under his belt, and he had a lot of success and was heralded by the State Department of Education and a number of other agencies as being one of the best administrators.  He hired my dad as the head of the audio visual department for the school system, degrading to say the least, but my dad did have a philosophy that intelligence is making the very best of what you have.  It's not measured by your degrees or which school you attended or any of those things.  It's measured by your ability to take what you have at hand and make the very best out of it.  And that's what he did with that job as audio visual guy.
Speaker 2: Now, how old was he when this--
Speaker 1: He was in his sixties.  Interesting enough, I mean I remember, I think my dad was 62 or, or so.  And he could sort of see these changes over the horizon before they actually happened.  And he decided he would develop some additional skills so that he would be prepared to fit into some kind of new regime before the changes were made.  So he went to the University of Tulsa [Tulsa, Oklahoma] and took a compressed course for language majors in Spanish.  And the Instructor said, you know, I admire your, your spirit and your self confidence, Mr. Tilmon, but first of all, you know, at your age--and my dad laughed at that.  And he said, okay, well, the fact is, this is a class for people who are already majoring in languages.  And it, it really is not suitable for somebody that's just learning the language.  My dad said is it open for me to take the class?  He said, yes, but you don't have a chance.  Well, my dad ended up second in the class.  I brag on my parents a lot because, I guess it's true.  I guess maybe there's a saying about if, if it's true, it's not bragging.  But they were sensational.  And, and I grew up in a very, very loving and supporting household.  I was taught at a very early age that you make your decisions about what you want in this world, and you don't allow anybody to get in your road.
Story_ID: 14307
Speaker 1: Do you have brothers and sisters?
Speaker 2: I had--well, I had a sister who was, who was, I don't know if she was stillborn or died very shortly afterwards, after birth, childbirth, and one brother, George William Tilmon, Jr.
Story_ID: 14308
Speaker 1: I want you to reflect back on growing up and give me some idea of some of sights and sounds and smells of growing up in Guthrie [Oklahoma] and Boley [Oklahoma], I guess?
Speaker 2: Well, actually, no, I didn't--I never lived in Guthrie.  I was born there, but I never really lived there.  I lived in Hominy [Oklahoma].  And as a little kid in Hominy, I did all the things that other kids do.  And my brother [George William Tilmon Jr.] was 5 years older, and I literally worshiped him.  I thought he knew everything there was to know and that he had never made a mistake in his life.  I, I--the things that I really enjoyed doing was, I guess, like any little kid, I liked to play with my toys and that sort of thing.  I had the experience of standing out in the backyard one day, and I heard this sound.  And I looked up, and I saw this silver thing flying through the air.  And I ran in the house and told my dad [George William Tilmon Sr.] what I had seen.  And I asked him what it was.  And being an educator, he sat me down to explain exactly what it was.  It was an airplane, and that it was flown by people who sat in the front end.  And they were called pilots.  And that's the day I decided I wanted to be a pilot.  And I was never discouraged.  As a matter of fact, I was encouraged because if that's what I wanted to be, then that's what I would be.  And you've got to realize, we're talking about the late '30s [1930s].  The idea of a black child deciding he wants to fly an airplane was just unheard of.  I can remember growing up, the little ladies stopping and saying, well, what do you want to be when you grow up, young man?  And I'd say, I want to be a pilot.  And you could hear them--you know, it's like a lot of people that speak around children as if they're not, the children aren't there.  And they would say to each other, you know, somebody needs to tell this child, he's not gonna be a pilot.  I mean, you know, who ever heard of such a thing.  But the thing that stuck with me is, both my parents told me, if that's what you want to do, and you're willing to pay the price, that's what you will do.  So I stuck with that.  And I believed my parents more than I believed these other people.  As the story goes in my flying career, I went through a lot of things to become a pilot.  There were a lot of roadblocks and a lot of people who were willing to go on, on line to do anything they could to keep me from becoming a pilot.  And that's a whole story within itself.  But there was a day when I saw that Blue Eagle that I had seen on that first airplane that I ever saw in my life.  And I believe it was on the side of an American Airlines jet.  And I was at the controls.  I landed at Tulsa International Airport [Tulsa, Oklahoma] because we ended up living in Sand Springs [Oklahoma], right next to Tulsa.  And I taxied up to the gate and after the passengers were off, I invited my parents on, on board to take a look at the cockpit.  And I was showing them all the dials and all that stuff.  And I was very proud of myself and going through all of this.  And I turned around and, my dad, who rarely showed emotion, had a tear.  I said, what's the matter?  He says, I told him.  If you wanted to do and you're willing to pay the price, you could do it.  And I'll never forget that moment.  It was a very moving moment for me.  It was a dream come true, but it was not without its nightmares along the way.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I'm sure.  black people, I know, not only your parents were proud of you, but a lot of black people were proud of you.  I mean I just know what it was like on the days that we saw a pilot--and you didn't see any.  When you saw somebody, you know, in that position, it made you feel proud as well.
Speaker 2: Well, it didn't come easy.
Story_ID: 14309
Speaker 1: I want to backtrack some to your childhood still.
Speaker 2: Okay, well, it was, it was a great childhood, coming up in that household.  And you asked about smells.  I guess my favorite smell was the smell of breakfast.  My mom [Manila Hazel Tilmon] made a breakfast that was for a king.  And she was very proud to, to do that every single day.  Suppers and picnics and all those other things were fun, but there was nothing like her breakfast.  And by today's standards, it would be very unhealthy (laughter).  But growing up in the South, I mean it was, it was perfect.  I mean you could have all the eggs you wanted, and they'd be sitting on top of the grits.  And the grits would have butter oozing out of them.  And so would the biscuits.  And there would ham steak or there would be sausage or there would be bacon or whatever else.  And it was just--oh, man, I could--those, those smells would just, you'd wake up to that, and you knew that, that everything was all right.  It was like, it was securing a place in life.  And in terms of the things I liked to do, right behind the school in Hominy [Oklahoma], there was a pretty good-sized hill.  And I, I loved to sled down that hill when, when it snowed.  But it was a tricky thing because there was a drainage ditch at the bottom of it and concrete.  And my brother [George William Tilmon, Jr]  always made sure that I understood that, you know, you have to turn the sled before you get to the bottom.  I don't care how fast you're going.  You have to turn it.  If you have to fall off of it, do that.  But don't hit that concrete.  And it was kind of one of my first lessons in safety.  It was, it was a joy, but it was--I had my first experience dealing with jealousy.  My mother was a first grade teacher.  And, of course, when I went to the first grade, I was in her class.  And there was a little girl who was jealous of the fact that my mother was a teacher and my father [George William Tilmon, Sr.] was a principal.  And in those days they had a heating unit built in the floor.  It was a floor furnace, in fact.  It had these squares on the grate that sat on the floor.  Those, those things were terribly hot all the time.  She pushed me down on that furnace.  And I thought I would live with the scar forever.  It finally went away, but I had third-degree burns on my leg.  But it was a fit of jealousy.  The, my first experience with any kind of an engine was while I was in that school in the first grade.  My, my dad kind of took over a young man who was on the brink of going in the wrong direction and kind of led this young, youngster through his teenage years.  And it turns out that the kid was just really enthusiastic about engines, reciprocating engines.  And I don't know how he did it, but my dad found some place and got parts and everything else.  And this young man built an engine.  And he kept it in the school.  And after school, he would fire it up, and he would tune it up, and he would change things and all that.  And he was, he became quite a master mechanic out of that.  And I was fascinated with this thing.  I, I think it was a one-cylinder engine (laughter), but it was loud and everything else, but I just thought it was fascinating to see this thing work.  And it was my first introduction to how pistons work and how spark plugs do their job and how a reciprocating engine really works.  See, it never was hooked up to anything to do any work of any kind, but it was a great learning experience.  And I don't know whatever happened to the young man, but I know very well that, I believe I can trust that he went to great heights because he had the encouragement and support from my father.  But we left Hominy to go to Boley [Oklahoma].
Story_ID: 14310
Speaker 1: At that time, there were only, I think two all-black town, black towns in America, Boley [Oklahoma] and Mound Bayou, Mississippi.  And it was an interesting cultural situation.  Of course, I was so young until I never thought about racist to the, for any extent.  I mean I didn't really know that much about it.  But I learned when I was Boley because it was an all-black town, and you never saw anybody else of any other color until you went to the neighboring town, which was Okemah [Oklahoma].  And it was an all-white town as, as many of the other towns were in that vicinity, to the extent where in the early days, there were--there would be a sign on the road saying that, something about, black people, don't be caught here after dark, or something, you know, whatever.
Speaker 2: Just to, Okemah now, is famous for--there's a certain couple of lynching postcards that were made in Okemah, Oklahoma--
Speaker 1: I'm not surprised.
Story_ID: 14311
Speaker 1: You mentioned earlier, you were talking about breakfast, about breakfast in the South, and a lot of people think of Oklahoma as the West.  But it's, it is South.
Speaker 2: No, it's the South.  All right, call the Southwest if you want, but I mean growing up, there wasn't, there wasn't enough difference in Oklahoma and Mississippi to even consider in terms of the way that you were up and the cultural situation that you grew up.  Now, one difference was when the great land rush took place in 1889 and Oklahoma was declared a territory and became a State.  It was Boomer Sooner, that, I don't know if many people know what that was all about.  But they fired canons all around the periphery of the State.  And that's when people rode in on wagons or whatever else to stake out, grand land that would, that would be theirs.  But before that happened, there were a number of slaves, black slaves that had escaped slavery and were taken in by Indian tribes and treated as one of their own.  And they were occupying that land before 1889.  And there were some disputes about land ownership which generally were resolved by black people being killed.  But anyway, it was--I'll tell you this about Hominy [Oklahoma] too.  There was an Osage Indian Reservation just off the city limits practically there.  And it's very interesting about that tribe.  My dad [George William Tilmon Sr.] sat down and explained to me once about what had happened, and how justice is divine.  The written charter that was given to the surveyors to find a place to, that they could call the Reservation for these Indians so that they could put them there, dictated that they find land that had no running water and had no support for, for growing anything, no natural streams, no anything like that.  It literally was barren land that, that was totally useless to white people.  Therefore, that's where Indians should be.  So they forced them to go there.  And they became wards of the State, of government.  So they had just enough money to keep some kind of a miserable life, until somebody stuck a boot in the ground and oil came out.  And they became the richest tribe of human beings on the planet overnight.  They didn't last with that title for very long.  I mean it was a few decades later that there was a tribe out west that had been given the same kind of treatment, and they found uranium (laughs).  And so, so my dad was right.  Justice is divine.  The, those are some interesting things that happened in those days.  The Indian could pay for anything he wanted.  And, incidentally, they still got to get more money from the [United States] Government because that didn't change because they were words.  And they would buy new cars.  And they hardly knew how to drive them, but they knew they had to practice.  So Hominy [Oklahoma] had one main street.  All the stores for the most part were on that street.  And it had a natural U-turn on each end of the street.  I don't know how long that street was, but it wasn't terribly long.  And, and on a given day, there'd be a number of Native Americans that would come in riding in their new automobiles, and they would just have a parade.  They'd go from one end of the street to the other, and they'd just turn back and forth.  And just as that would happen, a number of different Saturday nights through the year, without any warning, they'd come into town on their ponies.  And they would be yelping and they'd shoot out all the windows in the stores.  And there were businesses that literally thrived boarding up windows.  And they never hurt anybody.  And they were never arrested or anything else because for one, it was to help the economy because when, when they would go back to the Reservation, these several businesses were making money, boarding up the windows.  And, and the Indians would pay them.  There was no problem.  But it was exciting.  And I, I remember going out to a powwow.  My, my dad was, had befriended a number of the Native Americans.  And there were powwows that were public.  And then there were powwows that were sacred.  And my dad was allowed to take me to a sacred ceremony; a very, very moving experience.  It was mystical.  I didn't understand a lot about what was going on, but I knew that it was a spiritual situation.  And it was not entertainment.  And I suppose that's one of the places and times in my life that I began to understand the significance of other cultures and, particularly, the Native American.  And I've had tremendous respect for Native American people since that time.  And it'll never go away, because for one, I guess I have it in my blood, but more than that, that was an incredible, indelible impression that was made at that time.
Story_ID: 14312
Speaker 1: We went to Boley [Oklahoma], I, I digressed, digressed.  We went to Boley, and my grandfather, Bill Hazel, is, he, it was--he the man, okay.  He was very, very prominent in town and very highly respected.  And not only did he run the training school for boys, but he also had a grocery store.  And it was, by those standards, it was very, very large and well stocked with everything.  It was, it was a magnificent store.  And he built quarters on one end of the store.  And that's where he and my grandmother lived and everything else.  But it was a beautiful to, to live.  I remember they had, they had the old-fashioned swing, love seat, you can call it.  It was a place that you could sit on both sides and the swing went back and forth.  And four people could comfortable sit in there and face each other and talk and it was just--they had a very nice little living area out back, a lawn and all of that.  It was good stuff.  I got--I grew up understanding a little bit more about entrepreneurship because of my grandfather because he had a very successful store.
Story_ID: 14313
Speaker 1: In the early days of Boley [Oklahoma] and before we moved there. [Charles Arthur] Pretty Boy Floyd came to Boley to rob the bank.  He didn't actually show up himself, but he sent his gang there to rob the bank.  I don't know if you know this story or not.  But the bank was right across the street from my grandfather's [Bill Hazel] store.  And they had always; the merchants there had always been a little leery about the bank because it was a lot of money in there.  All these farmers and everybody else from all around the territory would put all their money in that bank.  So they instituted an alarm system that would ring in every store along that main street.  And that was the only street that had access to the highway.  Well, the gang pulled up, went into the bank, showed their weapons and demanded money.  And they, they literally shot one of their heroes who lived, but he was shot.  He had rang the alarm.  And when that alarm went off, every merchant on that street grabbed their shot gun and went to the front of the store.  And when the alarm went off, then the gang got scared and ran out.  And I don't know how much money they had at that point, but they ran out and jumped in the get-a-way car.  And they made a crucial mistake.  They went the wrong direction.  The highway was that way.  The cemetery was that way.  And they never made it out of town.  I think every, every merchant got a shot at them.  So that was one of Pretty Boy Floyd's big failures.  But that was kind of legend when I was a little kid--
Speaker 2: It's a famous story now.
Speaker 1: Yes, it's an incredible story.
Story_ID: 14314
Speaker 1: Boley [Oklahoma] was an incredible town.  It had a very primitive telephone system.  It was--you've heard of party lines.  Everybody was on the same party line, everybody in town.  And they had an operator who sat there, in the office in, in downtown Boley, if you want to call it that.  And all calls from long distance or from any place else went through her.  And it was kind of comical because you would call there.  And, you know, you had to ring the phone to, you know, to, to call somebody and all that sort of thing.  This woman would answer, Boley.  And you'd say, well, I want to talk with George Jones.  Oh, he ain't there.  I beg your pardon.  He ain't there.  He's, he's in Okemah [Oklahoma].  He'll be back about 3 o'clock this afternoon.  I mean she was, she was the very first voice mail (laughter).  But she knew everybody's business because she listened in on all the calls (laughter).  It didn't make any difference who you were, she listened in on the calls.  Boley had a grade school, an elementary school and a junior--a senior and junior High School and my dad [George William Tilmon] was the superintendent of all those.  And they had a beautiful stadium that was built by the WPA [Works Progress Administration].  And it was native stone.  I don't know if you can conceive of that, but the whole, the whole--the fence and everything else and the bleachers and all that were built out of this native stone.
Speaker 2: What color was the stone?
Speaker 1: I was, oh, it's kind of a brown or beige sort of.  And I--it's hard for me to remember whether it was WPA [Works Progress Administration] or if it was the CCC [Civilian Conservation Corps] because the CCC Camp, there was a CCC Camp right there on the outskirts of Boley at that time.  It was a beautiful place.  And there, there were a number of wonderful things that happened there.  We had a great band.  We had a great football team and, and I enjoyed my life as kid and a student in the elementary school.  It was, it was one of those experiences that, it could not be duplicated today because everybody I knew that was successful was black, everybody; the doctors, the lawyers, the school teachers, obviously, the school administrators and everybody that was in a prominent position had a black face.  Therefore, I really didn't know any difference, except I knew about Okemah and the dangers of being there at the wrong time.
Speaker 2: Were there ever any attempts by the people or any other place to attack Boley or--
Speaker 1: No, no, that--it was, it was pretty well understood that attacking Boley was a losing proposition because the residents and the merchants and all were armed to the teeth, always on alert for anything that might, might affect the safety of that town.  So I don't think there was any attempt ever made to come into Boley and do any damage.
Speaker 2: Now, when you were growing up, had the dangers of Dust Bowl, like passed, Oklahoma or was it that bad in that part of Oklahoma.
Speaker 1: No, it wasn't that bad in that part of Oklahoma, and the farms were thriving.  As a matter of fact, we lived on a farm for a little while.  My dad was a terrible farmer, could not grow rocks, nothing.  It was, nothing.  (laughter) But he tried it.  He really gave it a whirl and everything else.  We had a nice little house out on this farm.  And I learned something about that whole part of Americana.
Story_ID: 14315
Speaker 1: I had one really good friend, Sammy, Sammy Cobb.  And Sammy and I were close as kids could be.  And I remember when I first read some Henry Miller, and I don't know which book it was.  But he was talking about love.  And he said, in his mind, the most intimate and most intense love was between two boys who didn't know sex yet, didn't know any those other things.  They were pure in their minds.  And I remember having, many years after I left that whole situation, looking back on my life with Sammy because we truly loved each other.  And we didn't have any reluctance to put our arms around each and walk for blocks (laughter).  And it was really kind of funny.  We lived about a mile or two apart on farms.  And we loved to play with each other.  And we would play and play and play and then it would be time for Sammy to go home.  And I would ask, Mother, Mother, could, could I walk piece-a-way home with Sammy.  And piece-a-way meant that I wouldn't go all the way, but two-thirds of the way, and I'd come back home.  Well, she said, okay, just a piece-a-way.  And I would go.  And we'd get to talking, and I'd end up at his house.  And so then Sammy would say, ask his mother, can I walk piece-a-way home.  And this would go on forever, I think till finally one of the parents would say that's it.  You go home.  You stay here (laughter).  That's the end of it.  But Sammy's family wasn't as well off economically as mine.  And I remember my dad [George William Tilmon Sr.] bought me a kite.  And we went out in the fields there and got my kite up.  And it was flying and everything else.  And Sammy didn't have a kite.  And I remember that was one day he went home crying because he didn't have a kite.  And I told my dad--because I was terribly sad and when Sammy cried, I cried.  And my dad, well, what do you want to do about it?  I said, I don't know, I don't know what I can do about it.  Well, if you want Sammy to have a kite, why don't you to make him one?  And how do you make a kite?  So my dad taught me how to make a kite.  I'll never forget the look on Sammy's face the next day when he came.  And we had bought twine and everything else for it.  And I gave him this kite.  So we cried again (laughter).  But we went out and flew our kites together.  And that was the kind of relationship we had.  It was--I don't think there's anything quite like that.  I think Henry Miller was right.
Story_ID: 14316
Speaker 1: What about school?  Were there any other teachers in schools or administrators that you remember besides your parents that really made an impression on you?
Speaker 2: Well, Mrs. Foundry was the teacher that I had when I was elementary there in Boley [Oklahoma].  And when--you had free time, from time to time, and you could do whatever you wanted to in the classroom or whatever.  And you could go to the blackboard and, and draw things.  That was about the time of World War II [1939-1945].  It had just gotten started.  And I would go to the blackboard, and I would draw--Sammy [Cobb] would draw cars.  And I would draw airplanes.  And it was really kind of wild because I had--by the time the free time was over, I had a whole aerial battle going.  I had, you know, the Japanese Zeros and, and the American airplanes all fighting each other and everything else.  And, of course, we, the Americans always won (laughter).  I modeled, I made models of just about every airplane there was, that I could get a model of.  And in those days, you could, certain cereal boxes either had a model in them or you could send off the box top.  And they would send you a model.  And there was all this of interesting papers, kind of a semi-stiff paper.  And you could roll it and everything else and, and paste it together.  And you made airplanes.  And they were very, very authentic looking.  But I modeled everything, everything I could.  And I had relatives that lived in Kansas City [Missouri].  And we would go there from time to time.  And I used to, I just--they knew that the place I wanted to go was not to the park or to the zoo and whatever else.  Take me to the [Kansas City International] Airport.  And going out there to the airport in Kansas City, Kansas [sic, Missouri], you had to pass by that Mitchell B-25 Bomber factory.  And they test flying those things and everything else.  They had an interesting whine to the engines.  I mean you could--I could hear one today, and I'd know that it was a Mitchell B-25.  I thought that was the most beautiful airplane in the world at the time, until I'd get out to the airport and see all those incredible airplanes, the commercial airplanes (laughter).  But I was an airplane fanatic.  I mean the whole family knew if they were to get me something, if it wasn't aviation, don't bother.  We left Boley after 3 years living there.  And we went--my dad [George William Tilmon Sr] was hired to be the superintendent of schools of Boyington, Oklahoma.  We went there in the summer.  And it never worked out.  I mean my dad, after seeing the school and finding out something about what it was like and the town and everything else, says, we're out of here.  We never, we never really--he never really worked there.  And he took a job as a principal of Booker T. Washington High School--Booker T. Washington School, rather, in Sand Springs, Oklahoma, which is right outside of Tulsa [Oklahoma].  And that's where I graduated from high school.  It was nice being in Sand Springs for lots of reasons because for one, it was right next to Tulsa that had a major airport [Tulsa International Airport].  And my dad would take me over there to see the airplanes.  It was kind of comical I guess, but I wanted to stand as close as I could to where the airplanes were gonna taxi up and park.  And I was not allowed out on the tarmac, of course, but I'd get as close as I could.  And my nose would be pressed to the glass as they'd taxi up there to deplane the passengers.  And the airplanes that I really loved were the American Airlines DC-6s.  It's a 4-engine, reciprocating engine, airplane.  They had this lightening bolt, an orange lightening bolt on the side of the fuselage.  And in those days, when they taxied up, they, the crew--the cockpit crew would open their cockpit windows.  And the co-pilot would put a flag out on the, right next to window, and it would be flapping in the breeze and everything else.  And as they taxied up to park, the, the captain would stick his arm out the window and wave to the, the crowd and all that.  I always thought he was waving at me.  But (laughter) probably not.  But I remembered, you know, those guys had on these starched white shirts and these black ties and they just--they looked like, wow, man, those guys really have it, that, that's it.  That's the whole world.  And then they parked the airplane, they had what American called the Red Carpet Service.  And they literally rolled a red carpet out from the terminal out to the steps of the airplane so that the passenger never walked on the tarmac.  They walked on this carpet all the way in.  And that was part of my dream to one day be able to pull up to the terminal at Tulsa and maybe not the red carpet, but certainly to have that feeling of that, being that captain.  And it finally did happen.
Story_ID: 14317
Speaker 1: You were talking about the [Kansas City International] Airport in Kansas City [Missouri].  That's the same airport that, back in June, when we interviewed Ed Dwight who was the first black astronaut.  He used to go--he was raised there--
Speaker 2: Oh, really.
Speaker 1: (unclear) near the airport.  He used to go and watch the planes.
Speaker 2: Isn't that something.
Speaker 1: And he used think the same thoughts.
Speaker 2: Yeah, that's amazing, isn't it?
Speaker 1: It is.
Speaker 2: It's really amazing.  I think one of the reasons that I've spent all of my adult years visiting school, talking with children, mostly minority, is because so many times I think we fail to remember the incredible impact that we can make on a child's life just with one single incident, one single something.  And I've had the, the privilege of seeing some of the results of some of my visits to some of these schools.  I visited a school in Texas.  And I was there because I was part of the Hubert Humphrey's--what do you call that?  Team for Youth Motivation [Task Force on Youth Motivation] or something like that.  The Vice President wanted to do what he could to help minority youth.  He was sincere about it.  He got corporations of all kinds to lend some of their, their minority employees to this program.  And for months, we traveled all over the United States encouraging kids to stay in school.  And I think after that program was over, some of the schools had not had this privilege, so they literally would ask the airline or whoever they were gonna ask, would you please send a representative to our school.  I went to this school in Texas, and it was amazing, man, because the, the auditorium was packed.  And I made my little presentation, and I, I pushed the thing about you can do anything you want to do, just as I had been taught.  And if you want to fly, you can fly.  If you want to be a school teacher, you can be a school teacher, whatever.  And I went through this whole (unclear) thing.  I was finished, and this little boy came up to me and he says, okay, that's it.  I want to fly.  I said, that's great, that's wonderful, I'm glad to hear it, you know.  No, I want to fly now.  I said, well, that's not real simple to do.  I mean there's some things that I--no, you told me, you told me that if I wanted to fly, I could fly.  Now, I want to fly.  I said, okay.  How old are you?  Sixteen.  Okay, if you're really sincere--you have to realize the other part of that, I said, you have to be willing to pay the dues.  He said, I'm willing to pay the dues.  I want to fly.  Okay, here's what you do.  You find the nearest small airport and you find a way to get out there.  If you have to ride your bike or hitchhike or walk, you get out to that little airport.  You introduce yourself, not to anybody except the operator of the airport.  You make sure you don't leave there, if you have to sleep there for 3 days, you don't leave until you talk with the operator of that airport.  When you get to that person, you tell them just what you told me.  You want to fly, and that you're willing to do anything it takes to learn to fly, no matter what.  He says, okay.  I said, now, wait a minute, you may be asked to do a lot of things other than fly.  You may be asked to clean the bathrooms.  You may be asked to sweep the floors.  You may be asked to do all those things.  You do those things.  You do them so well that they're impressed with you.  And the next you know, you'll be out, and they'll let you wash an airplane.  And the next thing you know, they may let you sit in an airplane.  And the next thing you know, somebody will be making a cross-country flight and they want somebody to ride with them, and they'll let you sit in, in the seat while they fly from one place to another.  And the next thing you know, they're gonna let you touch the controls, and before you know it--and I don't know how this will take, they'll let you touch the controls and fly.  They'll teach you to fly.  And I don't know where all that came from when I said it, but I said the whole thing.  He says, okay.  Well, I never heard from this kid, and I just figured well, you know, it's not gonna happen, it can't really.  Nobody's gonna go through all that if he's lucky enough to even find it.  I was here in Chicago [Illinois] at, doing Channel Five's weather and aviation.  And I got one of the most beautiful letters I've ever received.  It was from a Bird Colonel in the United States Air Force, who was that kid, who had learned to fly the exact way that I had said.  In the letter, he said, I did everything you said.  It took I don't know how many years for him to go from cleaning the johns to flying an airplane out of that little airport.  And that took him to the [United States] Air Force Academy [Colorado Springs, Colorado], where he graduated and flew jets for the [United States] Air Force.  And he wrote me this letter, and I'm moved by it because it was so touching.  I had changed his life.  There're stories like that all through, some of these visits I made, and it really gets to me.
Speaker 1: What you gave him was more than just encouragement, it was a plan, a road map to how to--
Speaker 2: Well, he insisted on it.  I give him the credit, not me.  He insisted on having a plan of action, and I gave it to him, and he did it.  And another instance not exactly like that, but there's a lot of cases like that, that happened through the years, but when I was flying for American [Airlines] and in the winter time, out of Chicago, I used to like to go west where it was warmer.  And there was this great flight that I could take that we flew through Oklahoma City [Oklahoma] and went nonstop OK City [Oklahoma City, Oklahoma] to L.A.[Los Angeles, California]  We'd land there and, at night, in the middle of the night.  And then the layover was until the next night.  So you had a full day to go out to the beach or whatever else there.  It was just great, you know, to get away from the cold and everything else in Chicago for a day.  So I flew that trip for month after month after month.  And, particularly in the wintertime, and I remember seeing this man who was in uniform for American, but he was a ramp person of some kind, who every time we pulled up to the gate there, he'd be standing there.  But he didn't have any role to play there.  He wasn't like one of the guides or whatever.  He was just standing underneath the nose of the airplane when we'd pull up.  I didn't know who he was or anything else.  He was a black man.  And one night we pulled up there, he came up to the cockpit and he says, do you mind if I look around.  And I said, no, I don't mind.  So he was looking around, looking around.  And I told the rest of the crew to go on to the hotel, you know, I was gonna stay with this guy and show him around.  He says, may I ask a few questions?  I said, sure.  So he asked questions about all the things in the cockpit and everything else.  And finally, he said, do you think I could do what you do?  And I went back to what I've been taught.  And if you want to badly enough, and that you truly believe, and you're willing to pay the price, yeah, you can do it.  But how old are you because he they had a limit then for, for age.  I think he said he was in his late '20s or whatever else.  And well, that's sort of old to get started.  I mean, really, it's gonna be tough.  But I told him, I said, you know, the only thing I can suggest to you is you go out and start taking some private lessons.  And, you know, he says, okay.  I'll do that.  I said, I don't know that you're gonna end up in a commercial airplane, but at least you can learn to fly.  And he says, no, I want to, I want to be in a commercial airplane.  I want to be in the seat you sit in.  Then, okay.  I didn't see him for a long time.  But the story is that he was working the honey wagon.  That's that vehicle that drains the labs.  That was his job.  He didn't make much money.  He certainly didn't have enough to go pay for flying lessons, and he knew that.  But they posted on the bulletin board a position for a lift agent.  These are the people that stand at the gate and take the boarding passes and print them out or whatever else.  It's a pretty jump from honey wagon to lift agent.  And they posted this bulletin board message that there was gonna be a class starting up very soon.  So he went to the instructor and said, I'd like to take the class.  He says, what are you doing now?  I drive the honey wagon.  No, I'm sorry, this is class is only open to people who have the prerequisites, somebody that's been working on the ticket counter; somebody's been working in reservations; somebody working in all these other positions.  You can't--you don't have any, any credentials, you don't have any background.  You know, it's--no way.
Story_ID: 14318
Speaker 1: This guy's name was Sam.  And, in fact, he sat in on the class.  He did let him sit in because they said, it's not gonna mean anything.  He said, oh, I'd just like to sit in if you don't mind.  So he sat in the back of the room and never asked a question, never interrupted anything.  And at the end of the training, he asked the instructor if he could the exam.  He said, you can take the exam because you've been here everyday, but it means nothing.  But if it's, you feel, it would be rewarding to you personally, that's fine.  He made the only perfect score in the class.  So he went to his bosses, the trainer went to his boss and said, what am I gonna do with this guy?  He said, what do you, he came to all the classes and never late.  He never asked any questions, didn't do anything else and made the only perfect score in the class, then we hire him.  That's what you do.  So he became a lift agent and he began to make enough money.  And he began to take flying lessons.  I didn't know any of this.  All I know is I didn't see him ever any, any more.  Years later, right here at O'Hare [International Airport, Chicago, Illinois], I'm walking through the terminal--this is a true story, I see this black face in a pilot's uniform, an American [Airlines] pilot's uniform.  And, you know, hey, in those days, you could have a meeting of all the black pilots with American in my, in my closet.  So I'm really looking at this guy.  And the closer I get to him, I said, that looks like Sam.  That can't be Sam.  So I was getting close to him, and I realized, it is Sam.  And I went up, and I said, Sam.  He looked around.  I said, do you realize--I mean I know how you want to do this, you know what'll happen if they catch you in this uniform.  And he just fell out laughing.  And he says, Jim, it's real.  I, I did what you said, and I'm a bona fide pilot for American Airlines.  Sam's probably retiring now, this year or thereabout.  But he's--the last I heard he's flying [Boeing] 757's and [Boeing] 767's to Europe and to, to South America.  I guess the moral of all of these things that I'm talking about is, there'll always be obstacles--and this does go back to my dad's philosophy, that when you stop having obstacles, when you stop having barriers put up to prevent you from going where you want to go, you will already be 6 feet under.  But if you're alive, not only will you have those barriers, but the challenge of living is to conquer that and move it through it or around it or over it.  But get where you want to go.
Story_ID: 14319
Speaker 1: Now, when you were in high school, were you involved in sports at all in high school?
Speaker 2: No.  I went out for the basketball team.  And I was really invited, because I was pretty tall, I thought that--in my school, I wasn't, I wasn't the tallest kid by a long shot, but I was on the junior varsity basketball team, made the team and made captain on the team during practice before the season started.  And when the season did start, I went out and played the first half and went into the locker room.  And my dad [George William Tilmon Sr.] was the school principal.  So he came and stood in there as the coach was going through is remarks.  And after the coach sent everybody out, to go back out to practice before the second half, my dad came over to me and said, I hope you'll play like hell the second half.  I said, why?  Because this is your last game.  Well, my dad was not one that you questioned.  You didn't say, why, or no or I don't want to.  That just didn't happen in my household.  So I went out, and I was the high point man.  I mean I really, I really played my heart out.  And I was so depressed afterwards because I turned in my uniform and cleaned out my locker.  Nobody understood why, and I didn't either, but I just said, I can't play anymore.  Well, the next morning my dad woke me up.  And he sat there on the bed, and he said, I don't believe in taking that much away from you without giving you something in return.  If you could have anything in the world you wanted, what would you have?  Well, I had just started playing in the band, and started out with trumpet and I didn't really like that.  And I fell in love with the clarinet.  And I was playing one of those metal clarinets.  As a matter of fact, you probably would find a picture of me and that metal clarinet.  It was a school issue.  And it was, it was okay, but it was, you know--I said, I, I'd like to have a real clarinet.  He said, okay.  So we went to Tulsa [Oklahoma], and went to best music house in town.  And they bought me a French clarinet and gave me an opportunity to take private lessons from Tommy Thompson, who was the principal clarinetist with the Tulsa Philharmonic, who had never been that close to a black face in his life.  But Tommy was a pro.  And he said to my dad, if he's serious, I'll teach him to play clarinet.  If he's not, I don't want to see him anymore.  Well, that's my kind of challenge.  So I got very heavily involved in music, playing clarinet.  And I remember I went to the first music festival, high school Music Festival, State-wide.  And there was a guy there from Tulsa--no, he was from Oklahoma City [Oklahoma], I'm sorry.  And he played clarinet.  He was the cockiest guy I ever saw in my life, arrogant to the end.  I mean he was just obnoxious as far as I was concerned.  But he played clarinet really well.  His Dad was a music teacher.  And he let everybody know that, and he let everybody know that he was the best in the state.  In fact, he was at the time.  He played ['The] Flight of Bumblebee'.  And I didn't play a solo at all.  I wasn't in the contest.
Speaker 1: 'Flight of the Bumblebee' is some serious stuff (unclear) playing the clarinet.
Speaker 2: Absolutely, he played it, he played it very well.  Oh, and the reason, the reason that I didn't have a soloist because I caught measles about, from about a month or 2 or 3 months before the cont, this contest, and I couldn't practice.  You know, in those days, when you got measles, they put you in a dark room, and you didn't, you didn't see daylight (laughter) for weeks because the theory was that you'd injure your eyesight permanently.  Ah, was it measles or mumps.  I don't know.  I know I got one of those things that wasn't pleasant.  Anyway, so I wasn't prepared for a solo, and I've got to sit and listen to him because this guy, he used to--you know, you keep your reed wet.  You have to have a wet reed to play the clarinet, and he kept a reed in his mouth for days.  I mean, you know, he was just showing off.  I told my dad about how unpleasant that whole experience was.  He said, well, hey, you know, you don't take anything from him, except the desire to do as well, if not better.  That's what you take from him.  You don't remember that he was an obnoxious guy or anything else, but it gives you a goal to shoot for.  So you either shoot for it or you just give up.  Your choice.  So (laughter) now, I got serious with Tommy Thompson.  I really got serious.  I was practicing 4 hours a day, and I did that for that whole year.  And I came back, and the criticism that I got from this other kid's Dad after the contest, I won the contest, was that it's unfair because he's playing college-level music.  Well, I was.  I played concertos (laughter), you know.  And I beat the pants off of him every year for the rest of--all through high school.  And you're talking about being demoralized, I really wasn't trying to crush him.  I remembered what my dad said.  That's a goal, and that's what you shoot for.  So I became a fairly accomplished clarinetist.  And as a matter of fact, I ended up here in the Chicago [Illinois] area in my adult life playing first chair clarinet with the Lake Forest Symphony.  And I played E-flat clarinet with the Evanston Symphony [Orchestra, Evanston, Illinois].  And it's really provided me with a resource.  I'll never have to take drugs because I have a resource that does more for me than, I think, than drugs could possibly do for anybody.  I've never tried drugs, but from everything I've heard, I get just as much sitting down and playing the clarinet.  So anyway, that was, that was most of my high school experience.  I--
Speaker 1: Now, did your father ever tell you why he stopped you from playing basketball?
Speaker 2: Oh, I didn't find that out until I was an adult.  And I found out that, what had happened is, the summer before that year, my grandfather and I were walking downtown in Sand Springs [Oklahoma], and they had one of these tuberculosis vans.  You'd walk in there and walk in one door and walk out the other.  And you got a free X ray for tuberculosis.  So he said, why don't we go get X rays.  I said  fine.  So we went in.  We got an X ray.  It's just the two of us and we got this X ray.  I didn't think I even remembered to tell my dad about it because, hey, what, there wasn't anything to it.  We just walked over there and did that.  What I didn't know was that they, the only address they had for these records was my home address.  And they sent a letter to my home address speaking about James Tilmon and the fact that James Tilmon had an enlarged heart.  Now, it turns out my grandfather's name was James.  And they had mixed up the records.  My dad--and, and it indicated in there that this person is, should not play active sports; he should do this; should not do a lot of other things.  And my dad was frightened that I was going to have a heart attack or something.  So he did that, but he did not explain it to me.  There was one other factor involved, and that was that a week or so prior to that game, there was a break-in at a service station.  And it was said that it was a gang made up of basketball players from my school.  They never proved that, but that was what was said.  So my dad felt he had a justification to do it, but he felt awful about it.  And then that's why he got me into music.  I'm glad he did.  I would have never been a Michael Jordan (laughter), believe me.
Story_ID: 14320
Speaker 1: Were you involved in any other school activities in high school?
Speaker 2: Not really, only, the only thing else I did really in, in an extracurricular, you might say, was in the orator, oratorical contests.  I wanted to, I wanted to participate.  I wanted to be in the contest.  And I had remembered that my grandfather [Bill Hazel] was a great orator.  And I wanted to, I wanted to speak.  And I was preparing for my speech.  I was doing a speech on cancer, believe it not.  And we know a whole lot more about cancer now than we did then.  But, so I had to do an awful lot of research.  And I had an uncle that was a medical doctor.  And I would go to his library, and I'd do research.  And I was, I was all prepared to do this, this speech, and I was sitting down writing it.  My dad [George William Tilmon] walks in the room, and said, home, and he said, what are you doing?  I'm writing my speech.  He said, what?  Writing my speech, Dad, you know, I'm gonna be in the contest.  Then why are you writing it.  Dad, because I'm going to give my speech at the contest.  I don't know why you're asking me this.  Yeah, well, you don't know why I'm asking.  I'm asking because I want to figure out why you're writing it.  I'm, I don't understand what you're saying.  He said, well, either you know your subject or you don't.  If you've got to write it, just mail it to them.  Don't insult your audience to say that they can't read.  If you have some information for people, you stand up and you tell them what you know and what you believe.  But you don't write something and anybody could have written it.  And you had to do is learn how to read.  What's that worth?  He would not let me write that speech.  I have not written a speech since.  I won the State Oratorical contest three years in a row.  But man I had to do some powerful research.  I really had to know my stuff and scared to death the first time, I mean absolutely, knees-knocking scared because there I'm standing.  And I got no crutch.  I got no notes.  I got nothing.  It's just me and all these kids out there waiting for me to make a stupid mistake.  But I didn't.  And he taught me the trick of the first thing you do when you go out on the stage is you take a deep breath from the diaphragm and then you start talking.  And I used that for that.  And I also used it when I played recitals on clarinet.  I use it today when I go on television.  So all those things really had the roots that made me who I am.
Story_ID: 14321
Speaker 1: In high school, your senior year, you had--were you known primarily as a musician or as an orator or (unclear) [simultaneous]--
Speaker 2: A little bit of both.  It depends on who you're talking to and all that sort of that stuff.  Everybody used to assume that I was gonna major in music, but I didn't.  When I was about to graduate from high school, my dad [George William Tilmon] said okay, what do you want to do?  I said, I'm gonna do one of two things, okay.  I said, I want to either join the Air Force and fly airplanes or I want to take my clarinet with me to California and sit on the beach, typical teenager reaction I suppose.  He says, Hum.  He did not answer me.  He didn't discuss it.  The next--it, it was almost like time was compressed.  The next thing I knew I was on a train on my way to Washington, D.C. to attend Howard University.  I don't know what happened in between, but there was no [United States] Air Force and there was no beach and there was no anything else.  It was me, on my way to Howard University to major in chemistry.  Now, my chemistry from high school was pretty weak.  The, the chemistry teacher was our high school, high school Coach.  And the only reason he was teaching chemistry is because of the political makeup.  I mean the superintendent liked him as a coach.  That was the only teaching position available.  My dad knew that he was terrible as a Science teacher, but he couldn't fire him.  He couldn't do anything about it.  So here is his kid going to, to take chemistry courses in high school.  And I was teaching the class.  I taught that class out of my Junior Gilbert Chemistry Set.  You can imagine how little any of us learned.  So going off to Howard University [Washington, DC] to major in chemistry?  Are you kidding me?  My first chemistry instructor was Professor Hugley.  Professor Hugley was a black man who was the only black person to work on the Manhattan Project, the nuclear project.  He was a genius.  And this guy would start doing his lecture about 5 or 6 doors down in the hall.  So his classroom was--you could hear a pin drop before he came in the class because he would start giving the lecture out in the hall.  And he would--by the time he walked in there, I mean about 3 or 4 questions that were gonna be on the test, he'd already covered.  He was a genius, but he was a little eccentric.  We had these sliding blackboards at Howard [University, Washington, DC] at that time in the chemistry--not in the lab, but in, in the auditorium.  They had like 300 students in this place.  And they had blackboards that would slide, and you'd write on it, and it would slide.  I've got to tell you, it was, it was like a daze.  I mean he would go down to one end.  He'd started writing and sliding boards and everything else.  And I'm sitting there next to, to kids that had graduated from high schools in Chicago [Illinois] where they had real chemistry teachers and New York [New York] and, and all over the country and Detroit [Michigan] or whatever, you know.  And I had no chemistry background.  I had to really work my tail off, but I had, I had a kind of an end because Professor Hugley kind of took a liking to me for some reason.  And I was the only student invited to his poker games, which he had in his basement about once every week or two weeks.  And I never won any money.  I never had enough to really be at the table because the other people were all instructors.  But he let me sit there, and he and I would talk chemistry (laughter) through the poker game.  That was his way of keeping these other guys off base, I think.  But that's really where I learned chemistry.  But, anyway, I was at Howard for two years.  And money was very tight.  And I ended up going from there to Tennessee State [University] in Nashville [Tennessee].
Story_ID: 14322
Speaker 1: I guess I really made a terrible mistake--I know I did.  Professor Hugley [from Howard University, Washington, DC] had used some equations that he would use to solve problems that were in another world.  I mean, and you didn't see those in any book any place, but they were fast and they were accurate.  And most of them, he had developed.  That was one that dealt with gas laws and how to solve a gas law equation.  I went to Tennessee [State University, Nashville, Tennessee] and I ended up registering a little bit late, but I got into the school and everything else.  And I remember walking into my first chemistry class.  The class was in progress when I walked in.  The only seats were in the really back, up in the upper level.  So I disturbed the class when I came in there.  And this woman instructor really made a thing of it, you know, like, well, I had your name here and everything else.  I wondered if you would ever show up.  And she really put me down in front of the whole class.  Everybody's turning around looking at this weird guy coming in.  Well, it was the next class that she was teaching gas laws.  And I mean I knew the gas law thing like, like crazy.  Hugley and I used to sit and talk about it across the poker table.  And so she says, okay, I'm gonna walk you through this.  And I want everybody to take special attention because I'm only gonna do this one time, and I want you to get it.  So she went through this whole process.  It was a process I'd never seen before.  It was slow and it was, it was tedious and everything else and spread all across the board.  And so she says, okay, now, we're gonna try a problem and if you, and if you have any questions, raise your hand.  So she gave you, gave the essential elements and I [click, click] raised my hand.  She said, I should have known that you would be the first one with a problem, coming into this class late.  She went through this whole scenario.  What is your question?  Ma'am, I don't have a question.  Well, why did you raise your hand?  Because I finished the problem.  Oh, sure you have.  You couldn't have possibly finished.  You did it wrong.  I said, no, ma'am, I did it right.  She said, okay, just march right up here to this blackboard and put it up here.  She saw that problems solved like she'd never seen it before.  And it was the right answer.  She gave me three other problems while I was at the board.  It was the right answer every time.  She left the class in tears.  Well, the third day, I'm about to go into that classroom, and somebody said, the Dean of the School of Chemistry wants to see you now.  Well, (laughter) I figured he was gonna give me a medal for having solved this problem, but I was too stupid to know the difference.  I didn't know it, but that was his fiance.  I walked in his office.  He says, you, your choice.  You can either now accept a grade of F in chemistry or you can get the hell out of my department.  So I said, thank you, sir.  (laughter)  And I left.  He literally kicked me out of the chemistry department.  And I went over and enrolled in the Music Department (laughter).  I called my dad [George William Tilmon Sr.]--the reason I was studying chemistry because my dad was frustrated.  He'd always wanted to be a medical doctor, and that's what he wanted for me.  I went over to the music department, and I joined the music department.  They were delighted to have me because I was playing first chair in the, the band and everything else.  And they were just, they welcomed me.  But I knew I had to get through this thing with my dad.  So I called home that night, and I said, Dad, I changed my major.  What?  Changed my major.  To what?  I said, to Music.  Here's your mother [Manila Hazel Tilmon].  He put her on the phone.  I didn't talk to my dad for months I guess.  But he finally understood.  And I majored in music, and that's what I finished up in.  I don't know.  You know, fate is funny.  It's really crazy
Story_ID: 14323
Speaker 1: While I was at Tennessee State [University, Nashville, Tennessee] I was in the Air Force ROTC [Reserved Officer Training Corps].  And I'd been in Air Force ROTC at Howard [University, Washington, DC] for long enough to actually get me into the Advanced ROTC, but they made me stay in the Junior ROTC until I had arrived at the, with all the credit for a Junior in college.  And I was an Officer, even as--in, in the Junior ROTC, for freshmen and sophomores, you can only rise to the rank of Master Sergeant.  But I was an officer in the ROTC at Howard because I was a drum major of the band there.  So when I came to Tennessee State I had no such status, but I was--I knew everything, you know.  And then you had to be approved to go from Junior ROTC to Senior ROTC.  And the Professor of Air Science and Tactics was a white colonel.  I was not approved for Senior ROTC.  And I wanted to find out why.  He said, well, here's your, here's your record.  I had perfect scores in everything, but at the bottom of the record, he had written in there, this candidate lacks the intelligence, the aptitude and something else to fly a modern jet airplane.  I was crushed.  I was literally crushed.  I transferred schools as a result of that.  I had to go some place because I wanted to fly.  Well, my dad had a friend at Lincoln University [of Missouri] in Jeff City [Jefferson City, Missouri] so I went there.  And the music department, there was a great music department there, and I knew they had ROTC.  I didn't know that they didn't have Air Force.  They had Army ROTC.  I get there, and I, well, I got to do this.  I, I understand they have airplanes in the Army, so that's what I'm gonna do.  So I signed up for it.  But it was senior ROTC Army.  I had no preparation for that and it was Corp of Engineers; a music major going into a Corp of Engineers atmosphere.  This time when I went in to report to the Colonel, he was black.  And he says, you don't have any business in here.  I mean, it's a joke.  You're a music major.  You don't know anything about engineering.  You ever had an engineering course?  No, sir.  How can you expect to--he said, right now, we're, we're right now on bridges.  You have to understand physics.  You have to understand engineering.  You have to understand all those things.  You can't build a bridge with music.  And he literally laughed at me.  And I said, sir, I, I have to be in this ROTC program.  So he said, there's no way for you to make it.  There's no way.  So I kept insisting that I could do.  And he said, I'll tell you what, you pass bridging, and I'll let you stay.  By you're gonna have to pass it.  I'm not gonna give you any, any, any extra study or anything else.  He says, have you ever used a slide rule?  No, sir.  I, I don't know how you're gonna make it.  Well, that night I taught myself to use a slide rule, and I was number three in the class for, for bridging.  So I got my commission in the Corp of Engineers, United States Army.  And I went from that to, to flight school and got my wings.  It wasn't that simple, but I did.
Speaker 2: Okay, so the Army maintained--the Army and the Air Force--the Air Force was new then, wasn't it?
Speaker 1: No, it wasn't brand new, but they had, they hadn't been around too long.  But the Army had, they didn't have any combat aircraft.  They just had single-engine airplanes that were utility airplanes and helicopters.  And getting into that program was interesting to say the least.
Speaker 2: Now, this is 1950--
Speaker 1: This is 1950--this would have been 1950--late '50s [1950s], about '57 [1957] or something else like that.  I was--I went to Fort Belvoir [Virginia] to go through the engineering training for the officers.  I left there and was stationed at Fort Leonard Wood, Missouri.  And I was in the training regiment there.  And I was working under--I was a second lieutenant.  My commanding officer was a second lieutenant, but he was senior to me, one of the most bigoted people I've ever met in life.  We had another second lieutenant was all--we were both platoon leaders.  And he was, this other guy was the commanding officer.  To give you some flavor for it, the two of them would go over to Columbia, Missouri to--there was a very elite school there for, for girls or whatever.  And that's where they would go to, to date.  And they eventually both decided they were gonna get married.  And Army protocol was such that you did send an invitation to all kinds of social events like that or anything that happened in that way to all of your junior officers.  So I got a formal invitation to both weddings.  And then one night, they called me to their office.  And--I may be going over my time here.  What time is it?
Speaker 2: It's 10 minutes to 12:00.
Speaker 1: Oh, my God, I'm way over the time.  All right, I'll make this brief.  They called in their office, and they said, hey, we, we sent you the invitation, but obviously, we don't want you to show up.  We had to do that because of Army protocol, but you can't come to the wedding.  That's the kind of people they were.  But that was okay.  I applied for flight school, even though everybody on post said you can never get in it because we're short officers and everything else.  There were only two people on the post that applied, me and one other guy.  And there was a master sergeant at regimental headquarters that saw that request.  He came to see me, and he says, you stick to it, a black guy.  He says, I'm gonna make sure this paperwork goes to the right places.  Well, to make the story short, both of us, those two--the other guy and me, both got out of flight school.  And I did something there that could have got me court martialed.  I was so happy, when the Sergeant came by the BOQ [Bachelor Officer's Quarters], he wasn't supposed to do that either.  He said, sir, here are your orders.  And the two of us got knee walking, commode-hugging drunk.  And I wasn't supposed to fraternize with him, and but I was so happy, (laughter) I was out of my mind.  So anyway, I went to flight school, and, and learned to fly under a guy who said, black people are either very, very good or awful.  There's no in between.  I, I was the first one to solo out of my little group.  I asked him why he picked me because I saw the other guys' landings and they were good.  He says, because you made every mistake in the world you could make other than kill yourself, and I knew, I saw you recover.  So I figured you'd be able to recover from any problem.  There were lots of things that happened in flight school that, where people tried their best to discourage me.  But I knew what my goal was.  And I got my wings.  That was my beginning of the flying business.
Story_ID: 672472
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe.  I'm interviewer for The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Scott Stearns.  Sir, could you please state your name?
Speaker 2: James Tilmon [HistoryMaker Jim Tilmon].
Speaker 1: And what is today's date?
Speaker 2: Today is the 15th of August, nine--15th of August, 2005.
Speaker 1: Right, and where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: We're in the Oak Room at CBS 2 studios [WBBM-TV], 630 North McClurg Court, Chicago [Illinois], 60611.
Speaker 1: And we're completing an interview that we started I think in 2004 [sic. January 28, 2003], right?
Speaker 2: That's correct.
Story_ID: 672473
Speaker 1: And we were, when we left off, you were talking about flight school.  And you were just about to wrap up flight school, so.
Speaker 2: Well, one of the things that I think was remarkable about flight school with me is that you had to take check rides, regular check rides to check your proficiency at a certain level in the training.  And one of my last check rides that I was required to take, I went up with the check airman, and we were flying different types of maneuvers that we were trained to fly.  One of them was to fly constant distance from a target on the ground.  In this particular case it was a farm field that had, was kind of in a almost perfect square.  And in order to fly so that you kept exact same distance from the boundary of that square, you had to be able to understand where the wind was and play the wind.  On certain turns, you'd have to turn more sharply and others more shallow, depending upon the wind.  And it was designed to illustrate your ability to fly the airplane safely, and still monitor things on the ground.  Well, I was in the midst of this with this instructor, pilot.  And I just happened to catch a little something out of the corner of my eye, because my--I was, my attention was drawn to the ground.  And I looked up, and sure enough, I had a windshield full of airplane.  There was another airplane that was right directly in front of me.  They were, our training airplanes were painted orange so that you could see them very clearly.  But this thing was right there, and I really reacted just automatically.  And now I was only at about five hundred feet when this happened, because you did this whole maneuver at about that altitude.  I just ratchet over and immediately kind of made a descending right turn, which was the proper thing to do because this guy was coming from right to left.  And I went, I must have gone just right behind him.  I thought I was gonna hit him.  I really was just waiting to feel the hit.  And I didn't, and I leveled off at about, I don't know, a hundred, two hundred feet, and climbed back up.  And the instructor didn't see the guy until I was in the midst of this.  I climbed back up to my five hundred feet, and he said well, I gotta just take a minute to get your wits about you.  And I tried to settle down, but you know you don't--when you're doing it, you're not upset; it's afterwards that you begin to react.  And I had flown a very good ride up to that point, and the rest of the ride was pretty bad.  I just did not perform well.  And we went back and landed.  And I thought boy, I'd blown this thing.  We got out of the airplane, and we were standing next to the airplane.  And he had his clipboard there, and he says, "Well, you flew an almost perfect ride, up until the time we had that near midair collision, and then, then on you were terrible.  I could give you one of two grades.  A passing grade is eighty.  Based upon what you did prior to the near accident, you were in the mid-nineties, at least.  Afterwards, you had to be in the mid-sixties."  He says, "I could give you either an eighty-one or I can give you a seventy-nine.  If you get a seventy-nine you have one more check ride before you get washed out here.  I'm gonna give you an eighty-one."  I have no idea why he decided to do that.  But (laughter), maybe because I saved our lives by making that abrupt maneuver.  I don't know.  I never questioned it.  I never said another word.  I was just so relieved to know that I was still in the, in the program, and I went on and finished that, that flight training there without another hitch.  That was primary flight training.  That was--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Now this is 1959 in--
Speaker 2: This was in 1959, that's correct.
Speaker 1: And where were you on--
Speaker 2: I was in Texas.  I was at Camp Gary, Texas.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And you left there after primary and went to tactical, and then in Fort Rucker, Alabama.
Speaker 1: Now, now tell me this though, now who, how did this near collision take--I mean who was supposed to be checking out--I mean--
Speaker 2: Well--
Speaker 1: --how did another plane get up there and--
Speaker 2: There were students flying all over the place.  Some had instructors with them and some didn't.  And there was never an investigation as to who was right and who was wrong.  Had we had the collision, there would have been obviously.  But since there was no incident of any remarkable significance, there was never an investigation as to whether this other guy was in the wrong place.  He should not have been there, because it should have been obvious to him and his instructor, if he was with an instructor, that we were flying this course around this, this farm field.  And he should have cleared the air before he ever even flew across that, that area.  Who knows?  I mean I will never know really what his plan was.  I didn't see the, the pilot.  All I saw was the orange airplane, and it was huge.  I mean it, it filled up my windscreen.  I mean it was--
Speaker 1: It would seem to me that he was wrong if he was, he was in a, on a course that's regularly used to, you know, for the check rides, you know, the--
Speaker 2: In that--type of situation, it's not so much who's right or wrong as who's left.
Story_ID: 672474
Speaker 1: We left there [Camp Gary, Texas], and we were assigned to go to Fort Rucker, Alabama for a tactical training.  And that's where we actually flew the aircraft into very small unprepared fields, made landings that in most airplanes you just could not do.  This particular airplane, the L-19 Bird Dog [Cessna L-19/O-1 Bird Dog] was particularly well suited for this.  It was a two seat airplane, tandem seats, single engine, high wing airplane with a very power engine for its size and weight.  And it was used primarily for spotting artillery and for reconnaissance and that sort of thing in, in the military.  So, we had to be able to operate out of just about anything.  I mean in [U.S.] Army Aviation at that time, we rarely had an airfield to operate out of.  You went into unprepared places.  And we trained right there in, in Alabama, and we flew into Georgia and Alabama with this training.  And you landed in the Georgia pine trees.  I mean it's like you would--these terribly tall trees were there, and there would be just a clearing.  And you had to learn how to land and come over the- those trees, get your aircraft as close to the trees as possible, because you only had so much distance to roll out and stop and get the thing stopped; then you had to be able to climb on the takeoff and get out of there.  So, those were a challenge, to say the least, but I passed all of that without any problem.  We also fired art- artillery from there.  You'd call in the artillery fire on the target.  And they'd grade you based upon your ability to be accurate with the artillery and all.  It was kind of a fun part of the program.  I really did enjoy the tactical training.  It was very, very well done and everything.  I had no complaints about any part of that.
Story_ID: 672475
Speaker 1: But then we went into instrument training.  Instrument training, we went from the L-19 [Cessna L-19/O-1 Bird Dog] to the L-20 de Havilland Beaver [de Havilland Canada DHC-2 Beaver].  This is a, a larger airplane.  It was a six place airplane, high wing, large radial engine, 450 horsepower Pratt and Whitney engine, which developed a lot of power.  And it was a, a great workhorse for the, the Army at that time.  It's a, it's a bush airplane.  I mean the, the--it's made in Canada, and the Canadians designed that airplane to fly in and out of tight spots in, in, in the bush, so to speak.  And you of- often find 'em even today being flown on floats and that sort of thing for, for the Canadian tourists and all.  Anyhow, they picked the Beaver for us to train in because it had excellent instrument capabilities, and we took our instrument training in that aircraft.  In the instrument training portion of the course, there were three students assigned to each instructor.  And you'd swap seats in the air, you know, to train for certain approaches and whatever else.  And you either wore a hood, or you actually flew in, in real weather to train for this instrument training.  I've forgotten exactly how long the training was, but every day you'd go out early in the morning, and you'd come back in the late afternoon, and you'd eat lunch someplace other than your home base.  That was where the rub was.  When we landed, we had the pick of any number of military airfields all across the South that we could land and have lunch at an officers' club or an officers' mess or whatever else to have our lunch.  Our instructor elected to always land at civilian fields.  That posed a problem for me because, example: Montgomery, Alabama, at that time had a brand new terminal [Montgomery Regional Airport], and it was beautiful.  We landed, taxied up, parked, got out, and we were all in uniform, of course, except for the, the civilian.  And we went to the restroom--not the restroom, but to the restaurant, and were met at the door with the greeting for the other officers and the instructions to me that, "If you're gonna eat here, it's fine, but you had to go through that door over there, and then you'll turn right.  And you'll go around the back of the building, and you'll find a door marked kitchen.  You go through there, and then they'll serve you."  I was an officer in the United States Army.  I wasn't about to do that.  There was no way I was gonna disgrace my name, my rank, or my, my race; I wasn't gonna disgrace any of that, no way, so I missed a lot of lunches.  And oddly enough, I didn't have anything else to do, so I would go up to the weather department and talk with the meteorologists there and ask them questions and everything else.  And I began to learn a whole lot more about weather than any of my contemporaries because I spent a lot of time talking to these guys at lunchtime.  Eventually I started trying to carry a lunch, but I couldn't do that all the time.  But he did that every, every day, and I finally sat down and confronted him with it and said, "Hey, you know, is there any reason why we can't land at a military field?"  He says, "I don't wanna land at military fields."  I said well, "You realize what's happening.  I, I mean I'm not getting lunch, and the afternoon comes, and I'm, I'm really, I'm, I'm, I'm suffering from hunger."  He said, "It's not my problem.  I'm from Pennsylvania.  I didn't create these things.  I'm, I'm not gonna deal with it."  And he didn't.
Story_ID: 672476
Speaker 1: I guess the straw was the day of--my first child was born.  On a Sunday my wife [Tilmon's first wife, Louise Tilmon] went into labor.  She was in labor for nine hours, and I stayed with her that whole time.  And my son [James Tilmon, Jr.] was, was born in the evening hours, and I had to get up very early for our training flight the next morning.  We were gonna do a cross country and not rightly come back to Fort Rucker [Alabama].  And I didn't have a chance--as a matter of fact I didn't even have a desire to eat anything.  I hadn't eaten all that day, and I didn't eat anything when I went home that night.  And I got up at the wee hours and got right out to the airport so that we could take off on time.  We flew all morning, and I gotta tell you, man, I was, by that time I was really starving.  And sometimes we were in weather and--bouncing all over the place and just exacerbated the situation.  We landed at Orlando, Florida, and they too had a--their terminal [Orlando Army Airfield No. 2; Orlando International Airport] was super abandoned.  I mean they had just opened.  And I remember it was on the second floor for the restaurant was.  And we went up there, and I began to wonder, "Wow, I wondered if there're any problem here."  Sure enough, we got to the front end of the restaurant, and the maitre d' literally ran from--physically ran from the rear of the restaurant to where we were and said, "Welcome, gentleman," he says, (points) "and you know you can't eat here."  And you have to realize those were the days of sit-ins and I guess and problems with equal accommodations.  I don't know what all, but I said, "Hey, look, I'm not trying to demonstrate anything; I'm not trying to do anything.  Today I'm just plain hungry."  And he said, "Hey, but look, you know, we have no provisions for feeding you here," he said.  And I will never forget what he said; he said, "Please don't take it personally."  I said, I said, "Well, I can't think of anything more personal than my, my hunger and the fact that you're not gonna allow me to eat."  But I figured, okay, I'm not gonna have an altercation here.  I mean I'm in training; I mean, I, I gotta finish this training; I gotta get, get--graduate from this program.  When the program is finished, they told us you can fill out a critique sheet, and you could say whatever you wanted to say about what was wrong with the program.  You didn't even have to give your name, but you could do that.  And I figured boy, that's, that's what I'm going to do.  And besides that, they've gotta have candy machines or something in this airport.  There was not one machine in that airport.  It was brand new, and that just did not happen.  I went out to the front of the terminal, and there was a skycap there.  And I said say, "Where's the closest place for me to get a meal?"  He said, "How much time you got?"  I said, "We're on a flight plan, and we have to depart in forty-five minutes."  He says, "It's over a half an hour drive one way."  I said, "There's no place between here and there?"  He said, "Nothing, absolutely nothing."  So, then I said, hey, what am I--why am I worried?  I'm--you know, these are my flying buddies.  They know I didn't get anything to eat.  I'll go back and sit on the airplane.  They're gonna bring me some food.  Why am I upset?  So I get back on the airplane, and I'm just sitting there and I watched them walk out to the airplane.  I'm looking for a bag or a sack or something, nothing.  They came out there with a toothpick in their mouth; that was it.  I'll never forget that day because they got on board the airplane.  I was furious.  I mean I was really, really angry and hungry and everything else.  And we flew in weather all the way from Orlando down to Miami [Florida] and then- in that type of airplane, that took a while.  I wasn't doing any of the flying at this point.  I'd done my flying in the morning.  And I sat in the back of that airplane, and I say--the, the airplane's really loud.  I mean, you know, it's not like a commercial airplane and whatever else, and lots of air, nose, and everything else and storm.  I sang patriotic songs all the way to Miami.  I figured if I did that, I wouldn't kill anybody, but I was so angry until I was, I was beside myself.  So we got to Miami and, and landed at the [U.S.] Air Force base [Homestead Air Reserve Base, Florida] 'cause there was no other place for us to keep the airplane.  So, I got out of the airplane, and there was an airman driving a jeep across the ramp.  And I said, "Stop," and he did.  "Yes, sir?"  I said, "Take me to the officers' club." Said, "I beg your pardon, sir?"  I said, "Take me to the officers' club now."  (Laughter) He looked at me like this man is crazy, so I'm gon' take him.  (Laughter) He, he's an officer; he's just given me an order; I'm taking him to the officers' club, which he did.  I thanked him.  I got out of the, the, the jeep, and walked in the officers' club, still in my flight suit.  I sat down at the, at a table, and the waitress came over.  I said, "I'll have a steak, the biggest steak you have in this club, right now.  I want it medium rare," and I went through the whole thing.  I didn't look at a menu, nothing.  The waitress looked at me like this guy is weird, but I'm gonna get him the steak (laughter).  So that's how I ended that day, which was the day following my son's birth.
Story_ID: 672477
Speaker 1: So it was remarkable because I kept telling myself, when this program's over, I'm gonna burn 'em with my critique.  Well, the program did end, and I did finish it successfully.  And I sat down in this room, and they handed you as much paper as you wanted to write as much as you wanted to write.  And there were a number of other officers in their writing.  And I sat down, and I don't know how many times I started to write my critique, tore up the paper and started over again.  Final analysis, I realized the only way for me to make my case, even if I didn't sign my name, I'd have to start out by saying I'm a black officer in this training program.  I refused to acknowledge that in that way.  My feeling was, I was an officer in the United States Army.  I also happened to be black.  I refused to some--have someone just say, there is a black officer.  No, there's an officer.  Is he a black man?  Oh, yeah.  That part I could deal with.  I could not deal with the other part, therefore, I never wrote the critique.  I had to be satisfied with the fact that I had accomplished my goal.  My goal was to finish that program successfully with my wings.  My goal was not to correct bigots, or racists, or policies that were not good or whatever else.  And I gave up my right to complain simply because, to me, that was not my mission.  I'm sure there are those that would be critical of that.  They would say well, you could have made it better for the next guy.  That's true, and that did bother me.  But, quite frankly, after what I had been through just to get to that point, I didn't want to do anything that was gonna in any way take away from what I had accomplished.  And I didn't want to have any part of my records or anything else to be blemished.  I wanted to make sure that I was going to be a success as an aviator in the United States Army.
Story_ID: 672478
Speaker 1: I, I left that training program [at Fort Rucker, Alabama].  And my first assignment was to report to Fort Belvoir, Virginia.  I was in the Corps of Engineers [U.S. Army Corps of Engineers], and that's the center, still is, of the Corps of Engineers, United States Army.  And it was interesting because I reported in there to, I think it was the 30th engineer battalion [U.S. Army 30th Engineer Battalion], topographic, which meant there was an engineer battalion that was designed to do mapping.  And it was a pretty routine assignment in many ways, except at some point, I was assigned to, to get a top secret clearance and to fly an airborne mapping device that was mounted in an L-20 airplane [de Havilland Canada DHC-2 Beaver].  This equipment was so top secret that it was incredible.  I mean it's like, we only had one in the United States to test, and I was honored to be given this, this opportunity.  We were to fly at low altitude.  I had a couple of civilian scientists that were riding with me.  All the seats in the airplane, except for my seat, were taken out so they'd have room for this equipment.  These two civilians literally sat on the floor in the back, strapped down on the seatbelts in the back, and they operated this exotic equipment.  The equipment was such that it had a huge magnet in it.  And because of that magnet, the compass hung on east, no matter which way you turn.  So I had no compass, and the directional gyro, which was your other means of determining which direction you're flying, precessed.  And by that, it, it just kind of went into a certain error mode, and after the first fifteen, twenty, or thirty minutes, it was totally unreliable.  But we were flying what we called pilotage; we were flying low enough to the ground where that I could literally use roads, streets, railroad tracks, whatever else, to know where I was.  First time we went to operate out of a remote air, airport there in Virginia, we were to land in Culpepper, Virginia.  Culpepper, Virginia had, I think, two runways.  But one was terribly short, and the other one was not much longer (laughter), and they were grass; there was no pavement at all.  The preferable runway was the one where that you landed on the grass going uphill, and because you needed to be able to stop.  And the first time I was to go in there, we--I was on approach, and all of a sudden I broke off the approach, (gestures) gave the power, and went around.  The civilians in the back said, "What's wrong?  Are we gonna land, aren't we?"  I said, "I'm not sure."  They said, "What, what do you mean you're not sure?"  I said, "That's--looks to me to be an enemy air- airport."  "What, what are you talking about?"  So I backed the airplane.  I said, "Take a look at that flag."  They were flying the stars and bars [Confederate flag] (laughter).  This guy say, "Oh, come on, you know.  You know, we got a (laughter), we gotta land; we gotta go to work down there."  I said, "I'm a little nervous about this," but I was United States Army.  I don't know what country that is down there.  So sure enough, I--
Speaker 2: So that's the--they, they didn't fly a U.S. flag with that?  They just, just, they just flew the stars and bars?
Speaker 1: The stars and bars was the only flag on that airport.  So I landed, taxied up.  This good old boy came out to the airplane.  And he was all smiles and everything else, until I opened the cockpit door and crawled out.  And he looked at me as if he'd been hit in the face with something awful.  And he said, "What do you want?"  I said, "Well, we're gonna be operating out of this airport for the next three, four, or five weeks or more.  And I'm gonna need to refuel probably four times a day."  And I told him how much fuel that was gonna be.  Well, this was money in the bank.  He says, "Well, welcome, I'm, I'm glad to have you" (laughter).  And I said, "We may need a few provisions."  "Oh, yeah, you can have whatever you want.  I'll take care of you.  I mean, you know, don't worry about it."  I said, "There is one thing you can do for me."  "What's that?  Anything at all, not a problem."  "You think you might be able to fly the flag of the United States of America."  "Oh, oh that?  Oh, yeah, well, I, I'll take care of that.  Don't worry about it" (laughter).  That's the last time we saw the stars and bars there (laughter).  That's one of the most--those lessons I learned, that sometimes money is more important than bigotry.
Speaker 2: I guess so.
Story_ID: 672479
Speaker 1: Now you were with the Corps of Engineers [U.S. Army Corps of Engineers] for eight years, I believe.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Yeah, and you told me a story last time off camera that, that--
Speaker 2: Well, let me get to that.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, keep going, keep going.
Speaker 2: Flying out of Culpepper, Virginia, we were flying in the mountains of Virginia quite a little bit.  And this one day, I knew the weather was going to deteriorate, but I didn't realize it would deteriorate as fast as it did.  And all of a sudden, the ceiling just dropped like crazy.  Now I was instrument rated, but I couldn't fly this airplane on instruments.  It didn't have, I didn't have a compass that was reliable.  I, I--if you know which direction you're flying, you certainly can't fly on instruments very well.  So I was finally pilotage, just following railroad tracks and whatever else, and I made a wrong turn.  I picked the wrong railroad track or whatever, and I ended up in a valley.  And the ceiling continued to come down at--it was down low enough, by the time I looked around and realized this was unfamiliar territory.  The tops of the hills were obscured by the clouds, and there was no place to put the airplane, that literally there was not one single clearing anyplace down there, lots of trees and whatever else, boulders and whatever.  And I didn't dare just pick two peaks or something and decide I'm just gonna barrel through there; and I didn't dare climb up into those clouds, 'cause I knew that would be suicide; and of course, I didn't wanna let anything happen to that airplane because I had this exotic equipment, which we only had one in the entire United States.  So I was, as they say, between a rock and a hard place, I really truly was.  And I began to call in an emergency, and nobody answered.  I was at fairly low altitude, and I guess nobody was hearing, I suppose.  Finally, I called in a mayday.  I'd never thought I'd have to call in a mayday, and I did.  "Mayday, Mayday, Mayday, this is arm- Army one-niner-eight-one."  That was my tail number.  And I tried to explain my situation.  I did that, and you know, you're trained if you say that, then the whole world opens up to you.  I heard nothing but noise in my ear (laughter), earpiece.  Finally, the third time I called in a mayday, I heard this voice: "[U.S.] Army squawking mayday.  This is [U.S.] Air Force So and So and So.  And I'm at Angel's three-seven-zero, and what's your problem?"  Well, he's at 37,000 feet.  He's looking down on these clouds like--(unclear)--bright sunshine (laughter), you know, can't figure out why I'm having a problem down here.  So I told him what the problem was.  "All right, we'll see what we can do."  Now the other problem I had was I was beginning to get low on fuel.  So, sure enough, this Air Force jock got in touch with the FAA [Federal Aviation Administration].  They got in touch with the [U.S.] Coast Guard.  And literally a Coast Guard twin engine airplane flew in between these peaks.  He had all kinds of exotic instruments that I did not have.  And he flew in between these peaks, came in and says, "We got you, Army."  He says follow me, so I flew into fairly close formation with this guy.  And we flew right through the clouds and whatever else until we got unto a valley.  He took me all the way back to Fort Belvoir [Virginia].  And I landed, thanked him of course.  I landed and taxied up, and got ready to shut off the engine, and I didn't have to.  It ran out of fuel.  As soon as I stopped the airplane to park it, it kind of coughed.  There wasn't another drop of fuel that was usable in that airplane.
Speaker 1: Well, that's--I mean how did you feel (laughter)--
Speaker 2: I felt very fortunate that the Coast Guard was on the job (laughter), I really did.  And I, I, I, I'd, and I felt like, the fact that we had saved that airborne equipment, was key to this.
Story_ID: 672480
Speaker 1: That Culpeper [Virginia] experience was all part of this business of flying this top secret equipment around.  And I ended up flying that airplane, with this equipment on board, all the way to Yuma, Arizona, from Fort Belvoir, Virginia.  It doesn't sound like a big deal in today's flying, but when you consider the airplanes flying at less than 150 miles an hour or so, or somewhere in that range, it took quite a while to fly that thing across country and, and all.  And every place I had to stop, if I stopped overnight, they'd have to have some military police person there that had a top secret clearance, and that wasn't easy to find from time to time.  So, it was quite a trip to get across the United States.  When we went out to--
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: (TAPE INTERRUPTION) Okay.
Speaker 2: Anyway, it was a real hassle getting out to Yuma.  And we flew the test out in Yuma for quite a, quite a long time.  I don't know how many weeks, but we--I had special provisions with military waivers to fly over a hundred hours a month, so it was flying seven days a week going through this test.  The comical thing about this, if there is such a thing, is the test ended.  And I was getting prepared to fly back to Fort Belvoir and line up all of these top secret people to get back there, when they learned back at Fort Belvoir that this equipment, which was designed and made by the South Africans, had been sold to the Russians three years before we ever got ours.  So, (laughter)--
Speaker 1: So some top secret, I guess.
Speaker 2: They brought down the classification of (laughter) top secret almost immediately, and I had no trouble flying back to Fort Belvoir from Arizona.
Speaker 1: That seems to be a contradiction from what we always heard of, you know, from South Africa, that they were so anti-Communist and--so, you know, they persecuted a lot of the people of ANC [African National Congress] because they were Communist, but yet they're selling secret equipment to the Russians.
Speaker 2: I told you about this gentleman at Culpepper, Virginia, and how the economy was more important to him than his personal feelings about race.  The same thing applies to nations.  The economics, you got enough money, I don't care what kind of so-called enemy you are, we'll do business.  And apparently that's what happened with the South Africans and the Russians.  In any event, they--that was an experience that I shall not forget, with that L-20 [de Havilland Canada DHC-2 Beaver] and, and all.
Story_ID: 672481
Speaker 1: I was looking forward to getting into some other types of flying in the [U.S.] military.  And sure enough, I got orders to report to Germany for a three year tour.  And the requirement was that I be rotary wing qualified.  This was great news for me.  And I went down to Camp Wolters, I guess Fort Wolters or whatever else, Texas, for the helicopter training.  It was an interesting experience.  My whole class was made up of guys who were fixed wing operators.  I mean we had been flying airplanes for quite some time.  I had fairly decent amount of hours in airplanes, and we were all pretty cocky about going down to find this little funny whirlybird thing.  But how complicated could this be?  So, we got there, and I'll never forget all the exuberance and everything else when we went out to the airfield for the first time from a (unclear).  We're on the bus and everybody was laughing and joking, and carrying on, and making wisecracks about these engineering marvels called helicopters.  When we got there, and I, I learned later that the same experience happened to everybody that happened to me, introduced to your instructor and everything else.  And you go out and you kinda preflight the helicopter.  You had done some ground school prior to that and understood something about the principles of flight for the helicopters and all that sort of thing.  And you sit in the chopper, and, and the instructor says, "Now look, we're gonna take this very slowly because a helicopter can be kind of complicated.  And I wanna make sure that I don't take you too fast.  And if you think I'm going too fast, you tell me.  But I also don't wanna insult you.  So I wanna make sure that we move rapidly enough so that you will not be bored, so to speak."  So we went out to this one helipad, and he flew it out there.  And we sat down on the pad, and he says, "Now, let's just take one thing at a time," said, "this thing here on my left hand, well, that's, that's how you control the, the pitch.  That is, that's how you control the pitch and the blade to get the bite in the air and everything else, and the higher up you pull it, the more lift you get out of the blades.  And you can--the helicopter will go up in altitude." So he says, "So I'll demonstrate it."  So he did that, and says, "Would you like to try it?  I mean I, I know this is a little ahead of the program, but would you like to try it?"  "Oh, yeah."  So, he said, "Well, I'll take care of everything else.  You just do that.  So, I did that.  Oh, that's a really nicely done."  He says, "We normally like to hover at about three feet.  You think you could find three feet?"  I said, "I'm gonna try," so I--"Oh, remarkable.  You're ahead of the program.  I can see that right now.  Well, the next thing I'd like to, to show you is that we have these anti-torque rudder pedals," like--deals, you call 'em rudder pedals in the airplane with--we, we say anti-torque because the torque of the (gestures) main rotor and all that.  "So, I'll tell you what, I'll pull it up to a three foot hover, and all you do is just see if you can get the helicopter to turn around one side and then turn the other direction, that's if, if you think you're ready."  I said, "Oh, yeah, I'm ready," so, sure enough, I did that.  "Man, I don't have any students like you, you know that?  But I don't want you to say anything to anybody because we have to have the program that lasts a legitimate length of time.  We'll just have extra time at the end of the program.  Don't worry about it."  He said now there's only one more thing, it's the cyclic, it's this stick here, and, and in the airplanes you've been flying, well, this works just about the same.  The only difference is, at a hover or whatever you can just move it to one side, and you can just fly the helicopter sideways or whatever.  Or if you want to, you can pull back on it slightly, and just a little back pressure and you can back up.  How about that?  That's really fascinating."  "Oh yeah, that is fas--." "Tell you what, I'll, I'll, I'll hold all the other controls steady at three foot hover, and you, you just do that, if you think you can do it."  Oh yeah, so I did it.  He, he sat the chopper down, and he said, "I'm gonna tell you something: I don't know what these other guys are doing, but you're ready to hover.  And hovering is basic to flying helicopters.  You do that, and the rest of this program is just nothing.  So, I'm gonna let you just, if you want to, just take all the controls."  I had no idea what that meant.  He said, "See if you can just pull it to about a three foot hover."  So, I pulled on that thing, and that helicopter was like it got angry with me and decided I'm gonna teach you a lesson.  It was all over the place.  It was sideways; it was backwards; it was up; it was down; it was every place I didn't want it to go (laughter).  What I did not realize is that the whole procedure is a matter of a coordination between all these.  Any one of those controls is simple operate by itself, but trying to operate all three at one time took practice, and training, and coordination.  And I was, that was, it scared me.  I couldn't believe it.  I couldn't, I mean I wanted to let this monster go.  So he took the controls and he landed.  He says, "Okay, now, the reason I did that is so that you would understand something very basic: I'm the instructor; you're the student.  You are to keep that in mind and in focus the entire time you're in this program.  Do I make myself clear?"  (Laughter) Oh yeah, he did.  But I later found out, that's something they did with every fixed-wing guy that came through there.  And it just brought you right back down to earth.  And on the bus ride back to the meal queue it was silent in that bus (laughter).  None of the guys were--nobody wanted to admit what had happened to them.  But helicopter training was, was, for the most part, fun.
Story_ID: 672482
Speaker 1: There was one crazy thing.  I don't, I don't know how much of this you're interested in.  But, in hovering, you had to pull up on the stick.  And once you got the coordination down and everything, it was fine.  But trying to find three feet was really tough, 'cause you this, it's like you had the whole weight of the helicopter on, on that collective pitch.  You know, and, and it, it was like, man, your arm got tired and everything.  So, I hadn't hovered yet, and, and when you hovered, you got a special patch for your hat and everything else.  And you wore that to the officers' club or whatever else, and (unclear)--oh, man, he's hovered.  So, I went to the club one night, and I was pretty depressed.  I was having all kinds of trouble trying to hover.  And this guy said, "Well, didn't anybody tell you?"  I said, "No."  "There's a trick to it.  See, what happens, they have these little arms up on the rotors, right in the center, and they're counterweights.  And until those plop out, because of the, the, the, the pitch, you will be out of balance, and you'll be literally holding the chopper up with your arm."  He said, "And nobody can do that for very long."  So I said, "Well, how do you get 'em out?"  He said, "Well, you just kind of pop the pitch; just when you get up to where you wanna get, just pop the pitch like that.  And they flop out, and then it's just a piece of cake."  I said, "I can't wait to get back out there."  So the next day I went out.  Those were days when everybody smoked, and instructors would smoke in the helicopter while the training was going on.  So, he lit up, and he said, "Okay, let's see if we can do that three foot hover now."  I said to myself, man, I'm gonna show him something.  So (laughter), I pull it up to about a three foot hover.  And what I didn't realize was how little popping you had to do.  You just had to think it.  You couldn't move it.  And I didn't know you just thought it, so I moved it.  And man, that helicopter went from three feet up to thirty feet just that (laughter).  And then, and I realized--(unclear)--right back down as I landed it.  And it was really comedy in a way.  I wasn't tickled a bit.  But his cigarettes were all over the floor and everything else, and his lighter was down on the, the deck and stuff, and he was policing up all of his stuff.  And I was just sitting there with that chopper running and just (laughter) looking straight ahead, thinking, boy, that's it for me in this program; now I know it's over.  He had got all of his stuff together and put it back in his flight suit and all, and he sat there for a second.  And he looked at me and he said, "Let me know if you're gonna do that again, will you please?"  (Laughter) I'll never forget that.  Then he taught me how to pop the pitch, and then I could fly choppers.  But it was one of those days in training that, again, brings you down to earth, you know.  You meet the so-called cocky pilot.  The ones that are really good, are not necessarily that cocky.  They know that they're human, and they know that some of these machines may do some things that, if you're not ready for it, you can get a terrible surprise.  Well, that was chopper school [at Fort Wolters, Texas], and got through that and was assigned to Germany.
Speaker 2: About what year is this now?
Speaker 1: That would have been 1962.
Story_ID: 672483
Speaker 1: All right, so where did you go in Germany?
Speaker 2: Went to Hanau, Germany, Hanau am Main; that's Hanau on the Main River--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: H--it's H-O--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: H-A-N-A-U.
Speaker 1: H-A-N-A-U, okay.
Speaker 2: And I was assigned as the platoon leader of the aviation platoon for the 37th Engineer Battalion, 37th engineer group--group or battalion--group, yeah, engineer.  And it was a great assignment in many ways for me.  I had a command.  I was in command of all the other officers and, and the, and the, the helicopters and all.  I had my own platoon to do this with.  I was, I was a very dedicated soldier.  I mean I was really a lifer, man.  I was there forever, and I had decided not to ever get out of the [U.S.] Army.  I mean, they were gonna have to kick me out.  I wouldn't wanna ever get out of the Army.  I mean, for one, it was a shield against, what I considered to be second class citizenship.  As an officer, I had certain privileges and everything else that were not afforded me as just another black man in America, and particularly being in Germany, where I was treated like anybody else, any other American.  They did have some racial things in the social side.  The gasthaus were--gasthauses are the same thing as a bar or whatever else here.  Gasthauses were pretty much segregated by the [U.S.] military, not by the official military, but by the troops themselves, where you did have white troops that walked into a predominantly black gasthaus.  There was almost always a, a fight that would break out and vice versa.  But for the most part, everybody was on the honor system, and you went to your own gasthaus.  But fo- other than that, as far as the German people were concerned, I thought they treated me as an equal.  And I was really very pleased with that whole operation.  There was a, there was a town not too far from where I was stationed.  And I think, I'm almost positive the name of the town was Langendiebach [Germany].  It was an interesting little town because the history of it--I found by accident when I went there and I stopped by the gasthaus and ordered a beer, and they just treated me like I was royalty.  And I didn't know why, and I finally found out what happened.  During World War II [WWII], the American black soldiers were not allowed to fight in certain frontline units.  It was assumed they didn't have the courage or whatever else to fight frontline.  So, they were given the duties of, of driving trucks, the supply lines, and everything else.  They were well behind the, the, the, the frontlines most of the time, not all of them, but many times that was the case.  It doesn't mean they didn't come under fire.  It just means that that's what their main duties were.  And in this town of Langendiebach, when the German occupa- German Army was pushed out by the American Army [U.S. Army] moving further toward the east.  The American Army did not conduct themselves very well.  The soldiers did all the kinds of things we don't like to think of for American soldiers to do, rape and pillage and do whatever else they wanted to do.  And by the time the trucks got there, they found a town that was totally deserted, couldn't figure out what in the world was going on.  How--there--where are all the people?  I mean there were places where there, there was hot food on the stove, but there was nobody in sight.  And they decided to (unclear)--there for the night.  And during the late afternoon, the story goes that there was a little kid that was seen running across the street.  So they ran after him, and you know, said--and the kid was scared to death--tried to find out, you know, where are all the people?  He pointed down.  They were underground.  They were so afraid of the American soldier that they were hiding.  Well, it turns out these people had been living like this for a while, and there was no supply, there were no supplies coming in town, so they were hungry.  So what do you think these guys had on their trucks?  Tons and tons of food.  So they decide, hey, let's feed these people.  So they broke open some, some of the rations and everything else, and they started feeding people.  And people began to come out of these holes and these basements and everything else, and before it was over, they had one incredibly big party.  And the Germans were bringing out their best wine and whatever else, and the G.I.s and the Germans were having a great time.  Well, as it turns out, the people of that town never forgot that.  After all those years, they never forgot what black soldiers had done to literally keep them alive.  And the black troops occupied that town for quite some time before they moved on.  And when they left there, they left with people in tears, you know, waving at them, you know, and everything else, and we're gonna miss you.  Well, many years later, long after the war, the year I come in, and I sit in a gasthaus, they treated me like I was one of those truck drivers.  And I don't know who did that, because it was, it was one of those ironies in social interaction that was pretty remarkable.
Story_ID: 672484
Speaker 1: Germany all and all was a pleasant experience.  I actually asked the [U.S.] military to allow me to extend my tour there after three years.  It was exciting.  It was Cold War, and in every sense of the word.  We, we were literally facing eyeball to eyeball with the East Germans and the Russians.  There were a number of incidents that took place over that period of time that were pretty remarkable.  When the Cuban Missile Crisis took place, I was in Germany.  And they sent us out--they had alerts every month.  At least once a month, you'd--they, they staged what they call an alert.  And everybody'd have to get into their battle gear and everything else, and go to prearranged places.  And you'd--they timed you, and they'd check you to make sure you had all of your equipment and everything in case that had been a real, a war situation if we'd been under attack or whatever.  This one time, during the missile crisis, nobody really attached the missile crisis to us in Germany.  But, there was an auta- automatic attachment we did not realize.  And sure enough, on that final day, or evening, or whatever else, we were sent out on an alert.  And everybody thought it was just an ordinary alert, except things were different.  We were beginning to see some interesting things that were different about that, things in terms of some of the equipment that was being issued, some of the orders that were being opened, some of the other things.  We were within just inches of going to war.  Because had, had we gone to war let us say with, with Cuba, the Russians had made it very clear that they were gonna come screaming right across that border.  We were just kind of a slowdown.  There was no way for us to stop 'em.  I mean, we all knew that we wouldn't live through it, but that was what our mission was.  Our mission was to slow 'em down, keep them slowed down enough so that they could bring in reinforcements and try to fight these Russians over there.  That was a pretty exciting evening, 'cause we all thought, by the time we got out there and saw what they were preparing and some of the things I still can't talk about, we thought this is it.
Speaker 2: (Unclear) you can't talk about 'em because there's still--
Speaker 1: Well, I don't know how much of that stuff is still classified.  And I was--my military occupational spe- specialty had a dash five behind the number.  And that dash five stood for being a nuclear weapons employment officer.  I had been trained to deal with, with nukes.  So, to this day, I don't intend to ever divulge all the details that were going on at that time, but it was heavy duty.
Story_ID: 672485
Speaker 1: I tried my best to get the [U.S.] military to extend me over there [Hanau, Germany], but they wouldn't do it.  The one saving grace to me was that I might get to come to the states and get in a unit that had the Huey [Bell UH-1 Iroquois].  The Huey helicopter was something I really wanted to fly, man.  I mean it was, it was first class.  And we were authorized Hueys, but we were way down on the, on the priority list for ever getting one of 'em.  So, we didn't have 'em.  We had the H-34 helicopter [Sikorsky H-34] instead, a far cry from a Huey.  I asked them--on your preference sheet, you can put down okay, first priority for base or first priority for assignment.  And I put down first priority for base.  I did not want to be based in the South, because I'd been living the life of quote, a free man in Germany for quite some time.  I was spoiled.  I didn't wanna come back to the South.  So I, I put down all kinds of places, Fort Lewis, Washington, even places in the far Northeast and whatever else.  As much as I disliked cold, I was willing to put up with that just to be out of the South.  So they gave me Fort Benning, Georgia (laughter).
Speaker 2: Now this is 1962?
Speaker 1: This is in nine--no, this is in nineteen sixty--I guess I was sent there in very late '64 [1964]--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --or--no, it must have been early '65 [1965]--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --because I had completed three years in Germany.
Speaker 2: All right.
Speaker 1: Now 1965 was an interesting year in this country, historically.  It was the year the Voting Rights Act [Voting Rights Act of 1965] I believe was signed.  It was the year of, of, what was it, Bloody Friday [sic.] or whatever it was (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: Bloody Sunday, the--
Speaker 1: Blood Sunday?
Speaker 2: Yeah, the, the Voting Rights Act was signed in '64 [1964], but they were trying to implement, you know.
Speaker 1: Yeah, it was implemented in '65 [1965] I believe.
Speaker 2: Sixty-five [1965], right, Bloody Sunday, the march across the Edmond Pettus Bridge of Selma, Alabama.
Speaker 1: Yeah, all of those things were happening in 1965.  And I was oblivious to most of it because I had been in Germany for three years.  And I hadn't really kept close contact with that.  Let me back up a second.  Let me go back to Germany for a second.  One of the things that I did do in Germany was, I felt very strongly about the German people.  And I felt that coordinating some of our social activities with them was important.  And I started what was called the Hanau Community Course [ph.].  Having a music background, I was able to do this.  And it was made up of German nationals and American dependents and Americans that were there, civilians that were working in, in a number of different areas, as well as American military personnel.  And I had every rank from a bird colonel down to a cleansly [ph.] private in there.  And it was a great little course.  We did a lot of, lot of things.  We actually did 'Guys and Dolls.'  We did a number of concerts and everything else.  And while I was in Germany, President Kennedy [President John Fitzgerald Kennedy] was assassinated.  Now you may remember that, when President Kennedy was in Germany, in Berlin, he made that famous phrase, (speaks German) "Ich bin ein Berliner."
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Well, the German people, the West Germans just thought the world of him.  And when he was assassinated, without any notice, without anybody making any statement, there were lit candles in the windows of homes all over West Germany.  You could drive down almost any residential street, and you'd find a candle lit in the window.  And that was out of recognition and respect for the president that had been assassinated in this country.  And that course, that Hanau Community Course was commissioned to perform in churches, and in synagogues, and in cathedrals all over West Germany.  We performed on Armed Forces radio network [Armed Forces Radio Services; American Forces Network].  We, we had a whole concert we did in tribute to the president, and that was a very moving experience for all of us.  We traveled from cathedral to cathedral all over Western Germany and performed these concerts to standing ovations, packed crowds.  I don't know if many Americans ever knew how much love and affection the German people had for President Kennedy, but it was remarkable.
Story_ID: 672486
Speaker 1: Can I--
Speaker 2: Sure.
Speaker 1: --ask you a question about Germany, just--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Sure.
Speaker 1: --I know that--did you ever encounter any of the children of the black G.I.s who were over there--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Oh, my goodness, yes.
Speaker 1: --in, in--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: I, I ran into people that looked like me that spoke perfect German all over the place.  I mean they were younger than me by far, but sure, children of, of mixed marriages and, and of children of unwed mothers and whatever else that were mixed with black blood.
Speaker 1: What was their condition in Germany?  I mean did they--I mean--
Speaker 2: They were like anybody else.  I didn't get any inkling that they were treated any differently than any other German.  They were first of all a German, and the German people are very proud people.  So, I mean, you know, there was no claiming them as being American.  These were Germans, and, and they were very proud of it.  So, I, I, I don't know.  There may have been something underlying that I was not aware of, but I never saw any evidence of any of that.  Incidentally, I should have gone into the part that when I was in Germany, one of the things that made it pleasant for me was I was working under a commander, Colonel John C.H. Lee, Jr., a direct descendent of Robert E. Lee, who was so brilliant that when Secretary McNamara [Robert McNamara] wanted to go through some scenarios of what would happen if, he put together what was called McNamara's whiz kids.  He selected from every branch of service the brightest officers that the service had, IQ and whatever else.  Colonel Lee was one of those, and he was just a delight to work for.  I loved him, for one, because his whole makeup was pretty close to mine, in terms of stamina; neither one of us needed more than three and a half or four hours sleep at night.  And he would burn out staff, 'cause they just couldn't keep up with him.  The man was just incredible.  He had unbelievable energy, and we did all kinds of things together.  And he was one of these officers that you serve under, and you say to yourself: if I have to fight and die, I wanna be with this guy.  He was by every means I can think of the perfect officer, in my view.  And some didn't like him at all because he was such a hard charger.  But, man, I thought if you're gonna be a soldier, what else can you be?
Story_ID: 672487
Speaker 1: I wanted to ask you about, as I asked you off camera, ask you if Colonel Lee [John C.H. Lee, Jr.] was one of these people that was still trying to fight the Civil War, you know, with his heritage being one of--
Speaker 2: If, if you thought of it that way, maybe on the Union side, 'cause Colonel Lee was, he was a man devoid of prejudice.  I mean you could get in a lot of trouble with him by getting into some kind of ethnic argument.  That wasn't where his head was.  His head was with serving United States of America in uniform, and that was the alpha and the omega.  He wanted the best talent he could find on his staff, and I was honored to be on his staff.  So, you know, it was like a real privilege--I mean, he was a fun guy too.  I mean, at, at the little establishment where the headquarters for our group was situated, there was only one place to put a helicopter, and that was in the, in the softball, baseball field there, just a tiny little diamond there.  And often I would need to go pick him up to carry him some place, and I would land in this, this little field.  Well, he used to love the fact that I would land, bring the chopper down, and I would set it down so that the nose was right on home plate.  And he would hop in.  And--(unclear)--trees and everything else, bleachers, whatever else, right in front of me, there's no way to safely take off over those.  So I used to always take off backwards (laughter).  He got a big kick out of it.  I'd take off backwards, then do a torque turn, and go like that.  Every time I did that, I'd--out of the corner of my eye and see a big grin on his face (laughter).  We had fun together.  He was, he was a great guy.
Speaker 1: Okay, and you say he was passed over for general.
Speaker 2: They passed him over for general.  I have--the only thing I can think of for a rationale for that, maybe he was too great a guy, and maybe he rubbed some of the old iron officers the wrong way.
Story_ID: 672488
Speaker 1: Did a lot of crazy things.  One of them was when the president [President John Fitzgerald Kennedy] was coming to Germany, that's when he made his official visit, and he was gonna come to Hanau [Germany].  And we were to have all the troops out there pass and review, and you know, (gestures) reviewing stand, and whatever else and all that big deal for the president.  And being in the Corps of Engineers [U.S. Army Corps of Engineers], the Corps of Engineers was responsible for a lot of things like, like landscaping and all that kind of stuff.  So, the order came down that there would be grass (laughter) on that, on that airfield.  They closed the airfield down.  They threw me out of my office, and told me that I had like forty-eight hours to get all my helicopters and everything in my office out of there.  And they, they were gonna use that for Secret Service and for this guy, and that guy and whatever else.  They just cleaned out the airport all together for this visit; everything was getting painted up and fixed up and whatever else for the president's visit.  Well, I had no place to take my unit, and there was a place right next to our BOQs [bachelor officer quarters], our billets for the officers' housing.  It's called Campo Pond [Campo Pond Training Area].  Campo Pond was just a fairly decent sized clearing, and, and it had mostly sand.  And I, I didn't have any place to go. Forty-eight hours, where am I going to take my troops?  Where would--you know, I, I got a whole bunch of helicopters and men and everything else, equipment.  Where are we gonna go?  Well, being in the [U.S.] Army, we were prepared to, to literally live and create an airfield wherever we were.  So I decided to pick Campo Pond.  And I had a friend who was across from me in his, in his command, who had a light equipment company, graders and all kind--bulldozers and all kinds of other equipment and stuff.  So I said how about, come over and let's, let's level off enough land here for us to land these helicopters and, and, and fixed-wing airplanes.  He said great, so we took it on as a project, and literally we created an airport.  We compacted that sand and everything else, so it was almost hard as concrete.  We took our, our tactical lighting set out, put lights on this thing.  I had my buddy from the Bailey bridge company to come out and build a vertical Bailey bridge, and we put a little tower on top of that.  We had our radio communications; we had everything.  Well (laughter), we were operating just fine out of there and all, and everybody just thought it was wonderful, great innovation, work around, everything else.  And literally, I could walk out of my housing area and just a, a few hundred yards, I'd go to work right at the airport (laughter).
Story_ID: 672489
Speaker 1: Oh, it worked just fine until the commanding general of the 5th Corps [V Corps] was--the day or so before, I guess the day before the president was coming in, was making his final inspection to make sure everything was fine.  And he had his pilot flying in over to this airport where the president was going to be.  He looked down and he said, "What's that?  I don't know, what airport is that?"  And his, his pilot said, "Sir, I don't know; I haven't seen it before."  He said, "Gosh, it's awful close to our installation.  Let's find out what that is."  Well, he found out.  And I didn't know, but there was an [U.S.] Army regulation that pre- precluded your ever creating an airport without having the authority of the [U.S.] Department of Defense (laughter).  I had violated some very serious [U.S.] military orders.  But before he could do anything about it, the president showed up the next day.  And wouldn't you know, airplanes from all over Europe had no place to land close enough to be reasonable to the president's visit--couldn't land at that airport, because it was closed, and there was no other airport in the immediate vicinity.  They found my little airport, and I had international traffic.  I had Italian dignitaries; I had French dignitaries; I had 'em from Belgium; I had from all over, all over Europe.  My airport was loaded with all kinds of insignias and everything else, of airplanes from all over Europe.  And before this general could court martial me, or (laughter) whatever he was trying to do, he was getting a flood of thanks and compliments from military high end staff from all over Europe, saying, "What a great idea to put that little airport there and everything else.  We enjoyed it very much, with the short ride to go out to the--" (laughter).
Speaker 2: So did they call it Tilmon International Airport [ph.] (laughter)?
Speaker 1: It was called Tilmon International.  And the--my commanding officer, Colonel Lee [John C.H. Lee, Jr.], called me in several days after the Kennedy [President John Fitzgerald Kennedy] visit.  And he was very seldom really stern with me.  And he had me remain at rigid attention, and he read me this letter from the commanding general of 5th Corps, saying, citing all the military regulations that were violating and everything else, and total disregard for authority and blah, blah, blah and blah, blah, blah, and everything else, and demanding that that airport be immediately dismantled and, and the runway destroyed, and et cetera, et cetera, and mentions in there that this is a court martial offense.  I'm standing there, by this time, man, I'm shaking all over.  And then he said that's the first half of the letter; the second half: "However, in that this airport solved the day for us, saved the day for us by creating an opportunity for our international partners (unclear)," blah, blah, blah, and everything else.  "As reluctant as I am, under the circumstances, I'd like to commend Captain Tilmon [HistoryMaker Jim Tilmon] for his innovative and creative approach toward solving a problem" (laughter).  At which time Colonel Lee just broke out laughing, and you know, it, it was one those strange days in the military where I was that close to being court martialed and actually had gotten out of this with a commendation.
Speaker 2: They gave you a problem that, that had, you know, where you, you had to solve it yourself.  You didn't have the resources to do anything else but that.
Speaker 1: And nobody told me that it was against regulations.  I had no idea.  I would have sought to get permission.  I would have never got it in time.  But it, it literally was, it was great.  We even had a landing system.  I mean the Army at that time had a prism type thing where that you could set up this device with a little electric bulb in it.  And it had three different prisms, so that if you were flying or approach and you were too high, it would be white; if you were too low, it would be red; and if it was green, you were right in the slot, and you could just take that right down to the runway, pull off the par, and land.  And we were using that at night.  It was great; everybody loved it, man.  It was Tilmon International, which almost ended up with Tilmon in Fort Leavenworth [Kansas] (laughter).  So Germany was, was great fun--
Speaker 2: Okay, so--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --a big challenge.
Story_ID: 672490
Speaker 1: You came back here in '65 [1965] to Fort Benning, Georgia, right?
Speaker 2: Came back here in 1965, Fort Benning, Georgia.  I was assigned to the 11th Air Assault Division Test.  This was a division that was to test air mobile, mobile tactics and the move, quick and effective movement of large numbers of troops by helicopter.  It was to revolutionize the way the military functioned.  Much of what we learned during those tests, are still being used today in Iraq and Afghanistan.  A lot of what they used in Vietnam came directly out of that, that test.  Some things we thought would work, didn't, but we did the test nonetheless.  It was an exciting thing being in that operation.  For one, for me, I got to fly Huey [Bell UH-1 Iroquois], and I still think that's one of the greatest helicopters that ever been made.  I know that there are others that, much more modern, much sexier and everything else, but that baby was just great.  It just had power to burn, and I just felt like I could do anything with it.  It was just a great helicopter.
Speaker 1: Is that the one that was used primarily in the Vietnam War?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: The Huey, the one--
Speaker 2: The Huey was--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --the one, the green one with--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --a workhorse--
Speaker 1: --with the side doors open, with--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --that you see--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: It was a workhorse of the Vietnam War.
Speaker 1: As a first--I mean the Air Cavalry [1st Cavalry Division] used it, right, that--
Speaker 2: That--well, here's what happened, during 1965 in my life: one, something that most people still don't know anything about.  At one point we were all of a sudden ordered directly to--we were supposed to be doing tests and everything else.  We ordered out to this bivouac area.  All of our choppers, and this particular battalion, and whatever else were sent out there.  And we, we were there, and we had staging areas and everything else, and we didn't know why we were there.  We were not told.  I got a little concerned because all of a sudden, the ordinance trucks started arriving full of live ammunition.  I'm saying to myself, what in the world is going on?  Last time I'd seen something like this, it was at the Cuban Missile Crisis, and we were in Germany facing the Russians.  Here we are, in a field, in the middle of the United States, so to speak, sitting out there in, some place in Georgia, with live ammunition.  Where are we gonna go?  What we're gonna do?  No one knew.  Everyone was afraid to ask.  But somebody had a portable radio, and they were listening to the progress of the march on Montgomery [Selma to Montgomery March].  And it was pretty exciting news, particularly to me, and I, I didn't know squat about what was happening in the civilian world anyhow.
Speaker 1: This is Dr. King's [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] march from Selma [Alabama] to Montgomery [Alabama], right?
Speaker 2: That's correct.
Speaker 1: The follow-up after that Bloody Sunday--
Speaker 2: That's correct.
Speaker 1: --debacle, yeah.
Speaker 2: Well, it turns out, an order had been issued from the White House, I believe, saying there would not be a repeat of that, that Bloody Sunday, and that the United States military would see to it.  I never knew what the full orders were.  I just know that there were certain officers that had been assigned landing zones in the City of Montgomery, that we were subject to be issued live ammunition for all of our weapons, and that we very well may have been called upon to bring martial law to that city, pretty wild experience.  We left there when everything was quiet in Montgomery, and that's why we pretty much were sure that's what had happened.  All of us had to kind of stay awake that night, saying to ourselves, how in the world could we ever fire on another American?  But if we were ordered to do so, we would not have had a choice.
Story_ID: 672491
Speaker 1: Now you described, I think, at the end of our last session.  We were off camera and were talk- talking about how some of the soldiers cried and had a fit at the, at the, the suggestion that they may have to shoot some of their--
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, oh yeah--
Speaker 1: --their, their--
Speaker 2: --when the word was trying to--getting around--it was filtering out--it was buzz.  It wasn't something that came down through the orders.  It was a buzz.  And there were some very emotional soldiers out there, and officers and enlisted men, about the very thought that we might have to actually use or weapons and our training and everything else to hurt Americans.  You're talking about a bunch of die hard, hard soldiers, man.  They, you know, most civilians, when they talk about patriotism, it's whether or not they put their hand over their heart when the flag is moving or whatever, or singing the national anthem ['Star Spangled Banner'].  These were people who were ready to die for this country, and for what they believed in, and for America, and for Americans.  And the very thought that they might have to turn their guns against other Americans, it was unthinkable.  It was literally unthinkable.  It was for all of us.  It was for me, and I'm sure it was for a lot of others.
Speaker 1: Now you described a speech that was--or at least a dialogue between the soldiers, the--some of the white soldiers, especially from the South, were very upset that they may have to shoot other white southerners; that was their major concern.
Speaker 2: Yeah, that was a major concern.  But, you know, I think overriding that, I think all of us realized that there was no Mason Dixon Line in terms of shooting another American.  There was no division, North and South.  Those of us that were black and those of us that were white from the North, and whatever else, had almost identically the same emotional response to this as they did if they were from Mississippi, or Alabama, or Georgia.  It just wasn't right; it just was not right, and most of us were just so thankful that we did not ever have to go in and do that.  I'm sure that had, had things gotten like they were on that Bloody Sunday, we would may very well have been called in.  But, thank god that didn't happen.
Speaker 1: So, the enemy, in that scenario would have been the, the sheriffs' departments and the, the police officers, and other volunteers who would level themselves against the marchers, right?
Speaker 2: The way that it was articulated to me--and again, this is unofficial because they never officially told us anything--was that anybody that materially endangered the lives of the marchers was to be considered an enemy combatant.  None of us knew how that would really play out.  I don't think there was an officer or an enlisted man at any rank that was pleased with that operation at all.  No matter where they were from or whatever else, inclination they might have, it was a terrible thing.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I, I think most people don't realize that the reason why we have a police force is for a more civil kind of control of, of these kind of incidents.  And the, the military is, is, is charged with keeping order by whatever means, right (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: It was the first and only time that I can think of that the whole business of the violation of the use of the United States military would have taken place, that, you know, the United States military is not to be used in, in domestic issues unless they, the nation is under attack or whatever else.  I've forgotten what the exact language is, but it's pretty strong language.  I suppose that's what they thought would, the interpretation was, that if these people had fired on or done something else to these marchers, it was like a domestic war.
Speaker 1: Now this is something I think that most African Americans would--well, most, most people today would be kind of, would be kind of shocked to consider--I mean in light of the fact that FBI [Federal Bureau of Investigation] back in those days often didn't protect the marchers at all.  In fact, they actually--
Speaker 2: Nobody protected the marchers--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --Bloody Sunday.  It was a difficult time.
Speaker 1: So it said something about the commitment of the Johnson [President Lyndon Baines Johnson] administration to civil rights, I suppose.
Speaker 2: No question about that, no question whatsoever.  The Johnson administration, as it turns out, as much as I didn't think so, because when Kennedy [President John Fitzgerald Kennedy] was gone, I assumed, oh, wow, we got a Texan in the White House now, we're in trouble.  He did more, I--that's my, my estimation--for black America than any other president than, that's ever taken that office.  I mean he had the courage, and he had the understanding of how to deal with [U.S.] Congress, to get things done, get legislation passed, and everything else.
Story_ID: 672492
Speaker 1: Going on with this, that spring, that spring was a time when my life really began to change.  Nineteen sixty-five [1965] was a life changing year for me, in many ways.  I had to come to grips with some things that I just, were foreign to me about what was happening in this country between the races.  But I was working for, again, this time, an officer who was really a die hard, fourteen karat, absolute bigot, (laughter) I mean.  He was my battalion commander.  He was, he was interesting, to say the least.  I was a captain.  I had excellent refrigi- efficiency reports, and by all means, it looked like I was headed to becoming a field grade officer, a major, just a matter of time.  And I was very proud of that.  I had command of a certain number of helicopters there in the, in the unit.  And suddenly I was reassigned to the job of public information officer, the PIO.  Public information officer at that time in that unit was a job that was to be occupied by a warrant officer, not a commissioned officer.  And no flies on warrant officers, I mean I'm, that was a very proud position for a person to have in the [U.S.] military.  But warrant officers didn't command.  They did other kinds of thing, and it was a slap in the face; it was a demotion; it was whatever else.  And the whole unit had to know it because I had orders to become the public information officer.  Well, I didn't know what I was gonna do with myself.  We didn't have any need for press.  I mean our battalion wasn't doing anything outrageous and, and remarkable.  Besides, I didn't have any contact with anybody to do any press releases.  I didn't even know what a press release was.  I had no preparation for this whatsoever.  It was a do-nothing job.  And the hardest work you could ever have in this world is one where that- there's nothing to do, and that's what I had.  I did something really, really ridiculous.  I really took an incredible chance with my career.  The unit was ordered to go to Watertown, New York, during the summer of 1965, or really the early spring of 1965, and fly our troops, our, our, our equipment in support of the National Guard in New York [New York National Guard].  Well, we were gonna have to fly all these helicopters all the way from Fort Benning, Georgia, to Watertown, New York, which is a stone's throw from the Canadian border--what a trip.  And I was trying to figure out, how can I make something out of this?  And I did.  This is gonna be the most bizarre story you've ever heard.  I went in to see the operation's officer, and said, "Sir, I wanted to make you aware of the fact I've done considerable research about our trip to Watertown."  "Oh, really?"  "Yes, sir, and I'm very concerned about maneuver damage."  Now, maneuver damage is a phrase that no senior officer wants to hear.  It deals with the military damaging civilian property or whatever else, and getting sued, having the United States government sued because of it.  So if you create maneuver damage, your career is damaged.  You know, it's just not a good thing.  So I had his attention when I said those words, maneuver damage.  He said, "What, well, in what way?"  I said, "Well, sir, I've, I've found out something really strange.  I've found out that the ultra high frequency wind of our turbine engis- engines on the Huey [Bell UH-1 Iroquois] strangely affect livestock, hens stop laying their eggs, and you can't believe what happens to minks," said, "we happened to fly over a mink farm, they destroy each other's pelts.  We could have a considerable amount of maneuver damage here."  He says, "Oh my god, what do we do?"  So I said, "Well, I propose to take a chopper and fly out ahead of the unit.  I will scout out the route to discover where all the hatcheries are and where the mink farms are, send back the coordinates, and you can simply avoid those places, and it won't be a problem."  He says, "Do it.  I'll have the orders cut."  (Laughter) So, he cut orders for me.  I had--
Speaker 2: Now was any of this true?  I mean--
Speaker 1: It's all true--no, oh, you mean about that--
Speaker 2: I mean was the story--
Speaker 1: --mink farm?
Speaker 2: --of the mink farm, yeah.
Speaker 1: I have no idea.
Speaker 2: So you created (laughter)--
Speaker 1: Yeah (laughter), sorry about that.  I hope the statute of limitations will allow me to get away with this.  But in any event, he gave me a fist full of credit cards and cut the orders and everything else.  "When you wanna leave?"  "Right away, sir.  I think I need to get out there and start--this is gonna take a little effort."  So, he says, "You have your pick of the choppers, whatever you want, pick your crew, and get out of here."  "Yes, sir."  So I picked the best chopper in the unit--I picked the best crew chief and the best co-pilot; and we took off and headed north, I mean, really, man, headed north.
Story_ID: 672493
Speaker 1: Heading north was a good thing for me (laughter).  But I really did do what I said I was gonna do.  I tried to scout out all these farms.  I didn't find much in the way of hatcheries and mink farms all the way from Georgia to New York.  But I did stop in a number of towns, and I was a big celebrity there because most civilians had never seen a Huey [Bell UH-1 Iroquois] up close.  They didn't even have a good picture of it.  They'd seen it on, on, on the news from Vietnam, but certainly, it was so new that they just didn't see one in--that, that was available for civilians to see.  So when the word went ahead that this Huey was gonna come into, whatever town, the press was there in droves and everything else.  And that was my first experience dealing with the press.  I was holding press conferences.  I mean I would just stand there on the side of the Huey, and I had cameras laid out all in place, and the radio was--they had their microphones in my face, and they were asking me questions and stuff.  And I was telling them about what the Huey could do and all that sort of thing, why it was a remarkable helicopter and way ahead of its time, state of the art and the whole number (laughter).  I did that all the way from Fort Benning, Georgia, to Watertown, New York, just every stop.  Every place I had to refuel or whatever else, I'd have this big gaggle of press there.  And it turned out to be a lot of fun.  It was pretty satisfying for the ego (laughter) and whatever else.  And I got all the way up to Watertown, New York, and then they gave me a small staff to work with, because I had created all this press.  I mean and this was great press for the [U.S.] Army.  I mean, you know, the, the, the, the--my battalion was getting great accolades--"Hey, great job," you know, "Real good forward thinking, you know, having some guy go out and do this thing; it's just a great idea."  You know all kinds of kudos and accolades are coming down to this battalion, that they'd given this PIO [public information officer] job to this black officer (laughter).  So, I had a kind of a double whammy because most of these people had never seen a black officer and- doing anything besides flying a modern helicopter.  Neither here, nor there, went to Watertown.  We had daily press briefings.  We did the whole thing.  We were on radio; we were on, on film; we were on, on all the television news programs; we were on nightly news and all those programs.  It was great, sixty helicopters.  I had the press.  Well, finally the thing ended, and I was starting to see it end but--
Speaker 2: So you were, you were sort of an advance man for the--
Speaker 1: I was the--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yeah, so, it, it--
Speaker 1: --advance party.  And although it started off as a hoax, it turned out to be the best thing that could have happened for the battalion and for [U.S.] Army Aviation at that time.  So, anyway, and I, I had authority to fly the press around.  I could take 'em up on, you know, joyrides and stuff like that.  Boy, I'll tell you know, they just loved it; they ate it up like crazy.
Story_ID: 672494
Speaker 1: So, going back, I had the choice of either flying back with the formation or flying back alone.  I chose to fly alone, and I landed wherever I pleased.  And I, I stopped in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, for refueling.  And the press came out.  A guy named Adam Lynch came out from NBC television news, white guy, a real, real fan of aviation, was just absolutely blown away by this Huey [Bell UH-1 Iroquois], just blown away; did a, an in depth interview with me about everything there was and all that.  And he said, "You know, you, you, you can't leave Pittsburgh now.  It's getting late in the day, no point in your flying at night, and trying to get any further down the road.  You're gonna have to stop some place.  Stop here.  I want to introduce you to a really good friend of mine.  I wanna take you to supper and tonight," and all that sort of stuff.  Okay, so he took the whole group to, to supper.  And I met a guy named Regis Bobonis [Regis Bobonis, Sr.].  Regis is a black guy.  He was a producer for the, the NBC news at that time, Adam Lynch's producer.  It was a great meal, and we had a lot of fun talking and visiting.  And finally, Adam says, "You know, you really need to get out of the [U.S.] military.  You need to get out and fly for an airline."  Well, this was my lifelong dream, but I said, "Adam, have you taken a good look at me recently?  There isn't anybody that looks like me flying for an airline in this country."  He said, "Oh yes, that's where you're wrong.  That's where you're wrong," he says, "as a matter of fact, you can fly for American Airlines [American Airlines, Inc.]."
Story_ID: 672495
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, so American Airlines [American Airlines, Inc.]--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: So he said, "I know you can fly for an airline.  As a matter of fact, American Airlines is hiring right now."  And he says, "And I know they'll hire you."  I said, "Well, how do you know that?"  He said, "Because they already got one black pilot, and they gotta find somebody to fly with him" (laughter).  So, we all laughed on that one.  And I kind of took it as kind of a, a joke.  I mean it, you know, it wasn't really serious, wasn't something I should seriously pursue.  And the thought that I could get out of the [U.S.] military--you know, remember, my whole concept was I was a lifer; I was there forever.  Granted, I was working in a very uncomfortable position in this particular unit, but it didn't completely sour me on the military altogether.  Anyway, flying back to Fort Benning [Georgia], I thought a lot about what had been said the night before.  And I wondered, you know, what should I be doing with my life?  I mean, I'd been in the [U.S.] Army almost eight years to the day or whatever, and it didn't look like I was gonna make major any time soon, because this battalion commander was really not in my corner.  But I kept saying well, Jim [HistoryMaker Jim Tilmon], after all--I landed there finally, and I guess this next day or two, maybe three, we had a routine mission.  We went out to--flying a whole load of troops out to a drop zone and just a typical tactical training situation.  And I was leading a gaggle of helicopters to, to go out there to this, this drop zone, and I looked up and saw this big black column of smoke.  And I'm gonna tell you something, you know, as a pilot, there's something strange about smoke.  Sometimes you know that it's an airplane.  It's not just an, an oil fire or tires on fire or whatever else.  And I knew, instinctively I just felt like oh, my god, somebody's bought it.  And about that same time I got this thing on the radio ordering all aircraft back to base immediately.  So I had to turn this whole big gaggle of helicopters around and go back and land.  And they took us into a, kind of an assembly room, and they announced that there had been a mid-air collision between two of our choppers, twenty-one guys died.  And they said that they wanted all of us to go home immediately, and so that our dependents didn't freak out when they heard that there had been this crash, and they had not notified the next of kin, and they would not wonder whether it was their husband, or their father, or whatever else.  So they sent everybody home.  And I was pretty shaken.  I mean, you know, the idea that this could happen.  These guys just meshed blades and (makes sound) that was it.  Later on I'll tell you about why all that happens.  Anyway, I get home, I'm walking in the door, and I'm just putting my stuff down, the phone rings.  It's Adam Lynch and Regis Bobonis [Regis Bobonis, Sr.] from Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania].  They had been watching the wires and saw that the wire service said the 227th Helicopter Battalion [227th Assault Helicopter Battalion] from Fort Benning had a mid-air collision, and twenty-one soldiers died with no other information.  And they were concerned, genuinely concerned, whether or not I was alive or dead.  That's when I began to take them seriously.  I said to myself, gosh, I've met these guys and with 'em one night, and here they are, this concerned about my welfare.  Maybe I ought to think carefully about what they were saying.  That was the day I applied for the airline.
Story_ID: 672496
Speaker 1: And the application was kind of interesting, because I didn't know which airline to apply for.  I'd always wanted to fly for American [American Airlines, Inc.], but I figured, gosh, that's probably out of my reach to do or whatever else.  And even though they already had a black pilot or whatever else, I didn't know if there was gonna be any chance.  But I apply to American; I applied to United [United Airlines]; I applied--
Speaker 2: Now, now why did you prefer American?
Speaker 1: It's the first airplane I ever saw.  And when I would go to Tulsa [Oklahoma] to look at airplanes up close and personal, that was the terminal I only went--always went to.  American was big and tall, so they had a big maintenance facility there, and still do for that matter.  So, that was the airline of choice.  But I ended up going to take the stanine exam [Standard nine].  The stanine exam was a written exam that you had to take in those days if you're gonna get hired by almost any reputable airline.  The exam took about nine hours.  You had fifteen minutes for, for lunch.  It asked questions about, just about everything you could imagine, and even some things you couldn't imagine.  And it was every kind of, of exam, math, and physics, and recognition of aircraft, and all kinds of word problems, and comprehension problems and whatever else.  You come out of that, that exam and you're just, you're numb.  An interesting thing is, the guys that I know of that took the exam and felt like they did well, flunked it.  I thought I had flunked it.  I passed it (laughter), go figure.  Anyway, you had to do that.  I remember going to United, and the guy there say, "Hey, you've got all the credentials; you've got everything here all lined up."  He said, "You're as good as hired.  You're just waiting--we're just waiting for a class assignment for you 'cause you're a, you're, you're in."  I didn't realize that was a charade at that time.  That's the way they played the game.  I went to American, and it was an interesting experience.  The guy there in personnel--they had to go to the personnel guy first--looked at all my records and everything else, and says, "I see here you've been flying helicopters.  Do those things go straight up and down?"  I said, "No, sir, not quite."  "Oh, well, and you got some, you got a lot of fixed wing time too."  "Yes, sir, I do."  "What is this airplane you've been flying?"  I said, "I've been flying the L-20 Beaver [de Havilland Canada DHC-2 Beaver]."  "Oh, really?  How much does it weigh?"  Well, you know, in the [U.S.] Army we never thought about weight.  In the [U.S.] Air Force and [U.S.] Navy and all those, they think weight and, and they're thinking in terms of all those kinds of characteristics of an airplane.  In the Army, you know, 5,500 pounds I don't know, 5,800 pounds, I don't know, somewhere in that range.  If you could get it in the, in the Beaver, you could fly it, so (laughter) we didn't worry too much about the weight.  But he was kind of nonplussed at that answer.  He said, "Well, I can tell you something, you know," he said, "you look out that window.  We're getting ready to become an all jet airline," said, "you know, you gotta think really fast to fly a jet.  You gotta stay ahead of the airplane.  You cannot think like you do in these little airplanes.  Do you think you can fly a jet?"  I said, "Sir, if it's got wings, I'll fly it."  So he sat back in his chair, and I guess he looked at me as to say this sucker is arrogant too.  So he says, "Have you ever flown an ILS?"  Well, that's instrument landing system, a particular type of instrument landing system.  I said, "Yes, sir."  That's what we were trained on.  That's what I trained on at, at Fort Rucker [Alabama], you know, when I was doing all that crazy training.  We, we flew ILS approaches all the time.  He said, "All right, I'm gonna send you upstairs to the simulator.  And if you can successfully pass the ILS test, I'll let you, I'll let you get, get by here."  So, hey, I went up there.  It was really, by the time I got back downstairs, he was standing at his desk, and it was a completely different mood.  He says, "This is unbelievable.  My guy upstairs says you flew the best ILS he's ever seen.  Okay, so I guess you can get by me.  Your next stop is the chief pilot."
Story_ID: 672497
Speaker 1: So I had no problem from then on, except that--and, and I, I knew I was hired.  I, you know, I had, I had a class assignment and had everything else.  I was to report I think on the 5th of September or something like that of 1965.  This was July, and a day or two after that--I guess this must have been early July, because a day or two after that I got notification from American [American Airlines, Inc.] that all I had to do was pass the flight physical.  Well, I couldn't get any time off from my battalion commander for anything, so I flew all night on like a Friday night to go up and take the physical on a Saturday morning.  And it was an all night flight and everything else.  I got there and I was thinking, boy, I don't know how I'm gonna get through a physical now.  You know, I'm bushed and everything else, and I figured what I need is to get a hearty breakfast.  I did not know what a hearty breakfast really was that was healthy, so I had a good southern breakfast.  I had three, four eggs; I had whole milk; and I had sausage and biscuits with butter all over 'em and everything else.  Needless to say, they sent me a little note saying that, "You were hired except for the fact that you flunked your physical.  Your cholesterol is too high."  I'd never heard of cholesterol before.  I--I didn't know what they're talking about.  Well, but they said, "But you can have, have it rechecked, and if you can pass this, then you'll be all right."  So, after all of this, now we're gonna play a cholesterol game--(unclear)--know about it.  So I got in touch with the nearest flight surgeon, because that's the only credentials they would accept.  Nearest flight surgeon was, I think he was in, right across the line in, in Alabama.  And I figured well, here we go.  I go over there and obviously this guy is white, and I thinking well, chances of my getting through this are not too great.  Turns out he was a hell of a nice guy, and he gave me some advice about how to take the test.  He say first of all, you wanna take it fasting, said you, you were eating all the wrong stuff and everything else.  It's a wonder you didn't just, you know, flunk it forever.  So he says I want you--he said here's what you do: for three days before you take this test--he told me exactly how to eat and everything else.  I was fasting when I went in; I passed the test; I got hired; put in my papers to get out of the [U.S.] military immediately.
Story_ID: 672498
Speaker 1: It was, the paperwork was in progress late July, 1965.  President Lyndon Johnson [President Lyndon Baines Johnson] went on television and said, "I am beefing up our troops in Vietnam.  Effective immediately, I'm re-designating the 11th Air Assault Division Test to the 7th Calv [7th Cavalry Regiment], and they'll be shipping out to Vietnam to support our troops."  Wow, here I have my lifelong dream, not only being able to go out and fly for an airline, but to be able to fly for American Airlines [American Airlines, Inc.].  And now they decided they wanted to send me to war?  I mean I, I'm a career soldier.  That's what I'm supposed to do.  There's a war, I'm supposed to go and fight.  But by the same token, I've wanted to do this since I was four or five years old.  What do I do?  And I remember I got in touch with my dad [George Tilmon, Sr.].  And he said to me, "This is a decision you have to make.  You're talking about your entire life here.  You're talking about what you value as being important to you in your life.  I cannot dictate that to you.  This not a father's decision.  This is something you have to do."  I elected to get out of the [U.S.] military because it was a lifelong dream.  Besides that, I was over thirty years old.  I mean the chances of my getting hired on by an airline after that, after maybe a two or three year period, nil.  Thirty-two I think was the cutoff for American Airlines at the time, and I must have been thirty-one, at least.  I think my birthday was that year.  I was probably thirty-two by the time I, I got out of there.  Anyway, I am all wired to get out of the military, and two or three things happened.  This battalion commander called me in, and he chewed me out like I'd never been chewed before.  I was called names that I never thought I'd be called by anybody.  I mean he really, he was just violent.  And, and the one name he called me that I wasn't able to deal with, and I was, I almost did what I think he wanted me to do, I almost hit him.  He called me a coward.  I've never had in my life I'd been called a coward before, and I was ill-prepared for it.  When he did that, I mean I had a kind of a knee jerk reaction to get up and smash his face in, but I didn't.  Thank god I didn't, 'cause that's exactly what he wanted me to do.  And his parting words to me were as follows: "This unit is going to Vietnam.  And not only are you going with it, you're not coming back."  And I said to myself, man, if there was ever any doubt in what I wanna do, that doubt's erased.  Well, the paperwork went only so far before he said--oh, and in the same meeting he says, "I am going to personally follow that paperwork right up through Third Army headquarters [Shaw Air Force Base, South Carolina].  And I'm, I'm gonna follow it all the way up to Third Army headquarters, and I'm going to make absolutely certain that it's declined at every level.  I'm gonna make a personal visit, and that's what I'm gonna do with my time.  You'd better get ready to go to war."  So, he did.  I had no idea what was going on.  I did mention something of this to my friends in Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania], because they wanted to know how I was progressing.  I don't know the, all the details of this.  I can only tell you what I've been able to learn.  But apparently, Regis Bobonis [Regis Bobonis, Sr.] had a contact, and I don't know whether this was the contact directly or he had a contact, he knew somebody.  But somehow, word got to a gentleman who was working as an aide or assistant to Vice President Humphrey [Hubert Humphrey] that this black officer was getting out of the [U.S.] Army to fly for American Airlines.  And Hubert Humphrey was quoted as making the following statement, and I have no way of making sure that it was exactly what he said.  He says, "I'm glad to hear that.  I would rather see that black face sitting in the cockpit of an airliner over the United States than face down in a rice paddy.  I wanna know how this guy is doing."  Well, of course that triggered a certain string of events.  This question about how I was doing went to the joint chiefs, that went to the secretary of the Army, secretary of the Army took it right down through the ranks to the Third Army headquarters.  Every one of these times that is goes there it has a sus- suspense date on it that has to be answered within a certain length of time, and it'd better be the right answer (laughter).  And the query came down that the vice president of the United States was asking, "What is the progress of Captain Tilmon's [HistoryMaker Jim Tilmon] departure from the military?"  Well, all of a sudden, this battalion commander did not have the clout.  The secretary of the Army did, and the secretary of the Army said, "Get him out of here" (laughter).  "I don't wanna deal with this.  I don't want the vice president on my back," or words to that effect.  And all of a sudden, my orders were approved.
Story_ID: 672499
Speaker 1: Now in the meantime, this battalion commander had played a dirty trick.  He assigned me as a, a--what do they call it--report of survey officer.  This is an assignment that they can be put on.  And when you're a report of survey officer, what you're supposed to do is if some damage has happened to military property, you're supposed to investigate that and bring back a report.  And it's supposed to be in limbo until it's approved.  Now, while you're a report of survey officer, you cannot be assigned anything else; no personnel action can take place.  Therefore, I couldn't get out of the [U.S.] military even if everything was approved until the battalion commander approved this report of survey, which he was not about to do until we were on a boat to Vietnam.  Well, it came the last day I was to get out, and I went over to this captain's office, who was the officer in charge of this report of survey.  And I went in, and I said, "Here's your report of survey."  He said, "Well, it'll have to be approved by the battalion commander."  And he was, he was obviously in on the deal, and he was really pleased to say this.  I said, "No, it doesn't."  He said, "Yes, it does."  He says, "You'd better know you're not getting out of the Army at all."  I said, "What's your date of rank?"  He was junior to me.  I said, "I'm not accustomed to an officer junior to me sitting on his butt when he talks to me.  Get off your ass."  (Laughter) So he stood at attention.  I said, "Now, let me give you a lesson 101 in the Army.  The report of survey you're talking about is not my report of survey, because it does not exist until I accept it and sign it.  I didn't do either.  This report of survey is blank.  It belongs to no one.  Have a nice day," at which time I went out and got in my car, then I drove off the post.  That's how I left the United States Army (laughter).  It's a bizarre story, like a lot of my life has been bizarre, but--
Speaker 2: So this is--I'm trying to understand the protocol here.  I mean this, the survey you turned in, I mean, didn't have to be--I mean since the commander wasn't there to approve it, it--and the other guy really couldn't--
Speaker 1: No one could do anything because I had not officially accepted it.  What they should have done, they should have given me the report of survey and ordered me to accept it and sign it right then.  They would have had a copy; I would have had a copy; that would have been official documentation.  That act never took place; therefore, I was never the report of survey officer.  I was never under those orders.  I was never directed to do anything because none of that personnel action took place.  So there was no hold on my records because I was not on report of survey.  All of them thought I was, but they never bother to check that one single item, whether or not I'd ever accepted it and signed it, and I didn't.
Speaker 2: Okay, I got it (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: So, I guess you can call that cheating if you want to.  I call it savvy.
Speaker 2: How who, who was your, who was this commanding officer anyway?  You, you--
Speaker 1: I can't think of it--
Speaker 2: --haven't given his name.
Speaker 1: I, I haven't given his name because I can't remember his name.  I frankly cannot.  And I wouldn't be ashamed or anything else--(unclear)--give it to you, but I, I don't--I suppose my memory is just protected.  I, I just--he's dropped out of my memory bank altogether.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: He was a very difficult and troubled individual.  And I think he was right.  I think I would not have come back from Vietnam.  I would have been on every suicide mission there was.  So, there I was.  I would have either been killed in combat, or I'd have been in Fort Leavenworth [Kansas] for failure to obey an, an order in combat.  So, I got out.
Story_ID: 672500
Speaker 1: Okay, so this is 1965--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Nineteen sixty-five [1965].  And I reported in to American Airlines [American Airlines, Inc.] in September.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, so did--you, you had to be trained there, right, to fly the--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: With American, yes.
Speaker 1: --jets?  Had you ever flow a jet before--
Speaker 2: No, but I didn't start off with jets--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --with American.  They still had proper airplanes.  When I reported in to Dallas Love Field [Dallas, Texas] to be one of the candidates, one of the class members for this class for, with American Airlines.  It was very interesting because we all came from different places, but we were to assemble in this one area.  And we assembled there, an American rep came in and said, "Welcome to American Airlines, and we're delighted to have you gentlemen.  First act is that we want you to understand that you will be given accommodations and a hotel.  There will be double accommodations, therefore you're gonna need a roommate, so we'd like for you to choose your roommate now."  That was a fun event.  You ever seen what happens on a little league field or something where a sandlot ball where people are choosing up sides and they're choosing people, and there's always one pee wee guy that nobody wants, so you keep choosing people to make sure that you don't end up with this guy?  That's the way that went.  People knew that I was the only black face in that room, and nobody wanted to be my roommate, so they were choosing anybody.  They were just "I choose that guy," "I choose that-" you know, just (laughter) going around the room.  And I was kind of chuckling.  And all of a sudden, this big, booming voice, "I choose him."  He was pointing directly at me.  This big white guy was pointing his finger at me, and he wanted me to be his roommate, great.  So I go over and shake hands with him, and his fist just swallows up my--he was an ex-professional, professional football player, [U.S.] Navy jock, flew jets for the Navy, whatever, Ray LaCont [ph.] was his name.  Ray and I became very fast friends, and we were, we were really tight, lots of fun we had over the whole racial situation.  They had a bus that took you from the hotel to the, the academy, flight academy [American Airlines Cadet Academy].  And there were never enough seats on the bus for everybody.  So, at breakfast, you know, you had to try to dash out there right away so you could get a seat or else you'd have to stand up going all the way to the academy.  So Ray and I had this plan.  I would go to breakfast early; I would eat; I'd go out and sit on the bus.  Ray knew he'd always have a seat, no matter what time he got there because (laughter) nobody wanted to sit next to me (laughter).  So, we used to laugh about that every time we went to the flight academy.  We would sit there, and we would just chuckle all the way over there to them.  There'd be guys standing up in the house, (laughter) all over the place.  All these guys weren't awful people.  They turned out to be really nice guys, but that's the way it was in those days.
Story_ID: 672501
Speaker 1: Anyhow, we started out our training [at American Airlines Cadet Academy].  And I had an orientation ride that they gave all the, all the candidates and all the students.  This one was in a Lockheed Elektra [Lockheed Model 10 Electra], and I was doing the walk around with a guy who's based there in Dallas [Texas].  And he was just shooting the breeze with me, a nice guy.  And he said, "Where are you gonna--want to be based?  You can ask for almost any base you want."  And I said, "I wanna be based right here in Dallas."  He said, "Oh really, yeah, why?"  Said, "Well, my, my home is in Oklahoma.  And this is close to home, and I'll be able to visit my parents [Manila Hazel Tilmon and George Tilmon, Sr.] and whatever else frequently, and I think I would be ideal."  He didn't say anything for a while.  And later on, in the whole course of events, he said, "You wanna revisit this thing about where you wanna be based?"  I said, "Well why should I?"  He said, "I just think it would be a wise move."  He said, "There's such a thing as, let us call it, crew resistance.  You might have it very difficult here in Dallas.  Your first year with the airline, and you're on probation.  Any captain can walk into the chief pilot, pilot's office and get you fired just like that (snaps).  You have no union protection.  You have nothing for the first year," said, "if I were you, I would choose Chicago [Illinois].  Chicago has got a chief pilot who is really a number one guy, one of the best bases in the system to fly out of.  If you have crew resistance there, it's not gonna be anything like it would be here in Texas."  He says, "If I were you, that's what I'd do."  So, after that orientation ride, I went back to the hotel room.  And I said, "Ray [Ray LaCont (ph.)], I think I'm gonna choose to Chicago."  He said, "Good, I'm gonna choose Chicago too."  "Why are you choosing it (laughter)?"  And I told him.  He said, "Okay, cool."  So, we started--we knew that you had to have housing within thirty minutes of O'Hare Airport [Chicago O'Hare International Airport, Chicago, Illinois] with almost any kind of weather, because you were gonna be on reserve.  So we started drawing concentric circles around a map of, of the Chicago area, concentric circles around O'Hare Airport, and we figured fifteen minutes, twenty minutes, thirty minutes, whatever else.  And we didn't have a chance to really go scout out--both of us had family and children.  We didn't have time in the program, training program to go do what most people would do to locate a place to stay.  But we did have a little break over Thanksgiving holiday.  And I think we were out from Wednesday night until Sunday night.  And we said okay, we're going to Chicago; we're gonna find a place to stay; and we'll be all squared away when the program ends.  I stayed with my uncle and my aunt, who lived here in Chicago, and lived here for many, many years, the Langrums [ph.].  And I was making phone calls, based upon all these places.  Ray and I started getting the Chicago Tribune whenever we were down there, so we could look at all the places to stay and we had highlighted the places we thought would be great.  And he was calling from wherever he was, and I was calling from my uncle's house.  And my uncle said, "Before you make those calls, you're gonna tell 'em you're black, aren't you?"  "No, why should I do that?"  Said, "Oh, come on, I would do that if I were you, save you a lot of time.  I mean, this is a holiday weekend, you know; you're not gonna have a lot of time to be looking around and be told no.  Just tell 'em you're black, and then see what they say."  I said, "It sounds awful ridiculous to me.  Here we are, you know, in, we're in the middle '60s [1960s].  Why should be doing this?  And I'm--this is Chicago, man," I mean, you know.  Well, I grew up thinking that the North was a land of milk and honey, that if you were black and in the North, you'd be okay.  I had no idea what it was really like.  Well, (laughter) every place I called, you know, they'd ask me questions.  And I'd say, "Well, I'm an airline pilot with American Airli- [American Airlines, Inc.]." "Oh, really?"  "Yeah--(unclear)--." "How many children?"  And I'd tell 'em and everything else.  And, "What size place you want?"  And all that, and they ask all these questions.  Said, "We got--I got several listings here that would be just perfect for you."  "Oh, by the way, I know this probably doesn't make--mean anything, but I'm black," silence.  And then finally, "Hold the phone a minute, will you?"  They'd come back and they each had a different answer, you know, "I, I haven't been in the office for a few days.  I didn't realize all of these listings have gone.  Man, I'm really sorry to hear this," and, and he said, "you know, you can call back another time."  So that was like that with every single one of them.  And my uncle said, "See, I told you."  I, in short, did not have a place to stay when I left here in Thanksgiving.  Ray had, Ray had (unclear), a laundry list of choices.  I had none.
Story_ID: 672502
Speaker 1: That's the way it was when I was in flight school.  I also needed a haircut really badly, and I didn't know where to go to get my haircut.  Well there was a barber shop right there in Greater Southwest Airport [Greater Southwest International Airport, Fort Worth, Texas] there right in, at, near the flight academy [American Airlines Cadet Academy].  And Ray [Ray LaCont (ph.)] said, "Let's go get our hair cut."  I said, "No, you go get your hair cut."  He said, "No, you gotta get your hair cut, man.  You look awful.  Come on, let's go."  And I said, "Ray, I can't get my hair cut there."  "Well, sure you can.  It's a barber shop.  It's in a public place.  Why can't you get your hair cut?"  I said, "Because they won't cut my hair."  He said, "Yes, they will."  So we go through this whole argument, and he's dragging me physically over to the terminal.  We get over there, he strides in there.  Now this is a big guy.  He strides in there, you know and everything else.  I think there were two, maybe three barber chairs, and there's no one in two of 'em.  He strides in and plunks down in a chair.  He said, "Jim [HistoryMaker Jim Tilmon], why don't you sit there?"  And the barber looks like, terrified that--"Why, I can't cut his hair."  So Ray says, "What do you mean, you can't cut his hair?"  "Well, I can't cut, I don't, I don't, I don't cut that kind of hair."  He said, "What kind of hair has he got?"  "Well, well, he, he's, he's black."  "Okay, your clippers won't cut black colored hair, just cut blonde hair?"  "Well, well, we don't, we don't cut black hair here."  He says, "Yes, you do."  He said, "No, no, no, we don't."  Then Ray then stood up (laughter).  Scared me.  Ray was bigger than all three of those guys put together, so I thought he was just gonna mop up the place with them.  I said, "Ray, let's cool it.  Let's get out of here.  I don't really even want to get my hair cut, besides this guy doesn't wanna cut it.  I don't want to do it.  He could do a terrible job, you know.  Who knows?  Let, let me get out of here."  I took all I could do to get him out of there.  He never was satisfied.  To this day, he's not satisfied with that whole event.  I finally rented a car, found out where I'd have to go.  I drove all the way across town to get my hair cut.  But those are just kinds of things you had to do in those days.
Story_ID: 672503
Speaker 1: Okay, my name is Larry Crowe.  I'm interviewer today for The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer today is Matthew Hickey.  Sir, could you please state your name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: James A. Tilmon, Sr., J-A-M-E-S, A. Tilmon, T-I-L-M-O-N, Sr. [HistoryMaker Jim Tilmon].
Speaker 1: And what is today's date?
Speaker 2: Today is the 30th of September, 2005.
Speaker 1: And where are we today?
Speaker 2: We're in the Oak Room at CBS 2 [WBBM-TV] studios in Chicago [Illinois], 630 North McClurg [Court].
Story_ID: 672504
Speaker 1: And we're here to continue an interview that we started in 2003, and--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: That's correct.
Speaker 1: --we're, we have you, we left you at American Airlines [American Airlines, Inc.], becoming the third black pilot for American Airlines, and then, let's pick it up with you moving to Chicago [Illinois].
Speaker 2: Well, coming to Chicago was an adventure because I didn't have a place to stay.  And I was desperate because, one, I did not want to create some kind of a situation with the airline where that--oh, boy, we got this black pilot.  Now he has no housing; now we got a problem and whatever else.  I just wanted to be another airline pilot, and I worked very hard to try to do that.  And I was fortunate because I did finally meet a lady in real estate, who lived in Deerfield, Illinois, who was working with me to try to find some place that I could live.  Well, it a pity, futile search, and I didn't have much time to, to report into the airline and, and go to work.  And she understood that, so what she said was, "Until we find a place, my family would like to invite you to come in and stay with us.  Unfortunately, the only place we have is in the basement, but there is a nice bed down there and a full bathroom and whatever else, and you're welcome to stay with us free of charge," which I did.  And for two weeks I stayed in that basement while we were trying our best to find a place that I could move to and bring my family here.  I never said a word to American Airlines about that, did not want to--and I, I would've resisted it 100 percent because, again, I just wanted to be an airline pilot.  We happened to run into a lady who was a good friend of this real estate agent.  Mrs. Rothschild was very prominent in the North Shore.  And she was the one who finally did contact a gentleman, who was the head of the opening housing council or committee, or whatever else, for Highland Park [Illinois], and who had spearheaded this group to create the first open housing ordinance in the State of Illinois.  It was in Highland Park.  So she called him, just knowing that if anybody would be sensitive to this, it would be him.  It just so happened, he was also in real estate, so she thought maybe he might know of a place that would be available at a price I could afford to pay.  Because, I mean, I was on probation, you know, as all airline pilots were on the first year.  You make very little money during that year.  So, anyway, she got in touch with him.  And the long and the short of it is, it was not in my backyard.  And sure, he had a place available, but as much as he had fought for the ordinance, for some strange reason, he didn't want me in his house that he had for rent.  And she was appalled by this.  She let him know that, and in no uncertain terms she suggested to him that, hey, you know, you got a choice: you can either rent to him at a price which I will, I will let you know, because it has to be something he can afford; or I'll make public the fact that, after your having spearheaded this whole movement toward open housing, you are the first one to reject the first qualified black candidate in Highland Park.  And that did not fly, so I got a place.  I never forgot the kindness of those two gentle women, who went way out of their way to help me and my family to get established in the North Shore of Chicago.
Speaker 1: Can you give us their, their names?
Speaker 2: Well, I, I, I, I believe Mrs. Rothschild was Eleanor Rothschild [ph.].  But I've been wracking my brain to try to come up with this real estate lady's name.  And I'm sorry to say that I cannot dig it out of my memory bank at this moment, only to say she was a, a magnificent woman and one of a kind.  Her son had been very much involved in civil rights, the Civil Rights Movement, in that he actually traveled to the South to be part of some of the activities that were going on there in support of black people trying to get their civil rights.  So, it was an unusual family altogether.
Story_ID: 672505
Speaker 1: Anyway, so, once established here [at American Airlines, Inc.], everything was rocking along very nicely.  I was flying as an engineer on the DC-6 [Douglas DC-6] and 7 [Douglas DC-7].  Everything was rocking along nicely until I finally, after a number of months, ran into my friend Ray LaCont [ph.] again.  And he said, "Hey, look, let me give you the deal.  There's this one guy, if you get assigned to fly with him--," because I was on reserve.  When you start off, you are, and then they can assign you to any trip they want to.  "If you get an assignment to fly with this guy, do whatever you have to do, grab your chest; fall on the floor; froth at the mouth, you know, screaming things, whatever.  But you do not wanna get in the airplane with him.  He is a diehard racist; this guy is absolutely a racist, and he's gonna get you in trouble."  Now you have to realize something about probationary year.  In the probationary year, you can be fired just offhand.  They don't have to have a really establish, well established reason for it.  The union has no protection for people who are on probation, therefore, the company has total discretion as to whether or not they're gonna can you or not.  And the word was that, you know, if you get with the wrong crew, you could get yourself canned for little or nothing.  So we were all kind of running scared in that regard.  And then I was told not to fly with, with Ernie, Ernie Saviano.  Wouldn't you know, it wasn't more than a week later I go out to sign in, and I'm signing in on the book, and the captain's name's there; and the co-pilot's name is there; and I'm signing in the engineer's slot, the captain's name was Ernie Savianno.  I felt a chill that went through my whole body.  I mean it's like oh, my goodness, what am I gonna do?  And I looked around like, I wondered could I just ask some other guy to maybe, could we switch trips and nothing like that made any sense, so.  I figured it was--I'm gonna have to go, so I did.  This man was so dedicated to his bigotry that it was if I was a nonperson.  In the cockpit he would not address anything directly to me or would he ask anything directly of me.  If he needed to communicate with me, because I was an engineer on the airplane, he would simply ask the co-pilot to say, "Would you ask the engineer such and such a thing?"  The co-pilot would turn and he would ask me this question, and I would answer it to the co-pilot, and the co-pilot would relay it to him.  He refused to have any direct communication with me whatsoever.  That's the way it was for the whole time we were flying together.  The DC-7 had an oscilloscope right next to the engineer's left ear (gestures); it was all right there.  And with that you could literally look at the firing pattern of every spark plug on the airplane.  And you know, it's just interesting information, unless you had some problem with the engine.  But I had no one to talk with.  I mean there was no discussion whatsoever with me.  I was a nonentity.  So I began to name the spark plugs on the airplane, and I had 'em pretty much all named and everything else.  And it was like Hewey, Newey, and whoever else, you know, and I had 'em all worked out.
Story_ID: 672506
Speaker 1: We landed for the final landing that day in Cleveland [Ohio], and we were overnight there.  Well, I'm thinking about this guy all night long.  I can, I can hardly sleep, sleep because I don't know what he's gonna do next.  But get up the next morning, go downstairs to get in the limo to go out to the airport, and sure enough, the captain's not there.  "He's already gone, sir."  Oh, okay, that's kind of unusual.  We get in the car.  We go on out to the airport.  And we get there, and as we were walking up, I see he's doing a walk around around the airplane.  Now wait a minute, captains don't do walk arounds.  Now what is this?  So, anyway, he's walking all around, and he's looking at everything.  And that's what he was doing when we got there.  So I get myself together, and I go out to kind of work with him, if, if anything.  And as soon as he sees me, he just hikes right on into operations, never says hello or anything.  So I started doing my, my preflight, and I remember I got to number three engine.  And the spark plugs have a, a firing harness that's attached to them, and that's how it gets the energy to spark.  The top cylinder of the number three engine, there was a firing harness that was separated from the spark plugs by maybe an inch or two.  But it was definitely not attached to the plug, a definite no, no.  So, naive me, you know, I, I said oh, my goodness, how about that.  So I go back--there are three mechanics that were standing under the tail.  And I went back there and I said, "Hey, guys, I noticed the, the firing harness is loose from that engine, number three engine in the top cylinder."  One of them just said--took his hat and threw it on the ground, "Damn."  And I didn't know why he was saying that.  I mean it's like, did he not wanna do the work, to climb up the ladder, and put that on there or what?  What did, what was going on?  So I figured, well, I'd better tell the captain, so I went in to see the captain and sure enough, I told him what happened.  And he did identically the same thing.  He through his hat on the floor and said, "Damn."  Well, apparently--I say apparently because I don't know, but I do know that, that spark plug was firing when we landed because I had it named.  I had watched this firing pattern.  No one did any maintenance on the airplane overnight, that night, so what's going on here?  If we had flown back to Chicago [Illinois] with that wiring off of that spark plug, I could be fired on the spot.  So I did catch it, and there was dead silence in the cockpit all the way back to Chicago.  I got through that one okay, and I never fooled with Ernie [Ernie Saviano] again.  I wasn't assigned to fly with him anymore, and I never knew why, except many years later I found out that a captain who was one of the most unusual guys I've ever met--he was a huge man, physically, just huge, I mean big boned and huge muscular frame and everything, Monk McCormick [ph.], nickname was Monk.  Monk had gone in, and I didn't know this, to crew scheduling, and in a loud, billowing voice he says, "I wanna know who assigned Tilmon [HistoryMaker Jim Tilmon] to fly with Saviano.  I wanna know who that was."  Everybody just kind of looked at their paperwork and whatever else.  He said, "No, no, I wanna know right now."  And somebody said, "Well, I don't know that anybody here really did that."  "Well, somebody here did, and I wanna know who it was."  "Well, why do you wanna know, Ernie--Why do you wanna know, Monk?"  And Monk said, "Because I'm gonna bash his head in."  So nobody owned up to it.  So he says, "Let me tell you guys something, every one of you:  If for any reason Tilmon is reassigned to fly with this guy again, I'm gonna come into this office, and I'm gonna beat the crap out of the first person I see--you better hope it's not you;" and turned around and walked out (laughter).  I never had to fly with Ernie anymore, and I didn't know why.  But anyway, I tell you that story to say that an overwhelming majority--I'd say out of my entire early experience with the airline, there were two, maybe three, captains who obviously had some problems with being in the cockpit with me.  If any of the others did, I never saw it.  I flew with captains who had a problem with flying with anybody, but, but I think in particular with me.  I, I didn't have--that was not a big problem, and I, I learned to deal with it, you know, and just go with the flow, sort of, so to speak.  It's only a trip.  You go out for two, three days; you come back and, and not likely to have to fly with that guy again for quite some time, so it's all right.  The airline was, as I'm sure you know by now in this piece, that it was an answer to a dream, a lifelong dream, to fly; and not only to fly, but to fly for a commercial airline; and not only that, to fly for American Airlines [American Airlines, Inc.], the airline that I had associated my life with when I was five years old.  So, this was a true dream, and nothing was going to take that away from my feeling really wonderful.  I never took it for glan- for granted.  Every time I sat in that seat, I felt like, man, what a blessing.
Story_ID: 672507
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) You flew with United [United Airlines] too at some point, right?
Speaker 2: No, I never flew for United.
Speaker 1: No?  Okay.
Speaker 2: No (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: All right (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: Never, ever flew for United.  I did--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: --interview with United.  And I don't know if I told you that part.  I think I did.  But I interviewed with them, and the guy said, "Oh, wow, you got all the credentials and everything's straight here and everything.  We're just waiting for a class assignment, and you're in."  Well, I found out later they told every black pilot that at that time.  So you left there thinking any day you're gonna get this in the mail.  Well, it never came.  And well, I shouldn't say it never came; it did; it finally came.  It was addressed to me at American Airlines flight academy [American Airlines Cadet Academy].  Now they know where I am.  I know I've already been hired, so they're sending me this thing saying I have a, a class assignment with United.  Get out of here.  It wasn't serious.  United was later, many years later, it was sued for doing just that kind of thing.  I didn't join in the law- the lawsuit, I mean because it was obvious they were gonna get whatever they deserved as a result of that shenanigans.
Speaker 1: Okay--
Speaker 2: But--
Speaker 1: So--
Speaker 2: --a lot of guys got fooled by it.
Speaker 1: Anybody that's, that's watching this in the future should know that if you check the file you'll see United, but it's wrong (laughter).
Speaker 2: Yeah, if you see--
Speaker 1: They, they--it's, it's--
Speaker 2: --anything with my name on--
Speaker 1: --in the, it's in the stuff I read, but it's wrong.
Speaker 2: And, and I have no, I, I don't have, I don't harbor any ill feelings with United.  That's what most of the airlines were doing at that time in one way or another.  American [American Airlines, Inc.] was very unique, in that they had made a conscious decision to go and do this, and they did it.  They made it work.
Story_ID: 672508
Speaker 1: But anyway, the early airline days were just marvelous.  And I, I flew the DC-6 [Douglas DC-6] and 7 [Douglas DC-7], and finally, I was assigned to the BAC One-Eleven [British Aircraft Corporation One-Eleven], had to go to school for that; went down to Texas again; and went to flight training for the BAC One-Eleven, my first experience in a jet airplane.  It was exciting, I mean really exciting, partly because it was jet.  But I think the, I think the great thing about it was it was such a hot little airplane.  I mean it was like, it was like a sports car in automobiles, relatively small, short hop airplane, lots of power, had these incredible engines that you had instant power.  With, with some of the other engines, and you push the power forward (makes sound) and you gran- gradually get--with a BAC, as fast as you could move the throttles, you had the power.  And I'll never forget, went through the whole grounds crew and everything else in the yard.  And the instructor pilot said, "Okay, guys, tomorrow we're gonna actually get in an airplane and go fly."  So, sure enough, I got in the seat, and I was--I think I was one of the first ones of the students that were riding that day to actually fly the airplane.  And he pulled it out onto the runway and got on the numbers, and we were cleared for takeoff.  He says okay, you got it.  And I didn't know what to expect, okay.  But I moved those two little throttles forward, and with a BAC, it, it went all the way.  It fire balled that baby.  And it was like a giant mule just kicked that thing in the rear end, and we went flying down the runway.  And I'll never get, you know, I'm sitting right there and I'm looking at, you know, these little stripes that are so far apart, all the markings of the center lines of the runway.  And they go (makes sound) and pretty soon it's just one solid line.  You're moving so fast that your eye cannot see any disconnect between those, those dashes.  And you're looking at that because you're supposed to stay right on the center line as you take off.  It was just amazing to see that happen.  I'd never seen anything like that before.  And this V-1 rotate, and you just kind of put a little back pressure.  You don't pull, just kind of think about it.  That nose came up, and we were flying, man, and it was, it was incredible--positive rate gear up, and I got the flaps all cleaned up and everything else.  And he said, the instructor looked at me and said, "Okay, I've got it.  You can do it now."  And I went "Whoopee" (laughter).  I don't know how he knew that I wanted to do that.  But anyway, I'll never forget that moment.  It was just--oh, man, that was exciting; that was really exciting.  So I loved flying the BAC, so much so that later on, I, I don't remember whether I volunteered for this or not, but I was chosen for one reason or another and so was Ray LaCont [ph.], to go back down to the school and teach the BAC One-Eleven.  Not only that, most--more than teach it, we were going to rewrite the manual because the manual had a lot of stuff in there that was left over from the time we bought the aircraft.  And the original engineers and everything else had put a lot of stuff in there that we really didn't need to have.  We needed not gee whiz information; we needed solid information about the airplane and, and have all the other stuff out, so we, we, we rewrote it.  And we spent oh, the better part of a summer in, in DFW [Dallas/Fort Worth Regional Airport; Dallas/Fort Worth International Airport] when--now it's called DFW now, but it was in the Dallas [Texas], Fort Worth [Texas] area rewriting this thing at the flight academy; came back and, and taught the refresher course to pilots here in Chicago [Illinois] for that airplane, no question about the fact that I really did love it.  It was just a wonderful airplane.  And then, of course, they decided to discontinue the airplane, so what am I gonna do now?
Story_ID: 672509
Speaker 1: So you said it was used for short hops or (unclear)--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Well, it was designed so it was pretty self sufficient.  I've forgotten how many passengers it took, but not a lot.  And you take off from Chicago [Illinois] and you might go to Detroit [Michigan], and you go from Detroit, you might go to, to Rochester [New York], or Syracuse [New York], or Buffalo [New York] whatever else, and then you might end up in Boston [Massachusetts].  You turn right around and come back the same way you got there.  And, and, and you stop because it had all these modern things that a lot of airplanes have now, but it had integral stairs, stairs so that when you park, you could pop the stairs.  And the stairs came right out of the airplane.  You didn't have to pull the stairs up, you know.  And it had its own APU, which is auxiliary power unit.  You didn't have to plug in to something round to get power, on electrical power and that sort of thing, and, and air conditioning for that matter.  So you had all of that built in.  You are a self-sufficient airplane.  And the airline was trying to prove that they could do--prove to themselves, I think, that they could do really rapid turns with it.  So, you would land, and I might be more than fifteen and eighteen minutes on the grand--ground--in between these flights.  When that time, you've got to go in; you've got to get your paperwork together; you've got to check it carefully and look at the flight plan carefully, make sure that, sure enough, it's okay, and sign off on that; and then come back out and preflight the airplane; and get in the airplane and get your, your clearance and go.  Well, there was almost no way for the, the first officer--and on that airplane there were only two pilots, a pilot and a co-pilot, so.  The co-pilot couldn't pos- possibly get all of that done, so the captain would normally volunteer to take care of some things, and the co-pilot would do the other.  So the co-pilot, in my particular case, decided that, okay, we'll--I'll do the walk-around, and you do all the paperwork.  Fine, so that's what they will do, and it worked great.  I guess, I guess the time that it really was kind of awkward was the time when I was flying with a guy named Bill Barry--Bud Barry [W.H. "Bud" Barry], rather.  Bud Barry was an Irish guy with an incredible sense of humor.  And it was one of my earliest flights, and we flew all day long.  And like I said, we would just have the short times in each airport.  And after we were on the way back, and maybe the second or third stop, man, I, I'd really gotten to the place where I really had to go to the bathroom.  I mean to tell you I really had to go.  But I'm saying to myself, no, no, no, I'm, I'll go after the captain.  So the captain would go, and didn't go, didn't go, and I damn, I gotta go.  So, we were, we had I think entered a holding pattern, trying to come into Chicago, and we were making little circles.  And I had myself programmed so that--figured when we land I'm gonna--but that changed when they gave us an estimated time for change in our clearance thirty minutes later.  I didn't think I could do thirty minutes (laughter).  So, so I said, "Bud, I, I hate to do this to you, but I mean I'd like to really go to the bathroom."  He said, "Well, yeah, go ahead, come on, you know."  Because in those days, you know, the flight attendants kept feeding you coffee all day long anyhow.  So, I got up and I started back.  I got about two-thirds back to the--because the johns were all the way back in the rear of the airplane--and I said to myself, there's something about the way he said oh, yeah, go ahead didn't ring right; it's just something about it.  Sure enough, I heard the click of the PA [public address system]: "Ladies and gentleman, this is your captain speaking.  I know that you probably look at airline pilots and think they're, well, superhuman.  They're not.  We're like everybody else.  As a matter of fact, you might notice right now, the first officer's on his way back to take care of some necessities that we all do," you know.  "And I just want you to know that we're just like anybody else," turned it off.  Man, I couldn't wait to--all the heads were turned, you know, and everything.  I can't wait to get in that, that bathroom.  I went in there and closed the door, and it was almost like I forgot what I was in there for.  I was so embarrassed (laughter).  So, okay, I finally came out and started toward their cockpit again.  About halfway up the aisle, click: "Well, see, ladies and gentlemen, I told you that, that we're just like everybody else.  As a matter of fact, look at that kind of relaxed expression on the face of the first officer" (laughter).  Well, the airplane just broke up.  I mean people were just laughing at--and, and you know, it was great for the passengers because they were in a holding pattern and going around in these circles for twenty minutes, and (laughter) they just--it just broke the ice.  They just really thought it was great, except I didn't.  And I got in the cockpit and closed the door, and I said, "You know, if I didn't think for sure I would not only go to jail but also get fired, I'd kill you."  (Laughter) He laughed.  But there are those kinds of moments that were kind of fun moments, but there were lots of fun times, flying the BAC One-Eleven [British Aircraft Corporation One-Eleven].  It was a sweet little airplane, very maneuverable, maneuvered like a fighter plane I thought, and very handy to have around an airline when you needed to be, be able to get in and out of, of short fields with a jet, and at the same time, be able to, to fly segments long enough to make it a valuable asset.
Story_ID: 672510
Speaker 1: Can you speak maybe to the difference--it just, just occurred to me, between, you know, flying a military aircraft, a commercial--and a commercial liner in those days and flying one today.
Speaker 2: Oh, and flying--oh, well, a world of difference.  Today's cockpits have a lot of, lot more glass, as they put it, cathode ray tubes that really give you the information multiple--multi-displays so that on the same display you might see all your navigation; you might see your--you, you might also see your, your, your weather; you might also be able to paint on there all kinds of clearance information.  It's just really a marvelous way to fly.  Now, and you know, they've got a lot more automation.  Autopilots are much more sophisticated now than they were before.  You have to know that on the DC-6 [Douglas DC-6] and 7 [Douglas DC-7], we didn't have an autopilot; you know, you were the autopilot.  But the BAC One-Eleven [British Aircraft Corporation One-Eleven], of course, was my first autopilot airplane.  And that really helps a lot, you know, to give you a moment to just kind of relax and catch your wits.  But the autopilots have gotten a lot more sophisticated, and there's a lot more improvement that we find in the avionics, all the radios and that sort of thing.  So, just equipment wise, we have very, very different kind of an airline now than before.  So far as the airline [American Airlines, Inc.] itself and the people involved, I, I think the social implications are just about like they were some twenty years ago.  We thought, we being other black pilots, as there a few more that were hired, we all thought that we're pioneering this thing.  And before you know it, they're going to be so many black pilots that nobody turns around and stares at us when we're walking through the terminal.  That is not the case at all, not at all.  What happened was--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Why do you think that--
Speaker 2: --the, what happened was the EEOC [Equal Employment Opportunity Commission] had reminded the airlines that, hey, you know what, not only does this involved black men and women, but it also invi- involves white women.  So the airlines began to hire white females.  And I gotta tell you something: I'm not against it because I was one of the ones who was backing that effort.  But I was in Chicago [Illinois] not too long ago--I, I mean I had a trip to Chicago not long ago.  I'm walking through the terminal, and I keep looking around, looking around, and I'm saying to myself, this is amazing, all that dreaming we had about enough black pilots so people wouldn't turn their heads.  I think if I sat here for half a day and counted all the black pilots that walked by, I may spend a whole half a day and maybe find one.  But if I sat here and counted all the white females, I'd need a calculator.  And I'm not against white females flying because, again, I was in their corner to get that start--going.  But the tables turn so radically, so that now we have, we have a number of black pilots flying for different airlines, but the number is miniscule.  And it's nowhere near where we had prayed that it would go.
Story_ID: 672511
Speaker 1: Well, everything was rocking along just fine.  The only challenge I had was that I didn't have much money.  I mean, you know, you only--I've forgotten what we made, but it was, it was a pittance.  I mean, I was trying to live in Highland Park [Illinois], on the North Shore of Chicago [Illinois], a relatively high rent district you might say.  Now, my rent actually wasn't that high, because it had been set to a level that I could handle.  But all of my other expenses were, were way out of line with what I was able to bring home, so I sought other things to do.  I became an in- insurance investigator for a little while and other things.  And I found out that there was this organization called Wingspread [Project Wingspread] that was working with the Chicago Board of Education.  And they were looking for someone to work with them, and I volunteered to do that.  And I got on a, sort of a payroll for not much money, but I didn't have to have a lot.  I just needed to supplement what I was getting.
Speaker 2: Now, now what--most people would think that an airline makes enough money, you know--
Speaker 1: Most airline pilots do make a considerable sum, however, not in their first year.  Your first year, I guess, at that time, I don't know what they're doing now, but at that time, I suppose the airlines wanted to make sure you really were serious about wanting to fly for them, because you wouldn't take the job for money, not for the first year.  Now, things got a lot better after that, but it still moved right along up the ladder.  It took a while to really begin to earn decent money.  And today, of course, things are reversed.  A lot of salaries are being chopped.  But anyway, I took this position as a consultant with the board of education in Chicago--(unclear)--worked on this operation, Wingspread, which is, it was a plan to bus minority youth from the city to the suburbs, and bus kids from the suburbs back to the city.  And they were trying to work out things with the North Western railroad [Chicago and North Western Transportation Company] and with the bus companies and everything else, get their assistance in do--making this happen.  And they were gonna create rolling classrooms so that none of this travel time would be wasted.  It was a very ambitious plan, and we needed the assistance of all kinds of corporate entities.  And one of them was Channel 11 [WTTW-TV], the public broadcast station here in Chicago.  We went there.  We had an appointment to meet with the program manager, who was at that time Ed Morris [Edward L. Morris].  And I think it was four of us.  There were three women, white women, and me.  And we went in to see him, and we were telling him about the things we needed to have for support for our project.  And everything we said that we needed he said no, didn't look up from his desk or anything.  He was working on something else, and he just said no to everything.  And pretty soon it got obvi- it became obvious that this is a waste of time.  I mean let's just leave.  So we got up and said thank you very much and sorry for taking up so much of your time.  At which time, he jumps up from his desk, and he says, "Oh, I'm terribly sorry.  I've been very rude to you, and I didn't mean it that way.  I'm just preoccupied.  I'm trying to put together the first of, for and by black television program, and I don't have a host; I don't have a format; and really--I'm really caught."  And I was standing at the door, getting ready to go out the boss--office--and I figured, what a patronizing thing to say, you know.  Why would he say that now?  So, just on the spur of the moment, I just looked at him and said, "I'll tell you what.  I'll be your host, and I'll do your format."  Well, I didn't know Ed Morris.  If I'd known Ed Morris, I wouldn't be in television today, because I would have never said that, because Ed said, "You're on, buddy," and shook, shook my hand (laughter).  Well--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: So, it happened that--
Speaker 1: Just like that.  So, we're on our way back to our offices, and the women were just chatting like crazy--"Oh, Jim [HistoryMaker Jim Tilmon], this is great.  You're going to be on TV, man.  That's really super."  I'd never dreamed of being on television, not really.  I mean it wasn't even in my mindset, nowhere.  And not only that, I had no clue as to what a format was, none, and I was caught now.  I mean this guy really called my bluff.
Story_ID: 672512
Speaker 1: So I got back to Highland Park [Illinois].  And I got on the phone and called the only people I'd ever met in television, those two guys [Adam Lynch and Regis Bobonis, Sr.] in Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania].  So I call 'em, and I got 'em on the phone.  They were on a kind of a conference call thing with me.  I told them what the situation was, and they fell out laughing.  They laughed themselves half silly because, there I was, I'd been given an opportunity to do my own television program in the third market in the United States, and I had no clue about what a format was.  So (laughter), they kept trying to explain it to me on the phone, and I, I wasn't gettin' it.  And finally, one of them said, "You know, I think you're gonna have to come over to Pittsburgh, and let us work with you a little bit."  "Fine, I'll be on the first flight in the morning," so I did.  I took off for Pittsburgh, got over there, and at the airport they met me; and we walked into the little snack bar, sat down, and I was introduced to a gentleman who was confined to a wheelchair.  His name was, oh, my goodness, I'm drawing a blank. Cut for a second, let me think about this guy's name.
Speaker 2: (TAPE INTERRUPTION)
Speaker 1: And I met this guy confined to a wheelchair.  His name was Rift Fournier, who was a, a very, very well known producer.
Speaker 2: How do you spell that?
Speaker 1: Like (pronunciation) Fournier, okay (laughter).  And--
Speaker 2: With an F?
Speaker 1: He was asking me questions and, and taking some notes and everything else, and he wanted me to take some notes and everything else about what he was saying.  And I couldn't keep up with him.  His ideas were just going like crazy, like crazy they were coming in, and I, I couldn't, I, I couldn't fire up enough to keep that pace.  So, all of a sudden, right in the mid-sentence almost, he just stops talking, wheels around, and goes over to a TWA [Trans World Airlines] counter.  Oh, I followed him with my little notepad, and I said, "Beg your pardon, what you doing?"  He said, "I'm, I'm buying a ticket."  "Okay, where are you going?"  He said, "I'm going to Chicago [Illinois]."  I said, "I didn't know you were going to Chicago."  He said, "I didn't either, until I met you.  But now you're too dumb to be able to figure out what I'm doing here, so I'm gonna have to go to Chicago with you."  (Laughter) So, we go to Chicago.  We go directly to WTTW [WTTW-TV, Chicago, Illinois].  And about twenty-four hours from the time that Ed Morris [Edward L. Morris] had laid down the gauntlet, we go into his office and there I am with Rift Fournier.  And he jumps up out--Ed jumps up out of his chair and says, "Rift Fournier, my goodness, what are you doing here?"  He says, "I'm his producer."  So, great, man.  So, Rift says, "I need a private room, fairly quiet, with a typewriter, and I don't want anybody to bother us."  Fine, you can have anything you want.  So he gave us a room and a typewriter, and Rift Fournier and I put together a format for 'Our People.'  Now it turns out, that was not the final format.  The format we came up with was kind of fun, and interesting, and you know, a great magazine for television and stuff like that.  But that was oh, I don't know what date it was in 1968.  I don't know the specific date, but when we were all set to go on the air, a week prior to that, Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] was assassinated.  Well, it was pretty obvious we could not go on the air with a jolly show with lots of fun and frivolity under those circumstances.  So, Rift came to Chicago, and we wrote the format to become 'Our People,' a relatively serious magazine format that was informative, that, that dealt with the issues of black Americans, that spoke to a lot of the questions that were not getting answered any place, with interviews of--with very famous black people and some that were not so famous that should have been.  And we just covered all kinds of subject material.
Story_ID: 672513
Speaker 1: Let me ask you this then, how did you--do you remember where you were when you, you heard Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] had been assassinated?
Speaker 2: Yes, I know exactly where I was.  I was on my way to the airport to fly a trip.  I was on the expressway just entering the airport.  And the announcement came over my radio, and I had to pull over.  I, I couldn't, I couldn't drive anymore for a while.  I mean it was, it was so shocking; it was so unbelievable that something like that could happen; that--I was just stunned.  I remember very it clearly, but I was like--as a matter of fact, I don't know if I actually flew that trip that day.  I think I went in to finally sign in for work, and I think the crew schedule, they took one look at me and said, "Jim [HistoryMaker Jim Tilmon], I think I know what you're going through.  Why don't you go back home?"  And I think I did.  I don't remember exactly how that worked, but it was, it was just awful.  I mean, as you remember, it was, it was awful.
Story_ID: 672514
Speaker 1: Anyway, so we got a new format, and then we went on the, on the air with 'Our People.'  And it turned out to be a very successful program of its kind.  It's--matter of fact, we were hoping to finally go network on PBS network [Public Broadcasting Service], but the network had other plans.  They, they said send us some of your tapes.  We hear you're doing great work out there.  So we sent them our tapes, and we were looking forward to their saying we're gonna take your network and all that, which is gonna be the greatest thing in the world, man.  Well, that's before we found out about Tony Brown.  Tony Brown was looking for a format.  And he took that format and made it work.  And the rest is history about the Tony Brown, Jr. show ['Tony Brown's Journal'].
Speaker 2: So that's the same format that you--
Speaker 1: Essentially.  There, there were a few changes.  And hey, you know, maybe I'm all wrong.  Maybe he didn't use our format.  Maybe he got it from someplace else.  I don't know, but it sure looked like us (laughter) when we saw it the first time.  And I, I couldn't allow myself to be miffed by that.  Because the overriding truth was there had to be room for more than one black person on television; I mean, why not, you know, if, if he used my format or not?  That's flattering that, if, if he did, but I was really proud and happy that, that at least somebody else was going to be here.  I never wanted to be the sole black person that did something.  If I was gonna be a pioneer, I wanted somebody to be coming behind me to do the same thing or better.  So, that worked out really well.
Story_ID: 672515
Speaker 1: What was your first show?  Who was on your first show [of 'Our People']?
Speaker 2: [HistoryMaker] Ossie Davis and [HistoryMaker] Ruby Dee, my first guests.  They were friends of Rift Fournier's, and that's how I reached them.  And they were happy to fly in at their own expense and do that program.
Speaker 1: At their own expense, really?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  And it was a magnificent program.  I'd give anything to be able to dig out that tape.  I, I, I know, I know that you know who they are, were and all, but you had to, to see and feel them on that program to really appreciate it, two people whose lives were dedicated to making life better for other black people, whose talent was immeasurable, who sat there and recited poetry, and, and talked about issues, and they were the only guests.  I think I may have had a muse--musical thing or whatever for entertainment.  But, man, did they make that show hot.  It was so hot, and we immediately began to move and had audience and that sort of thing.  So, they were my first guests.  The show--
Speaker 1: (Unclear)--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --did pretty well.  And, and we ended up interviewing all kinds of notable people, Ella Fitzgerald, [HistoryMaker] Nancy Wilson, Sammy Davis, Jr., and all that ilk, just all a laundry list of people like, [HistoryMaker] Lerone Bennett and you know, some of--a lot of the comedians and whatever else.  Wes Montgomery, we had Wes, Wes on the air from Ga- from Gary [Indiana].  He did--the last television program he ever did was with us.  He died very shortly afterwards.  We had a lot of unbelievable talent.  And we had a very wide audience, not just in the black community; we had a big audience outside of the black community.  It may have been my undoing that our audience grew like it did across racial lines, because after the first year and a half--and we had done some stunning things.  I mean we, we did, we got into the Black Panther Party.  We did all kinds of interviews.  As a matter of fact, when El--Eldridge Cleaver wrote 'Soul On Ice,' I--they flew me out to California to interview him.  And it, it was a, it was really groundbreaking to have that kind of an interview on local television here, but I think I alienated some people.
Story_ID: 672516
Speaker 1: And after the first year and a half, Ed Morris [Edward L. Morris] called me in and said, "Jim [HistoryMaker Jim Tilmon], we have to take the show off the air."  I said, "Why?"  He said, "We don't have any money."  "What do you mean you don't have any money?"  "Well, we don't have any money.  Illinois Bell [Illinois Bell Telephone Company], Commonwealth Edison [Commonwealth Edison Company], some of these other companies that had been giving us grants for the program, took a powder."  "Why?"  "Well, I'm not sure why, but it was sudden."  I said, "Ed, we cannot do this.  This show is too important.  I mean it's filling a void.  You know there's nobody out there right now.  We've got to keep this show going."  He said, "I feel just the same way you do.  You know, and you know, I've felt that way from the very beginning, but what can I do?"  I said, "Well, if you will keep the show on the air, I'll work for free.  Well, it's not a big deal."  I was only making two hundred bucks a show, but that was big money to them, to us, in those days, particularly to me (laughter).  And he said, "You would?"  He said, "I wouldn't even be able to pay your expenses."  I said, "If you'll keep it on the air, I'll do everything out of my own pocket."  He said, "If you'll do that, I'll find the money."  And we kept doing television.  And I worked for two and a half years for free, not one dime, nothing, because it was too important.  Somebody had to be willing to step up and do that.
Speaker 2: What do you think, in retrospect, when you look back at it, what do you think offended the--(unclear)--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: I don't know, I--
Speaker 2: --'cause, 'cause you, you, you, you mentioned Illinois Bell--
Speaker 1: Well, only because I remember they--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: At the time, they were, they were sponsoring 'Lou's Notebook,' which was a, was pretty radical little radio show--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --you know.  And they did it until '83 [1983].
Speaker 1: Remember I told you I think--
Speaker 2: That's what--
Speaker 1: --I reached a little too far into the white community.  I mean there was a buzz.  We don't know if it was true.  I have no way of documenting, but there was a buzz that some of the suburbanites were offended by seeing Black Panthers on television, and that we glorified them.  I didn't glorify them, but I just gave them their voice.  They were a segment out of the black community that had a voice, and I wanted that voice to be heard.  I talked with a number of gang bangers and whatever else, because they had a message too.  I mean why pretend that those elements don't exist in your community if they're there, and that, that dynamic, as dynamic as they were at that time.  And you know the Black Panther Party has a lot of ills and everything else, and I'm not gonna go one way or the other trying to defend their, their business.  But they did feed a lot of kids breakfast in the mornings.  So, you know, it's, it's, it's, there are some gray areas here.  And I thought my audience deserved to hear both sides of it, and they did.  We gave both sides of it.
Speaker 2: Okay, so if I'm understanding this correctly then, the reason why, say Lou [HistoryMaker Lutrelle "Lu" F. Palmer, II] would stay on the air is because his, he was in a niche that where, that didn't reach the suburbanites, and they didn't know what he was talking about.
Speaker 1: I can- I cannot document that.  I, I don't wanna go on record as saying that to be absolute gospel.  I only know in my case.
Speaker 2: It's just like, you know, we're just trying to think about what, what--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --that might--
Speaker 1: In my, in my case, there certainly were--it wasn't black people that didn't wanna support me.  Because there today, all these years later, from time to time I run into, to people, white and black, that say, "Man, I remember that 'Our People' show."  It was a pioneering, interesting effort.
Story_ID: 672517
Speaker 1: The way it finally ended was kind of interesting too.  I was sitting in my office out in Highland Park [Illinois], and I get a phone call.  And it's some woman that I'd never heard of before, and she's working for Channel 11 [WTTW-TV, Chicago, Illinois].  And I'd never knew she was there.  And she introduced herself on the phone.  She says, "I'm just calling to tell you--," we, we aired live on Thursday nights, "I'm just calling to tell you tomorrow night is your last show [of 'Our People']."  I said, "I beg your pardon?"  "It's your last show."  I said, "Well, whose decision was this?"  "I don't know.  I was just told to call you and tell you" (laughter).  Ed Morris [Edward L. Morris] had left the station by then and gone on to something else.  I couldn't believe it.  It was such a shock.  It was just crushing.  Well, I did that show on that Thursday night, and I was feeling in low cotton, man.  I just felt like it was too abrupt, and I didn't have a chance to really finish up, and do some of the things I wanted to do.  But it was done for.  Friday morning, that following morning, phone rings.  "[HistoryMaker] Jim Tilmon, this is Bob Lemon."  "Yes, sir?"  "You don't know me, but I'm the general manager at, at WMAQ Channel 5 [WMAQ-TV] in Chicago [Illinois].  I hear you're out of work."  "Yes, sir, that's right."  "Well, I think I'd like to ask you to come by and talk with me.  Can you do that?"  "Yes, sir."  So I went right down to the Merchandise Mart [Chicago, Illinois].  Then something happened that day that will never happen again.  I walked in, and he said, "First thing I wanna know is are you bitter?"  Well, I'm, I'm saying to myself there's got to be a right answer to this, and the truth ain't it (laughter).  'Cause I was bitter, but I said, "No, sir, I'm not."  He said, "Good, because I don't deal with bitter people."  He said, "You probably wanna know why I wanted you down here."  "Yes, sir."  "I want you to do television on my station."  "Really?"  "Yeah, I do," and says, "I want you to get started right away."  "Well, well, what kind of television do you want me to do?"  He says, this is the part that will never happen again: "Any damn thing you want."  I said, "Wow, okay."  He said, "Bring me back a format.  And if it makes any sense at all, we'll go on the air with it."  Well, I went back home, man, and I now I'm really on a cloud.  This time when I go back home with format in my mind, I really know what's going on.  And I put together a format that brought in the total Chicagoland community and beyond.  It was called 'Tilmon's Tempo' [sic.]. And it was a show designed to showcase local talent and issues and everything else across the board.  And we went--we just completely blurred the lines between ethnic groups and everything else, and began to get into all kinds of other programming and stuff and issues and all.  And it was, it was really a broad based program that really did reach a whole lot of people.  And there are people today who remind me about 'Tilmon Tempo.'  So, that went along, and we finally did a show called the Ebony Fashion Fair.  We had a live orchestra, I think about eighteen, twenty-two piece orchestra, in studio; we had a live audience; we had fashion fair models; we had, at that day 'Shaft' was very hot.  We had Shaft on our show that day.  We won an Emmy [Emmy Award] with that.
Speaker 2: You had Richard Roundtree on the show (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: Richard Roundtree was there.  And we just had one heck of a show, I mean one heck of a show.  We, we got at Emmy because of it.  But there wasn't--
Speaker 2: This is--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --anything that we couldn't touch and--
Speaker 2: It was 1974 or--
Speaker 1: It was in the 1970s.  I don't remember those years (unclear) all run together now.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: But it was before '74 [1974].  As a matter of fact, I think it was--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --about '73 [1973] or sometime in '73 [1973], mid--if, if within '74 [1974], it was mid to late '74 [1974].
Story_ID: 672518
Speaker 1: Because in 1974, I switched horses.  That's when the station was working without a weather guy at ten o'clock at night, because the weatherman had literally walked away several months prior, and said, "I don't wanna work here anymore," so he didn't (laughter).  And their anchor guy, Floyd Kalber, was reading the weather.  And some of the TV columnists were just giving him a bad time, saying this guy's got so much ego until he doesn't want anybody else to even read the weather.  You know, well, that was just the reverse of what was true.  Floyd hated reading the weather.  I mean that wasn't his thing.  He was a news guy.  He didn't want to do weather.  So, I'm flying a trip out on the East Coast, and I landed like Rochester [New York].  And somebody comes out to the cockpit--one of the employees with American come out and said "Hey, here's this note.  There's a phone call for you, and they want you to call 'em back."  And I recognized that it was Channel 5 [WMAQ-TV, Chicago, Illinois] general manager's phone number.  Well, I said okay, said oh--I couldn't call then because we had a short hop, and we went to the next place to land.  And I finally got to a phone and called.  And I think the general manager at that time was Lee Schulman.  I'm not sure, but I think so.  And he said you know, "We've been sitting around trying to figure out what we're gonna do about a weather guy, and we're having problems with that.  We got, got guys who understand meteorology.  They don't understand anything about broadcasting.  We've got guys who know broadcasting.  They don't understand a thing about the weather.  And somebody thought, you know, you--what you need was, is maybe a guy who is kind of across both disciplines.  Well, maybe we need a pilot.  Somebody said we got a pilot working here.  And he said, and said and they reminded me that you're a pilot with American Airlines [American Airlines, Inc.], and you know, you gotta know something about weather.  And you, you, you gotta know something about broadcasting 'cause you're working on our air.  So, you wanna be our weatherman?"  That's the way it came, and I said yes.  Now I had no idea if that would fit in my schedule.  I didn't know, I had no idea how much money I could make, and I had no idea about anything.
Speaker 2: Now this is interesting because what you just describe for the last half hour is a situation where, without any training whatsoever, you, you get a show on public television, and now you're on a network.  And then you're gonna--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --be a weatherman on the, you know--
Speaker 1: That's true.
Speaker 2: I mean this is, this is interesting.  Nobody ever asked you if you'd been trained, or did you ever feel as if, you know--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Well--
Speaker 2: --maybe I don't know what I'm doing or--
Speaker 1: I didn't feel competent to go on the air right then and use what I had been using all along and flying as my basis for telling all these hundreds of thousands of people or millions of people what the weather was gonna be.  So I said I will take it--oh, actually, I did two auditions, and they loved them both, and they said you're on.  I said well, "I'm only gonna be on if you will bring on board a tutor.  I will work with a tutor until I feel competent to do this by myself."  They said, "Fine, you pick whoever you want."  I picked a guy named Lenny Fletcher [Leonard Fletcher], who was at that time one of the lead forecasters with American Airlines, one of the most brilliant meteorological geniuses that I've ever met.  The guy was, I mean he just head and shoulders over anybody I'd ever seen or heard of before.  They hired him, and Lenny worked with me every single night during the weather, and taught me all the kinds of things that, well, that a meteorologist would, would, should know to accurately forecast weather.  I mean he took me from step one all the way through.  And I learned everything you would learn at a college or institution, except for the humanities, and literature, and a few other things like that.  After two and half years, I, I'm in, at work and I'm walking in there, and Lenny's in there already before me.  And he's puttin' boxes and--I mean books and boxes and things.  I said, "What are you doing?"  He says, "I'm leaving."  "What do you mean you're leaving?"  He says, "I'm out of here."  "What do you mean you're out of here? We haven't done the weather yet."  He says, "We are not gonna do the weather.  You are gonna do the weather.  You're going solo from here on out.  You know everything that I want you to know, and you, you know, you learned it well, so you're on your own."
Speaker 2: Now--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: At which time he took the little box of books and walked out.
Story_ID: 672519
Speaker 1: Now, what--walk us through what you have to do to prepare for a weather program.
Speaker 2: Well, I'll tell you what I do, I start preparing for the weather that--when I open my eyes in the morning.  I look out to see what that sky looks like, and I look at, out the window and see how people are dressed and do they have an umbrella or not.  And I, I look at cars to see if the windshield wipers are going.  I mean I literally get a feeling for the weather as soon as I have conscious thought, and that never leaves me throughout the day.  So far as a formal preparation is concerned, I go--in those days, we didn't have all the computer stuff.  We had computers, but they were nothing like today's situation.  So all of your maps, and charts, and data came across on fax machines, huge fax machines that would print out these big maps and everything else, and charts.  And you would pin them up on, on, on the wall.  And you could, and once you got 'em up, you can study them, and you can go back a few hours and look at some of the older ones and compare them with what we have now.  Then he taught me how to, to study those and to literally draw on those to get some feel for the speed of, of whether we would time it as if it was an airplane, with an ETA [estimated time of arrival] from point A to B, et cetera.  We did all those kinds of things.  We looked at all the parameters, all the data, all the everything else, and we came up with what, in fact, was the story of the day in weather, that these kinds of things were predictably going to happen, and happen at such in time--such, such of time. And that's the way we prepared it.  And when I went on the air, I told that story, that's all.  I mean it wasn't anything more complicated than that.  It was a weather story that had been written by Mother Nature, and that we had seen that over a period of time these things that are carried prior to that moment, and if we can anticipate that they were to continue in a certain direction, at a certain speed, and, and carry with it a certain weather characteristic.  So, the preparation was time consuming in- indeed, but it was fun.
Speaker 1: Okay.  How have things changed from then in terms of equipment?  And you've got--I remember they used to, weathermen used to actually draw on a board at one time.  Did you do--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Well, I never drew on a board, but I did have, I had to take map replicas and actually draw on that map what I wanted to be seen on the air.  And I handed that to a graphic artist who then drew that out for us, and then they, they made, made transparencies out of that and, and with color and all.  And they would put that on a projector, and they would project that on a screen behind the weather guy.  And then you would talk to that, that graphic and whatever else.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you actually had it projected behind you?
Speaker 2: Behind me, yes.
Speaker 1: In--instead of being chroma keyed onto a--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Instead of being chroma keyed.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: Yes, that's correct.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: Chroma key came later.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But in the, in the early days it was all projected. And, and even when chroma key came, we still used graphic artists to actually draw up a lot of the things that we were gonna do.  Later on, when the computer technology became what it was, we were able to use computer graphics and do things there.  And there was a kind of combination between the two for a while, and finally got in the place we do all of it now in computer graphics, in, in creating the formats and print for the forecast in print and whatever else.  And the, all those maps and things I used to hang on the wall are now just images on our, on our computer monitor.  So, things have changed a lot.
Story_ID: 672520
Speaker 1: I, I wanted to go back and talk about--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Sure.
Speaker 1: --the show on some level.  And we were talking off camera about 1969, when your show ['Tilmon Tempo'] was on the air, and the Fred Hampton, Mark Clark murders.  Just, just tell us what you--
Speaker 2: Well, you have to realize the impact that had on the black community.  There were a lot of black people who were not at all in favor of the Black Panthers [Black Panther Party], I mean, you know, and all of that time.  It was a very controversial organization.  But I don't think there were many black people that wanted to see what in turn was a- an assassination.  And that's the only way I know to, to call the Fred Hampton situation, an ambush, an assassination, an attack, an assault--I don't--use any terminology you want.  You know, it, it wasn't as if somebody presented themselves and said, "Chicago Police [Chicago Police Department], open up," or, "Come out with your hands up," or none of that kind of garbage, none of that happened.  They, they were fired upon because they were there.  And they were a target of opportunity, and they took 'em out.  And I reported it that way on my program, and we interviewed a lot of the people who were in the know and this whole business of, as you say, the bullets all coming in and none of them going out.  And they were saying they were, they were shooting in self defense.  No way, I--and the Panthers had enough armament to, to, to fire back, but they never had a chance to get to it.  I mean I actually did visit their headquarters, and man, they had an arsenal.  But to the best of my knowledge, they never really used it.  They always had it, but I don't know of any case whether they really went out and used automatic weapons and sprayed down someplace.
Speaker 1: Did you have anybody on your shoulder in that period of time--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Oh yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --that was--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: I mean I had a number of people that, that I interviewed about the issue and about who they really were and who they weren't, and about police brutality.  And, you know, I had, you can, you can imagine how many shows that I had guests on for the next I don't know how many weeks discussing the significance of what that really was, and what it really meant, and that it was a threat to every black person.  And it was an acknowledgement of where we really were in this country at that time.  And to be able to be assaulted in that fashion under the guise of the law, and--I mean, black people just called it murder.
Speaker 1: Now those were hot years when you think about it.  Now you've got the, got the riots after Dr. King's [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.]--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --assassination.  You've got the Democratic Convention [1968 Democratic National Convention, Chicago, Illinois]--
Speaker 2: Yep.
Speaker 1: --the murder of Fred Hampton and Mark Clark, and a lot of real tense moments.
Speaker 2: The '60s [1960s], it is interesting when people talk about the '60s [1960s] and the throwback to the '60s [1960s], and they're talking fashion; they're talking music and, and all.  The '60s [1960s] were volatile.  It was an exciting and a frightening time to be alive in America, white or black.  You know that I started off with the airline [American Airlines, Inc.] in 1965.  That was the year that the Voting Rights Act [Voting Rights Act of 1965] was, was signed into law.  And that was the year of Bloody Sunday.  That was the year of, of, that was the Montgomery march [Selma to Montgomery March].  That was the year of, of a lot of turmoil in this country.  It was the year I got out of the [U.S.] military and started flying for American Airlines [American Airlines, Inc.].  I, I gotta tell you that, actually, if I could live my life in any period that I wanted, I would pick the one that I had because so much history was written during that period of time.  This country was going through growing pains that were off the scale.  And yes, we were growing, but yes, it was really painful for a lot of people, and very difficult for a lot of white people to make the adjustments, very difficult for a lot of black people to be, be willing to patiently wait a little bit longer.
Story_ID: 672521
Speaker 1: So, those were tough years.  And, and, and there was a lot of feeling.  You know, I told you about what it was like with the airline [American Airlines, Inc.] when I first started.  Well, I had been with the airline for quite some time when I flew my first trip as captain.  And it was interesting because there was one other black pilot who was here.  And I--did I ever tell you about Sam [ph.]?
Speaker 2: I think you mentioned--
Speaker 1: He was that guy who had that honey wagon and out at the airport [Los Angeles International Airport] in, in Los Angeles [California].  He wa- emptied the labs.  He wanted to be a pilot.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Yeah, well, Sam was on reserve at American [American Airlines, Inc.] as a pilot.  And just by luck of the draw, he was selected to be my first flight engineer, as, as a captain, fully qualified, no, no check airmen, no FAA [Federal Aviation Administration], no--my first actual flight as a captain completely.  And that we were both just ecstatic over that.  We couldn't--we didn't see the co-pilot.  And then finally, we get on the airplane and all that, and the co-pilot comes hustling kind of after the fact, but just get back down and everything else, doesn't say much.  We go through the checklist and all that kind of stuff.  And I do my briefing that was standard with me, and it was to talk to both my co-pilot and my flight engineering explaining, you know, "I need your help.  Let's work together as a team," you know, blah, blah, blah and everything.  "Here are the things that I'm--that I think are important."  And Sam's taking it all in, and co-pilot just kind of looked at me.  Well, we took off, and we were flying to Washington National Airport [Ronald Reagan Washington National Airport, Washington, D.C.].  That's what it was called in those days.  And I got the airplane up on cruising altitude and turned on the autopilot.  And I looked over to see that the little dolly we call it, that little round piece of paper that we used to write all the, the essential elements for the flight, you know, the power settings and that sort of thing.  And, and the first officer's duties were to write on there, that piece of paper, the weather conditions at destinations, so the captain could take that and he could say okay, the weather at the destination's gonna be such and such.  When you get to Washington [D.C.] it should be seventy-five degrees and whatever.  I looked at the thing, there was nothing on it like that.  So I said to the co-pilot, "I beg your pardon.  Where did you put the weather?"  And he said, "Well, since you're the weatherman, I thought you'd get the weather."  So, I unfastened my shoulder harness, sat my seat back and turned.  I said, "Let me tell you something.  As long as I sit in the left seat of this airplane, I'm the anchorman, you are the weatherman.  Don't you ever forget it," turned back, pulled my seat forward, flew on to Washington National, landed the airplane, went in, took care of all my paperwork stuff and everything else and came back out, got in the cockpit, taxied out for the flight back to Chicago [Illinois], put the airplane out on the--we were clear to take off, put it on the center line of the runway, and said you got it, which was standard.  It was the end of the--you know, the captain flies one leg; the co-pilot flies a leg.  But in this case, the guy looks at me, he said, "You're gonna let me fly?"  I said, "You do, you know how, don't you?  Because if you don't know how, you're on the wrong side of this door (gesture)."  "Oh, oh, yeah."  I said, "Take us to Chicago."  "Okay," so he flew all the way back to Chicago.
Story_ID: 672522
Speaker 1: We had one more leg for that day, and we flew out on the East Coast someplace.  (Laughter) We landed and walked on into, got in the limo, and we were on our way to the hotel.  And the tradition was, on the captain's first full flight, he would take the crew out to supper.  So, I was following tradition, and I said, "Okay, guys, what time you wanna meet for supper?"  Silence, so I said, "Well, how about 6:00, 6:30?"  Finally then one of the flight attendants--the flight attendants in those days had a steady banter that they used when they didn't wanna be bothered with, with crew members.  "Oh, gosh, I gotta wash my hair;" you know, "I got letters I've got to catch up on;" "Oh, I gotta do--I gotta sew some buttons on."  You know, they use the same line over and over again (laughter).  It was like, why don't you just say you don't wanna go to supper with me.  So, Sam [ph.] said, "Well, I'll be there" (laughter), and I chuckled over that.  And no else said anything, so I figured it was gonna be just the two of us.  I go downstairs and, at the hotel, at the appointed time, and Sam's waiting there.  And we're getting ready to go out to get in this rented car that I'd gotten to, to go to the, the, the restaurant.  And here comes the co-pilot and one of the flight attendants, and he's got a big box under his arm, wrapped with ribbon.  I don't know what it is, but--what the hell--kind of--I don't know even know where he, where he's going, and he says, "Okay, are you ready?"  "Yeah," so we all get in the car, and we go to this place.  It was called The Bank [ph.].  It was a restaurant, and it was called The Bank.  It, it was a bank before, and they made it into a restaurant.  We go there, and we're sitting there for a little bit and kind of having the hors d'oeuvres and whatever and relaxing.  And I--curiosity was just killing me.  I said, "I beg your pardon.  What's, what's the box?"  So he said, "Well, the box is a surprise."  And he pulls it up on the table, sets it there, and there's a card on top of the box, and he hands it to me.  So, I open the card, and it's a congratulated card--con- congratulatory card for making captain.  They said open the box, so I opened the box.  And the two of them had taxied all around the suburbs--'cause it was at night, you know, and, and there was--wasn't, wasn't a lot open downtown--all around the suburbs to find a department store that would sell them a set of blue pajamas, which she had gotten some iron on ribbon and ironed on four stripes and some junior pilot's wings.  And that was my surprise, and it was really very nice and very touching.  So I says, "Oh, man, wow, this is, this too much.  This has got to become a party," so I told the maitre d' I needed to have a private room.  So he said yeah, we got one.  It was the vault; the actual from the back was the private room.  And you talk about private, that was really private.  We went in there and we started talking.  And truth be told, we had a few, as they say in the business, oranges juices, while we were in there.  And this co-pilot told me that when he grew up, the only black people he ever saw were servants.  And his grandmother raised him, and that she had made it very clear to him when she heard that American Airlines [American Airlines, Inc.] was hiring black pilots, not only is it, "I don't want you to fly with one of 'em, I don't want you to ride with any one of 'em.  If you get on an airplane and you see a black pilot in the cockpit, you get off."  And she said, "You stay as far away from them as you can, because they all either have, they have a kni- they have a comb in one hand and a razor in the other."  That was his upbringing.  He said, "And then I insulted you, and you were professional enough and enough of a gentleman to give me all the professional courtesies that I would be given had I not done that."  And he said, "I gotta be- tell you, tell you the truth; that blew me away.  And for the first time in my life, I began to realize I had not been taught the right thing."  Well, before it was all over, I mean as he went through the story, it was a flight attendant, Sam, this, this kid, and me, and we were all crying.  I mean it was such a touching and moving story about this guy talking about what he had to go through for struggling with this issue, and how when he saw that I was his captain, he had second thoughts about wanting to go fly with me, but he thought well, what the heck, how bad can it be?  So, it was one of those conversions that I had a chance to meet and, and be part of.  And it taught me a lesson I've never forgotten.  No matter how deep rooted a person's ill feelings are, given an opportunity to see the truth, almost anybody can come around.  And it's a beautiful thing to see.  And as a people, as a person, I would be less than what I would like to think I am if I wasn't receptive to that change, that I wasn't willing and ready to accept the fact that, okay, that's where you were; this is where you are now; and where you are now is, is a wonderful thing.  And we can be friends; we can be brothers; we can be flying partners; we can be whatever we want to be, now that we have arrived at the same place.  So, that was one of the, I think, interesting moments, then that whole racial situation with the airline.
Story_ID: 672523
Speaker 1: How long did you fly with American [American Airlines, Inc.]?
Speaker 2: Well, I was on the roster for twenty-nine years.  I didn't actually fly the cockpit that long because, in 1983, I had a tumultuous year.  I'll tell you about that as we get to that, but in remind me when we get to 1983 what happened and all.  Anyway, the television business was great.  And I would, would fly trips in the mornings.  I would go out early in the morning, and I'd fly over to the East Coast, get back by noon, do my television show for, for, for 'Tilmon Tempo' at that time in the afternoon, and then do the news or do the weather in the afternoon, late afternoon and the evening.  And I think it was the Tribune [Chicago Tribune] that decided they wanted to follow me around for a full day, and they assigned this reporter and a photographer.  I had to get up at 5:30, 6:00, sometimes earlier than that, because sometimes I had a six o'clock takeoff.  And I would have gotten off the news at 10:30, driven to Highland Park [Illinois], bed down, and get up the next morning and go to the airport [Chicago O'Hare International Airport, Chicago, Illinois].  Well, I said, "In order to really do this, you're gonna have to live by the same schedule I do."  "Oh yeah, oh yeah, that's fine.  That's what we're here for."  So, fine, so after that kind of a night, then I'd go out and I'd fly my trip in the morning, get back and do all this other television.  Well, the first day, they were supposed to finish this thing in one day.  The first day, they didn't make it through the whole day.  They got as far as my finishing up my taping of 'Tilmon Tempo,' and says, "You know, hey, we gotta do the other part tomorrow.  We can't cut this.  This is too much" (laughter).  Interesting thing about article, this young woman was so impressed with what the lifestyle was.  And she wrote a glowing article, and then she'd call me, and she said, "They won't let me print that.  The editor says, 'Nobody's that good.  You gotta find some other side to this guy, 'cause you can't paint him as being the arch angel.  I mean, you know, you gotta find something else.'"  So she said, "Tell me anything about you that maybe you're not proud of."  Well, I didn't know of anything I wasn't proud of, I really didn't.  I mean everything I was doing I was really proud to be doing; I was happy to be doing it.  I felt blessed to be in those positions.  So I didn't come up with anything.  I didn't know what to tell her.  Well, she printed an article that she said in her article that she had interviewed some physicians and whatever else.  And they were saying that I was flying on, on deprived sleep, and that I was creating a danger for the passengers.  So (laugher), the rest of the article was very nice and glowing and everything else.  But she threw that in there, and I was very disappointed about that because the fact was, in those days, I was a bit younger than I am now, and four and a half hours sleep was just fine.  I could go forever on four and a half, five hours, just (makes sound)--so, that's where I was.  She later told me that she was really ashamed of what she had to, to print.  Because her father was, I don't know, a physician or whatever he was, but he lived on four and a half hours sleep for most of his life (laughter), so it really didn't really bother her.  That's why it didn't stand out to her until somebody pointed out that it--she should print something, another side.
Story_ID: 672524
Speaker 1: So, flying and television were both very, very rewarding.  Some of the things that I did with 'Tilmon Tempo' were very, very exciting.  The kinds of people that I attracted to, to be on my program, the biggest names in this country in entertainment, some of the biggest names in politics, some of the biggest names of every, every corner and crevice of the society were on my show, and I'm proud to say some of the smallest names, some of the ones that no one knew about until then, some of the talent that was buried in, in, in, in the City of Chicago [Illinois] and, and the surrounding communities that I had a chance to showcase, some of the ethnic things that happened in this incredible experiment called Chicago, where you've got all these pockets of ethnicity and everything else, and they have their own culture, and that's very, very interesting and deep.  And I would bring people out of that and put them on the air, and help others to establish some relationship with these people who were very different in the way that they worshipped, in the way that they danced, in the way that they married, in the way that they, they related with each other and with the rest of us.  So, it was a, a wonderful experience for me, an incredible growing experience because I had to know about all these things.  If I interviewed somebody that'd written a book, I had to read it.  If I interviewed somebody that had made some important speeches, I had to make sure that I have referred to those and did my own research.  There was a lot of work that had to go into this program.  It wasn't just a matter of sitting down and talking to people.  You had to know something about them, and so far as your entertainment was concerned, I had to hear it first.  I had to know that it had a quality that was, that merited being on my program.  So I was a very busy fellow.  And at the same time I was doing all this, I was flying full time, and I was also doing the weather.  So--
Speaker 2: You, you had a family too, right?
Speaker 1: Oh yeah, and I had a family.  I was raising three chil- children most of that time by myself.  My wife [Tilmon's first wife, Louise Tilmon] had separated with--and we had separated, and then finally we divorced.  And the kids of ours and I have always been very, very close, and I ended up really kind of raising them to their teen years.  I'm not sure I raised them to their teen years.  I think they raised me during their teen years.  But it was, it was a busy time.
Story_ID: 672525
Speaker 1: Nineteen eighty-three [1983], back in eighty--when, is that when the article came out, in '83 [1983] when, when--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: No--
Speaker 1: What, what happened?
Speaker 2: The thing about 1983 that's really remarkable is that in 1982 I had a production company I had been running for quite some time.  And I did all kinds of motion picture and stuff.  The video was in its infancy, so to speak, and I wasn't doing much in the way of video.  I knew about it, but I wasn't doing much there.  Everything was film.  I did a lot of audio work, a lot of film work, and a lot of still work, a lot of slide things with computerized slide productions and whatever else.  I did, I'd say 85 percent of my business was with the federal government in the set-aside program, the 8(a) set-aside program [8(a) Business Development Program].  And business was thriving at that point in time.  But then--as a matter of fact, I had like nine or ten people on my staff, and I had a full, a, a, a little building that I'd rented out in Ch- Highland Park [Illinois] that I had my studios in.  Then they had a change of administrations, and the new administration--and don't, don't make me say which one it was, 'cause I don't know whether it was the, the Democrat or Republican.  But they had no, no interest in 8(a) programs, and they just slashed the budgets for them.  And if that was 85 percent of my business, you can imagine what happened.  So my business began to really go downhill.  At the same time, my parents [Manila Hazel Tilmon and George Tilmon, Sr.] had moved here to be near me because in 1970--I think it was '70 [1970]--I had gone out to Washington, D.C., to present a proposal to do some of this work for the government.  I was gonna do a piece for the FAA [Federal Aviation Administration] that was going to be kind of a recruiting film for black air traffic controllers.  And I couldn't find any place to make copies.  I had not fulfilled the requirement in that you had to have eight copies of this thing.  They only had like two or three copies.  And I got a taxi, went all over Washington trying to find something in the neighborhood of a Kinko's [FedEx Office Print & Ship Services Inc.].  I don't think they had Kinko's then, but something like that.  I couldn't find one place, so I'm frustrated as all get out, and go by the, the medical services area, Medical Corps headquarters at the surgeon general's office [Office of the Surgeon General], where my brother worked.  He was a major in the Medical Service Corps [U.S. Army Medical Service Corps], medical corps for the United States Army.  And I, I said, "You gotta tell me where I can get these things copied.  It's for the government."  "I can do 'em here."  So he took 'em and made eight copies and brought 'em back to me.  At that time the surgeon general's offices were directly next door to FAA.  So it was a simple matter for me to take 'em from him and walk 'em over there.  Well, I delivered them, and he said, "I'll take you to the airport," 'cause I had to get back to do 'Our People.'  And leading up to that day, I had spent more time with my brother from week to week than I had since we were kids, because I was doing all this work with the government.  And every time I had some proposal or whatever to do with the government, I'd spend some time with him.  And sometimes we spent the night, and sometimes we would be so engrossed in talking about old times and when we were kids and everything else, his wife [Melba Jean Ferguson] would just say, "I'm, I'm going to bed.  You guys can have the bedroom.  I'm going to bed in the guestroom; I'm--I've had it."  And we would talk into the wee hours of the morning.  And then finally, in bed, like when we were little kids, we would continue talking until we fell asleep.  And that happened a number of times during that fall.  This date, with the film proposal that he had copied for me, was in February of 1970 I believe.  And he did that for me, and on the drive to the airport I kept saying, "George [George Tilmon, Jr.], you know, you need to get out of the Army.  I mean, man, you know, the truth is you got a lot of talent.  You're a very smart guy.  There are lots of things happening for black people now.  You could get out and get a really good job and make a lot of money."  And he said well, "I thought about it, but you know, I'm on colonel's list now.  I'm gonna make colonel, and I wanna make colonel first, and then I'll think about it some more, but, you know, I have given it some thought."  That's the way our conversation went.  He--he dropped me off.  I got on the airplane, flew back to Chicago [Illinois].  I went to WTW studi- studios [WTTW-TV, Chicago, Illinois].  I was in the studio area for about maybe twenty minutes to thirty minutes when I got a phone call.  It was from a mutual friend in Washington saying, "Your brother's dead.  He had a myocardial infarction, heart attack."  The proposal that I had made to the FAA [Federal Aviation Administration] was entitled, 'Brother.' It was an awesome, and difficult, and almost impossible time for me.  And I, I was worried about my parents 'cause they were up in age, so I moved them from Oklahoma to Chicago, got 'em a nice little place to stay, and paid their rent, and everything was fine.  But they get, they got older, and both of them had strokes.  And my mother was, my mother was very, very taken by the, the stroke, I mean to the point whether--she was incontinent, and she, she needed medical care around the clock, and I was providing that for her.  I was paying for registered nurses, $6,000 a month.  My dad was also infirm because of it, but he was doing pretty well by comparison.
Story_ID: 672526
Speaker 1: But I say all these things to say that financially I went down the tubes, I really did go down the tubes.  And I don't know what the year was now 'cause they're all blurred, but I filed bankruptcy at the urging of my attorney.  I learned, later learned I really didn't need to, that I had enough income and everything else that I could have dealt with the creditors and taken care of everything.  But my attorney says, "No, just file bankruptcy.  It's the easiest thing in the world; just do that, and walk away from all this; it'll all go away."  So I did, biggest mistake I ever made in my life, for one, I was cheating people who had trusted me.  And with some of them, I paid 'em anyway, much to my attorney's chagrin because he said, "You don't have to do that."  There was a bank in particular, Banca di Roma [UniCredit Banca di Roma S.p.A.], that had been very gracious and very helpful to me when I was in business and everything else.  And I mean I could literally pick up the phone and say, "I need $12,000."  "How soon you need it?"  "Well, I need it today."  "Well, okay, it's in your account.  Come on down when you can and sign the paperwork," fine.  And that's the way we had been working.  It must have been some time in I guess 1982, I guess.  And all of a sudden the FBI [Federal Bureau of Investigation] let me know that I was being investigated.  And finally I was indicted in September I think of 1982 for bank fraud.  I couldn't believe it.  What are you talking about?  Well, turns out, somebody had complained--I don't know who yet--and the U.S. attorney's office took the case that I had committed fraud against the Banca di Roma.  We went to trial.  And in that trial, it was discovered that the Banca di Roma said, "We have no quarrel with this man.  He has paid us, even though he filed bankruptcy, every penny that he ever owed us.  We don't know why we're here."  Well, to make the story short, I was acquitted totally.  That wasn't the only testimony.  There were lots of testimony about, you know, the fact that this is crazy.  That was in 1983, in the spring of '83 [1983].  But in the--in January of '83 [1983], and this is--I should tell you.  My bosses at the television [WMAQ-TV, Chicago, Illinois] and my bosses at the airline [American Airlines, Inc.] said, "Hey, in this country you're innocent until you're proven guilty.  You keep flying your trips."  It was not, it was not easy to do because I like to stand in the door and greet my passengers.  But you know, they're getting on the airplane seeing a guy who's been indicted for bank fraud who's flying their airplane.  And you know, I couldn't hide it because I was a television personality, and my television bosses said the same thing: "You ain't guilty until they, they, they, they hit the gavel and say you're guilty.  So you stay on the television, and you do your work.  The only time we don't want you on the air is when, during the midst of the trial itself."  So I kept working, and everything was just fine, in a way.  I flew my trip that one morning to Indianapolis [Indiana]; it was a morning in January of 1983, and came back, did television that night.  And after the ten o'clock news, I, after the ten o'clock news, my son [John Tilmon], who was assisting me there at the station, just helping me out with paperwork and hanging these maps, was driving me back home to the apartment.  We got to LaSalle [LaSalle Street] and, and, and Ontario--Ohio [Ohio Street] and, and, and LaSalle.  Out of nowhere, a Yellow Cab came screaming out of nowhere, and hit us on the left rear quarter of our car, spun us around three times on dry pavement, and we--the third car, we, we hit a third car, and that's what stopped us from spinning.  I ended up in the hospital, transitory vertigo [benign paroxysmal positional vertigo], and I couldn't stand up.  They didn't think I was gonna walk, much less do anything else.  And the most crushing blow was when the guy says, "You'll never fly again."
Story_ID: 672527
Speaker 1: They told me that I couldn't fly with transitory vertigo [benign paroxysmal positional vertigo], couldn't pass a flight physical.  Actually they told me I couldn't walk.  They told me that I'd never fly again.  I had transitory vertigo, and I could not pass a flight physical with that.  They said I couldn't walk actually, 'cause I couldn't stand up.  I don't know if many people know what that is.  It's not like being dizzy and having the room spin.  It's like not knowing which way is up.  In a dark room, I could stand up and fall.  In a dark room, a, a normal person would stand up, and their body's normal equilibrium will let them know when they're standing and what they have to do in order to, to stand straight.  If you don't have the, those signals in the inner ear, you have no idea where the vertical is, and you might be leaning to one side or another, and you just keep falling; you don't have any sense of whether you're straight up or not.  It's a very eerie feeling, and it's a very uncomfortable feeling; I mean you, you literally feel ill.  You feel miserable, because that element of your existence is so basic.  You've heard people say well, you know, he didn't know which way was up.  But I'm gonna tell you what, when you don't know which way is up, you're in deep trouble.  That's where I was, and it was a, a very ugly experience.  But I was determined to get back in the cockpit, so I really fought like crazy and began to try to develop coping mechanisms and whatever else to deal with it.  The stress was enormous, just the idea that I had to put that much into my willpower and my, whatever else, and try to make something work.  And I worked with some doctors who were very, very anxious to help me, and they did a mar- marvelous job.  And they give me the credit because they said I did all the work, but that's not true.  They really did most of the heavy loading, because they knew what to tell me to do, to try and everything else.  And I finally did get to the place as I could walk and all, but I, I couldn't, I couldn't stand up and pray with my eyes closed without holding onto something like the pew or whatever in front of me.  There were a lot of things like that I couldn't, but there were a lot of things I could do.  It was very fragile for a while, because I could go right back into the way it was in the beginning, if I wasn't careful.  For an example, there was a lawsuit against the taxi company [Yellow Cab Company] about this accident.  And the lawyers from the other side kept trying to prove that I really didn't have transitory vertigo.  So they took me through a batteries of tests.  I went through every test you can imagine, and the darn tests would put me right back where I was in the beginning.  I'd, I'd have, I'd be in bed for three days afterwards, because the test was one that was developed for NASA [National Aeronautics and Space Administration] because one of the, the astronauts had fallen in the bathtub and injured his inner ear.  And they wanted to, to ascertain just how badly he was hurt, so they developed this test.  This is the craziest test in the world.  They strap you on a, on a table, and they have the room dark.  And they have like a screen in front of you.  And they have bead--little dots of light that move back and forth and all that kind of stuff.  When you talk about being disoriented, the first time that happened to me, I ended up screaming because I, I, I was holding onto the bedrails, and it was like all of a sudden the bedrails were going like this.  I mean I--it's hard to describe.  Anyway--
Speaker 2: So, I'm, I'm trying to understand what, what this is like.  So you'd lose the sense of, of, of up and down, but to--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --compensate, you had to compensate visually for, for--
Speaker 1: Visually.
Speaker 2: --what?
Speaker 1: You could use clue, clues--cues would work very well, after a while.  And physical cues would work if you could hold onto something that was solid, and you didn't have this silly test going.  They told me that over 90 percent of the cases just all of a sudden got better.  And this is one time being in a minary- minority group was not pleasant, 'cause I wasn't in that group right then.  It took a long time, I'd say years before I got to the place I felt really I was okay.  And even now, I'm very careful, I mean, because I would not want anything to go wrong to put me back into that state again.  Could I pass a flight physical now?  Oh, I think I could pass the physical, but if they looked at my records, they may not like what they see.  So that's how my flying ended, for all intents and purposes.  I still go up with my son [James Tilmon, Jr.] every now and then, who's a pilot with US Airways right now, and one of the safest pilots I've ever flown with in my life.  And I go up with him from time to time, and we tool around.  But that's all I do for flying now.  That's how my flying career ended.
Story_ID: 672528
Speaker 1: Did you still--well, I imagine you couldn't be on the air either during this period--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Oh yes--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --of time.
Speaker 2: --I could be on the air.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: They understood this, what--I mean, the thing is, I didn't ever have to close my eyes; I was never operating in the dark; I always had the visual cues that would help me, so, I, I knew which way was up there.  I just had to be careful when going back and forth between the, the weather set and the, and the anchor desk, stuff like that, because I didn't wanna like trip and fall or something.  But, you know, your, your cues, your, your, your--the human mind is such an incredible device.  I mean you, you develop other kinds of senses to help you and eventually you compensate almost 100 percent, to the place where that no one would ever know.  So yeah, I could do television.  It wasn't a problem to do that, and it was like my saving grace.  I still had something to do.  I had some place to go with my life, and thank god for television.
Speaker 1: And you were in your early forties then, or?
Speaker 2: Well, let's see how I was--no, no, no, I was--
Speaker 1: Eighty-three [1983]--
Speaker 2: --I was a lot older than that.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Nineteen eighty-three [1983], 1983--(unclear).  I was around fifty, fifty years old or so, in that range.  So, there you have it.
Speaker 1: Okay, so, so you were with Channel 5 [WMAQ-TV, Chicago, Illinois] until--
Speaker 2: I was with Channel 5 from, from 1974 through 1994.
Speaker 1: Now there was a break there somewhere, was, wasn't it--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: --were you--just steadily through all--
Speaker 2: No, it wasn't.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Seventy-four [1974] to ninety-four [1994]--(unclear)--right now.  No, wait a minute.  I started that before then, because I started doing 'Tilmon Tempo.' I was doing the weather from '74 [1974] until '94 [1994], but I was there prior to that time.  I actually started out there in 1972, doing 'Tilmon Tempo.'
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, 'cause I, once again, I've got this bio here that says that you were at NBC from '74 [1974] to '88 [1988], and then from '90 [1990] to '94 [1994].
Speaker 2: That's, the reason they--well, I don't know why they did that, because I didn't have a break between--and, and they probably did that because I was doing the weather that way, the weather from ninety--from '74 [1974], '74 [1974] to '94 [1994], but they forgot the 'Tilmon Tempo' years.  And I--then nothing happened in 1988.  I mean, you know, I was, I was still there.  I didn't have a break, so it was twenty-three, twenty-four years, something like that, at Channel 5.
Story_ID: 672529
Speaker 1: Now you, you left in '94 [1994] or W--for FOX [WFLD-TV, Chicago, Illinois], right?
Speaker 2: I left because at the end of 1993 my contract ended.  And without announcing it to me, they did not renew me, and I was without a job.  And I was literally kicked to the curb.  There was a lot of upset people in this town because of that, particularly the way that it happened.  My general manager was Pat Wallace.  And Pat Wallace had not told me the truth, had not been straightforward with me and everything else.  And the word that got out that, you know, I was being terribly mistreated.  So the mailbags filled up, and the phone banks went crazy and everything else, and talk radio was just berating my general manager something awful.  I mean some of the things they said I didn't know you could say on, on the radio.  But there was a lot of, of anguish across suburbia, the city, whatever; people were very upset about what happened.  Chicago's [Illinois] a crazy town, man.  When they embrace you, when they embrace you, you, you really are in good shape.  If they don't like you, you're dead meat.  (Laughter) But if they embrace you, you couldn't have better friends anywhere.  This town is warmest city on the planet in that regard.  So, all of my friends came to my, my aid, you might say, and there was a lot of stuff going on.  I was dealing with this thing, and I was struggling with it because I had--remember back when Bob Lemon said he didn't like people that were bitter, and I was trying my best not to be, and I was working on myself desperately.  And I remember I had a moment when, when--I've, I've gotta have help with this.  This is scare--this was driving me crazy.  And I called my minister, Reverend Johnnie Colemon [HistoryMaker Reverend Dr. Johnnie Colemon], and said, "Let me tell you what they did to me."  And I told her, and she says, "Okay, so what, what do you want me to do?"  I said, "Well, I want you to tell me, you know, how will I deal with these people?"  She said, "You don't deal with these people.  These people don't belong to you.  You're not responsible for them, what they do, good, bad, or indifferent.  You're only responsible for you.  I can tell you what you should do for you, okay.  You will not be able to get over this or get through it until you learn to love those people who have done this to you."  I said, "Reverend Colemon, you've got to be kidding."  (Background noise) Pardon me (pause).  She said, "You're not gonna be able to deal with this effectively until you learn to love these people who have mistreated you."  She said, "I don't deny that you've been mistreated, but that's their problem.  Your problem is you.  You've gotta get yourself corrected."  I said, "You can't expect me to love people who have done me this way."  She says, "Yes, I do."  I said, "But you know how tough that is?"  She said, "Did you call me to find an easy out?  Is that what you called me for?  I'm not gonna give it to you.  I'm gonna tell you what you have to do if you're gonna make this happen."  Well, I hung up the phone feeling like oh, man, even my minister's against me (laughter), you know.  But she wasn't wrong.  I prayed an awful lot over that.  I mean I really prayed over it, and just didn't feel like I was making any headway at all.  I mean I was still going in a little circle.
Story_ID: 672530
Speaker 1: And Dr. King's [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] birthday celebration came up, and there was a huge celebration at the Conrad Hilton Hotel [Hilton Chicago, Chicago, Illinois].  And unlike other years when I was on television and so-called celebrity, which the station would buy out so many seats and whatever else, I was invited, and I stayed at one of the major tables and that sort of thing, I only went because a good friend of mine at PUSH [Rainbow PUSH Coalition, Chicago, Illinois] said, "You're invited, come on."  But I sat in the back of the room, 'cause I didn't have any deal going.  Somebody came back there and he said, "Did you hear what Jesse's [HistoryMaker Reverend Jesse L. Jackson] gonna do?"  I said, "No."  "Well, you know how PUSH likes to have some kind of thing built around Dr. King's birthday, so he's well aware of what happened to you over at Channel 5 [WMAQ-TV, Chicago, Illinois].  So he's gonna do, at the end of this thing, he's gonna invite everybody to join him in a march, and march over to Channel 5 and, and picket."  Now I don't know if there was any truth to this, but this is what I was told.  I said, "Oh, no.  I mean it was just like, it was the coldest day of the winter so far, I mean bright sunshine and just cold as all get out.  And I said I'm not gonna send--not stand by while all these people getting frostbite over me, walking around Channel 5.  I mean that's, that's not what I want.  I mean that's, that's, that's, that's wrong, downright wrong."  "Well, hey, that's what's gonna happen."  So I got in touch with a woman who was involved in the programming.  And I said you've gotta get word to Jesse that if he is planning to do such a thing, please don't do it.  Well, before she could get to him, I went up front and I was gonna say something.  And Jesse saw me, and he came over, and we embraced.  And he says, "I hear you been keeping up the good fight."  And I started to say something, and it--my eye caught Pat Wallace.  He was standing ten, fifteen feet away.  When he saw Jesse embrace me, he looked like a man who had been frightened to death.  I mean he was, he was like a little kid who knew that he had done something wrong, and now he was gonna really be punished.  I mean he just looked awful.  I will tell you now, that was my first moment that I felt real compassion for him as a human being, because what he was obviously going through was torture.  And of course, when I told this person what I did, they did whisper something in Jess--Jesse's ear.  He did not call for the boycott and for the march, and we left there.  And I began to feel empowered.  I began to feel like I could find a way to love him, not like him, but I could love him as a human being and respect him as a human being.
Story_ID: 672531
Speaker 1: And I went back home, and I called my, my agent and I said, "It's time for me to sit down with Pat Wallace."  She said, "Okay."  I said, "I'm gonna call him, and I'll tell you what it looks like."  I called him and I said, "We need to talk."  He said, "All right, what are we talking about?"  "We need to talk about my working at Channel 5 [WMAQ-TV, Chicago, Illinois], how is that?"  "We need to talk about the terms under which I will come back to work." "Okay."  I was surprised almost to hear him say that, but I was so empowered with all this thing that had happened to me.  So I said, "I'm gonna bring my attorney."  He said, "Well, I'll have my attorney here."  I said, "No, no, no, no, the only reason I'm bringing my attorney is to make sure that I don't do something really stupid and give away the farm.  I'm gonna ask him not to say a word."  "These attorneys don't sit quietly."  I said, "Mine will."  So, sure enough, I told my attorney, Todd Musburger, what is happening.  He couldn't believe that I was getting this meeting.  We go over to Pat Wallace's office, and he had a power chair.  That was the chair he always sat in.  And anybody that was visiting in his office sat in the other chairs.  I walked in and sat right down in the power chair.  He came over and did not complain a bit, brought a pad and pencil, and said, "What are the terms?"  And I dictated to him the terms of my contract, and they were pretty significant.  I had a nice raise; I had a signing bonus; I had only one show a day to do, to do, the ten o'clock news, nothing else, and that was it.  He took notes, buzzed for his secretary, said, "Type this up.  This is Jim's [HistoryMaker Jim Tilmon] new contract."  My attorney sat there open mouthed.  It was like, I can't believe this is happening (laughter).  And sure enough, after a little while, we waited around and she brought back this, I think it was like a one page document.  And he signed it, and I signed it.  And as I was leaving, my attorney went out first, and as I was leaving, I turned at the door.  And by that time, he was back at his desk.  And I said, "You know what?  I love you."  And you would think I'd hit him in the face with a two by four.  And then my attorney and I rode down the elevator together.  And then I came back up, and I said, "Now, Pat, you and I need to go down and announce this to the newsroom."  'Cause the newsroom was very much in my corner.  It was really crazy.  He says, "Oh, no, no, you go down, and you can tell--." "No, no, no, Pat, it's not gonna be right for me to do down.  It has to be something we do together.  We've got to mend these fences; we got to bring this thing back together.  It has to work."  So he went down with me, not because he wanted to.  He said, "Well, what am I gonna say?"  I said, "Just you don't have to worry about what you're going to say.  It'll come to you.  It'll be fine."  Then we went down in the newsroom.  We walked in together and like there was silence, man.  And you could hear a pin fall in there because (laughter) no one could believe that the two of us were in the same room together, much less walking in together.  And we walked right into the middle of the newsroom.  I said, "Ladies and gentlemen, Mr. Wallace has an announcement he wants to make."  And trembling voice, he said, "Jim's coming back to work for us."  And there were cheers and everything else, and everybody was applauding and screaming and everything else.  There were tears, and people were running up and hugging me and everything.  It was wild, emotional experience.  And afterwards, I walked him out of the newsroom, and he says, "New York [New York] is gonna just think I am crazy."  I said, "No, New York is gonna think you're a hero if you use your head.  Because what you did was you prevented a potential boycott of not only this station, but NBC.  And if they can understand that you did that, given the fact and the history of this town when Channel 2 [WBBM-TV, Chicago, Illinois] was boycotted, it took them down to the toilet.  They given--given that history, I think they'll call you a hero."  He says, "I sure hope so."  I don't know what happened with him in New York, but that was the story of my being canned and coming back.
Story_ID: 672532
Speaker 1: I later on quit television.  And I did because he [Pat Wallace] had lost that battle in his mind.  And one of the things that I had said to them about what was unfair was that they never told me what I did that was wrong.  If I wasn't measuring up, they never called me and said, "Hey, you know, you should be doing this better or whatever else."  So he instituted this program of checking me out.  Every night I was required to do a rehearsal for the weather at nine o'clock.  Nobody at the station thought it made any sense at all, especially me, but--
Speaker 2: Were you the only one required to do the rehearsal?
Speaker 1: Oh, oh yes, of course, I was the only person required to rehearse anything.  I mean, rehearse the weather, give me a break.  So they had a full camera crew, everything else.  I had to go through all the steps, all my graphics, all my, everything else about the weather for, for the next day on the ten o'clock news.  I had to rehearse that entire thing for, for the, for the ten o'clock news every night.  And then most mornings I'd come to work, and I'd be called to his office and he would have a critique sheet.  And he would go through all the things.  "It took you twelve seconds to get from the desk to the, to the chroma key.  That's too long.  You're not pronouncing the, the morning weather woman's name right.  Her name is Roberta Gonzales," and--
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: He said, "You're not pronouncing her name right.  You, you like just kind of rush over her name.  Her name is Roberta Gonzales.  You need to pronounce all the syllables."  And that was kind of a matter of comedy, because every night when I would--they'd wanted me to promote her show for the next morning, I would say, "Make sure to tune in to (pronunciation) Roberta Gonzales tomorrow morning."  And that's the way I said it every night at ten o'clock (laughter).  Well, this little game only went so long before I went in for a regular physical.  And my doctor said, "Physically you're fine; you're just perfect.  But you're gonna die a premature death unless you get away from the people that are bothering you, because the stress you're under is unbelievable."  And sure enough, I was not well.  But all the vital signs and everything were fine, but I wasn't well.  That was in the late spring.  In September I walked into his office and handed him an envelope saying my days with Channel 5 [WMAQ-TV] are over.  "I'm going to stay here until the 7th of October, at which time I hope you have found a suitable replacement for me.  I, I don't want to leave later than that in the year because it would interfere with the November book.  And I don't wanna leave earlier than that because I wanna give you a time to readjust your personnel and your scheduling and whatever else.  So I want this thing to be a very smooth operation."  And, and then in talking with him, I said, "And don't worry about the press or what the people and how they will react.  I will tell people that I had a very good experience here.  I will tell them that I am leaving on my own, in my own terms, et cetera, et cetera, and this station will come out smelling like rose.  I have no desire to leave a stink here on my friends who are still here, and have the station, and them suffer, and their careers suffer because of me.  So, that's the way it's gonna be."  He said, "Well, look, you know, we can talk about money."  I said, "You could quadruple my salary.  It had nothing to do with that, nothing to do with that.  What it had to do with is outside that window where there is another world.  I wanna get into that world.  I wanna enjoy that world.  And this has been a good world for me, but it's over," and it was.  So, on the 7th of October I had my last show on Channel 5.
Speaker 2: This was 1994, right?
Speaker 1: Nineteen ninety-four [1994].
Story_ID: 672533
Speaker 1: I did a few things with FOX [WFLD-TV, Chicago, Illinois] here, just voluntarily.  And they wanted me to come in and then do weather for 'em, and I said, "No way."  But I said, "I will do some aviation things for you."  So, a few things I did with them for aviation stories and all that for a while, and that kind of played itself out.  And I started working my, with my production company [The Tilmon Group, LLC] in Arizona.  We were doing a lot of production work of all kinds and stuff, and corporate things, and doing television commercials, radio commercials and that sort of thing.  It was, it was a fun thing to do.  And I was enjoying it as a, being my own boss and being able to direct things as I wanted them to go.  Everything was going fine with that too.  I, I was at peace like I had not been since I was a little kid.  I, I had as part of my studio, I had a synthesizer.  And I began to just toot away with that.  I'm not a keyboard player, but I began to just kind of have fun with it.  And my wife [Tilmon's second wife, Joan Tilmon] would walk in and say, "That was really beautiful.  Did you record it?"  No, no, no, I didn't record it.  Well, this one day she had been standing in the studio when I was playing, and I played a whole piece of music that I guess came to me.  And she said, "That was just really terrific.  Did you record that?"  "No, sweetheart, I didn't."  She said, "You know, I, I was standing here, and while you were playing I looked around the room.  There are twenty-five different pieces of equipment, any--any one of which you could have used to record yourself.  You chose not to use one single one of those."  And she did what I call the wife thing.  You know, the wife thing is where they say something dramatic and turn and walk out of the room before you can say anything (laughter).  Well, she did that.  And I just sat there with my mouth open, and I say okay.  To myself, I said I'm gonna start recording things, so I did.  And before too long, she says, "You know, that was really good.  You need to polish this and polish that a little bit, and it'll be a real piece of music."  So I would follow her lead on that.  All this time, these different selections of music that would come to me, I sat at the piano--I mean at the keyboard, but I wasn't thinking musically.  I wasn't thinking anything.  I was like, I was like just a vehicle through which these ideas came.  And my fingers just did things, and we created a bunch of pieces of music, ended up putting them on a CD [compact disc], and calling it 'Angel Whispers.' That was my one big production that I did myself, composed all the music and whatever else.
Speaker 2: Now what, what year did 'Angel Whispers' come out?
Speaker 1: 'Angel Whispers,' must have been '95 [1995], '96 [1996], somewhere in there.
Speaker 2: Now, now you still play in, in--
Speaker 1: I--
Speaker 2: --orchestra, right?
Speaker 1: No, I don't (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: You don't?  Okay.
Speaker 1: I, I still play clarinet from time to time.  I should play more frequently.  But I'm going to be playing a lot more because I'm at another transition in my life right now, which I don't wanna get ahead of myself for, but I'm going to be.
Story_ID: 672534
Speaker 1: By now you must know my life has taken a lot of different turns.  And, and some of them have been magnificent, and some of 'em have been different.  That production company [The Tilmon Group, LLC] I had was a really fun experience.  It was just my wife and myself that did that, that business.  And I don't think we have ever been any closer than we were during that period of time because being in business for yourself, as you may know, is no simple matter, I don't care how successful you are, whatever else.  You don't have a clock to punch.  You can't just quit when it's five o'clock.  You can't do any of those things.  You have, you have work you have to do for yourself.  I was living in a beautiful home in Scottsdale [Arizona], had tennis court right there on the grounds with me.  I mean I could walk out the door, and our court was right there.  I had a pool.  I had an outdoor kitchen and barbecue and stuff like that.  It was a resort.  Then as we got further and further into the business, we got to use it less and less, because the business was that demanding.  And then, of course, business in the United States was booming until 2001 and 9/11 [September 11, 2001] came.  And 9/11 came, and all that commercial stuff we were doing, advertisement stuff we were doing, and a lot of the carpet things we were doing just dried up overnight.  It was gone; I mean it had disappeared.  We would call people to find out what they were doing, and they were out of business.  Our business just went south, I mean like suddenly south.  And we had over a million dollars in equipment.  We had our fortunes, our live--our life savings tied up in that business, and we watched that business just peter out.  So, it was not a pretty sight.  My lawyer at the time did something that my other lawyer did.  He said, "You know what you need to do, you should file bankruptcy."  I said, "You know what you should do, you should talk to another client," (laughter), "'cause I'm not going there, not going to do that, been there, done that, never will again.  I'm not going to mistreat people who have trusted me, not one single one."  And since then I've been slowly but surely paying off all the debt.  And in a little while it'll all be gone.  Now, in the midst of all of this, my wife was keeping me informed about what was going on in Chicago [Illinois].  She was in the computer all the time anyway.  And she would go on the computer, and she'd read theater's column about television and all that other stuff, and read, you know, online accounts from the Trib [Chicago Tribune] and from the Sun-Times [Chicago Sun-Times] and whatever.  And she saw Channel 2 [WBBM-TV, Chicago, Illinois] just kind of taking a dive, and we would talk about it from time to time, you know, that's such a proud station.  It's awful that that's happening to them.  So finally the summer of 2002 I guess, early summer, she said, "You know, you need to, you need to find out if you could help them out."  I said, "Joan [Joan Tilmon], I'm over the hill.  Man, I'm--you know, I've been off television now for almost eighty years, and nobody remembers me, nobody cares, you know, whatever else; I'm old.  You know, who wants a guy, you know, that is a has been?"
Story_ID: 672535
Speaker 1: So, she said, "You need to call and find out if they would like to have you do whatever you'd like to do for them.  Do weather for them maybe or whatever."  I said, "Joan [Tilmon's second wife, Joan Tilmon], you don't just pick up the phone and call a television station and say, 'Hey, what can you, what could you do, could you use me?'"  She said, "You do."  I said, "No, no, no, no, I don't, I don't do that."  So, times are very difficult for us at that point in time.  And, and we were fighting off all kinds of demons.  We went to Salt Lake--well, before we went to Salt Lake City [Utah], she finally said, "They're bringing Joe Ahern back.  He's gonna be their general manager.  He's a terrific general manager.  This guy has a track record that's incredible.  Why don't you call him?"  I said, "Joan, you don't call a general manager and do that.  That's just not done."  She--make the story short, she convinced me that I had to do it, so I called.  And I got his secretary, and she said, "He was on the phone and you know, he'll call you back."  And I said, "Joan, see there (laughter), you know.  How many times do you have to hear that before you know what it really means?"  She said, "No, no, no, no, we don't know yet."  Well, I didn't hear back for the next day and the next day, and we had to go to Salt Lake City on business.  And we were there in a conference, and I got a call from his secretary on my cell phone saying, "Joe apologizes.  He's in San Francisco [California] right now, and he's going to call you as soon as he gets back."  I said, "Well, that's fine, thank you very much."  Joan said, "See there."  So, anyway, I guess it was the following day, I come, I walk out of one of the, the conference meetings.  My cell phone rings; I answer it.  It's Joe Ahern.  He's still in San Fran, and he's--we chat a little bit about things, just in general, and he says, "Well, when are you coming back to Chicago [Illinois]?"  I said, "Well, I've got business in Chicago Monday, and I'm coming in on American Airlines [American Airlines, Inc.]."  He said, "That's great.  I'm in San Francisco.  I'm coming back to Chicago on Monday.  What time do you arrive?"  And we were arriving thirty minutes apart, so he says, "Well, I'll see you at the airport."  I said, "Yeah, I'll meet your flight," so I did.  I met his flight, and he gets out of the airplane, goes out and gets in his electric cart for VIPs.  We ride in the cart with him to the front of the terminal.  He said, "Do you have transportation?"  "No, we're just gonna cab it."  "No, no, no, ride with me."  So we get in his limo.  We ride downtown right to Channel 2 studios [WBBM-TV, Chicago, Illinois].  He says, "Why don't you come in for a minute."  Okay, so we went in and we sat in his office, and my wife and I and all--and the news director, Carol Fowler.  And we talked about everything.  All the way downtown we were talking about family and kids and whatever else, no television.  We did that when we got back here.  We talked, we discussed everything in the world.  And finally, it was time for me to leave for my business meeting, and he said, "You know what?  I really like you.  I want you to go to work for me.  Will you work for me?"  And I looked at my wife, and she looked at me like if you say no, you will die (laughter).  I said, "Yes."  So, so I had no clue about what it was gonna be like.  I didn't make any demands, whatever else.  We shook on it.  I had to stay over.  We didn't--we were prepared to just go right back to, to Phoenix [Arizona], to, to Scottsdale [Arizona] that night.  We didn't bring any toiletries.  We didn't bring any other clothes.  We didn't bring anything, so I had to send Joan back to Arizona to try to begin to get things together because he wanted me to go to work that following Monday.  So I stayed in town to sign the contract, contract agreement and everything else, and, and I did.  I had to buy toiletries.  I had to do the whole thing.  And they put me up in a hotel.  So, anyway, I, I signed the contract.  He said, "Here's what I wanna pay you.  Is that okay?"  I said, "Fine."  I mean, you know, the way this thing came off was not formal--(unclear).  So, I agreed to it, and I've worked here for three years.  My contract wasn't renewed this time.  And it's okay because when I was hired here I was sixty-eight years old.  You don't just go pick up some guy at sixty-eight and put him on the air.  So he did, Joe did something that hadn't been done before as far as I know.  And he did something for me that I really desperately needed at the time.  To this day, he still doesn't know this part of it, but he really kept me going, kept my life going in many, many ways, brought my self esteem and self confidence back.  That ride in his electric cart in the, at O'Hare [Chicago O'Hare International Airport, Chicago, Illinois] was dramatic.  As we were riding along, we'd ride twenty feet, thirty feet and somebody, "Hey, there's [HistoryMaker] Jim Tilmon."  "Hi, Jim, how you doing?"  I hadn't been in town for eight years.  I mean I'd done some things on cable whenever act--actually that's aviation events.  You know, I was on CNN; I was on MSNBC; I was on CNN International; I was on FOX News channel.  I was on all those, and locally in Arizona when a, an aviation event would take place.  I was on all the local stations, you know, time to time.  I did 'Nightly News' ['NBC Nightly News']; I did 'Nightline'; I did 'Imus in the Morning'; I did the 'Today' show.  I did 'em all, just as a guest.  As a matter of fact, one of the things that impressed Joe, Joe Ahern, was the fact he saw me on 'Nightline,' and he thought I was pretty good.
Story_ID: 672536
Speaker 1: Well, anyway, I've been here three years, and I think I've served my purpose here.  My purpose was to kind of shake up the troops a little bit, and bring a familiar face back on the scene, and start a thing where that--Joe [Joe Ahern] is beginning to rebuild the station, and taking people, Chicago [Illinois] people, from other stations that were working there and bringing them in here to create a new team.  And it was exciting, very exciting to, to be involved in that process.  In January of 2005, they learned that they did finally successful get 'Dr. Phil' to be on our air.  And they decided they would put him in at four o'clock Monday through Friday.  That was the show that I was on.  The only show that I was on was the four o'clock news, Monday through Friday, and of course fill in for [HistoryMaker] Steve Baskerville, the regular guy at ten [o'clock], over whatever else was needed, and of course to do aviation reporting.  So, when Dr. Phil was coming, there was some uncertainty as to what would happen to the people.  And that uncertainty continued for many months without our really knowing one way or the other.  And finally, I was made, it was made known to me that I was not going to be renewed.  So, I'm out of here now, and I'm going back to Arizona.  What I'll be doing I'm not very certain, but I know one thing, it's going to be exciting.  I have a theme that's gonna run throughout a book that I'm writing about my life ['I Just Wanted to Fly,' Jim Tilmon].  The theme is a way that I'm gonna take one chapter to the next one.  It's gonna be the last sentence in each chapter and the last sentence in the book, and that's, that sentence is going to be, "And the dream lives on."  And I can tell you, as I sit here at this moment, on the eve of my departure from CBS 2 [WBBM-TV, Chicago, Illinois] as we know it--now I may come back and do some fill-in things and may come back and do some, some aviation things, who knows what.  And then again, I may reinvent myself again.  But I can tell you that the dream that lives on; the dream will never die, never.
Story_ID: 672537
Speaker 1: We always ask this question: when you look back on everything you've done up to this point, would you do anything major differently?
Speaker 2: No.  No, I would not do anything differently that's major.  I wouldn't do anything differently that's minor.  One event leads to another.  And if I were to change any one event, I may miss out on the most glorious, and marvelous, and self fulfilling, and incredibly beautiful things that have happened in my life.  I feel that I've been so blessed so many times.  So much of my dream has been realized.  At five years old I wanted to be a pilot for American Airlines [American Airlines, Inc.].  Guess what?  I was.  I wanted to do a lot of things with my life.  I've, I, I, I, I studied clarinet when I was in high school because I, I wanted to play clarinet in a symphony orchestra.  I did.  I wanted to be able to communicate with people.  I wanted to have some ability to, to get beyond just a conversation with you--the two of us.  I ended up on television.  I mean, I could go through so much of my life, and I can tell you they are dreams fulfilled, but I haven't stopped dreaming.  So no, I would not change one single thing, nothing.
Story_ID: 672538
Speaker 1: As you said, you're a highly recognizable public figure.  The black community really is amazed and proud of a figure like you.  And I'll, I'll tell you from just--I'm not just trying to--people, you know, the idea--to pilot; he's a musician; he's on television; and he's, he's able to--he's so smooth at what, what he does.  But it's--what, what are some of your hopes and concerns for the black community today?
Speaker 2: Boy, how many days you got, 'cause I can tell you I have so many hopes.  I have a dream for black people, for all of our people, that one day we can just be people that our identity, because of our color, is just, on one hand, incidental, and on the other hand, extremely important in terms of the pride that I think we can have as a people.  I, I would love to see education become a true reality in the black community, I mean a true reality.  I've seen education.  I've seen it in places like Highland Park [Illinois], and places like Scottsdale [Arizona], and places like--other, other places.  And, and, and I've seen what it can be.  And I don't see enough of that in the black community.  And you can't blame all of it on any one side.  Part of it is our fault.  Part of it's the fault that we, we don't, as parents, we could do a better job of working with our kids.  But a lot of it is the fault of those who are in charge and ruining this whole thing, that we're not given the ammunition to fight ignorance; we're not given the kind of support.  Financial is just one part of it, but we're not given the overall support to help our people really begin to enter the mainstream and be competitive.  Now we have some magnificent stories to tell of all those that have done that, and no one can be more proud of them than I am because I know something about what they struggled to do it.  And unfortunately, some of the young blacks today who have not struggled very much don't know exactly what it took to get them where they are, so they're not part of a movement; they're not part of any activity; and if you ask them the same community--question you asked me, I don't know what they would answer you.  I'm not knocking them.  I'm delighted they have that element of freedom, as they define it.  But I don't see our people as being free yet.  There are too many of us that aren't.  And freedom in this country is defined in some interesting ways.  So many of those ways we do not measure up because we're not given that privilege.
Story_ID: 672539
Speaker 1: Tell me this, when you look back on your life to this point, what would you consider today to be your legacy?
Speaker 2: Wow (pause), he was an active participant on a world stage that tried to insist that he was a second class citizen.  He never would allow that to become a reality.  And his greatest dream was to see to it that not only did he be recognized as being something far better and, and all than the second class, but all those that look like him as well.
Story_ID: 672540
Speaker 1: Tell us a little bit about your family.  I think--we, we, we, we've alluded to your family and--
Speaker 2: Well, my, my dad [George Tilmon, Sr.] and mother [Manila Hazel Tilmon] were both educators.  My dad was a school administrator for fifty-two years.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I, I mean, we've talked about that in the beginning.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: But, but I mean like what is your, your current family--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Oh, right now?
Speaker 1: --who, who--well, what is--who does it consist of?
Speaker 2: My family right now consists of, my immediately family is my wife, Joan [Joan Tilmon], our three children from a previous marriage, James, Jr. [James Tilmon, Jr.], who is a pilot with US Airways; Thera Irene [Thera Tilmon], who is now managing a health store in, in Scottsdale, Arizona; my son, John [John Tilmon], who is, runs his own computer consulting firm, and has some very, very heavy duty clients.  There are grandchildren, starting from John, John Michaels' family, his wife and, and two children, boy and a girl, Michael John [ph.] and, and, and, and--why can't I call my granddaughter's name?  Boy, I am tired.  (Pause) Michelle [ph.].  My son, John, has two children, Michael John and Michelle, beautiful kids.  Michael John is in college now.  My daughter has one child, and that's Desireen [ph.].  And my daughter's marriage failed, and she's been raising Desireen almost all of that child's life by herself.  I mean I think the divorce took place when Desireen was probably one and a half, maybe, two at the outside.  My son, James, has two children, and he, too, has suffered a divorce, and Marcus [ph.] and Connor [ph.] are his two boys, beautiful children.  That's my immediate family, of which I am very proud.
Story_ID: 672541
Speaker 1: Is there anything we haven't touched upon that you think you need to address before I, before I ask my last question?
Speaker 2: When you sum up a man's life, and ask him to sit before a camera and talk about himself hour after hour, you have to realize what happens with that person.  I am forced to revisit a lot of corners, a lot of closets, a lot of--open a lot of doors that haven't been opened for a long time.  I relive them for the benefit of those that will see this tape.  I pray that people will be kind in their appraisal of who I am and who I've been, and understand that I honestly do care very deeply about excellence.  And I do have very high standards for where I ought to be and what I ought to be doing.  And I hope that I've been able to measure up, first, to my standards and secondly, to the standards others would, would have for me.  I wanted to play my clarinet.  And if I was gonna play clarinet I wanted to be the principal clarinetist, the first chair.  And I worked to do that.  (Pause) I wanted to be the first chair clarinetist.  I didn't want to sit in the clarinet section, not that I felt I was better than anybody else.  I just felt that I, I, I, I need to achieve; I need to go as far with this as I could go.  First chair was as far as you could go.  Concertmaster was as far as you could go.  And the band, I wanted to play in the band.  But when I found out there was such a thing as a drum major, that's where I wanted to be, and I became the drum major.  I was a drum major in high school [Charles Page High School, Sand Springs, Oklahoma].  I was a drum major at Howard University [Washington, D.C.] for the ROTC [Reserve Officers' Training Corps] band.  I was a drum major in Tennessee State [Tennessee Agricultural and Industrial State College; Tennessee State University, Nashville, Tennessee] of the Tennessee marching 100 [Aristocrat of Bands].  When I came to television--before that--when I went into aviation, I wanted to be a captain, there's nothing wrong with being a flight engineer, nothing wrong with being a first officer.  They're both marvelous career fields.  But the ultimate was to be captain, so I worked for that.  Rest assured, none of these things came as a gift.  I may have had a gift of the opportunity, but I had to make sure that I didn't squander that gift by being willing to put forth the effort and pay the dues to get where I needed to go.  And when I went into television news, I wanted to be the weatherman, and I was.  This gig I'm finishing up right now, I wasn't anymore.  And I had to understand a level of humility that I hadn't had to suffer before.  And it was okay because I was working in the presence of a guy who was really the number one weather guy.  He wasn't that just in numbers.  He was that because he was that good, and he still is, and he's gonna be here long after I'm gone.  So, what you've asked of me is to go through all of this.  I pray that it won't be boring.  I pray that somebody will be able to get something out of it that will help their life, and to know that if I've had any successes, they could do a lot better.  Whatever I have done hopefully will just be another step toward moving our people a little bit higher on the rung.  There isn't anything we can't do, but we have to first of all want it, see a vision of it, in short, believe, and then be willing to pay your dues to get there, whatever it takes, and then achievement is almost automatic.
Speaker 1: Okay, now I have a last question, but I think you've answered it already.  So I'd like to say thank you, sir--
Speaker 2: Thank you.
Speaker 1: --for giving us your time.
Speaker 2: And thank you for whoever you are that's watching this if you're willing to put up with all this (laughter) at the time.  This has to be one heck of a research project for somebody.
Speaker 1: It's a great project.
Speaker 2: I hope I didn't leave out something important.  And I do appreciate HistoryMakers [The HistoryMakers] for allowing me this privilege.  It's helped me to organize my thoughts, so I might be able to go ahead and put that book ['I Just Wanted to Fly,' Jim Tilmon] together.
