Story_ID: 219644
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe; I'm interviewer today for The HistoryMakers, our videographer is Coy Melnick.  Sir, could you please state your name and spell it for us please?
Speaker 2: Michael, L., Thurmond, that's capital M-I-C-H-A-E-L, L, and initial "L," Thurmond T-H-U-R-M-O-N-D.
Speaker 1: And what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: I was born 1/5/53 [January 1, 1953], in Athens, Georgia.
Speaker 1: All right and what does the "L" stand for, can you tell us?
Speaker 2: Lamar.  L-A-M-A-R.
Speaker 1: All right and you were born in Athens, Georgia.  What is your occupation?
Speaker 2: I am commissioner of the Georgia Department of Labor.
Speaker 1: All right and you are a lawyer as well?
Speaker 2: I'm a lawyer by profession, I practiced law until 1994.  And then prior to that I served in the Georgia legislature [Georgia General Assembly] from 1987 until 1992.  And then in 1994 I was director of the Georgia Department of Family and Children Services [sic. Georgia Department of Human Services, Division of Family and Children Services].  In 1998, I was elected Georgia labor commissioner; in 2002 I was reelected to a second term.
Speaker 1: All right, okay.  And what is today's date?
Speaker 2: Today is October 12, 2004.
Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: We are on the sixth floor at the Georgia Department of Labor.
Story_ID: 219645
Speaker 1: All right now before we go into depth, there are five People magazine-ish lightweight questions that they ask me to ask people (laughter)--
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Okay.
Speaker 1: --and they're like a warm up.  The first, one is what is your favorite food?
Speaker 2: My favorite food, oh, barbeque ribs, beef ribs.
Speaker 1: Okay, do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: It's blue.
Speaker 1: All right a favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Fall.
Speaker 1: A favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Any beach near any ocean is just great with me.
Speaker 1: All right and the last question is: do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: There is dignity in work.
Story_ID: 219646
Speaker 1: Okay, now I'm going to ask you about your family history, I'm gonna ask you about your mother's side and your father's [Sidney Thurmond] side.  Let's start with your mother's side.  Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: Vanilla, that's V-A-N-I-L-L-A, Burton, B-U-R-T-O-N, Thurmond.
Speaker 1: Okay and what is her date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: Her date of birth was in 1900, she was born in Elbert County, Georgia.
Speaker 1: Vanilla is an interesting name, not a lot of people have that name, is there a story behind that name?
Speaker 2: No, she was one of seventeen children and no special significance in terms, of why she was named Vanilla.  Apparently her aunt--I take that back--one of her aunts was also a Vanilla.  And she was born near Burrell [ph.], Elbert County.  And her parents [Bossie Burton and Dewitt Burton] were farmers and she eventually came to Athens, Georgia to attend high school.  And I don't know whether I need to tell you all this, now you'll want me to come back to it.
Speaker 1: No, well no you can, it's okay.
Speaker 2: She graduated from high school, at Athens High and Industrial School [Athens, Georgia] in 1939.
Speaker 1: What is her date of birth, do you, do you remember?
Speaker 2: Yeah, my dad was born in 1903.  And she graduated from high school in 1939--so she would have been born about 1921.
Speaker 1: Yeah, so 1921 for her.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So what can you tell us about her side of family and how far back can you trace the ancestors on that side.
Speaker 2: Well actually I had a genealogist trace my ancestors back on her side about three generations.  And on my father's side we went back to slavery.  I think it's my great-great-great grandfather [sic. great-great grandfather, Harris Thurmond] we located him as a small child on a plantation owned by Harris Thurmond in Oconee County, Georgia.
Speaker 1: Well on your mother's side though, they, they go back three generations?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Now is that all the way back to slavery?  It seems like it might be?
Speaker 2: Yes it's almost back to slavery on his side.  I wish I had known you were gonna ask me the question, I, I have the documentation at my home and I could have been very specific about it.
Story_ID: 219647
Speaker 1: Are there any stories on your mother's [Vanilla Burton Thurmond] side of the family first of all, about slavery, about Reconstruction or any of that?
Speaker 2: Well no, the one story that's most often told is that my grandmother Bossie Burton, her mother was part Cherokee Indian [Native American].  That's part of the fable the legend in my family.  And that she smoked a pipe, and that's the one--and Dewitt Burton, who is my maternal grandfather--was a land holding farmer in Elbert County, Georgia.
Speaker 1: Is there any story attached to how he became a landowner?
Speaker 2: No, they lived near the Savannah River there in Elbert County, and there is a story that in his younger years, he ran a ferry, the ferry people crawled back and forth cross the Savannah River.  Between Elberton [Georgia] and Calhoun Falls, South Carolina.
Speaker 1: Did you know you grandparents?
Speaker 2: I knew my grandmothers, both of my grandfathers, on my maternal and the fraternal [sic. paternal] side were deceased when I was born.  But I knew both of my grandmothers.
Speaker 1: Did they ever talk to you about growin' up themselves and what life was like for them when they, when they were comin' along?
Speaker 2: Well not in great detail, my, my maternal--my fraternal grandmother--died when I was very young maybe five or six years of age.  I remember her because she actually lived in our house, during her last few months.  And all I really remember is that she would lie there in bed and I could see an aged hand laying across the bed, and that's the last memory I have of her.  Now my maternal side Bossie Burton died during my freshman year in college, in Paine College [Augusta, Georgia] in 1971 when I was freshman there in Augusta, Georgia.  She would often talk about family issues, about the family, about, they were very rural people.  And as I was growing my mother and her aunts they would still have quiltin' bees, and I could see them sitting there quilting together.  And you know the interesting thing about my family, my father [Sidney Thurmond], and really his father [Henry Thurmond] before him and his father before him, were all sharecroppers.  And when I was born in 1953, my father was one of, there only a handful of blacks who still sharecropped in Clarke County, Georgia.  And he continued to sharecrop until I was about fifteen/sixteen years old.
Speaker 1: So things had started changing then I guess, because if there were only a handful still sharecropping?
Speaker 2: Well, yeah, it's interesting as you know, this whole sharecropping system replaced slavery.  And interesting that generations later, in the early 1950s, I was born into that system.  The one that my great-great-great grandfather emerged from, into sharecropping we were still involved in it.  And just to show you how much or how little progress had been made.
Story_ID: 219648
Speaker 1: Were they [Thurmond's family] still with the same people all that time (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, actually my father [Sidney Thurmond] was raised by a white family in Oconee County, Georgia.  His mother and his brothers and sisters left when he was about seven or eight years old, and moved to Atlanta [Georgia], moved to the big city.  And the story is that he was forced or they decided he was required to stay behind, because they were sharecroppers as well.  And there were debts to be paid to the local white who owned the merchandise store.  And so in exchange for that, they left him behind to work off the debt.  And they moved to Atlanta, Georgia, and so he was actually raised by this family called the Dooley [ph.] family, in Oconee County, Georgia.
Speaker 1: And raised to pay off a debt, I mean so he's raised up--he's in debt as he's being raised?
Speaker 2: Basically that and, and when he became a young man of course he left.  But this family and you know, continued the relationship, they knew each other.  And it was interesting, one year I was campaigning for [Georgia] state representative, I went to this senior center one day to campaign for votes.  And one of the residents there two elderly white ladies were talking and one said that you know who that is, that's Sidney [ph.] Dooley's son. (Pause)  So even as growing up he was known by the white's family name, which is very similar to what occurred during slavery.  And he tells the story of how he had a room and he worked in the store every day.  He never received any schooling, my father, who was a very bright man actually could not read or write.  And he never gained those skills, but he often talked about how he worked there.  And you know, he doesn't talk about, he didn't talk about--he's deceased now--in an angry way, because they still and they did provide him with food, clothing and shelter.  Although it was a very unequal relationship, and as soon as he was able to leave he left.
Speaker 1: His name was Sidney Thurmond?
Speaker 2: Sidney Thurmond.
Speaker 1: And what is your father's date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: Now, I know that better, he was born in 1903, in Oconee County, Georgia.
Speaker 1: Oconee County.  Now did you say that his, his ancestors could be traced all the way back to slavery?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Are there any, any stories about their situation or any stories passed down about that sit- about slavery?
Speaker 2: He would talk about his father, who was Henry Thurmond, and but only in the context of being a sharecropper, farmer.  And he remembered, he talked about his brothers, he had several brothers.  And one of the more interesting stories that he told was that apparently during the '30s [1930s]--they decided like millions of other blacks--that they were gonna move to the North, to the land of promise, the promised land.  He and his brothers set out, two other brothers set out for the North, with all the money and clothing that they had on their backs.  But the interesting part of the story is that they ran out of money in Chattanooga, Tennessee.  And he always laughed that as far north as he made it was to Chattanooga.  And actually I had an uncle who stayed there in Chattanooga, of course he and another brother came back to Georgia, but they ran out of money time they crossed the border.  The story of how he went north and ended up in Tennessee, but he always had this great love for Chattanooga, Tennessee.  I grew up hearing about Chattanooga, Tennessee, like it was New York [New York] or L.A. [Los Angeles, California].  It was the biggest city and it was this great adventure.  And he always told me about how pretty the women were, in Chattanooga, that he had never seen women as pretty, as anywhere in the world, as in Chattanooga, Tennessee.  And years later, this is great irony of it, you're a historian, is my wife is from where?
Speaker 1: Chattanooga.
Speaker 2: Chattanooga, Tennessee (laughter), he always told me that (laughter).  And she is one of the prettiest women in the whole world, so he knew what he was talking about.
Speaker 1: All right, now did your father, let see now, so there're no really stories about slavery that come through or any of that (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, not about slavery, no nothing that was passed down from generation to generation, no nothing that was ever told to me.
Story_ID: 219649
Speaker 1: Growing up in rural Georgia and being poor is, can be you know, be a horrible experience you know, for some people.  So I mean I've heard lots of stories, you know Elijah Muhammad's story growing up in the early part of the [20th] century and stuff the things he saw.  I think he saw two lynchings as he was coming up and stuff did you hear any of those kinda stories?
Speaker 2: Well my parents [Vanilla Burton Thurmond and Sidney Thurmond] moved from Oconee County, Georgia, my mother was pregnant with me, I'm the youngest of what was nine children.  And the reason they moved from Oconee County and moved to Athens, Georgia was the results of the Moore's Ford [Bridge] Lynching.  And that case is being, still being investigated now by the Georgia Bureau of Investigation.
Speaker 1: Now this, the Moore's Ford.
Speaker 2: Yeah the Moore's.
Speaker 1: Now how do you spell that?
Speaker 2: M-O-O-R-E-S, Moore's Ford (pause) Lynching.
Speaker 1: And when did this take place?
Speaker 2: It took place in the early, late '40s [1940s], in the late '40s [1946], and it is the only lynching with a historical marking in the State of Georgia.  There was and still is a group of people who have advocated reopening the case.  That the men, who committed this crime, were never tried, never brought justice.  And apparently some of them at least one or two are still living.  And so because of that, happened near the Oconee-Walton County line, my father moved his family to Oconee County, and I was ultimately born in Clarke [County, Georgia] as opposed to Oconee County.
Speaker 1: Okay so the lynching took place in Oconee County?
Speaker 2: Yes.  These people lived in Oconee County and the lynching actual occurred, right on the county line.  But I think it was two men [Roger Malcolm and George Dorsey] and two women [Dorothy Malcolm and Mae Murray Dorsey] were murdered.
Speaker 1: Is there a story behind that you, that you know?
Speaker 2: Well it's been written about continually in the local press.  About that and how it occurred and the tragedy, and how these innocent people were murdered and the perpetrators never brought to justice.
Speaker 1: So your father was raised by the Dooleys [ph.]?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And where did he move?
Speaker 2: He moved to Clarke County, and you know, well we lived near Athens so if you're southern you understand what that mean.  We lived out in the country in Clarke County and the nearest city was Athens, Georgia.  We actually lived in a part of Clarke County called Sandy Creek.  And we were the only family, the land was owned by a woman by the name of Lucy Comer [ph.].  And we worked the land and shared the crops, so to speak, with Ms. Lucy Comer and stayed there in a little house, no indoor plumbing.  I, I like to tell my daughter [Mikaya Thurmond] I remember when I turned sixteen, because that was the year that we moved into a house that had indoor plumbing.  So we lived there and worked and you know daddy did the best he could.
Story_ID: 219650
Speaker 1: Do you have an earliest childhood memory?
Speaker 2: My earliest childhood memory, yeah (pause) it's in a cotton field.  And well you know when you sharecrop, the entire family works.  And even the little children, no daycare center, no one to stay at home, the older kids couldn't stay at home to take care of the baby, who was me.  And everybody had to go to the fields.  And what mother [Vanilla Burton Thurmond] would do is at the end of a cotton row you would put a cotton sheet and you place the smaller children on that cotton sheet.  And so as your mother would work the cotton row and come back and she would come and check on the children.  It was a way of childcare that existed for generations, for families who worked in the field.  And so my earliest childhood memory is to looking out across a cotton field seeing my mother, my father [Sidney Thurmond], my sisters, my brothers, out working in the fields.  And sitting there watching them go up the row and then coming back.  And so my daycare center was a cotton sheet.
Speaker 1: So now who all was in your household?  Your mother and your father of course, you and how many sisters and brothers did you have?
Speaker 2: I had eight brothers and sisters and three of 'em are quote unquote "half brothers and sisters."  My father was married, his first wife died and he had three children and my mother gave birth to six children.  And so, I had four sisters and four brothers.
Speaker 1: And where do you fall in there?
Speaker 2: I'm the youngest.
Speaker 1: So you're the youngest of all?
Speaker 2: Of all, yep.
Speaker 1: So you said one of your grandmothers lived with you for a while?
Speaker 2: Yes my fraternal [sic. paternal] grandmother, my father's mother, when she became ill, she had been living in Atlanta [Georgia], she was no longer able take care of herself, so they moved her back to our home in Clarke County [Georgia].
Story_ID: 219651
Speaker 1: Describe the sights and sounds and smells of growing up [in Athens, Georgia].
Speaker 2: Honeysuckles, around our house there were honeysuckle vines in the summer time and they were strong.  And you could hear the roosters crowin' and the chicken at night, at night it was nothing but crickets.  There were no street lights and it was dark, and you could hear the crickets it was just a symphony of sounds.  During the day people were working.  You know either in the fields, you hear tractors, in the evening you know, there were animals to be fed.  And you could hear when mother [Vanilla Burton Thurmond] was home, she was always in the kitchen cookin' or doing housework.  And then there were the sounds of kids playing all the time.  But we were the only people who lived in this very secluded area.  We had no nearby neighbors and so we were just there alone, which was very unique.  One of the most interesting things about it is that, the area I grew up in and the land I grew up on, which was the Sandy Creek [Clarke County, Georgia] area, is now a nature center [Sandy Creek Nature Center, Athens, Georgia], and it's been a nature center for the last 30 years, 25-30 years.  And so I can go there now and still sit under the trees I sat under and played under and now it's a nature center, it's was a very secluded area.  And what it did though--and because I was the youngest, my next oldest sister was two or three or four years older than I am, so I think she's four years older than I am--so I was basically an afterthought baby.  So I spent a lot of time with myself, and just kinda dreamin', big dreams, learned to read, I loved to read.  And that was my escape, 'cause I didn't have playmates.  There were no neighbors, no community center, and so you had to learn how to entertain yourself.
Story_ID: 219652
Speaker 1: Okay, now your mother [Vanilla Burton Thurmond] you said went to an industrial school near where she grew up and so that's, she had a high school education?
Speaker 2: Yes, she had what would be the equivalent to a high school education.  I have her certificate of completion, graduation from Athens High and Industrial [School, Athens, Georgia].  It's one of the things I have, in 1939.  And she actually even spent some time in Fort Valley State [University, Fort Valley, Georgia].  When she came back she was assigned to a one room school in Oconee County, Georgia, and that's how she met my dad [Sidney Thurmond].
Speaker 1: What happened?
Speaker 2: Well he says that she was sitting on a porch one day and he came walking by, he looked up and he saw her and the rest was history (laughter).
Speaker 1: Now did he have children in the school at that time or was he just a neighbor?
Speaker 2: I think he was just, his first wife died and he was just a single parent, and she was a young school teacher and they fell in love and she gave up teaching and really just became a farmer's wife.
Speaker 1: Now was she come along in the days that you had to quit teaching, if you were, when, when you got married and I know at some point they stopped doing that?
Speaker 2: You know she never really said that, but that could have been a possibility, but I think she just started having these babies and she just focused more on that than on.  And it's interesting, 'cause she was educated, but she really gravitated to this life of farming and sharecropping.  And people, many people didn't realize that she was educated as much as she was.  But that was a big boon for my dad who could not read or write.  And over the years, and see even though when I said dad was a sharecropper, daddy used to always, always kept a hustle going.  And not in the term hustle, like the young folks use it now, which is illegal.  Back in the day hustling meant that you had one, or two or three little gigs going, where you could make money.  Daddy would you know he had the sharecropping thing going, in the evening he worked at a chicken poultry, during the summer we sold vegetables off the back of his truck on weekends.  One of the memories I have is riding around Athens [Georgia] on what we call the route.  And we would sell--have you ever seen these peddlers, daddy was a peddler--and so we would sell vegetables off his truck.  And daddy had a route, that's during the summer.  In the winter he sold wood and coal, because people did not have gas and electric heat.  And so he was well known in the Athens area, because he called them his customers.  And interesting enough, people remembered me, when I first began to run for office, when I went out in '82 [1982], running for the state legislature [Georgia General Assembly].  I would go door-to-door and I'd knock on the door, and people would remember me, as Sid Thurmond's little boy who was on the back of the truck.  Selling tomatoes and so forth off the back of the truck.  So, in a way I tell folks that my daddy kinda laid the ground work for my political career.  Because these were the connections I used to build a political organization in Athens, and that ultimately has been one that allowed me to be elected statewide.
Story_ID: 219653
Speaker 1: Athens [Georgia] is the site of the University of Georgia [(UGA) Athens, Georgia], right?
Speaker 2: Correct.
Speaker 1: Did that have any influence on you growing up there?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, it's the academic environment, and by the way UGA has one of the best, most complete libraries in the country, particularly in the South.  And after, of course, integration came, and I became older in college, I used to live in that library.  And the two books I've written, most of it was researched there at the main library on the campus at University of Georgia.  It's amazing what is there, and the history and the knowledge and the information, much of it not mined, or yet be to fully mined.
Speaker 1: You're deeply interested in history now.  Did you, were you interested as a young man growing up?
Speaker 2: Yes, I was and still am part of it due to my mother [Vanilla Burton Thurmond].  Who loved old furniture I wouldn't even call it antiques, she liked anything that was old. She had a fascination about it.  And what I truly enjoy about history, I enjoy biographies I must admit, I can't remember the last fiction, book of fiction I've read.  I don't think I read fiction, which is bad, come to think about it.  But then it just grew on me and, and you know it just helps me, history provides insight into the present and the future.  I can't, I can't address and resolve problems unless I have some historical context in which to place it, particularly in the political sense.
Speaker 1: Okay so reading history in the late '50s [1950s] and '60s [1960s] I guess, when you were a young man, I mean were you able to get any African American history or black perspective on history at all in Georgia?
Speaker 2: Well early on, it was poems, poetry one of the, you know, part of the regiment in the segregated schools was that you had to learn to recite.  And whether it was Paul Laurence Dunbar, "Well son I'll tell you life for me ain't been no crystal stair, it's had tacks in it, and boards torn up, and places with no carpet on the floor, bare." [sic. 'Mother to Son,' Langston Hughes] I mean those type of things and then you know we had '[An] Ante-Bellum Sermon' [Paul Laurence Dunbar] you know, "We is gathahed hyeah, my brothahs, In di howlin' wildaness".  And so you know at first it was just a cultural piece from there it went to more of a historical kinda understanding, and, and when I got to college it was like wow.  I didn't know this black world existed in such a proud way, because even though I was in segregated schools, and even though I'd had some understanding I'd not read the great authors you know, the 'Invisible Man' [Ralph Ellison] and Frantz Fanon, and all the people I read about in college, I became a thinker, a Pan-Africanist early on, you smile (laughter) you know, in college I was.  And then I got into student politics then I had to come back to the middle a little bit, you know what I mean, at a conservative Christian college, Paine College in Augusta, Georgia.  They weren't going to put up with me being too much of a radical, and then it just continued.
Story_ID: 219654
Speaker 1: Okay, I want to go back when you were a little kid though and--what was the name of the school that you attended, grade school?
Speaker 2: Lyons Elementary School [Burney-Harris-Lyons Middle School, Athens, Georgia], it was named after Charles H. Lyons.
Speaker 1: L-Y-O-N-S?
Speaker 2: L-Y-O-N-S, school named after Professor Charles H. Lyons.
Speaker 1: Was he a local black school teacher?
Speaker 2: Yes, he actually was the headmaster at Union Baptist Institute [Athens, Georgia] which was a private school sponsored by the Baptists, in Athens [Georgia].  And when of course when the public and private schools merged you know he went into the public school system they eventually named my elementary school after him.  And then I went on to, then Lyons became a middle school.  So I was still at, I went and spent one year at North Athens Elementary [School, Athens, Georgia], my sixth grade year.  When they and then I came back to Lyons Middle School or junior high school is what they called it then, Lyons Junior High [(ph.), Athens, Georgia].  And after that I attended Burney Harris High School which was an all-black school there in Athens, and I attended Burney-Harris [High School; Clarke Central High School, Athens, Georgia] until my senior year, which was 1970, and that was a magical year in the South because that was the year that the segregated systems were finally merged.
Story_ID: 219962
Speaker 1: --Were there any teachers that, in grade school or middle school that stood out as--?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, in grade school there was Ms. Eva Howard, actually I don't know whether you interviewed [HistoryMaker] Doctor [Robert] Church [Sr.] last year or not but he was involved in this, it was her brother.  Now Ms. Howard (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) It was somebody else that did it but--
Speaker 2: Yeah, you remember Dr. Church--
Speaker 1: Robert Church, yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah, Robert Church, his sister, Ms. Eva Howard.  Eva Church Howard was my favorite teacher in the sixth grade [at North Athens Elementary School, Athens, Georgia].  And we remain friends and she's the supporter throughout my life.  And there were others Ms. Clara B. Gay in high school [Burney-Harris High School; Clarke Central High School, Athens, Georgia] who really taught us about the poets and the poetry.  And she was a stickler for recitation and we had to learn those poems, and you know and understand them and interpret them.
Speaker 1: You can still recite you went into two [Paul Laurence] Dunbar poems earlier [sic. one Langston Hughes poem and one Paul Laurence Dunbar poem].
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, 'Mother to Son,' [Langston Hughes] is one of my favorite ones, "'cause life is hard out here, right?"  And '[An] Ante-Bellum Sermon' [Paul Laurence Dunbar], I actually got it off the Internet about a month ago and passed it around to my senior staff.  They had never heard of it 'cause they're all younger than I am and didn't go to the schools I went to.
Speaker 1: Yeah it's funny times are changing and Dunbar doesn't get the same kind of attention he did at one time.
Speaker 2: That's true he really doesn't.
Speaker 1: See--
Story_ID: 219963
Speaker 1: --I'm from Dayton [Ohio] and you know, they, his [Paul Laurence Dunbar] hometown and so there's a lot of people, we had a lot of Dunbar coming up.
Speaker 2: And the dialect I think we went to a period of black awareness that you know that kind of fell out of favor with some people.
Speaker 1: Yeah I think that people, don't, do well do you think people didn't understand what he was saying in the dialect, in terms of what he actually meant or what he meant by what he was saying?
Speaker 2: Well I think we became more conscious and that meant to some people that we had to disavow certain parts of our heritage that they were uncomfortable with, i.e. the broken verse and you know the language and the dialect; it doesn't bother me at all.  And so Dunbar even while he was alive was very stung by the criticism that was heaped upon him by other black writers, they thought he was just pandering to a white audience.  I guess in today's terminology he was trying to cross over.
Speaker 1: It's strange in a sense that he, they would say he's crossed over by using the heavy dialect.  When other people are trying to use the language of the educated elite whites.
Speaker 2: Yeah, English poets and there were some blacks who wrote verse in rhyme and so forth.  But you know it's just tough, it's just tough and I've read in biographies of him that he was very disturbed by that.
Speaker 1: Because he could write both, actually. He could write like the high blown flowery stuff, as well as dialect.
Speaker 2: Sonnets he could use that as well as the dialect.  So that was interesting but, you know it's tough you know, the intellectual side, just talking to you.  And it's just tough being a quote unquote black intellectual.  Or having or being a writer or painter or any type of creative artist.  'Cause people have various interpretations of it and you can't really placate or satisfy the masses, it's just impossible, and you know we often don't see that side.  'Cause we read about these people in little snippets here, and you know they were born they became famous and they died.  What's left out is all the turmoil and all the despair that they went through, whether it's Paul Robeson not just from those who persecuted him, but sometimes from his own people.  And that occurs a lot, even today, and it's whether you're in art or writing, even in politics, any type of leadership position and I guess it goes with the turf.
Speaker 1: All right.
Story_ID: 219964
Speaker 1: Well you're in grade school now, you liked to recite and you were into history?
Speaker 2: Um-hm, like to make speeches.
Speaker 1: Was oratory common when you were coming up, people learn how to speak before a group or?
Speaker 2: I don't know, I've said publically that for most little boys many of them anyway you grow up wanting to be a cowboy, Indian [Native American], a policeman or a soldier, I wanted to be in Georgia politician.  And so we had this big rock in the back of our house and I would get up on that rock when I was even six, seven years old and just make speeches and recite verses and anything.  My little dog would start barking and you know there was this row of trees and when the wind would blow, the trees would rustle and that was my applause and it was just the most exhilarating moment.  And I tell that one moment, one day I was out doing it and I didn't realize that my father [Sidney Thurmond], mother [Vanilla Burton Thurmond], and all of my brothers and sister were standing listening and I'm just speakin'.  And my daddy, at least this what my brothers and sister say, daddy turned to mama and said, "I believe that baby boy of yours is touched in the head."
Speaker 1: About how old we you when that happened?
Speaker 2: I must have been six or seven.
Speaker 1: That is something.  Now did you know any of the names of Georgia politicians? Who did you, who was a role model for that kinda?
Speaker 2: I used to see 'em on TV, I had an uncle who lived in Atlanta [Georgia] and we would come to his house all while I was growin' up.  And that was always the big trip to Atlanta, I mean that was like the far off place and you know I just could never, could even dream of living here.  Because it was the big city and had at least one tall building back then.  But what I remember most, what I remember most is that he would get the Sunday Atlanta Constitution [Atlanta Journal-Constitution].  And I had never seen a newspaper that big. It was just the most amazing thing in the world, I mean it was that thick and I would just sit and look at the pages.  And you know as I was getting older I remember seeing pictures of [HistoryMaker] Julian Bond and [Reverend Dr.] Martin Luther King [Jr.].  And then and of course sometimes they would, and I'd say, "Boy if I could ever get to be at the point where I could get my picture in the Atlanta Constitution, that to me seem like the ultimate triumph in life."  And so I just saw these people in Georgia politics and Leroy Johnson was the first black legislator and that [Mayor] Maynard Jackson when he was very young and these people became role models I suppose.
Speaker 1: Okay well there's a, when you were I guess still in grade school or middle school, I think there's a lot of trouble in Albany, Georgia.
Speaker 2: Yeah I didn't remember because I read about it since then, but I don't remember the Albany situation.  I remember when Charlayne Hunter [HistoryMaker Charlayne Hunter-Gault] and Hamilton Holmes integrated the University of Georgia [Athens, Georgia].  Because I could hear the bombs and then you know the sirens and stuff even when we were out in the country, and that was a very scary time.  And I remember, I recall that mother [Vanilla Burton Thurmond] wouldn't let us play outside during the time period when the University of George was being integrated.  And you know the [Civil Rights] Movement happened, I was old enough to understand and I remember watching the March on Washington.  And you know the other things that occurred and of course King being killed when I was in about the ninth grade [at Burney-Harris High School; Clarke Central High School, Athens, Georgia].  And interesting enough, my first introduction to the movement was ironically my, my junior year in high school when after you know Brown versus Board [Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka, 1954], all those years right, of all deliberate speed.  But 1970 was the year that things in the South finally changed.  From 1954 to 1970 it took that long, well we took to the street.
Speaker 1: What happened? What was the change?
Speaker 2: Well we didn't want to give up our all-black high school.
Speaker 1: So the state ordered the schools desegregated?
Speaker 2: Yeah all schools finally were desegregated.  And we ended up with one system.  See we had two public systems in the South from 1954 to 1970.  Now there were some black kids that went to all-white schools and integrated them.  But the great majority, 95, 98 percent of all the black children in the South, up until 1970, were still in segregated schools.
Story_ID: 219965
Speaker 1: The high school you attended was?
Speaker 2: Burney-Harris High [School; Clarke Central High School, Atlanta, Georgia].
Speaker 1: Burney-Harris High and who is Burney-Harris?
Speaker 2: Burney was Ms. Anne H. Burney [sic. Anne M. Burney], she was the administrative assistant [sic. assistant principal] at Burney-Harris and before that Athens High and Industrial [School, Athens, Georgia].  And she worked for Professor Samuel F. Harris.  So it was Burney-Harris, Samuel F. Harris was the great educator in Clarke County, Georgia.  And he introduced industrial arts training to the Clarke County school system.  And he became what was the professor or the superintendent of the Negro school.  And after serving many years as a, as a principal and so the black, all-black high school was ultimately named in their honor.  It was Athens High and Industrial and of course industrial kinda fell out of favor 'cause industrial kinda harkened back to Booker T. Washington.  And so all black schools began to move away from training school, industrial school, and they renamed it Burney-Harris High School.  And it was named after these two outstanding black educators Anne H. Burney and Samuel F. Harris.
Speaker 1: Okay, now when you were in high school did you, you engaged in activities I mean, social and athletic activities or did you?
Speaker 2: Yeah, well in my freshman year in high school, I was freshman class president.  And then I was sophomore class president and I was junior class president.  And then when we went to the integrated school [Clarke Central High School] I was the co-president of the student body.
Speaker 1: Co-president?
Speaker 2: Co-president had a black one and a white one.
Speaker 1: Now was that by design or did they or did they decide, to have two (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, that was by design.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That was the first year of consolidation, so just couldn't contemplate having one SGA [student government association] president so we had two.  And I played, believe it or not, high school football and I ran track.
Speaker 1: Okay, what did you play football field?
Speaker 2: Scared (laughter), I played half-back, and my really, came to, claim to fame is I was second string.  And so the first stringer was a guy named Horace King who was the first black that, one of the first blacks to get a scholarship at UGA [University of Georgia, Athens, Georgia].  And he played for the Detroit Lions for about fourteen years.  So my greatest claim to high school football fame is that I backed up Horace King, who was really great football player.  In track I was pretty good, I had the high school, I was the co-holder of the hundred yard dash record.
Speaker 1: I was going to say you must have been fast to be the backup, back for, you know?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah they had mercy.  The thing about it was you know at that level in high school you know about 5 percent of the guys are very skilled and talented and might play at the next level.  The rest of us if you got a little courage you can play.  I mean you don't have to be good but you just can't be scared and as the children say, can't be scared.  So you know so I was not afraid and so that was one of things that my great claim to fame was that you know I wasn't scared of the big guys, which actually has paid a lot of dividends later in life.  Because if you're not afraid to challenge 'em, you know, you'll be surprised of what you can accomplish sometimes.
Story_ID: 219966
Speaker 1: Now you were class president all throughout high school [Burney-Harris High School; Clarke Central High School, Athens, Georgia], co-class-president with, in the--now how did you feel about, how did you feel personally about the integration of your school with the white high school?  Did you lose the name of your school, or did they, they merge the names?
Speaker 2: That's what we fought over.  What was intended to happened, which is what happened all over the South, was basically is you shut down the black school, particularly black high school.  Then all the black kids go to the formerly all-white high school.  And the identity and the history and the heritage of the black school is lost.  And that happened all over the South. And primarily it was the result of this whole notion of separate but unequal.  And in arguing that case in 1954, the basic tenet was that the black schools were not equal to the white school.  Which was why you couldn't have separate but equal, right?  The down side to that was then, by definition, was all the black schools and the teachers and the administrators, were what?  Inferior, so all of that had to be shunted aside.
Speaker 1: But, was that really true?
Speaker 2: No it wasn't true, I didn't buy it, so I lead the movement, I was the leader fighting to preserve the history and the heritage of the all-black schools, in fact I didn't want to go the all-white school.  See my teachers had taught me that this school and, by implication, myself was just as good as anybody else.  And that we accomplish anything in life that we wanted if we would apply ourselves and work hard.  And that just because we were black or just because we were at all-black high school, and did not mean I was inferior.
Speaker 1: Would it be your opinion that it was just the facilities that were not equal?
Speaker 2: Well no it went further than that, 'cause you were getting an unequal education.  And if that meant that people that were educating me were what, unequal or inferior?  Not only was the building inferior but the people who populated the building were inferior.
Speaker 1: I guess what I'm asking you is, did, did you feel at the time, or did you think that, that your teachers were of course just as good?
Speaker 2: I believe that.
Speaker 1: You were saying you believe that, but the facility that you were in was probably, well was it?
Speaker 2: I couldn't detect any difference.  I didn't have any problems with it.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, so even after you integrated you didn't really think that you had been this big step up at least in facility or anything?
Speaker 2: Well it was a nicer facility, it was bigger it was newer, but so what, I mean it had nothing to do with the quality of my education.  And see this was a total what antithesis of what integration had been all about.  Here we go, Brown verses Board of Education [Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka], 1954, and here we are what fifteen-seventeen years later the moment comes when we finally can consolidate, and here you got these kids, say but wait a minute, I like my school.  I believe I'm getting a good education, I think I got great teachers, I have a great administrator, I love being a Burney-Harris High School Yellow Jacket.  I'm not interested in being Athens High [School, Athens, Georgia] Trojan.  Right.  And I think I can succeed 'cause the others I've seen others that have graduated from Burney-Harris High School, who have gone on to become lawyers, doctors and politicians.  So why all of a sudden are you telling me that this will be an impediment to my ultimate success?  Well, we demonstrated.  The local authorities took out a peace warrant, I was named I had to go to court.  My first day in court--I always tell my clients--my first day in court, I was a defendant too, so don't worry about it.  I've been there and done that.  And I was scared, now don't get me wrong, but the judge, Judge Jane Burrell [ph.], issued a restraining order.  And after about two weeks of disturbance, they stopped the demonstration.  But let me tell you what happened as a result of the demonstration, because they had told us there would be no negotiation, and we're going to shut Burney-Harris down and you all are coming to Athens High.  After the demonstration, local officials said, "Okay lets compromise."  So what we decided to do was, the Burney-Harris colors were blue and gold, the colors that the formally all majority white high school was red and white, the new colors became red and gold.  And you say, look, if I gotta give up Burney-Harris, they'll get Athens High, we created Clarke Central.  That's when you have one black president and a white president.  And we negotiated a compromise that preserved some of the history and heritage of Burney-Harris.  And also the tenth graders ended up--they didn't close the school--what they did was left it opened as Burney-Harris High School Middle School.  And to this day in Clarke County we have a Burney Harris High School--middle school.  The original building has been refurbished and a new school was built and the name now is Burney-Harris-Lyons Middle School [Athens, Georgia].  Small things but from a historical prospective the names of probably the three most prominent black educators in the history of Clarke County [Georgia] are still preserved within the day-to-day operations of the Clarke County School District.  I think that's important.
Story_ID: 219967
Speaker 1: That's, it seems to be quite a victory too, for high school students to be a part of (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah it is, yeah and so it's still a part, but--and I go into too many communities in Georgia and it's gone, it's a distant memory.
Speaker 1: Now did many of your black faculty and staff [from Burney-Harris High School, Athens, Georgia] move over to the white high school [Athens High School; Clarke Central High School, Athens, Georgia]?
Speaker 2: Yeah we fought for them, my, you know, we felt and interesting enough when we were demonstrating some of the teachers did not support us, to be quite frank with you.  But you know, we felt like they should be given equal opportunity to serve as principals, and administrators, and as teachers and as lead teachers and so forth.  And but you know after that moment what you've seen is a declining participation, the declining presences of African American teachers, particularly African American men, in the public school system.  And I think you know, one of the mistakes that we made with integration was that we assume that everything that was associated with the all-black system was bad or inferior or not equal to.  And part of the reason assumes that is that, that's what we argued, to be honest with you to our great distress looking back on it.  When, in fact, if you look back on those schools, and the buildings were not as well or as good, sometimes I had an old textbook, but that was something there that, to be honest with you, missing from in this school system today.  What was in those schools that was transmitted was the sense of pride and importance of the education and the moment.  And you were there not so much for yourself but you were there representing your race.  And that you were a part of history and that your race at some extent was dependent on how much or how well you succeeded in life.  One of my best lines on the stump is that yeah there was some things not equal in the all-black system.  But think about it (pause) there were also no alternative schools, there was no need for alternative schools.  When we had the all-black system you had one alternative, Larry [Crowe], sit down and do your work, mind you manners and try to make something out of yourself.  That was your alternative.  And it's ironic now that all across this state and all across this nation the alternative schools are literally full of young black men.  You know, what has transpired, to go from not needing 'em to basically, now, with classes overflowing with our young men.  What did we lose?  And more importantly though, how can we gain it back?
Story_ID: 219968
Speaker 1: What you described in the course of this discussion was a victory in high school [Burney-Harris High School; Clarke Central High School, Athens, Georgia]. When you were--well, in your senior year in high school, had anyone in your family ever attended college before really?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, I have a sister who earned her Ph.D. ultimately, went to Clark [College, Clark Atlanta University, Atlanta, Georgia], earned a doctorate from the University of Georgia [Athens, Georgia], taught at the Medical College of Georgia [Augusta University, Augusta, Georgia] and is retired but now teaching at Paine [College, Augusta, Georgia].  I have another sister with a master's degree, two other brothers attended college, so I was not the first to go to college.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you were thinking that you would probably go?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah I was destined to go by then. You know, that's the other thing. I talk about my sharecropping, being poor, but you know, and people say I knew I was poor but then that didn't necessarily mean I could not achieve.  Matter of fact, that was an inspirational factor associated with it. More so than an obstacle, it became a sense and source of inspiration.  And, you know, Daddy [Sidney Thurmond], and my mother [Vanilla Burton Thurmond] who left nothing in their wills materialistically speaking.  What they did do was that they made their entire investment in educating their children, they spent every dime they could and had, I think, in our education.  And so they left me with a college education. Ultimately, a law degree.
Speaker 1: How did you choose Paine College?
Speaker 2: My sisters wanted me to go to Morehouse [College, Atlanta, Georgia], my mother wanted me to go to University of Georgia, I rebelled because I did want to go to either one, because that's where they wanted me to go.  And I decided I had been accepted at Paine College.  A cousin had sent in an application, so I went there sight unseen and I tell people that was one of the most important decisions I have ever made in my life. Paine College changed my life.
Speaker 1: And so Paine is in Augusta, Georgia (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) In Augusta, right.
Speaker 1: And what kind of a school is it? Is it run by a religious organization?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, the Methodist church.
Speaker 1: Which one?
Speaker 2: Well the C.M.E.'s, which is the black group.
Speaker 1: The Christian Methodist Episcopal now. Formerly Colored Methodist Episcopal.
Speaker 2: Yeah, formerly Colored Methodist.  Paine was founded by [Bishop] Lucius [Henry] Holsey, who himself was a former slave.  Who was freed and he established Paine College in Augusta, Georgia.  Powerful man, he worked with white Methodist to establish the school.  In his later years you would be interested in this, he became disillusioned with post-slavery America and he became a very outspoken Pan-Africanist.  He believed that the only real solutions were for blacks to be repopulated in a western territory or return to Africa.
Speaker 1: Now is he any relationship to the late professor from Baltimore [Maryland], Leon, Reverend Leon Holsey, Dr. Leon [Davis] Holsey?
Speaker 2: I'm not certain Dr. Le- well I'm not certain, he could be, could be, not certain.
Speaker 1: Leon Holsey taught at, on the black, not Coppin State [College; Coppin State University, Baltimore, Maryland] but the one right in the, in the middle of Baltimore [Maryland].
Speaker 2: Was that [University of] Maryland Eastern Shore [Princess Anne, Maryland], no?
Speaker 1: No, it's the black school right in the middle of Baltimore (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: Coppin? Not--
Speaker 1: Bowie [State Univerisity, Bowie, Maryland]?
Speaker 2: Not Bowie, not Coppin, it's the other one. It's--there's one more. Not Morgan [State University, Baltimore, Maryland], yeah--
Speaker 1: Morgan? Morgan State?
Speaker 2: It was Coppin, yeah I think it was (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Coppin.
Speaker 2: --Coppin State yeah.
Story_ID: 219969
Speaker 1: --Let me tell you about my senior year in high school [Burney-Harris High School; Clarke Central High School, Athens, Georgia].  You know I had never had a conversation with a white person of any significance.  I was eighteen years old before I ever sat down to have a conversation among equals with a white person of my age.  I was a senior in high school, amazingly. I'm not an old man.  See we often think about the segregated South, the apartheid, the legal apartheid that existed in the South as something that happened generations ago.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: All right, it changed when I was eighteen.  All of my experiences prior to that was of segregation.  Everything from the library I attended to the day we went to the fair, I was talking to a friend on fair day, they had Negro day.  I mean the schools, the churches, everything.  One day when I was co-president of the student body, some issue arose and administration was upset and they called all the seniors into the auditorium and I got up to speak.  And it was the first time I'd ever spoken before integrated audience.  You know I had been doing my little thing over the years, so this is my first moment to stand up before an integrated audience.  But I don't remember what I said or how I said it, but all the kids applauded, I looked out and the black kids were applauding and the white kids were applauding. (Pause)  And I went, wait a minute, you know that maybe this thing you know transcends you know maybe I can reach people other than, just people of my own color.  And that was the first moment in time that ever occurred in my life.
Speaker 2: How did the white students receive the black student there?
Speaker 1: Oh it was a war mostly, you know there were some, there friendships.  You know I've gotten to meet most of my classmates since I've been grown, I still meet them now and we talk about it.  And the interesting enough the black and white kids who were there think about it--I know this because I wrote about it--Clarke County [Georgia] had segregated schools for eighty-four years, (pause) for eighty-four years.  And in 1970, we were asked, seventeen, eighteen year old kids, were asked to change eighty-four years of history, (pause) of bias and prejudice segregation.  It was tough.  There were fights, there were some friendships made that were few and far between.  But now when I see my former classmates, we sit down and talk.  And we realize that there is this indelible kind of link in time that we were at a place and a time in that we all know now how unique it was.  And we talk about it, and there's this knowing kinda presence we have with each other when I talk to them.  And not like we're singing holding hands, singing 'Kumbaya' and all this stuff, don't happen.  But we were together at that moment and no one either before or after can ever say they were but us.  That we were the only ones that would ever be there at that point in time.  And I guess that's true all over the South.
Story_ID: 219663
Speaker 1: Well tell us about Paine College [Augusta, Georgia]?
Speaker 2: Paine was a very positive experience, opened my eyes; I majored in philosophy and religion while I was in college and it forced me to develop critical thinking skills.  I became much more aware of my history and I developed a love for writing while I was at Paine.  True to form, I was served as president of freshmen class (laughter) and my sophomore year I was editor of the student newspaper and my junior and senior year I was president of the student government association [SGA].
Speaker 1: So you just followed the same course?
Speaker 2: Yeah, same template that I used in the past.
Speaker 1: So who were some of your teachers and mentors at Paine?
Speaker 2: Dr. J. Tolbert Lacey [ph.] who was deceased, who's the dean of students.  Dr. Justine Washington many good teachers, Ms. Joyce Cherry who's the English teacher my freshman year, just the experience I had never really been around a black environment that was intellectually based environment.  And I got a chance to meet black lawyers, judges, things that you know just not available to me in Athens [Georgia], which had a relatively small black population, whereas Augusta [Georgia] was a equally a majority black population to some extent.  And had my first chance to interact with black politicians in a significant way, which had a major impact and influence as well, so it was a great experience, I loved Paine.  One of the realities of it, I actually graduated in December, my senior year and I stayed an extra semester just so I could finish out my term as SGA president.
Speaker 1: Okay, so that's December of?
Speaker 2: Seventy-five [1975].
Speaker 1: Seventy-five [1975], okay.
Story_ID: 219664
Speaker 1: So what did you decide to do after Paine [College, Augusta, Georgia]?
Speaker 2: I came home and my friend and former roommate at Paine, Fred Smith [Jr.], who was also from Athens [Georgia], we decided to start a newspaper, so we started a black weekly newspaper in Athens called the Athens Voice.  And it was affiliated with The Atlanta Voice which was owned and published by the late J. Lowell Ware.  And we published the paper got it started and it was the first time and some I guess seventy years since Athens had a black newspaper.  The first black newspaper in Athens had been the Athens Blade, which had been published by J. H. Heard and W. H. Pledger [sic. W.H. Heard and W.A. Pledger] in the 1870s [sic. 1879-1880].  And so that was fun 'cause we was writing, getting involved in politics we sponsored voter registration drives.  And of course I had already applied to law school and I was accepted at the University of South Carolina [School of Law, Columbia, South Carolina] and so we got the paper started that summer, but in the falls I headed out to law school.  And my friend Fred continued to edit the paper.
Speaker 1: Okay now University of South Carolina, now you must been one of the first black law students at the University of South Carolina I would guess?
Speaker 2: No there had been some earlier ones, of you know a small number that actually gone and graduated from there, 'cause you know this was '75 [1975].  So in the late '60s [1960s] early '70s [1970s] they began to admit black students at USC [University of South Carolina].  And law school is a very interesting experience. Believe it or not, that was the first year they experimented with affirmative action, and I think they brought in about thirty-five blacks in that freshmen class.  And I think about seven of us--
Speaker 1: Into the law school?
Speaker 2: --into the law school and as I recall about seven of us, actually survived the three year tenure or curriculum.
Speaker 1: That's a high attrition rate.
Speaker 2: That's a huge attrition rate and part of it was kids, I don't think were prepared, but it was a very hostile environment there.  One of the first day one of our professors told us that my job was to weed out the inferiors.  And it was clear who he was talking about, he was talking about us.  But I resigned myself to stay there and to graduate.  And USC law school--oh true to form, I started a newsletter, newspaper at law school, called the Advocate [ph.] and it is still being published today, by the way I was at law school a year ago and they still publish the Advocate the Black Law Students Association [BLSA].  And then my senior year, I was elected president of the black, what we called then BALSA, which was the Black American Law Student[s] Association [National Black Law Students Association (NBLSA)].  So either, I was running and getting elected to some student position or I was publishing some type of document or both.  And law school really forced me to dig down at a level or academic kinda, a very harsh environment, demanding environment, but I was determined to succeed and get a law degree.  And I enjoyed that and we were able to do some of things we advocated to, for USC to hire the first black law professor and after we graduated they did.  But interestingly enough I was writing my first book ['A Story Untold: Black Men and Women in Athens History,' Michael L. Thurmond] while I was in law school.  I published my first book in 1978, which was the year I graduated from law school.
Story_ID: 219665
Speaker 1: What was the name of your book?
Speaker 2: 'A Story Untold: Black Men and Women in Athens History,' [Michael L. Thurmond] it was a black history of Athens [Georgia].  And really the essence behind that was the summer of before law school [University of South Carolina School of Law, Columbia, South Carolina] I had began to write a column or series on black history in Athens.  And, and so out of that column and, and also because I was frustrated that much of the history we had tried to preserve in the public school system was still disappearing.  They had began to close down all the formerly black schools, so I saw the way to preserve the history that I was becoming aware of.  And I talked to the local school superintendent and he agreed to publish a 35-page pamphlet that would deal with local black history, and they were going to pay me four hundred dollars.  And, so, I wrote the thirty-five pages, I got the four hundred dollars.  And then I said, well look, let me hold onto this, and so the next three years I continued to working on the manuscript.  It was a 200-plus page book in 1978, which was used as a supplemental text in the Clarke County School District [Georgia].  So, the year I graduated from high school [sic. law school], I published my first book. I was twenty-five years old.
Speaker 1: Oh from law school?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 219666
Speaker 1: You know, what did you do with your law degree [from University of South Carolina School of Law, Columbia, South Carolina], did you go into private practice, or?
Speaker 2: Well I came back to Athens [Georgia], which was my only intent, was to return to my hometown, and I was hired as the quote "assistant city attorney."  And I worked in the city attorney's office, and that's an overblown title really I was the assist- I was a clerk to city attorney, but anyway I liked the title.  I called myself the assistant city attorney, and I worked there a year and then I, in December of 1979, I opened up my own law practice in Athens.
Speaker 1: Okay, was it just you by yourself?
Speaker 2: It was myself and I established the practice [Thurmond, Thurmond, Miller & Rucker; Thurmond & Mathis, Athens, Georgia] on Prince Avenue and I later I brought in some partners.  And I moved into, I rehabilitated a building in Athens that was originally built in the 1940s and used as a maternity hospital [Susan Medical Building, Athens, Georgia] by Dr. Andrew Jones.  So I went in and we rehabilitated that building and I moved my law practice at that time I had five, I had four partners and an associate. We grew quickly.  And the law practice was flourishing.
Speaker 1: Okay, now what, what year was this that you, you had four partners?
Speaker 2: I opened the practice in '78 [1978], by 1983 or '84 [1984], we had four partners in the firm.
Story_ID: 219667
Speaker 1: In 1982, I ran my first race for political office.  I ran for House District 67 to the Georgia House of Representatives.  I ran against an incumbent, a long serving incumbent, by the name of Hugh Logan.  I was defeated, I lost that race by two hundred votes.  That particular race was marred by some irregularities.  We made some allegations that there were voting irregularities.  Interesting about this district was that it was a majority white district.  It was about 66 percent majority white and the gentleman I was running against was a white incumbent.  And I was defeated in 1982 it was a very hotly contested race.  I ran again in 1984, against the same gentleman and lost again.  And we had problems with voting again, in that particular district, so I filed a law suit I contested the election and I went to court, arguing there were irregularities.  What we did was we settled out of court though before the case was heard.  And I think corrected many of the problems we had.  There were no polling places in black communities, there was no community voter registration, we changed all that, and we hired more black poll workers all through the district.  And in 1986 I ran again, but as state representative, same district, against the same gentleman, I lost by 200 votes in '82 [1982], I lost by 119 votes '84 [1984], and in 1986 I was elected by 200 votes.  And I became the first African American elected to the Georgia General Assembly, from Clarke County [Georgia] since Reconstruction.  And I was the only African American elected representing a majority white district in the Southeast.  I mentioned that to rewind back to that speech when I was a senior in high school [Burney-Harris High School; Clarke Central High School, Athens, Georgia], when I stood up and gave my first speech to an integrated audience and realized that, I had some appeal or ability to lead people black and white.  And interestingly enough years later, there I was, the only black in Georgia, the only one in the Southeast, one of the few in the country, representing the majority black [sic. white] legislative district in the general assembly in any state.  And, looking back on it, those first two races you know there were the voting irregularities, but there was also another reason I was losing, I refused or I was afraid or I didn't have the knowledge or the skill to really go out and campaign and ask white people to vote for me.  I focused all of my political efforts in my black base, in the black community.  But the district was two-thirds white, and after two defeats and these problems I realized that in order to win I had to develop a biracial coalition.
Speaker 2: And how were you able to do that?
Speaker 1: Well first I had to overcome my own inhibitions, and my own fears, we all have them, you know.  We live in comfort zones and one of the most difficult things for any human being to do is to desert or leave a comfort zone and move into another area.  It doesn't have to be politics, it could be even an intellectual discipline, you know people get comfortable in what they know or what they believe and they resist moving in the new environment.  So I had to make a decision, what was stronger my, my dreams of to hold public office or my fears or my inhibitions. And my dreams trumped my fears in that extent.  And so I began to ask everybody I met to vote for me.  And luckily the third time, which was in many probabilities, may have been the last time I was elected to the Georgia House.
Story_ID: 219668
Speaker 1: You served in the Georgia House [of Representatives] from '86 [1986] through (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Through '92 [1992].
Speaker 1: --to '92 [1992].
Speaker 2: While I was there my major accomplishment was that I authored a majored a piece of legislation that provided a tax relief, tax credit to low income working citizens, and senior citizens.  As of this date which is 2004, that tax break has generated about two hundred million dollars in tax refunds to low income citizens, senior citizens.  I also served as chairman of the Georgia Legislative Black Caucus in 1992, '91 [1991] and '92 [1992].  And in '92 [1992], I ran for [U.S.] Congress and was defeated again, and so I was out of politics.  And so I was forced back into what I call political exile and I was back to Athens [Georgia] with my tail stuck between my legs.  I finished fourth in a five person race.  It was.
Speaker 1: Now who actually won the seat?
Speaker 2: Cynthia McKinney won the seat.  She won the seat and so I went back to Athens and very distressed actually that was in '92 [1992] and in the summer, then that February my mother [Vanilla Burton Thurmond] died.  So that was really one of the most difficult periods of my life.  I was out of politics, my mother had died--you know the law practice had fallen in disarray 'cause I was out in politics--so I was really had my back against the wall at that point in the early '90s [1990s].  And had to really dig deep, or actually I was at a point where I could have just wiped it out.
Speaker 1: Well what happened what, what pulled you around?
Speaker 2: Well reading and I was just almost in cucu-clusion [sic. seclusion].  So I started re-readings novel, not novel, books, anything, I don't like novels.  I was reading books 'The Souls of Black Folks,' [sic. 'The Souls of Black Folk'] written by W.E.B. Du Bois.  And there was this passage that he had written and he states that, not only is Georgia just thus the geographical focus of the Negro race, but both now and yesterday, the Negro problems have seemed to be centered in this state.  Oh, obviously he's, writing about the Civil Rights Movement and [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther] King [Jr.], then I noticed the book was published in 1903.  No way could he be talking about King, hadn't been born.  So how could Georgia have been the focus of the Negro population, prior to 1903?  And I had no idea what Du Bois was talking about.  So I set out then to write the research and I kinda dedicated myself to pursuing and understanding more about black Georgia to better define it, interpret it and to document the significance of it.  And in the beginning of the writing and the research I began to heal myself emotionally and psychologically.  And I spent the next ten years working on this book ['Freedom: An African-American History of Georgia, 1733-1865,' Michael Thurmond], which was really the catalyst to get myself up and literally get back into the game.
Story_ID: 219669
Speaker 1: So you started working on the book ['Freedom: An African-American History of Georgia, 1733-1865,' Michael Thurmond]?
Speaker 2: In the spring of '93 [1993].
Speaker 1: Ninety-three [1993], okay, and it was published, when did it finally come out?
Speaker 2: It was published in June 2003.
Speaker 1: Okay, so it took you ten years?
Speaker 2: Took me ten years.
Speaker 1: Okay, it's an ambitious work, I mean, you covered the history of, of blacks in Georgia.
Speaker 2: Yeah, and see a part of what I, in order to understand you know put myself in perspective as a politician, a black politician or politician in to, and you know in the early part of the 21st century.  I had to get a better, develop a better understanding of where I as in terms of historical context of where the state was.  And so I always, I can, the only way I can solve problems is I have to have that context, and we talked about it earlier.  And so in the writing there was understanding and the research you know I developed a vision.
Story_ID: 219670
Speaker 1: And so two years after--I began the book ['Freedom: An African-American History of Georgia, 1733-1865,' Michael Thurmond] in '93 [1993] in '94 [1994], former governor, Zell Miller called and asked if I wanted, it was the worst job in state government, asked me if I wanted to be director of the department of family and children's services [Georgia Department of Human Services, Division of Family and Children Services].  I don't know whether you know much about the child welfare and welfare and you know here I was.  And so I'm out of politics, so I said okay I'd take the job.  And start work on it and in 19 that was '94 [1994], late in '95 [1995], early '96 [1996], [President William Jefferson "Bill"] Clinton signs the welfare bill [Personal Responsibility and Work Opportunity Reconciliation Act of 1996], to change welfare as we know it.  And I'm the, I'm head of biggest welfare agency, 1.2 billion dollar agency.  So, I decide that I would create something, welfare reform without the meanness.  Basically welfare reform, is particularly as Republicans and others tried to articulate it was a mean spirited type of fund.  I have always believed that there was dignity in work, I support work, I think work has value that extends far beyond the paychecks that people earn.  And I was convinced that given a better option that people would choose work over welfare if in fact the work could provide them with the support and the resources they needed to support their family.  You and I chose work over welfare, 'cause we can earn enough money doing this or more money than we can living off the government right?  I mean it just that's what people do.  And I believed that there were thousands, millions of people who wanted more but the government and system as it exists did not supply support or even more troubling scenario, basically needed poor people in order to continue to keep the system working.  So we went about changing, we put a system together with childcare, medical coverage, transportation, it wasn't mean spirited.  And, basically a hundred thousand people voluntarily decided, the same thing I decided, I want more money.  You offer people a better job, if you working in one job, someone offer you another position that paid more money or provide you with greater opportunity what do you do?  You go.
Story_ID: 219671
Speaker 1: One of the things I would think that anybody that's familiar with the welfare system, some of the flaws in it, would probably agree with is that people are generally treated with very little dignity.
Speaker 2: Very much so.
Speaker 1: At the basic contact level, when they go to the office they're looked upon with contempt and treated like children or idiots, and when they're in there, I mean it seems to perpetuate like a real, you know (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: Dependency, weakness, you know it's a deficit-driven system.  And one of the things, you know I mentioned when I was growing up we would get government rations, you know powdered milk, powdered eggs, you know government cheese.  And so what I told my caseworkers [at Georgia Department of Human Services, Division of Family and Children Services], it's interesting you pointed that out, you all be careful how you treat the little children who sit in the waiting rooms, 'cause they might grow up to be your boss.  And I literally from a kid receiving benefits; growing up to be the man who ran the system.  The initiative was called Work First, let me tell you some of the other (unclear), we started an initiative called Fatherhood Initiative, the basic thing about the whole welfare system was the assumption that the father was either dead or absent.  Or had no interest in the children, that basically the preference that's where you had to start, right. You got a mother you got children, and you got man or someone not interested in them.  So we developed a Fatherhood initiative, which reached out and trained fathers and taught fathers of responsible fatherhood and brought 'em back into the family.  We developed other initiatives associated with it that we got people into technical schools.  And I think, overall, we got a long way to go, but I don't know, it might be twenty-thirty years when someone is watching this video.  But, you know, people are what is the book 'The Grapes of Wrath' [John Steinbeck], these folk.  But these brave women who made this courageous move from welfare to work, I don't think have received kind of credit and the focus 'cause it took a whole lot of courage after generations of dependency to turn around and try to create something better for themselves and their families.  So, in '97 [1997] and I was burned out too really, it was a huge, cause you know you had forces from all sides, but I was very proud of what we accomplished.  And I left I, I stayed there three years.  And in September of '97 [1997] I decided, I, I told the governor, I would stay three years.  That's before Zell Miller went crazy, by the way history, he lost his mind after that.  But three years later I left and joined the faculty at the University of Georgia, Carl Vinson Institute of Government [Athens, Georgia].
Story_ID: 219672
Speaker 1: So how long did you teach?
Speaker 2: I was not going get back into politics, so I arrived there [University of Georgia, Carl Vinson Institute of Government, Athens, Georgia] in September, and in April I filed to guess what?  (Laughter) Run for labor commissioner of the State of Georgia.  I have been running all my life.
Speaker 1: That's seems to be, the kind position in most states is an appointed position, but in, in Georgia is an elected office.
Speaker 2: There's only three states that elect the labor commissioner and the rest of them are all appointed.
Speaker 1: What, are the other states?
Speaker 2: Washington and, I think, North Carolina.
Speaker 1: Well you, you had a least some kind of a track record to run on (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Unclear) was key, the welfare piece helped me.  And, you know, Georgia never elected a black person statewide to a constitutional office.  So I was elected and one other black guy was elected [HistoryMaker] Attorney General Thurbert Baker.  We were the first blacks ever elected to statewide office, constitutional office in the history of Georgia, in 1998.
Speaker 1: Right, right.
Speaker 2: And being elected obviously gives you a little bit more gravitas than being appointed by a governor.  'Cause you're independent, you can make your own decisions.  And what I've tried to do, is to transform, the first thing I did I closed all, quote "unemployment offices," now we have career centers.  State of the art--one thing you said--no citizens should have to check their dignity at the door in order to receive services from the state.  See I think you know you shouldn't do that you're a tax payer whether you're employed or unemployed, on welfare, need medical coverage, you should be able to carry your dignity with you.  And so one of the first things I told my folks is that, I want you to treat every citizen as if he or she is the commissioner of Georgia Department of Labor.  And when I first took the office in '98 [1998], there was a labor shortage.  And then, on September 11th [2001 (9/11)], obviously the terrorist attack.  And, prior to that, the implosions of the technology stocks, thousands of people laid off.  So as we speak we are in the mist of trying to recover from an economic recession.  Thousands of Georgians are still laid off.  And the labor department is the first responder during times of economic distress and dislocation.  So my job as we speak now, I'm responsible for making sure that every Georgian who needs a job or wants a job has that.  That's my primary sole mission as a labor commissioner.
Speaker 1: Now how you've, you've used technology I think to boost the chances that people, for what I've read you, you've used computers, when they weren't really utilized before?
Speaker 2: That's true, this was a pen and paper system when I came.  And now you basically can file for benefits online, you can search for jobs, send resumes.  And this allowed us to be more productive with basically the same number of people and with a huge increase in caseload.  Last year, we were ranked number one in the nation in helping people get back into the workforce.  Of all the states, all the labor departments we were ranked the best in the country.  So, I'm proud of that and we've started some new initiatives here too.  One is TOPSTEP [The Offender Probationer Parolee State Training Employment Program] to help rehabilitated ex-offenders get back to work.  In order to reduce recidivism people need jobs.  So one of the things we work with the [Georgia] Department of Corrections and in every office we have a person who assists them.  We have many youth-related programs, jobs for Georgia graduates.  And you know I got a philosophy of work and it really comes from my father [Sidney Thurmond].  Who believed in hard work, never made a lot of money, but he believed that people ought to work.  He never and he was just, and he liked hard work.  He still, he would laugh at me when I was wearing a tie as a lawyer, he used to always kid me saying "Y'all not workin'".  So he believed in hard work, you know, I'll talk a little bit more about the philosophy of work and why I think work is important.  And why that it's been a part of my political agenda, since the very beginning.
Story_ID: 219673
Speaker 1: Well we were just talking about, I was talking about the challenge and you know the responsibility, but I enjoyed that, it seems as if wherever I go you know it what you call it the breach in the wall, I always want the guy that you call when, when you know when the enemy is over running the position and it's a do or die kinda situation, that's where I want to be in life.
Speaker 2: Okay, now, at this juncture now you're still you're one of the youngest people we've interviewed really and at this juncture now we're, in the midst of a presidential election you have strong feeling about the candidates and the positions they take, I mean what, are the issues today in 2004 that you think are the most important ones?
Speaker 1: For me personally, honestly well first my daughter, you know, one thing about politics, politicians come politicians go, and I'm just totally committed to it, but as I've grown older, you know now this is a guy who's dedicated his entire life to running and engaging in the political process and I understand that value of it.  But my daughter Mikaya [Thurmond], who is thirteen now and I hadn't talked about her I hadn't talk too much about her mother, Zola [Thurmond] my wife.
Speaker 2: Now when did you meet her?
Speaker 1: In 1990, I met Zola actually back in the early '80s [1980s], she worked in the Governor [Joe Frank] Harris's, in the governor's administration.  And so we became friends, got married, which is my second marriage and her first.  And then we had Mikaya, and basically we dedicated ourselves to this child, to this young lady and she's very bright, excellent student.  And we were just talking yesterday and I don't know how it came up, that how people generally say that she's [HistoryMaker] Michael Thurmond's daughter and guess what she told me, she said one day people gonna say that's Mikaya Thurmond's dad.
Speaker 2: So she takes after you?
Speaker 1: Yeah, (laughter) she takes after me, and you know what I told her, I said, "If and when that day comes I'll be the happiest man on the face of the earth".  'Cause that's exactly, I said, do you, that's what I want to happen actually and maybe one day and I may not be on the face of this earth, she'll get a chance to see this tape, wouldn't that be interesting?  That's what's so great about this.  See that's the beauty of it, my, you know I didn't have this conversation with my grandfather, I don't know that much about him.  And I'm just thinking about the things I've told you, at least you've elicited from me that you know my descendants and you know will be able to hopefully see and learn a little more about me.  And more importantly about themselves, because who I am, you know genes are powerful thing.  You know I'm so much of these people these ancestors but I don't know all the parts or the pieces or where it came from.
Story_ID: 219674
Speaker 1: Now, that brings me to your book ['Freedom: An African-American History of Georgia, 1733-1865,' Michael Thurmond], I just wanted you to speak maybe briefly about what are the major points that you make in your book on freedom which is the history of black folks in Georgia.  And he holds it up, yeah okay, good you can hold it up higher really so we can focus on it for a second (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: Like all good writers you got to show your book.
Speaker 1: Who's that on the cover?
Speaker 2: Susie King Taylor, she was born a slave in 1849 in Savannah, Georgia, escaped, she's the only black woman to write a Civil War memoir ['Reminiscences of My Life in Camp with the 33d United States Colored Troops, Late 1st S.C. Volunteers,' Susie King Taylor].  And married one of the first black soldiers, she was the nurse and seamstress with the 1st South Carolina Volunteers.  The book, the book (pause) my first goal with writing the book, my hope, is that first of all I want to destroy the myth of the happy slave, the so-called happy slave.  If you look how we are betrayed as a race, that either we, while during enslavement, either we were happy or basically docile, during that entire period.  You have maybe a Nat Turner, or a Denmark Vesey, but the great majority of the population, Harriet Tubman, basically accepted it.  Except these very few blacks who rose up and fought against it.  What my research showed, was that, not in the hundreds but the thousands resisted, for instance, during the colonial period, several thousand successfully escaped to Florida.  Lived with the Seminoles [Native American], allied themselves with the Spanish, fought against the British to protect their freedom, freedom of their families.  During the Revolutionary War in Georgia some four thousand Georgia slaves sided with the British after they occupied Savannah, pledged their loyalty to the King [George III], after the war they sailed away on British evacuation ships to freedom.  During the War of 1812, the British Captain [sic. Vice Admiral Alexander] Cochrane, St. Simons [Island, Georgia] and Jekyll [Island, Georgia], three thousand more slaves, men and their families go out the British, the British had issued a proclamation of emancipation.  Men joined the British Royal Marines, they sailed away to other British Colonies, to Canada, some back to Africa.  What it shows, and I can go forward, that blacks did not accept their enslavement. That, like all people, of all races they love freedom and they were willing to live, and fight and die for it.  From the battlefields against the Seminoles, [Colonel] Andrew Jackson's soldiers wrote back in numerous letters, that the Black Seminoles and Negro Seminoles were the most bloodthirsty and brave men on the field of battle.  That they always fought to the death, that they preferred death rather than capture re-enslavement.  So hopefully to destroy that myth, the second thing I see and hope I can provide, is that not all white people supported slavery.  Georgia was founded by British nobleman James Oglethorpe, who was among one of the first white men in North America against the evils of slavery.  And the Georgia was founded as a slave free colony, of all the original colonies Georgia was the only one.  And he and other white fought courageously to prohibit the importation of slaves into the colony of Georgia.  In 1742, he returned to England and continued his advocacy against slavery, his entire life.  The point of this book is, that number one blacks, sought their freedom and they allied themselves with Native American, the Spanish, the British, with northern whites and even some southern white, when it lead to the acquisition of freedom and opportunity for themselves and their families.  That's the story, that all people of good will desire freedom, not just for themselves but for other men.  And even as we sit here and in 2004 and we're in the midst of a foreign war [Iraq War] called Iraqi Freedom.
Speaker 1: Now does this book, the information that you researched for this book, help you as a Georgia politician go forward?
Speaker 2: Of course, see I know the reason, I know the Georgia, I know I have the original vision of Georgia, the original vision of Georgia was not about the Confederacy, wasn't about slavery, matter of fact it was the anti-slavery hereditary that Georgia was found upon.  So the Georgia I work towards as a statewide elected official is that original vision of humanism, reaching out to all races of people, of giving the people opportunity to work and live and support themselves and their families.  That's the Georgia that I know is the Georgia that I work to build.  See that's what, you know, you have to, sometimes in order to solve problems in the present you have to go into the past.  You correct the past, you change the present and you create the opportunity for the future.  See problem, the thing is, we sit here trying to solve all the problems right here now, some of these problems are generational, so you have to go back.  See 'cause we're operating on bad information, it's a computer, bad information in what, bad information out.  If you operating on false facts, lies, distortion, you never will come to the truth.
Story_ID: 219675
Speaker 1: In that same regard what are some of your hopes and concerns for the African American community today?
Speaker 2: First we have to know who we really are, we gotta really engage, that's why people who are engaged, the Hilliards [HistoryMaker Asa Hilliard III and HistoryMaker Patsy Jo Hilliard] and others, who engage in the study of African American history and culture so important, 'cause we got to be clear about who we are.  See we may, some of us have been convinced that we are things that we are not, which is a part of the distortion that history provides, so you gotta engage in that.  Actually, if you think about it historically, 250 years American slavery, another 100 years of apartheid, in the mid-'60s [1960s], at least on the books equality came.  So we sit here today only about forty years hence, from equality.  You can't change three hundred and fifty years worth of history not all of it in forty years.  So when you put it in that context and the fact of how far we've come and the progress we've made.  You got to look at these folk and say this is a great race of people, these are great people.
Speaker 1: Say, what I hear you saying, is a key point your making here too about people thinking that the end of the Civil War basically the end of slavery or the end of discrimination, just, just not the case in the South is it?
Speaker 2: Not the case.
Speaker 1: And or the rest of the country for that matter (unclear).
Speaker 2: Susie King Taylor points that out, she in the epilogue of the book.  She realizes first the struggle was to abolish legal servitude, but that did not create equality under the law, it just that you are not a slave.  Now the 13th [Amendment], 14th [Amendment], 15th Amendments tried to address it, and did for a short period of time until all the rules and retrenchment.  She knew that the second struggle, and I point this out, was a struggle for equality that culminated under the leadership of [Reverend Dr.] Martin Luther King [Jr.].  That was the next hundred years, with the struggle to become equal and that culminated in the '60s [1960s].  My final conclusion, of my earlier conclusion is that Martin Luther King and Andy Young [HistoryMaker Andrew Young], and [Reverend Ralph David] Abernathy inherited a movement, they didn't create one.  There have been and there will continue to be a succession of leaders in the protracted struggle.  First to be free, and see, we confuse equality with freedom, you know so folks say we not free in the '60s [1960s].  We want freedom, but, but literally to 1865, freedom was the actual pursuit of freedom, not to be a slave.  The next struggle was about the ability to be equal under the law, which is what was achieved in the '60s [1960s].  Right now we trying figure out what this third stage, phase is all about.  Some say its economics and that's part of why we kinda wobble and we struggle with it, 'cause we hadn't clearly defined what the third phase should be about.
Story_ID: 219676
Speaker 1: When you look back at all the things that you've done thus far, was there any major thing that you would do differently if you had it to do again?
Speaker 2: I don't want sound like [President] George [Walker] Bush "I haven't made any mistakes," no one will know what that means a year from now, but I tell you what I would do differently. I would spend more time, you know, not pursuing politics, but pursuing, you know trying to develop a much happier life, right.  I'd invest more time in my daughter [Mikaya Thurmond], I'd invest more time in my family. I really would if I could do it over, or if it I had the opportunity to do it over.  But, unfortunately, I think that the mission that the Good Lord has provided for me doesn't really take all that into consideration.  You know people are put here for a purpose.  And you have to live out to that purpose, that's what life is about, purpose.  And I hope that they will look back and understand that well, you know, he was gone a lot, but he loved us and you know he had a mission, that he was on a mission, and that's why I was put here.  And so one thing this, this session can help me explain to, to descendants and family members that, you know, you have to answer the call.  You have to answer the call, and you know, you don't want to answer it, you really don't, but it's just you're born for it.  It was put in your genes even before you took a breath and throughout my life to be honest with you, I've tried to reject it from time to time but I always lose the struggle.
Speaker 1: In that same regard, now you, what do you project as your future, what would you see yourself doing in another ten years from now?
Speaker 2: Don't know you know, I all I know is that wherever the breach in the wall, is that's where I'll be.  I don't know where it is, but I'll be there.  You know I been reading Joseph in the Bible, who was put in the pit by his brothers and sisters sold into slavery.  But then he was placed over Egypt and he was there during the famine.  You know part of when I come to work as labor commissioner, if I could help people get a benefit check or find a job in the midst of this famine people have to be able to generate income to feed themselves and their--you know it's just always to the breach, to the breach, to the breach and that's, that's where I want to be, wherever it is.  Who was that, Marcus Garvey said "Look for me in the whirlwind." I love that.
Story_ID: 219677
Speaker 1: What you said earlier about Georgia being the center does seem to resonate over and over again. He [Marcus Garvey] was at Tombs Prison [Manhattan House of Detention] in Atlanta [sic. New York, New York] when he said that.
Speaker 2: Was he really?
Speaker 1: That's right and the last place that slaves were brought was Jekyll Island [Georgia] in 1856, I mean there so many different (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, it was really is.
Speaker 1: [Reverend] Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.] and the whole group, right here in Atlanta [Georgia].
Speaker 2: [W.E.B.] Du Bois was here, you know a.
Speaker 1: Atlanta U [Atlanta University; Clark Atlanta University, Atlanta, Georgia] (unclear).
Speaker 2: Atlanta U (unclear) and [Mayor] Maynard Jackson you know it's just over and over and over, and Andy [HistoryMaker Andrew Young], it continues to happen it's something about here.  And see Georgia, and that's why I say look you know (pause), that's what intrigues me, and see I understand it better now.  The number one destination of black folk in America is what Atlanta that's where they come.  More people come here move here that any other place in the world.
Story_ID: 219678
Speaker 1: Now when you look back at your life, what would you see that this point to be your legacy?
Speaker 2: Hopefully, empower some people to take control of their lives.  Hopefully people are less poor than, you know, maybe, and people may have more dignity, more pride more, more knowledge.  You know I always I tell my wife on my tombstone all I really want said is he tried.  And not that I accomplished anything, I don't know what I accomplished, I don't know if I accomplished anything, but one thing I do know is that I tried.
Speaker 1: And is that, how you'd like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: Yes, it's just he tried.  Then so you have to debate, how great was the success or the failure but the one thing any and everybody, enemy, foe, friend, he tried and that's it.
Speaker 1: Okay, thank you, sir.
Speaker 2: Thank you.
