Story_ID: 465152
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe, I'm interviewer today for The HistoryMakers, our videographer is Scott Stearns.  Sir, could you please state your full name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: Raleigh Trammell [HistoryMaker Reverend Raleigh Trammell], R-A-L-E-I-G-H, T-R-A-M-M-E-L-L.
Speaker 1: All right.  Do you have a middle name?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: All right.  And what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: Twelve, thirty, thirty-six [December 30, 1936], in Grantville, Georgia.
Speaker 1: All right.  And sir, what, what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: A pastor.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: Central Missionary Baptist Church here in Dayton, Ohio.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And, and what is today's date?
Speaker 2: Today, today is the 27th of February, 2008.
Speaker 1: All right.  And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: We're at the SCLC [Southern Christian Leadership Conference] headquarters in Dayton, Ohio.
Story_ID: 465153
Speaker 1: Now, before we go into depth, there are five lightweight kind of questions we always ask as a warm-up.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And the first one is, what is your favorite food?
Speaker 2: Oh, my gosh.  Fried chicken, sir.
Speaker 1: Yes, sir (laughter).
Speaker 2: Um-hm (laughter).
Speaker 1: And do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: It's brown.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you have a favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Yes, Christmas, I love Christmas season.
Speaker 1: Okay.  A favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Yeah, Las Vegas [Las Vegas, Nevada].
Speaker 1: Okay.  And the last one is, do you have a favorite phrase or, or saying?
Speaker 2: Yes.  It is adopted from an old Negro hymn ['A Charge to Keep I Have,' Charles Wesley], to serve this present age, my calling to fulfill.
Story_ID: 465154
Speaker 1: Now I'm gonna ask about your family history.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And I'm gonna ask about your mother's side of the family and your father's [Walter Trammell] side but we'll start with your mother's side first.  Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: Thomasina, T-O-M-M-I-E, Trammell, T-R-A-M-M-E-L-L [Tommie Smith Trammell].  It's--
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what was her maiden name?
Speaker 2: Smith.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And do you know her date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: Her place of birth was Georgia.  I do not remember her date of birth.
Speaker 1: Okay.  If you guess what about 1915 or so or maybe, I don't know, was she--
Speaker 2: Let, let me, let me, my mother passed in '60 [1960] and she was fifty-eight years old.
Speaker 1: Okay.  She was born in 1902?
Speaker 2: Nineteen o-two [1902].
Speaker 1: Yeah.  All right.  Now, what do you know about the ancestors on your mother's side?  How, how far back can you trace them?
Speaker 2: Not far.  I knew, of course, I knew her mother.
Speaker 1: Okay.  That's your grandmother.
Speaker 2: And I did not know, I knew, did not know my mother's father, you know, which would have been my grandfather because he had passed.  I knew her sisters and I knew, I know she had four brothers, I believe, and two sisters, she had more than two sisters, that's as much as I can remember.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you, are there any stories passed down in the family about, about what they were doing when slavery ended or during Reconstruction or any stories like that?  How they got, how, how they got their name?
Speaker 2: My mother seemed to have--name came from a white family as much as I, I, I remember that having been said.  But the Smith family name seemed to have been adopted from a, a white family.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And are there any stories about what, I mean, what, what did they, what do you suppose from the things you've heard they did after slavery?
Speaker 2: They worked, they, they worked in, of course, in the fields and in the, in the houses.  Not much schooling at all.  Not much history that I can recall.
Story_ID: 465155
Speaker 1: Any stories about race relations down there [in Georgia] and what it was like and--
Speaker 2: Of course, the, there was such a thorough separation of the races on, on every aspect, the, and even to the fact that when the Caucasians would walk the street the African Americans would have to get off the, the street to let them have full access to the street.  But the race relations were, were terrible, you know.  Any kind of, any kind of break out of violence towards African Americans it was just something that had to be tolerated.  I remember my mother [Tommie Smith Trammell] telling me that when she was pregnant with one of, well, one of the siblings, that a white man came and tried to misuse her and, and there was a fight involved, she fought him over that incident.  Those kind of things were pretty prevalent in the little country towns that my family grew up in.  The stores, the white people called my grandmother Auntie and (pronunciation) Auntie and those kind of phrases.  And, and treated them very distant as though they didn't exist except when they needed to have something done.  And, and in cases like that, they--I remember my mother saying that there was a doctor in the town, if he wanted something done on his yard he'd just come and got the, the children and to come up there and help, to his house and, and they did the work, no pay involved.
Speaker 1: No, no pay?
Speaker 2: No, no pay involved, just did the work.  The attitude of, the attitude of, of, of ownership had not, had not diminished very far during my mother's involved as early ages of life.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So the white community felt like they owned them?
Speaker 2: Oh, yes, they (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And can order them around and use them?
Speaker 2: And did--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --order them around.
Story_ID: 465156
Speaker 1: Now did your mother [Tommie Smith Trammell] have a chance to go to school?
Speaker 2: Very little.  I think my mother went to the fifth grade, she told me.  Very, had to go to the field and work, if not in the field, in the houses, homes of white people and do their laundry and take care of their house but very little schooling.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So did she, how old was she when she left Georgia?
Speaker 2: When, when my mother left Georgia coming to Ohio, she was oh, it was maybe only five years before she passed.
Speaker 1: Oh, okay, so she lived her whole life--
Speaker 2: She lived her whole life in--
Speaker 1: Oh, okay.
Speaker 2: --in, in, in Georgia.
Speaker 1: All right.  Okay.
Speaker 2: She came here to visit her, my brother, he wanted her to come.
Speaker 1: Now, did, did, did her family own any land or anything?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: So they sharecropped and that sort of thing?
Speaker 2: Sharecropping and--
Speaker 1: Renting?
Speaker 2: --renting, yeah, didn't own anything.
Story_ID: 465157
Speaker 1: Let me go to your father's side of the family.  Can, can, can you give me your father's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: Walter Trammell.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: There was no middle name that I can remember.
Speaker 1: All right.  And what is his date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: It, it's in Georgia also.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And my father died when he was fifty-one and that was in 1950.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So he must have been born in 1899?
Speaker 2: Eighteen ninety-nine [1899] (unclear).
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: All right.  Now, now, what do you know about your father's side of the family?  How far back can you trace them?
Speaker 2: Only to my grandfather and his brothers [Raymond Trammell and Render Trammell].  And I remember having, and, and his, and his mother [Leora Trammell].  His mother and his sister lived here in Dayton [Ohio], they came to Dayton and, and lived.  Of course, his, his father lived in Atlanta [Atlanta, Georgia] and he died in Atlanta, it was Rufus Trammell.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.  Now, are there any stories on that side of the family about slavery or Reconstruction or what they, what the family did after that or, or how they got the name Trammell?
Speaker 2: Don't know how they got the name Trammell, never heard about that.  A lot of stories.  My father was a hard worker in, in the, in the fields.  And, and endured all of the, he endured all of the leftover from, from slavery, he endured all of the ownership attitude and, and endured being directed, work was little or no pay.  My father worked in a cotton mill where they dyed cotton.  And actually, actually took, took his hands and dyed the, dyed the cotton and held all of that, all the fumes and, and it was a hard place to even think of working.  Only blacks worked in those, those areas.
Speaker 1: Did the dyeing?
Speaker 2: Before then, before then he worked in, in a hotel as, as a cook.  He, in that little small town, where people got off the train, got off the bus and came in and, and he had to serve them and cook for them.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, are there any stories from that side of the family about race relations or, in those days?
Speaker 2: Only that, that the attitude of ownership it was a carryover, go to the, the cotton fields and pick the cotton of the, the landowners and the sharecropping of, working hard.
Story_ID: 465158
Speaker 1: Can you describe your parents' personalities?  What was your mother [Tommie Smith Trammell] like and your father like and what were their talents and dispositions like?
Speaker 2: My mother was a kind of easygoing person, didn't, didn't wanna create any problems, taught her children to listen, that we're in a situation that there's only one way that you're going to be able to get out of this situation or to endure it and that you've got to educate your mind.  She believed in that.  It seemed to have been something somebody had said to her.  But it, it--she believed in, in her children going to school, even though we didn't get a chance to go to school until November 'cause we had to go, we had to go to the fields also.  But, but she was obedient to the, to my father.  A homemaker, churchgoer.  My father was a kind of easygoing guy.  He had a better relationship with people than he did with his children 'cause there was no relationship with the children except listen, you know, I'm the daddy, you do what I tell you to do without any questions.  And that's as, as far as being able to sit down and talk to my dad about anything, you know, I was afraid of my dad because they, they, they, that's the kind of attitude they had because they didn't want us to get in trouble.  The fact of the matter is I can remember one specific occasion when we were standing out in front of a white woman's house in the--me and a bunch of boys and she called the police because we were throwing rocks and the police came and, and was gonna take us all to, to jail and then he looked over and saw me and he said, "Oh, you, oh, you're Walt Trammell's [Walter Trammell] boy," said, "I'm gonna take you home to Walt."  And I begged him to take me on to jail.  I didn't, I, I would have had a better opportunity in jail than to have, have to gone on home to my daddy with standing out in front of a white woman's house throwing rocks 'cause my daddy absolutely was a disciplinarian.  And, and that was his total attitude, you know.
Speaker 1: Well, did he believe in corporal punishment?  I, I think a lot of people did so he wouldn't be by himself but I'm, I'm asking just because it's history, you know, so.
Speaker 2: If you come--talking about whipping your children corporal punishment?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Absolutely, absolutely.  Only my dad didn't have to whip that much 'cause, because I, I was afraid of him, he, you know, even the thought of, of my mother saying I'm gonna tell your daddy, come, just stopped any dream of doing anything 'cause he just absolutely didn't play.
Speaker 1: Well, when you think about your parents' personalities and talents and dispositions, who do you think you take after the most?
Speaker 2: I think I take more after my father 'cause I'm a disciplinarian.  I, I believe that I'm less tolerant of, of people ignoring, children ignoring their parents and, and clowning in schools and that kind of thing.  So I'm, I'm strictly a disciplinarian.
Speaker 1: Okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And as a pastor I'm a disciplinarian too.
Story_ID: 465159
Speaker 1: Now how many brothers and sisters do, do you have?
Speaker 2: Living, I have now, there are three girls and three boys living.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: We had a big family, there were fifteen of us.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So where did you fall in the, in the number?
Speaker 2: I'm the seventh son.
Speaker 1: Seventh son, okay.  All right.  And now there's a, supposed to be a significance of being a seventh son.
Speaker 2: Yes, sir.
Speaker 1: And what is that significance (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I hope you know, I hope you know that, that I'm, it, it's biblically sustained, that a seventh son having, have certain kind of powers.  As a child, and when the old folk come down with arthritis they would come get me and I'd have to go and rub their legs, and rub the pain away, and that kind of thing.  And, and other, other painful situations.  It, it was believed that the seventh son carries certain magics, certain powers.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.  So did they, so, so they talked about that pretty much as--
Speaker 2: Oh, absolutely.
Speaker 1: --as a well-known thing?
Speaker 2: It was a absolute, yes, it was absolute.
Speaker 1: Did it, did it make you feel like you were special when you were (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, it wore me out.
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: Because see all around you was somebody coming down with arthritis and they would just call, "Tommie [Trammell's mother, Tommie Smith Trammell], send that boy over here," and I spent my time rubbing down old ladies legs and old men legs and knees and so it wore me out.  I guess one could get some glory out of that, I didn't.
Story_ID: 465160
Speaker 1: Can you describe where you grew up?  Now, did you grow up in town or out in the country?
Speaker 2: I grew up in a country town.  In fact, my house was located in the cemetery.  And the, and the city, and the, the little town, you know, it's, Grantville, Georgia, is a town with one sign, you're, you're entering and leaving.  So and all around us were, were farming areas, farming areas.  But I did not grow up on a farm but I had to do all that a farm offered, you know.  We had chickens and pigs and, and all of, all of those things but it was a, it was a little small town.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So about how, how much land did you all have to, for, for, for your chickens and pigs and things like that?
Speaker 2: Got a half acre.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.  Now, was there a, a name to the part of town you lived in or is it--
Speaker 2: Yeah, Summerhill [Grantville, Georgia].
Speaker 1: Summer Hill, okay.  It was mostly black people that lived there?
Speaker 2: All black people.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  Okay.  So if you said you were from Summerhill in, in Grantsville [ph.], everybody knew where (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Knew where it was, yes.
Story_ID: 465161
Speaker 1: Do you have an earliest childhood memory, a first thing that you ever remember?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I, I remember blackouts.  And I remember that my mother [Tommie Smith Trammell] and brothers, the older one had to cover the windows with blankets and things because the, so that a light would not show through because the Japanese they thought were flying over.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So they'd, they'd blow a air raid, raid siren or something for a drill or something or what (unclear)--
Speaker 2: No, they, no, in this here time they, they didn't have no, they didn't blow on it, the word would go out.  I don't remember hearing any sirens, I just remember that that the word come out, that night put up the blankets over your window and put the lights and the lamps out, we didn't have electric lights we had lamps, put the lamps out and there was no, no lights to be shone around your, your, where you lived.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Then--
Speaker 2: I, I remember that, yes.
Speaker 1: And that was because of the war [World War II]?
Speaker 2: I'm sorry?
Speaker 1: That was because of the war (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, because of the war.
Story_ID: 465162
Speaker 1: Tell me, what were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up?
Speaker 2: Graves yard, and, and smelling of pigs and chickens and cows because, and sounds, let me see of animals.
Story_ID: 465163
Speaker 1: How did you all come to live in a graveyard?
Speaker 2: Well, the house, the house that we rented in Grantville [Georgia] they had a white graveyard and then they had a black graveyard.  The black graveyard, as you may remembered in the South, well, then here too a lot of graveyards were around churches.  Our house was just right down below two churches, the Methodist church and the Baptist church.  And the graveyard started at the end of our property there and ran all back up, up the hill and that kind of thing.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.  So I, I get the picture now.  Now, what did you like to do when you were growing up?  What, what, what were, what was some of your favorite pastimes?
Speaker 2: Baseball, playing ball, we used to like, we used to like to play baseball and basketball, and, and dance and that kind of thing.
Story_ID: 465164
Speaker 1: Was church a big part of growing up?
Speaker 2: Absolutely.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Unquestionably.
Speaker 1: So what was the name of your church?
Speaker 2: Jehovah Baptist Church [Greater Jehovah Baptist Church, Grantville, Georgia].
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you remember the name of your pastor?
Speaker 2: Yes, Reverend Sheridan [ph.].
Speaker 1: Okay.  And was it, was it a big church would you say, you know--
Speaker 2: Well--
Speaker 1: --I know it's a small town but--
Speaker 2: It was the only Baptist church in the town.  And it was a pretty large because people came from out of town and even those who had gone away would come back.  We only had service once a, a month, and it's the second Sunday.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And everybody would come but we, it, we had to go to Sunday school every Sunday though.  And--
Speaker 1: Now, was there a history of the church that you knew?  Did, had it been there a long time?
Speaker 2: Yes, it had been there a long time.  My mother [Tommie Smith Trammell] and grandmother had gone to the, to the church.
Speaker 1: Did it go all the way back to Reconstruction days, you think or--
Speaker 2: I, I'm not sure of that. I'm not sure of that.  But it had been there a long time.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Within your grandmother's lifetime that's almost reconstruct, that's, you know, that's pretty, pretty close.
Speaker 2: Oh, yes, that was--
Speaker 1: You know, you've got one more generation before you go back to slavery--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --pretty much so (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So but she and my mother went to that church.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So as far as you know your people were always in that part of Georgia down in Grantville [Georgia]?
Speaker 2: Yes, they were, they always were around Grantville, Chipley [Pine Mountain, Georgia], Hogansville [Georgia] and all that, that area.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, did you get special responsibilities in the church?  Did the elders in the church try to nurture you along?
Speaker 2: Absolutely.  Somehow the, the history of those early country Baptist churches, they generally can identify a youngster in, in terms of what their interest and enthusiasm as, as they come through the Sunday school.  And I had a principal of the school, of the local school, Reverend James Shropshire [ph.] who was attempting to turn every, every black boy in that, in, in the area to be a preacher. I'm being facetious when I say that but he did, he took a lot of time with us and my church took a lot of time with me both in Sunday school because they felt that I was, was gonna be a religious person.  In fact, I am, I am the only son of that church up to this day.  That, only, only son of that church, you understand what that mean?
Speaker 1: Tell us.
Speaker 2: Preacher (unclear).
Speaker 1: So you're the only preacher that came out of that church?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And all through my church life they, they kept me walking the straight and narrow because, you know, I, I had the, I had been target that, you know, you gonna be a preacher, you gonna be a preacher.  And with that coming from my principal at school and coming from inside the church, I was given special tasks.  I was put in charge of, of things.  I even organized a singing group, a little quartet that we used to sing in the church.
Story_ID: 465165
Speaker 1: What was your first school?  Where, where did you go to school?
Speaker 2: Grantville elementary school [Grantville School, Grantville, Georgia].
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, did, did they call it Grantville colored school or did they just call it (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, you didn't have to call it colored school.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Everybody knew.
Speaker 2: It was the colored school but it was Grantville elementary school.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And it was supported by the, was it supported by the state of Georgia in some manner (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: All right.  So the, the teachers were paid by the state?
Speaker 2: Teachers were paid by the state.  And in my early school they, the, the teachers were not college teachers, they were people who had gone, just high school graduates.  And as I remember, as (unclear), so we, we had a primer, and then a first grade, and, and those, those folks were not trained teachers, more a lot of, more or less babysitters.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you can t- when you look back on it you don't think they really knew that much, huh?
Speaker 2: No, they, they didn't know that much.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  So I, I know some cities in the South like, like Selma [Alabama] was, they were blessed to have teachers that were college trained (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That was a college town.
Speaker 1: --master's degrees and, yeah.
Speaker 2: A college town.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  But in, in your town they, you didn't have that luck?
Speaker 2: No, we didn't have it.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So did you like school?
Speaker 2: Oh, I loved school.  I loved school.
Speaker 1: Did, did you have a favorite subject?
Speaker 2: In, in my early, I, I always--history, in my early school years.  And, of course, later on I, I became more involved with some of the science, sciences.  And then I was interested in religion as I progressed.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And did they teach religion in school?
Speaker 2: Not in high school.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: When I went to college [Clark College; Clark Atlanta University, Atlanta, Georgia]--
Speaker 1: Sure.
Speaker 2: --I, I went right into religious courses.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well, I still had you in grade school.
Speaker 2: Oh, you still, okay.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: No, no, no.  I--
Speaker 1: Yeah, at, at, at Grantville now, did you have a, was there any teacher, and you were saying the teachers were not trained but--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: --was there, was there any teacher or teachers that, you know, were like a role model for you or a mentor to you?
Speaker 2: Yes, yeah, the, and, and, and let me just back up.  All of the teachers, there were teachers who had, were trained, all, all of them were not.  Professor Lewis [ph.], I remember him.  We were all excited about Professor Lewis.  He and his wife both taught at the school.  And he was the basketball coach and he took a lot of interest in, in the, in the male students.
Story_ID: 465166
Speaker 1: So did you have a gym in your--
Speaker 2: Oh, no, no, no, no, no.  A what?
Speaker 1: (Laughter) A gym?
Speaker 2: Gym?  No, no, no.  We played basketball out on the ground.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Is there, it wasn't even paved?
Speaker 2: No, no, no, no, no paved.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So there was a hoop up but was it a, was it a hoop or was it a basket or something or--
Speaker 2: Well, it was, it was a hoop, it was a hoop.  In my last years in high school [Grantville School, Grantville, Georgia], the, the white school allowed us to play, they play games in the, their gym.  And, and I'm sure they collected the money but they allowed us to play, play there, the game, home games in their gyms.
Speaker 1: Now, where did you play 'em before?
Speaker 2: Out on the ground.
Speaker 1: Oh, okay.  So there actually was a dirt court?
Speaker 2: Oh, yes, oh, yes.  And we (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And the other schools would actually play on the, on the dirt court too?
Speaker 2: Yes.  When we went out of town, we played, we went up to Moreland [Georgia], and Greensville [sic. Greenville, Georgia] or Hogansville [Georgia] and those places, we played outside on the ground on the dirt.
Speaker 1: Okay.  It's probably hard for people to believe now that that that you didn't have a facility at all but, but you say you didn't until you were a senior, and then the whites let you use their, their--
Speaker 2: Their, their gym, yeah.
Speaker 1: But for the games, not for practice, right?
Speaker 2: Oh, no, no, no, not for practice, for the games.  Because, you know, people paid to come in and--
Speaker 1: Now, did you, did, did you play organized basketball?
Speaker 2: Oh, yes.  I was on the first team for two or three, from, I think tenth and, yeah, tenth, eleventh, twelfth [grade], I was on the first team.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you liked baseball too, right?
Speaker 2: And yeah, I liked baseball.  We played baseball out, we just cut out us a place and, and played baseball.  Never had any base, I don't remember having a baseball, we made it.
Speaker 1: Now, how would you make a baseball?
Speaker 2: We made it out of, what did we make it out of?  We made it out of, we made it out of cloth and, and, and, and, and glue and that kind of thing.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So just get something to--
Speaker 2: Roll it tight--
Speaker 1: Roll it tight and--
Speaker 2: --and glue it.
Speaker 1: --and glue it down.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  That makes sense, I guess, yeah.  Yeah, I've heard this before, my father said he did the same thing.
Story_ID: 465167
Speaker 1: Did you go to high school in the same school [Grantville School, Grantville, Georgia]?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And how big was this school?  How, how many rooms?
Speaker 2: I think our school carried about a hundred, about a hundred, a little over a hundred students.  And that's from, you know, primer, elementary and high.  In fact, in, in my graduating class there were only, I think there were three, three of us--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --in the senior class.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, did you get very much, I guess counseling about what you could do, what your possibilities were?
Speaker 2: This Reverend Shropshire [James Shropshire (ph.)] when he came to be the principal at the school, he brought a lot of new ideas and, and brought in a lot of changes that we had not been exposed to before.  We were able to have field days, you, do you know what a field, field day, we had field days before they--
Speaker 1: And tell us what it is, so tell us, what, what is a field (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Field days is, were days where the students have a lot of activities at the school.  And many times the, the, these other schools would come to that and we would compete and that kind of thing.  And, and then we had conferences where Dr.--Reverend Shropshire would bring in counselors, particular for the junior and senior classes to talk them about careers and the future and, and opportunities and that kind of thing.
Story_ID: 465168
Speaker 1: What were you discussing in terms of, you know, your future in those days?  What, did you see yourself as becoming a (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah.
Speaker 1: --a reverend?
Speaker 2: Minister.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I, I wanted to go into the ministry.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And you said everybody was telling you, you should anyway, right?
Speaker 2: At the church [Greater Jehovah Baptist Church, Grantville, Georgia], and, and the principal [James Shropshire (ph.)] at the church [sic. Grantville School, Grantville, Georgia], and, and the principal.  I'm sure that there were other people in the school didn't think I fitted the, the ministerial pattern because of, I did everything that all the rest of the kids did.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, did you have pretty good speaking voice in those days?  Now, you, you've got a real resonant voice and everything.  Were you a good public speaker as a youth?
Speaker 2: They thought so.  They used--I was the captain of the patrol, we had a patrol and I, and I was the captain of the patrol so, I had to present myself with authority both in, in actions and in voice.  I did a lot of singing in church and I had a pretty domineering voice.  And I took that from my father [Walter Trammell].  My father was a, had a domineering voice.
Story_ID: 465169
Speaker 1: Now do you have a favorite song that you would sing in church or, or a trademark song or--
Speaker 2: Well, now, I can't remember.  And, you know, it has gotten so confused now because see I've been pastoring forty-one years here [Central Missionary Baptist Church, Dayton, Ohio], so, you know, it has kind of confused with, I can't think of what a song would have been down in, in Georgia, I can't think of one.
Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite one now that you (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Oh, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I have a, I had a, I have a favorite song now and I have the choir sing it all the, all the time.  It's, it's 'Hold On' ['Hold On (Change Is Comin')'].  And let me see how that go, The song is, "Hold On despite all of the things that may happen to you, you, you hold on because a, a change will come."
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I have a great investment in that.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.  I remember during the Civil Rights Movement Sam Cooke's 'Change Gonna Come' [sic. 'A Change is Gonna Come'] was a, a big hit.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: You know, when people thought of it in terms of the, the country changing.
Story_ID: 465170
Speaker 1: So when you were a senior did you know where you were gonna go to college at all?  Had that, did you work all that out that--
Speaker 2: Absolutely because our principal [James Shropshire (ph.)] again had gone to Clark [Clark College; Clark Atlanta University, Atlanta, Georgia] and he got us all scholarships and that kind of thing to Clark College and all of the students at Grantville high [Grantville School, Grantville, Georgia] that were going to college.  And remember I told you there was not, in my class there was only three in, in the class that was going to Clark because that was his alma mater.
Speaker 1: Say, did all three of you go to college?
Speaker 2: All three of us went, um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  Did you all go to Clark?
Speaker 2: All went to Clark.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  Did everybody graduate?
Speaker 2: I--no, I think one of the, I think the, I think one of the, there was two girls, no, two fellows and a girl, I think the one fellow went to the [U.S. military] service, he, he, he went on to service 'cause it was rough trying to go to school.  The scholarship, if I can remember, didn't even pay a good semester of your requirements.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So when you got to the, the campus did you have to get a job to try to make up the rest of that (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, I had, had to get a job, yes.
Speaker 1: Yeah, so, so what did you do as--
Speaker 2: I had two jobs.  I worked in the, I worked in the head of department's office.  And then I, they had a place in Atlanta [Georgia] at that time called the Rainbow Inn, I was, worked as a curb hop.  Do you know what that is?
Speaker 1: A curb hop?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: I think so but explain.  I think that's somebody that like, like a waiter but you go out to the car, right?
Speaker 2: Wait on cars, yes.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: It was an all-black drive in called the Rainbow Inn.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, this is 1954; is it?
Speaker 2: That was in, that was in '55 [1955].
Speaker 1: Fifty-five [1955], okay.  All right (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Fifty-five [1955], '56 [1956], yes.
Story_ID: 465171
Speaker 1: How did you like Clark [Clark College; Clark Atlanta University, Atlanta, Georgia]?  I mean was it, did you, was it what you thought it was gone be?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, well, I was excited about it--Clark.  I wished I had gone and this is interesting while you ask that question, yes, I liked Clark, and liked Clark very, very much.  It, it was coed that's, but I wished I had gone to Morehouse [Morehouse College, Atlanta, Georgia].
Speaker 1: Why?  You know (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Because--
Speaker 1: --I hear people say that but why?
Speaker 2: Well, because Morehouse had a certain status about itself and Dr. Mays [Benjamin E. Mays] was at Morehouse.  And the faculty at Morehouse that you encountered later on seemed to have had a greater interest in the future of the student.  Now, Clark was a Methodist school and I was Baptist.  Morehouse lent, lent itself more to the Baptists but, but it was the academic requirements, the, it's, it's, it's the standards that Dr. Mays set.  And it was him himself that impressed you so.  Not that my, Dr. Broaders [sic. James P. Brawley] at, at, at Clark was, was, was very, very good too but he was not Dr. Mays.
Speaker 1: Okay.  What was so special about Dr. Mays?  Did, can, can you remember when you first heard him speak?
Speaker 2: Oh, yes, oh, yes.  Dr. Mays could speak in, in, in such a fashion that would make you feel that you were right there where, where, whatever he was talking about, that you were encountering whatever the subject was, that you were a part of whatever he was telling you.  And he did, he was so graceful, so dynamic, and yet so down to earth.
Speaker 1: Can you remember something he said that, that stuck with you over the years?
Speaker 2: I, I remember--(laughter) isn't that interesting?  The only thing I can remember that he live- come out of South Carolina, down, down highway 19 [U.S. Route 19].
Story_ID: 465172
Speaker 1: Any professors from Clark [Clark College; Clark Atlanta University, Atlanta, Georgia], that--now, now could you take courses at Morehouse [Morehouse College, Atlanta, Georgia] while you were at Clark?
Speaker 2: You could, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  'Cause they're all, they're together.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: It's supposed to be Clark--
Speaker 2: And Spelman [Spelman College, Atlanta, Georgia].
Speaker 1: --then Atlanta University [Clark Atlanta University, Atlanta, Georgia], Spelman and (unclear)--
Speaker 2: And Morris Brown [Morris Brown College, Atlanta, Georgia].
Speaker 1: --Morris Brown.
Speaker 2: And I took courses at all of 'em.  But yes, I, my favorite, my favorite professor was C. Eric Lincoln.  Have you ever read any of his work?
Speaker 1: Yeah.  C. Eric Lincoln, right, has a book, it's a book of--
Speaker 2: The black--
Speaker 1: --biographies of famous black people.
Speaker 2: And, and the black--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --experience.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Religion and the black experience.
Speaker 1: Right, right, right.
Speaker 2: C. Eric was my professor of logic and religion and philosophy.  And he also was, what else did he teach?
Speaker 1: I know he was one of the men who tried to revitalize the American Negro Academy.  He formed the Black Academy of Arts and Sciences [sic. Black Academy of Arts and Letters].
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Right?
Speaker 2: I think he was at, was it, at, at he, he passed at, he left Clark and went over to, oh, what's the name of this school?  One of the big schools.  But he was my favorite.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Yeah, a lot of people, you know, point to him as a, one of the leading intellectuals of that time period.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: C. Eric Lincoln, right.  They used to give awards, he used to give an award for academic accomplishments--
Speaker 2: Um-hm, yes.
Speaker 1: --and that sort of thing.  He, he was the head of the Black Academy, right.  So did you, what courses did you have from you?  Did you, did you--
Speaker 2: I took logic under him and--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --religion and philosophy--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --under him.  And several other courses, but he was (unclear).
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, do you remember [HistoryMaker] Vincent Harding?  Was he there at that time?
Speaker 2: I, I remember, Vincent Harding?
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: He was, must have been a student.
Speaker 1: He probably was when you were there.
Speaker 2: He was a student.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: I remember Vincent while I was, yeah, what, what happened to him?
Speaker 1: Vincent Harding became like a leading theologian and he was head of the Center for the Black World [sic.] in Atlanta [Georgia], in Atlanta--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --for many years.  The, yeah, the, what do they call it, the IBW, the, yeah, the Center for the Black World, him and, it was, there were quite a few scholars in residence, it was Bill Strickland [William Strickland], and Walter Rodney who wrote 'How Europe Underdeveloped Africa,' all of those people were associated with the Institute of the Black World.  I'm sorry, I, I, IBW they call it, The Institute of the Black World.  It was there in the early '70s [1970s]--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --through 1970.  [HistoryMaker] Howard Dodson who is head of the Schomburg Center [Schomburg Center for Research in Black Culture, New York, New York] was there.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I--
Speaker 1: And, and it was quite a few of 'em.
Speaker 2: Bobby [ph.], (snaps fingers) let me tell you, Bobby, was another classmate that went on to Boston University [Boston, Massachusetts] and he taught, I'm trying to think of his name.  I'll tell you who was a, he was behind me, who was there when I was at Clark, the young fellow who was the chairman of the board at the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People].
Speaker 1: Oh, Kweisi Mfume?
Speaker 2: Unh-uh.
Speaker 1: No, not him.
Speaker 2: Unh-uh.
Speaker 1: Oh.  Not--
Speaker 2: From Atlanta (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Was it [HistoryMaker] Julian Bond?
Speaker 2: Bond--
Speaker 1: Bond.
Speaker 2: Julian.
Speaker 1: Julian Bond, okay.
Speaker 2: Julian.
Speaker 1: Right.  Yeah, his father was the president I, I think of Atlanta U [Atlanta University; Clark Atlanta University, Atlanta, Georgia] at one point, Horace Mann Bond?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  Yeah, yeah, Julian Bond, right, right.  So, there, there were quite a few, you know, powerful brains around there in those days?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: You know, and you had the, the theological school, what, what was the, the big theological school over there?
Speaker 2: Gammon [Gammon Theological Seminary, Atlanta, Georgia].
Speaker 1: Yeah, Gammon Theological Center there.
Speaker 2: Then, and then they, they combined it with (unclear).
Story_ID: 465173
Speaker 1: At Clark [Clark College; Clark Atlanta University, Atlanta, Georgia] I mean, did, was there any, any course of study that really drew you in, you know, in, more than anything else?
Speaker 2: I, be, like I said to you, I was, my mind was made up to be a preacher and I was very interested in the religious that is and philosophy studies.  The others, certainly, certainly, yeah, I've told you, I've always been interested in history and I, I did a lot of study in history.  And I, I, I was so crazy about World War II [WWII] because I had two brothers in World War II in the 92nd Division [92nd Infantry Division].  You know, I'm sure you've heard of the 92nd Division.
Speaker 1: The what now, what?
Speaker 2: The 92nd Division--
Speaker 1: Oh, okay.  Not--
Speaker 2: --in World War II.
Speaker 1: And tell us about the 92nd.  That's, that was the--
Speaker 2: Well, of course, it was all-black.  The 92nd Division, of course, trained in Italy with sticks, they had to go out--ammunition dumps with sticks, they were not given guns.  But and, of course, I, that, that was the division, the black division, the 92nd and the 93rd [93rd Infantry Division] that the Germans completely wiped out.  A lot of history about that.
Story_ID: 465174
Speaker 1: So you were interested in more contemporary history and--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --and, and theology?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, were you interested in theology from, more from a--I mean, did you, were, were you, I guess--
Speaker 2: Systematic theology.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Which is where my heart was.  I, I wanted to preach, pastor at church.  And impressed with the techniques of, of philosophy and, and theology and that kind of stuff, I--
Speaker 1: Well, you was in, now some people are more interested in just preaching, the techniques of how you move people with, with words.  Then some are interested more in philosophy like Howard Thurman and, and people like that.  So, I mean, and, you know, some are even interested in the ministry for how to move, you know, from the standpoint of how you move the community.  You know, we interviewed [HistoryMaker] Vernon Dobson in, in Baltimore [Maryland] and he had come from a long tradition of organizing in his church [Union Baptist Church, Baltimore, Maryland].  The, the, I think, the founder of that church organized the basis for the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People].  He pushed Du Bois [W.E.B. Du Bois] to do the organizing that create, created the NAACP.  So, so did you (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I like how, I enjoyed Howard Thurman's work.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I enjoyed the sociology and, and the psychology of religion.  I was interested, of course, I wasn't that interested in moving people in the church as much as I was interested in moving people in the community for service to the community.  I didn't just want to be a pastor of a church, I wanted to, I wanted to be involved in the, the struggles of the, the community against injust laws, unemployment, and all other kind of oppressive situations.  I wanted to be, I was an, I wanted to be a part of that.  So I, I did seek out professors to talk to me about how I should handle that as a pastor and you learn very quickly that that there are some techniques in the pastorial function that does not go along with the, the involvement of the street function.  It was some of 'em just strictly administrative.  You know, you learn how to administrate, the, the, the policies of the church and, and, and, and you deal with just that.
Speaker 1: Now, did, did you study any [HistoryMaker] Gardner Taylor when you were in--
Speaker 2: I, I studied more Gardner Taylor after I came out of--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --Clark [Clark College; Clark Atlanta University, Atlanta, Georgia].  In fact, I got all the, basically all of his books down--
Speaker 1: Now (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) down stairs.
Speaker 1: --at, at Clark were they teaching nonviolent direct action as part of the, the, the school of theology?
Speaker 2: No, no.
Speaker 1: Or were they teaching things like, well, you know, we, we mentioned Howard Thurman's 'Jesus of the Disinherited' [sic. 'Jesus and the Disinherited'] or, or more--
Speaker 2: You could go to the library and, and, and pull up some of the Howard Thurman's work.  In fact, I got his work too.  And, but as far as having that as a course, not at Clark (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Were you, were you--
Speaker 2: --not when I was there.
Speaker 1: --were you exposed to Reinhold Niebuhr and--
Speaker 2: Reinhold Niebuhr and his brother [H. Richard Niebuhr].
Story_ID: 465175
Speaker 1: So you had C. Eric Lincoln there on campus [Clark College, Clark Atlanta University, Atlanta, Georgia] and was, was, was his message, what, now was he, now you started in '54 [1954]?
Speaker 2: Five [1955].
Speaker 1: Five [1955], okay.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Now, that's just as, as the events in Montgomery [Alabama] were just starting to take shape.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And the, the Montgomery Bus Boycott, I guess, is 1956.
Speaker 2: Right (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Right?
Speaker 2: But--
Speaker 1: So--
Speaker 2: Okay, yeah.  You're, you're talking about the actions.
Speaker 1: Yes, uh-huh.
Speaker 2: But it started earlier--
Speaker 1: Sure.
Speaker 2: --than that.
Speaker 1: But so the cla- I mean, so, as, I know the discussion around a lot of those issues--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --in terms of theology--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --and social action--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --were going on in, in schools all over the country and, and in, you know, communities all over the country.  So were you, were, were you really seeking that kind of discussion when you, in those days?
Speaker 2: Didn't seek it as much as I was, because of what I was interested in it put me in, in positions for that involvement with other students.  For example, I was in, involved with several students from Montgomery and from Birmingham [Alabama] and, and we got involved in that kind of stuff.  We would go down to, down to Del--not Delta [ph.], what was that church called?  Hm.
Speaker 1: In Atlanta [Georgia]?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  It was on the other side of King's [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] church [Ebenezer Baptist Church] (snaps fingers).
Speaker 1: Wheat Street [Wheat Street Baptist Church, Atlanta, Georgia]?
Speaker 2: Wheat Street.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: When the old man was there, and I got his works too.  And he would talk to us about how to conduct ourselves in this business of confrontational action against unjust policies.  You know, he used to go down, I remember, he used to go down, Holmes, William Holmes Borders, and you remember him?  He was the pastor of Wheat Street.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: And he used to go down on, down on Auburn Avenue and, and go into the pool rooms.  And he actually was one of the first preachers that I saw that he could meet a guy at that level, at his level, and feel comfortable and the guy would feel comfortable at that--with him.  And, and they would enjoy, they would, they, they wouldn't try to hide from William Holmes, they would enjoy encountering him and he encountering them.  And at the end of most of the--he would go into the pool room and, and, and shoot pool with 'em, well that was just not something preachers did in that time because then you get labeled. But William would do that.  And at the end of all of what he would have done that day, he would tell them, "Come on down to see me, come on down to church."  And they would come 'cause they felt comfortable with Dr. Borders.
Speaker 1: Yeah, right, Dr. Williams Holmes Borders [sic.].  Did, do you remember John Wesley Dobbs in Atlanta?
Speaker 2: Yes, I remember John Wesley Dobbs.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Yeah.
Speaker 2: Absolutely.  So the actions of what was gonna happen in Alabama, the movement of what was gonna happen in the country, the, the, the feel outs started early, whether, you know, whether you were gonna be involved--
Story_ID: 465176
Speaker 1: Were people actually discussing nonviolent direct action then as a matter of discussion then?
Speaker 2: Not, not so much nonviolence as much as dir- dir- some kind of action.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Did they discuss the Gandhi [Mahatma Gandhi] philosophy in, was that part, part of the discussion as such?
Speaker 2: Here again, I don't remember that we discussed any theories as much as discussing something need to happen and whether you're gonna be involved or part of it, of something happening.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Say, you know, in Atlanta [Georgia], Doctor [Larry Crowe]--was, was violence.  You, you, you had to be prepared to go to war and just to survive.  Let's see, I had to walk through Vine, you ever heard of Vine City?  Vine City in Atlanta was a notorious area on the west side right down from Herndon Stadium [Alonzo Herndon Stadium, Atlanta, Georgia], where they found all those people had been killed and had, and had been buried in the backyard.  I used to have to walk through there and when I got off at night, to go home and, and you had to be prepared to, to battle, Doctor, or you better be a star, a running star.
Speaker 1: So people had to really prepare themselves for what they were gonna do, if they were gone do something?
Speaker 2: That's what I'm--
Speaker 1: Okay.  I see what you're saying (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) that's what I'm, that's what I'm saying.  And so--
Speaker 1: You couldn't go into it without, without--
Speaker 2: We talked about it.
Speaker 1: --some, some plan?
Speaker 2: So, you know, when King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] start espousing, listen, you got to, you got to have some endurance, see and that there, there is no bravery in fighting back, the bravery is remaining nonviolent, yeah, putting yourself out on front street and endure, the, the violence of someone else and to demonstrate your courage by not striking back.  But Doctor, now that's, that's tough stuff, see.
Speaker 1: And a lot of people can't handle that.
Speaker 2: No, no, no, most of us can't handle that, yeah, you may not hit back but you gotta say something.
Story_ID: 465177
Speaker 1: When the events of the Montgomery Bus Boycott started to unfold in 1956, what was your position?  I mean, how, you're a student but, but how did you feel about it?  Do you feel, I mean, what was the discussion among you and your friends and your teachers and--
Speaker 2: Frightened, frightened.  And what was gonna happen in Atlanta [Georgia], what was gonna happen on the campuses, whether or not we were going to gird ourselves to participate when it came to Atlanta or even travel to Montgomery [Alabama].
Speaker 1: Okay.  Did, so did, did any students actually try to go to participate in--
Speaker 2: Yes, some tried to go to Montgomery.  I don't know how much, we went one time, I don't know, we didn't participate, we went down there to one of the meetings and--
Speaker 1: Was it a group of theologic- theology students?
Speaker 2: They were just, just school (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Student in general?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Who led you, did you, do you remember?  Was Dr. Lincoln [C. Eric Lincoln] involved in any of this?
Speaker 2: Only, Dr. Lincoln was strictly our instructor on, on how to handle yourself and always remember to think, always remember to think logically.  I can remember who, a group of us went, I can't remember whether we just all got together and went to--
Speaker 1: Did you go down in cars or went in (simultaneous)--?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) In cars.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  Okay.  So what did you, how was, what, what impression did they make on you?
Speaker 2: That they were courageous people and that they were determined to, to bring some actions, and they were just tired of having to go through the Jim Crow kind of stuff.
Speaker 1: Now, who was at the meeting and did you recognize it, was, was this your first introduce- introduction to some of--
Speaker 2: That was my first meeting--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --with the people there.  King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] was not there.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It was some, some other folk who had called a meeting.  And it was not even at, it was not at, at their church.  It was at another church where people had gotten, gotten together.
Speaker 1: Now, did Dexter Avenue Baptist Church [Dexter Avenue King Memorial Baptist Church, Montgomery, Alabama]--
Speaker 2: It was not Dexter.
Speaker 1: Okay.  It was another--
Speaker 2: It was another church.
Speaker 1: First Baptist [First Baptist Church, Montgomery, Alabama], the, the one that Ralph Abernathy was the pastor of?
Speaker 2: It seem to me that it was--
Speaker 1: Or Second Baptist [Second Baptist Church; Eastmont Baptist Church, Montgomery, Alabama]?
Speaker 2: --it seem to me that it was at a Methodist church.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  Was, was Abernathy present?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Unh-uh.
Speaker 1: E.D. Nixon or Rosa Parks or--
Speaker 2: No, no, not, not that I remember.  I don't remember any of the, those being present there.  I, I think the minister and some other people in the community was there discussing some of the things that were needed to be done.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Were they determined to keep the boycott going?
Speaker 2: They were determined to keep it going.  And they were having, trying to raise some, raise money if I can remember to, to do something, you know, 'cause we were the brokest one in the whole group.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And did the spirits of the community seem up still, you know?
Speaker 2: It was, it, it seemed kind of courageous, there was not a whole lot of folks at that particular gathering.  I think this was a church, the one that got people who they clogged, then we all went down there.  I think, if I remember that but it was not a whole lot of people there but those who were there seemed more determined to make certain that they don't lose heart in what they were doing.
Story_ID: 465178
Speaker 1: Well, what happened when you got back to campus [Clark College; Clark Atlanta University, Atlanta, Georgia], did--
Speaker 2: We talked about it and in the dormitories we talked about what, what we had experienced.  And, and then said that it, we need to prepare ourselves because it was gonna come to Atlanta [Georgia], it was gonna come to Georgia.  And sure, it wasn't too long after that, you remember that William Holmes led a march, do you remember the old philosophy that I'd rather push a wheelbarrow in hell or something, I can't remember how he had that.
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: But we just talked about what had gone on.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So from what I, what I've read now, tell me if I'm, you know, correct me if I'm wrong, it seemed as though, Benjamin Mays [Benjamin E. Mays] and some of the other elders in Atlanta were not in favor of student activism at that time?
Speaker 2: I don't, I don't know that they were or were not.  I know that they didn't give any time to it because they were strictly interested in the students getting an education.  And I don't know, I never was in the discussion with any of the, or in the presence of any of the presidents and leaders of the school or faculty members of--do to open and discuss what we're gonna do and get their position on it.  But it's not uncommon to believe that, you know, the, the real enthusiasts for the Civil Rights Movement was always students.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So in Atlanta, so when did you all really start getting active?  I mean, did you, had you graduated before they started getting active or--
Speaker 2: No, I hadn't graduated.  We, we start, as I told you William Holmes Borders start leading some demonstrations and we joined that and we would go to the Y [Butler Street YMCA, Atlanta, Georgia], on, on Auburn Avenue and have discussions.  Now, very little came out of that as far as I was concerned and several others 'cause we were getting near graduation.  And, and I knew that at that time my family had moved to Ohio, so I knew that I was gonna be going to, coming to Ohio.
Story_ID: 465179
Speaker 1: Now, is there, was there a reason why your family moved to Ohio?
Speaker 2: We had a brother here named Raymond [Raymond Trammell (ph.)], and my, my mother [Tommie Smith Trammell], he had been encouraging my mother to come and the life would be better for her and the minor children, there were three minor children here in Dayton [Ohio].  And, of course, she moved here and, and she moved here in '57 [1957] or '58 [1958] I believe.
Speaker 1: Well, tell us about your graduation [from Clark College; Clark Atlanta University, Atlanta, Georgia].  Did you, did, did anything happen down there in Atlanta [Georgia] before you graduated?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So what happened in, in your, at your graduation?
Speaker 2: I just came on to, after having finished came on to, I got married.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Did you meet a, a woman in, in, in Atlanta [Georgia]?
Speaker 2: Yes.  I married and came on to Dayton--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --because my mother was here.
Speaker 1: And did you have any job prospects here or--
Speaker 2: Really didn't.  I, I came because it was so, you, you remember that, and I believe that was Eisenhower [President Dwight David "Ike" Eisenhower] days wasn't it?
Speaker 1: Yeah, he was President.
Speaker 2: Yeah, Eisenhower.  And things were rough.  Pretty much, he, he must have been some kin to Bush [President George Walker Bush] because things was really rough.  But I came on and, and start looking.  I know I went a whole summer and couldn't find anything to do because there was just no work.
Story_ID: 465180
Speaker 1: But I got involved in organizations, man, what's the boy's name?  They had, SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee] here and, and, of course--
Speaker 2: And by--well, I don't think SNCC was here then but--
Speaker 1: Wasn't--
Speaker 2: No, no (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) was it SNCC?
Speaker 2: It was CORE [Congress of Racial Equality], you might have had--
Speaker 1: Or CORE.
Speaker 2: --you might have had CORE.
Speaker 1: CORE.
Speaker 2: Here (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Melvin [ph.], what was his name Melvin, (snaps fingers) hm, hm, hm, hm.
Speaker 2: Melvin?
Speaker 1: What was his name?  I think it was CORE.
Speaker 2: I know McIntosh [W.S. McIntosh] is West Side Community [West Side Citizens Council] (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, but I'm talking about, we're talking about now '60 [1960].
Speaker 2: Oh, okay.  I thought, now you graduated in what year in--
Speaker 1: In '59 [1959].
Speaker 2: And you, you moved here in '60 [1960]?
Speaker 1: Oh, yeah.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Fifty-nine [1959], '60 [1960], something.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Well, yeah, I think McIntosh is the group that's still going on and you had (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) well, we had a, we had a group here named--
Speaker 2: --CORE hadn't started yet.
Speaker 1: We had a group here that this fellow, we had a boycott against Joy Apartments [ph.]--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --rent.  That, that wasn't, that wasn't SNCC, (unclear) (simultaneous) --
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I think that, that was, it had to be, well, Joy Apartments, I think there you're talking about '62 [1962] or '63 [1963], then it was McIntosh with CORE then.
Speaker 1: And that was CORE?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, he went down and, and when they were in CORE because they switched, they had a West Side Citizens Council or Citizens Committee and then the, they, that dissolved when, you know, McIntosh, he always had a democratic organization, they would always vote him out (laughter) at a certain point.  But he would make sure it was democratic and then they'd vote him out.  But he, he--
Speaker 1: We got involved in--
Speaker 2: --and then he went on and formed the Dayton [Ohio] chapter of CORE.
Speaker 1: SCLC [Southern Christian Leadership Conference] had not come to Dayton--
Speaker 2: I don't think so.
Speaker 1: --then.
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: I don't know.
Speaker 2: And SNCC couldn't have come here until after 1960 'cause it was formed in '61 [1961].
Speaker 1: Yeah, maybe--
Speaker 2: Sixty-one [1961].
Speaker 1: --SNCC.
Speaker 2: You, you would have had the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] here--
Speaker 1: Yeah, I was in the, I was in--
Speaker 2: --doing, they might have been doing things, the NAACP Youth [NAACP Youth Council] and, and McIntosh would have been the two here, I guess, at, at that point.
Story_ID: 465181
Speaker 1: So you eventually got involved in the Civil Rights Movement here in Dayton [Ohio] with (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes.
Speaker 1: All right.  And you said it was Melvin [ph.] somebody--
Speaker 2: Yes.  Melvin, he's over in Indianapolis [Indiana] now.
Speaker 1: Oh, okay.
Speaker 2: You might remember him, he was at this, Mecca [ph.], you remember Mecca?
Speaker 1: Mecca, yeah (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Melvin--
Speaker 1: --I think I know what you're talking about.  I can't think of it now (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Melvin, I see he's in Indianapolis now.
Speaker 1: Okay.  But did, did he have like a church based group or was it like another (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Community--
Speaker 1: (Unclear).
Speaker 2: --he was head of what they called community, that's what the name of the, the community of, it was a community organization it was called the community organization that Dayton Community Organization [sic. Dayton Organization] that we used to meet and take positions and issues on things.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  Well, now, what were the issues in Dayton in those days?  You mentioned Joy Apartments [ph.].
Speaker 2: Of course, always poor housing and no jobs, police brutality, the, those were the basic issues if I can remember.
Speaker 1: Then employment, yeah, the employment issues downtown?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Yes, we demonstrated against Rike's [Rike-Kumler Company].
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: They would, they would not, they would not hire blacks.  And we had another store down here, that same store that McIntosh [W.S. McIntosh] came out of, not the jewelry, well it was next door to the jewelry store.
Speaker 1: Oh, at Kresge's [S.S. Kresge Company; Kmart Corporation] or, or--
Speaker 2: Hm.
Speaker 1: I know they, McCrory's [McCrory Stores], Kresge's, they boycotted--
Speaker 2: It, it must have been McCrory (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) Rike's.  McCrory's I know he, they, they did a--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --sit-in at McCrory's.
Story_ID: 465182
Speaker 1: So it seemed in those days, I mean, that the civil rights leadership had kind of, the, the organizations kind of shifted around a lot, you know.
Speaker 2: It, it did.
Speaker 1: It'd be one organization, then it would shut down and another one would start up and--
Speaker 2: Dobson [HistoryMaker Vernon Dobson] was involved--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --during those days and was quite active.  That boy named Melvin [ph.] and someone else, I can't--
Speaker 1: Now, do, do you remember the, did you go down for the March on Washington in '63 [1963]?
Speaker 2: Yes, me and my wife [Ann Walker Trammell] both went to--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --the March on Washington.
Speaker 1: 'Cause I know there are two, two organizing forces in terms of that and one was W.S. McIntosh and, and CORE [Congress of Racial Equality]--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --and then you had Miley Williamson and the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] had, had, had a group too going down, you know, a bus load, right.  And, and McIntosh had a train car with people.  I mean, so, how did you (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Did you know James Bailey [ph.]?
Speaker 1: Who was that?
Speaker 2: James Bailey.
Speaker 1: I've heard the name, I don't think I know him.
Speaker 2: We drove all night long to that.
Story_ID: 465183
Speaker 1: So you drove to the March on Washington with James Bailey [ph.], right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, so what was that like, I mean--
Speaker 2: It was a tremendous experience.  I mean, it was just, I mean, it was just a tremendous experience, to hear all those great speakers and to rub shoulders.  And I had a lot of my friends from Clark [Clark College; Clark Atlanta University, Atlanta, Georgia], one from out of South Carolina, I thought you were gonna call his name what, a while ago.  His father was a bishop, his father was a bishop.  I had not seen him for years and we met at the March on Washington.  Commi- oh, gee whiz, but anyway it was, it was really tremendous.  I don't think I've ever felt so involved in, in, in, in a time and place as I did there.  I, I, and I think there were a lot of great speeches.  King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] was just, was, of course, super but there were a lot of great speeches there and a lot of good people.
Story_ID: 465184
Speaker 1: I mean, so when you came back, I know in '63 [1963] Dayton [Ohio] was in the midst of probably the most intense part of the civil rights struggle, that, the campaign, that rights campaign.
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.  I think the (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Were, were you a big part of that or did you--
Speaker 2: Yes, we, we marched, Johnson, what, what was his--
Speaker 1: Floyd Johnson?
Speaker 2: Floyd Johnson, you remember Floyd?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Floyd Johnson was a--the fact of the matter is that Floyd Johnson was one of the main leaders of that, of that march.  But, but we felt so full when we came back and, and felt the need to do something in our community.  I think that was the same year that SCLC [Southern Christian Leadership Conference] came here.
Speaker 1: It could have been.
Speaker 2: And I think that was the same year that SCLC came.  And--
Speaker 1: I know 'cause some people splintered off from CORE [Congress of Racial Equality] and got involved with (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, I think--
Speaker 1: --SCLC.
Speaker 2: --Henry Parker--
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 2: --was it Henry Parker or was it, who was it--?
Speaker 1: From, from Shiloh [Shiloh Missionary Baptist Church, Dayton, Ohio], Reverend Parker from Shiloh?
Speaker 2: Not--
Speaker 1: Not, not him?
Speaker 2: No, not, I don't think it was him.  Who was that?  I can't remember now but SCLC, he's dead, now, hm--
Speaker 1: I know Jessie Gooding was involved in it and Floyd Johnson, W.S. McIntosh, Reverend Dunson, Walter Dunson [Walter J. Dunson, Sr.].
Speaker 2: It was one other fellow, it was one other fellow.  He died about five years ago.  He got a son preaching.  He, he--we were great friends.  Can't bring those names up like I used to.  But at any rate, SCLC got started and, of course, I think, that was when King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] came here shortly after then, I believe.  At the--
Speaker 1: Now, do you remember the, there was a point when the paper, Dayton Daily News was vilifying the black activists and as they, and they said that they were harassing Rike's [Rike-Kumler Company] they were, they were, they were crucifying Rike's for no reason.  Rike's, Rike's was not really doing anything wrong and they, and there was a point where the media had turned a lot of people against what the movement and Mahalia Jackson came to town and gave a benefit concert at Welcome Stadium [Dayton, Ohio].  That was in '60 [1960], the summer of '63 [1963], do, were you, were you there for that?
Speaker 2: I don't know whether I was there for that--
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.
Speaker 2: --or I had gone down south to do something down south.  You know we were in and out--
Speaker 1: Of--
Speaker 2: --I'm not sure.
Speaker 1: --of Birmingham [Alabama] then? Because the, the Birmingham campaign was going on down south.
Speaker 2: Yeah--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --at Alabama.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: I'm not sure where I was.  But I do know that the newspaper really, well, Cox [Cox Enterprises, Inc.] had never been friends to the movement though so it's no surprise, you just name a time the movement went on and you know a time that Cox vilified us.
Speaker 1: Now, there was, I don't know if you remember this but, you probably do but the, the paper suggested that the Rike's meet with responsible Negro leadership and not the kind that would dare march around in the store with signs and that sort of thing.
Speaker 2: I just, I don't remember that statement but I'm not, I'm sure that it went on.  Yeah, because that's something that the Dayton Daily News would, would have done, would have said.
Speaker 1: Yeah, with suggestions that the, the leaders of the Movement were somehow misguided, they were being led by the wrong people that, you know.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: That Negroes were being led by the wrong type (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And, and they had the, they had their choices of who they should meet with, you know.  They, they were, they have always had their choices of who they should move.  And we didn't care too much about who they meet with so long as meetings were taking place on these issues, see. Because if the problems are getting solved it was not gonna prevent the movement from going on.
Story_ID: 465185
Speaker 1: Now, did you participate in that march inside of Rike's [Rike-Kumler Company]?  'Cause I know there was supposed to be one outside, it was the biggest one they organized.
Speaker 2: I was outside, I never did get to participate in the one inside.
Speaker 1: Okay.  'Cause it rained that day, I think, and they were trying to, the reason why they went inside is because they, it rained outside.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Did, were you, well, I know, there were, maybe, maybe eleven to twenty people arrested, I'm not sure but--
Speaker 2: Yeah, Johnson was, Floyd Johnson was one of them.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And McIntosh [W.S. McIntosh] was arrested.
Speaker 2: Yeah, right.
Speaker 1: And they accused him of being a Communist I think--
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: --at one point.  Yep.  So they all eventually were released.
Story_ID: 465186
Speaker 1: What was your involvement with SCLC [Southern Christian Leadership Conference] like?  I mean, how did you, you, you first got involved in what about '63 [1963], you said?
Speaker 2: About '63 [1963] or '64 [1964], I can't remember.  After we came back, after we, after we had come back from Alabama for something, I heard King's [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] speeches, we started getting involved with SCLC.  I was trying to think of the guy's name who then was leading the charge, Piner [William Piner] was one of them, Reverend Piner.  Do you remember him?
Speaker 1: No, no, but what--
Speaker 2: He--
Speaker 1: Yeah. How, how do you spell his name?
Speaker 2: P-I-N-E-R.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: He was, I think, he was chairman.  And the guy who was president--and he was president twice--was the one I'm trying to think of.  But it, it was pretty much confined itself to a lot of different meetings and a lot of planning.
Story_ID: 465187
Speaker 1: When we, when we went to the, when we went to the March on Washington and (unclear), I think then, I think we invited King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] here.  I'm trying to see what that, he came out to the University of Dayton Fieldhouse [Thomas J. Frericks Center, Dayton, Ohio].  Do you remember that?  I never, I remember the statement because he was late, you, you remember the statement that he made that when we, we waited and waited and he came in and said that I rather be Martin Luther King late than to be the late Martin Luther King and that was one of his familiar sayings because he was always late to most places that he, he went.
Speaker 2: So what was your impression of Dr. King in, in those days?
Speaker 1: I thought he was a god in those days.  You know, I just thought he was the, I thought he was fearless, I thought he was so articulate, I thought he was God sent, I thought he was a Moses, all of the, the great things that you can think about a leader.  And I used to latch on to his every word.  And, you know, and as I grew into the movement most people would take exception to this statement, Martin King would generally be called in to really, to really expose things nationally, to make it a national kind of thing.  It just, but the guy that was, Crowe [Larry Crowe], the guy that was the, that was the movement maker was that boy, Fred Shuttlesworth [HistoryMaker Reverend Fred Shuttlesworth].
Story_ID: 465188
Speaker 1: Okay. [HistoryMaker] Reverend Fred Shuttlesworth who--
Speaker 2: He was--
Speaker 1: --led the Birmingham [Alabama] campaign before Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] got there.
Speaker 2: And it was the (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) He relocated to Cincinnati [Ohio] later.
Speaker 2: Yeah, he was, he, he was the president of the ministerial, Birmingham Ministerial--
Speaker 1: Association.
Speaker 2: --Association [Birmingham Ministerial Association].  And because I just believe that had it not been for Fred Shuttlesworth the movement may have taken a different turn, it may have taken longer, maybe I should say, it may have taken longer to develop and to accomplish some of the things that the movement accomplished.
Speaker 1: So are you, are you saying that he, his, what, what are you saying that his, what did he do to make it happen faster?
Speaker 2: His determination, fearless, his, I guess, I wanna say when, when the Kennedys [Robert F. Kennedy and President John Fitzgerald Kennedy] for example would call Martin and would suggest to Martin why don't you just cool down and, and stop, stop the demonstrations and that kind of thing.
Speaker 1: Yeah, they were concerned about the election of 1964--
Speaker 2: Yeah.  And--
Speaker 1: --at the time in '63 [1963], yeah.
Speaker 2: --and, and Shuttlesworth would say not here.  And, you know, and there was a time that the (unclear) was sick in bed and he got up out of his bed and led the demonstrations when the White Citizens' Council was meeting and the suggestions seemed to have come from Washington [D.C.] that see what they were gonna do, Shuttlesworth would not, I'm saying my experience with Fred Shuttlesworth and studying his works and then, and studying a lot of things after the movement had gotten really gone, I saw that he was the real--
Speaker 1: You know, it's even more dramatic than you describe.  The time that he was sick and led the demonstration the next day?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: They dynamited his home--
Speaker 2: Well, you know about that (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) with him in the bed.  He told us in, to, to our face and the, the pictures on it, the Internet right now.  A white photographer for The Birmingham News shot the picture of this smoking home.  He was, he yelled to the police from down in the basement in the rubble he said throw me my robe, I don't have any--it blew my clothes off.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: And the next day he led a demonstration--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --to the shock of the, of the Klan [Ku Klux Klan, KKK] and the Whites Citizen Council, they couldn't believe that he could survive that.
Speaker 2: He, he--
Speaker 1: And he walked out unhurt.
Speaker 2: He was a, he was just a stonewall that was, and, you know, King had the faith and had the vision and, and had all that but it, it seemed to me, that Fred Shuttlesworth was the glue underneath it too because--
Speaker 1: So you're saying, I guess, are, are you saying that that if it was left to Dr. King and maybe some others they might have slowed down a little bit but Shuttlesworth would not let it go?
Speaker 2: I am, I'm suggesting the possibility, you never can tell what would have happened 'cause it didn't happen.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: But if, if you see the role that Shuttlesworth played in see, because surely King, and surely Kennedy, Bobby Kennedy, was, was asking, asking them to hold the, not to, to cancel the demonstration and a lot of the, a lot of the elders were going along with that.  And some of that's in the book 'But for Birmingham' ['But for Birmingham: The Local and National Movements in the Civil Rights Struggle' Glenn T. Eskew], have you read that?
Speaker 1: No, I haven't, sir.
Speaker 2: 'But for Birmingham.'  And it was suggested in that book that it had not been for Birmingham that the movement would have taken maybe different turns or even taken a lot longer to manifest itself and to the accomplishments that it really gained.  And it doesn't take anything away from Martin King because he was certainly the God sent man of the era.
Story_ID: 465189
Speaker 1: Now, what was it, what, what year was it that Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] came here and spoke at, at UD Arena [sic. Thomas J. Frericks Center, Dayton, Ohio]?
Speaker 2: I thought it was--
Speaker 1: Do you remember?
Speaker 2: --I thought it was, I thought it was '63 [1963] or '4 [1964], it might not, I'm not sure.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Don't hold me to that, I'm not sure.
Speaker 1: I think it may have been '64 [1964] but anybody watching this if they wanna find out, I know they can but I just wanted to--
Speaker 2: Go to (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) see if we could make it easier.
Speaker 2: Then just go to--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --the, the Internet and find it.
Story_ID: 465190
Speaker 1: So now, what was the big, the first big campaign of SCLC [Southern Christian Leadership Conference] here in Dayton [Ohio] that you worked on?  Or was your focus then SCLC 'cause I'm, I'm assuming that it was, you might have been doing something else.  Had, had you started a church by that, that time?
Speaker 2: Oh, yes, I had--the church, our church--
Speaker 1: Did you join a church or start one?  How, how (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I had joined, I had joined a church.  And I did not start a church, I joined a church and as, as the results of my joining I was called to pastor it after the other pastor left.
Speaker 1: And what was the name of your church?
Speaker 2: Central Missionary Baptist Church [Dayton, Ohio].
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.
Speaker 2: I've been there forty-one years.
Story_ID: 465191
Speaker 1: We were, you see we had a lot of movements going, some of 'em was ministerial movements.  The ministers in Dayton [Ohio] were very active at that time.  Then it was the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People], see, then it was the Dayton Organization, and I still wanna, I still wanna push CORE [Congress of Racial Equality] in there some (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, CORE--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --went out after 1963, I mean it, McIntosh [W.S. McIntosh] left CORE and--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --got involved in a version of SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee] in '64 [1964].
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: And then the Dayton Organization that was McIntosh too I think (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And Melvin [ph.].
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: I can't think of his last name.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And we were doing a lot of things, we were demonstrating against unjust, police brutality was a main thing, and no jobs downtown, of course, and, of course, the rentals, I told you about the rental things.  So we were just doing a lot of, rejecting the, the old, old ways, the old conditions, the old customs.
Speaker 2: Was Dayton, was Dayton, what was the atmosphere in Dayton?  Was it like a, what kind of segregation and discrimination was going on here?
Speaker 1: It had, you, you would think that coming to Dayton that you had a lot more opportunities and freedom but it was kind of, it was a subtle racism, it, it was a subtle kind of thing.  You, you knew that that the white guys were gonna get the best jobs and get the jobs first, you, you knew that 'cause it was clearly focused that way.  You knew that if you got in trouble downtown with somebody the police car were called, that if it was a white person that the police were gonna take the side of the, the white person.  You knew that if you got stopped by a police and you're driving the wrong kind of car, you know, you're gonna be profiled for that.  So, you know, there was segregated housing, very clear segregated housing, you know.
Speaker 2: Yeah, it was always clearly a black side of town and a white side of town (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) That's right.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And I was thinking of something.
Speaker 2: To the extent that if somebody got in trouble on TV and they said a West Side [Dayton, Ohio] man, you knew--
Speaker 1: Yeah, that's right.
Speaker 2: --what a West Side man was.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  Do you know where the railroad, the railroad was still the Mason-Dixon line you see, that we always lived on the other side of the railroad track.  And then the side that the train did not go over the bridge so we could drive under but go right through the center.  So it was, and it was even in school.  You remember at Roosevelt [Roosevelt High School, Dayton, Ohio] that they had separate facilities at Roosevelt.
Speaker 2: For black, black and white students?
Speaker 1: That's right.  You remember the Nettie Roth days.
Speaker 2: Yeah, the principal, Nettie Lee Roth?
Speaker 1: Yeah.  Racist to the bone and did not hide it.
Speaker 2: So did you, were, were you solely a pastor?  Did you get involved in other activities?  Did you--
Speaker 1: No, I got involved with every organization that was doing something that I could get involved with in addition to pastoring.  You know, we opposed them building a school out, out there and naming it Nettie Lee Roth in the middle our, in the middle of our community, see.  Those, those were things that, some of the things that we opposed.  I'm trying to think of this other company downtown that we, (unclear) them but, yeah, I got involved with organizations.  And, and NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People], I'm, I think, I, I'm, I'm, I'm a life member of the NAACP, and, of course, life member of the SCLC [Southern Christian Leadership Conference], life member of the Urban League [National Urban League], everything that I could get involved in, I got involved in it.
Story_ID: 465192
Speaker 1: I think, after there were demonstrations down in City Hall [Dayton, Ohio], they, I think, do you remember the, I guess, that that was 1962 or '63 [1963] when Don Crawford [Don L. Crawford] became the first (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah.
Speaker 1: --black city commissioner?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  Did, did you participate in that campaign too?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay. All right.  You know, and the, do you think it's made any difference at, you know, we had our first black mayor in 19- was it 1970--
Speaker 2: With McGee [James H. McGee].
Speaker 1: --two [1972] or '3 [1973], James McGee?
Speaker 2: It made some difference.  I didn't think it made any difference at the time, I didn't think it made any difference at the time because I did not think that the blacks who were in power were at- using that power to correct the ills that we had in this community.  We, our streets never, still suffer from the lack of repairs and whether it was a black or white mayor, and, and snow still laid on our side streets much longer than they did the white street.  I did not think at the time, and it took me a long time to think that it made some difference.  And, Dr. Crowe [Larry Crowe], let me tell you what finally started me to coming around.  I remember McGee opposing that 675.  And I remember him pounding away at opposing that 675.
Speaker 1: Yeah, Route 675 [Interstate 675] was like a link between--
Speaker 2: Yes (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) yeah, I-75 and--
Speaker 2: And 70 [I-70] (unclear)--
Speaker 1: --70, yeah.
Speaker 2: And I did not understand the ramification of it then, I thought he should be involved in opposing some other things in the inner city that were creating a problem.  I thought he ought to be demanding for more employment for, and, and, and, and that better schools and that kind of thing.  But what I came to learn is that he, his vision that if that 675 had gone in, the city was moving west at a certain time, that the city was going to follow and business was going to follow.  As, you know, the waterways and the highways, and what McGee was trying to prevent from happening that has happened now.  That when the city, when they put those highways in this city, business people moved out along those highways and that kind of thing, and has left our city a ghost town practically.
Speaker 1: And that's what a lot of people in other cities have said, they call this ur- Negro removal instead of urban renewal.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Was that what pretty much what--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --you're talking about?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: The creation of the interstates over top of the black community--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --the leading somewhere else to--
Speaker 2: So, so you, so it did make a difference 'cause he stood against that highway and prevented it from going in for a long time.  See, and it was only after he got out of office that they got, began to put that highway in seriously.  And as you mature you have a better, and, and as you learn you have a better understanding of the politics of what goes on and the climate of your community.
Story_ID: 465193
Speaker 1: Now, you were strictly a pastor for many years, right?  And but at some point you became like a, an employee of the Montgomery County Welfare Department [Montgomery County, Ohio]?
Speaker 2: I have always been a pastor and a social, what they call, activist.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And, and then, and, and worked outside of the church.  So I became the, the deputy director of income maintenance at the Montgomery County Welfare Department, I believe, in '66 [1966], it may have been '66 [1966], no, it was '72 [1972].  And got in some real trouble because so often the, the federals or state officials would come in and investigate those departments and they came in I, I believe, in '74 [1974] or '5 [1975] and when I was deputy director and, and, and I was accused of allowing needy families to get welfare department, get welfare assistance without their being eligible and they had a sheriff investigation, and I was convicted and sent to prison for a year because I refused to plead to anything that they, they asked me to plead to a non in prison, and the count, what, what was it?
Speaker 1: Pleading to a lesser count?
Speaker 2: Much lesser.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I was adamant about it, I refused utterly because the people, I had made the statement that I would prefer a person to get the assistance and found out that they were not eligible than to deny them and later found out that they were eligible.  And (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now, now, this is a sensitive point that a lot of needy people complain about that when they go to apply for assistance, they're treated like criminals and they're, they're raked over the coals and they're denied over and over and then they have to constantly come back and renew to get the assistance.  So you're saying your attitude was to believe them ahead of time and then, you know--
Speaker 2: Well--
Speaker 1: --not to make them go through that (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And I taught the staff that and, of course, I had some people in there that just didn't go for that kind of stuff.  And the next thing I knew they were, had an investigation going and had people coming in saying that, that, that I knew they were not, not eligible and, and I would not plead and, and I was sent to prison, sent to Chillicothe [Chillicothe Correctional Institution, Chillicothe, Ohio].  And I sealed that plea to get out but they finally released me after maybe nine month or a year or something like that.
Speaker 1: Who defended you?
Speaker 2: I had a, two attorneys.  And, and I don't know what happened, it, it was an unpopular situation because they convicted during that year, during this scandal about twenty-five folk of different things and they tried to say that I was a kingpin and that it was an organized effort.  But because that fell right through and they brought people in to say that, that I had given them identification cards, people that didn't, couldn't even identify me at the crowd, they didn't know when a prosecutor said now point out Raleigh Trammell [HistoryMaker Reverend Raleigh Trammell], the, the person couldn't point me out because they didn't, the person didn't know me.  And people that they had were drug addicts that they had made deals with. But anyway, I was convicted and sent to prison.
Story_ID: 465194
Speaker 1: And when I was released, I came back and came back to the church [Central Missionary Baptist Church, Dayton, Ohio], the church waited for me 'cause they knew what it was.  And start organizing in the community again, then I became the president of the Southern Christian Leadership Conference.
Speaker 2: Now, when did you become president?
Speaker 1: I became the president of the Southern Christian Leadership Conference in 1981.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: I went to prison in '79 [1979], came back in '80 [1980], and became president of SCLC in--
Speaker 2: Now, now, did people generally stand behind you or, when you were in trouble or how did, how did things go?
Speaker 1: It's just like you're going, much like you go in the hospital, when you go in the hospital the first three or four days you can't rest, people are always there but if you stay a week it slowly default.  I had good support but people are not gonna get themselves and, and go out of their way necessarily and if you're gone they'll soon forget about it.  And, of course, I had good strong support back here in the community because as soon as I came back I start organizing--
Speaker 2: Okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) again.
Story_ID: 465195
Speaker 1: And organized the biggest Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] celebration that we had--they have in the country because we have a whole week of celebration.  We, we changed this, the street out here to Martin Luther King, Jr. Way.  We had Mrs. King [Coretta Scott King] come here and, and bless the street the day it was changed.  The federal judge, Judge Walter Rice [Walter Herbert Rice] was a part of that.  And so we organized the community in celebration, Martin Luther King.  We have the biggest banquet, the biggest march.
Speaker 2: There are at least, I know in 2006, I came back I noticed there was like five or six banquets, breakfast and lunches and banquets during that (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah.
Speaker 2: --week or the week of his--
Speaker 1: We start at the first of January with the Emancipation Proclamation celebration and we make that a part of the Martin Luther King celebration.  And, of course, we go right on down the line.  We have a, we have a student participation, youth participation, they have workshops, we have a, a musical, we have a worship service, we have a cultural service, then we have an ecumenical service, and then we have a march and, of course, we have the, what is called the Presidential Banquet.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And--
Speaker 2: And as many as ten thousand people march down 3rd Street which is now Martin Luther King Way.
Speaker 1: And we have it coming from four ways.
Speaker 2: Okay.  That's right, that's right.
Speaker 1: We have the biggest come from west but it comes from four ways and meet up there in the community (unclear)--
Speaker 2: You mean downtown at the, at Courthouse Square [Dayton, Ohio], right?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: We meet up at the Courthouse Square all four ways, south, west, east, and north.
Speaker 2: Now, this year the governor of Ohio spoke--
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: --Governor Ted Strickland, the mayor, of course--
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: --Rhine McLin.  This is, it's the largest Dr. King march in the country.
Speaker 1: Yes.
Story_ID: 465196
Speaker 1: And, of course, I became national chairman of the board of directors of SCLC [Southern Christian Leadership Conference] in 2004, I believe, and still serve in that capacity.
Speaker 2: Okay.  And you hosted the national convention in 2006, did you not?
Speaker 1: We've had it twice.  We hosted it in '92 [1992] and then hosted it again in 2006.
Story_ID: 465197
Speaker 1: Some may say today, you know, what, what work is left for the Southern Christian Leadership Conference now?  What did--it's now it's 2008 and, you know, seem like all the marches should be over with now or, or we're, the civil rights bills have been passed.  What, what, what would you say to people that ask that question?
Speaker 2: They're killing themselves because let me just tell you, racism has been institutionalized.  And where the individual does not have to, have to discriminate against you now, the, the institution does it on their behalf.  So it is less likely to be put on front street by the individual.  You have to have these organizations, the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People], the Urban League [National Urban League], SCLC, so that you can keep those issues on front street that create divisions among people.  And, and, and organizations such as the civil rights organizations have opportunities to bring people together.  We, if you notice our celebration we have made it a community celebration and we have been able to teach the whole community that you have a part in Martin Luther King's [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] dream and you have an opportunity now, it's not just a black dream, it's a people dream.  And if we start participating in that dream and taught them to understand each other and start working with each other, then, I believe, that we'll have a great opportunity to get along with one another.  And certainly have the opportunity to prevent these injust things from happening to either one of the group.  We have a great legacy to teach our folk.
Story_ID: 465198
Speaker 1: We opened in Dayton [Dayton, Ohio] the first gun buy back shop where we bought thousands of guns off the street and had them melted down at the police department as a way of saying, you know, violence affect all of us and guns kill.  And America has never got it in their head that you cannot solve all of the problems with violence.  Someone has said that America has tried to use a gun to, to solve a problem with everything but a flood since you can't shoot a flood but every other thing, she try to solve them with guns.  And, and, and we try to teach that guns kill.  And so we have a gun buyback program to get guns off the street.
Speaker 2: Now, Dayton is usually the homicide leader in the state of Ohio, highest homicide rate in the state normally.
Speaker 1: In proportion to population.
Speaker 2: Yes, that's right.  And, you know, which seems incredible considering we've got Cleveland [Ohio] and Cincinnati [Ohio], bigger cities and, you know, you'd think would be more dangerous than, especially Cleveland, you would think it would be more dangerous than Dayton but, you know, Dayton used to win city beautiful awards and such and still had this high homicide rate particularly in the black community.  What do you think accounts for the, you know, Dayton being more violent than it, it should be or even the other cities?
Speaker 1: There are so many, I, as, you know, if I could ever, Mr. Crowe [Larry Crowe], if I ever got the answer to that I think I probably could sell it all over the world at a high price.  I don't know.  Except, Dayton is a manageable city that doesn't get managed.  And one of our problems is that we don't have a, the, the people who run this city doesn't seem to be interested in what goes on in West Dayton [West Side, Dayton, Ohio] as they should.  The little black kids were meeting up downtown in the center of the city and they had a big problem that I'm sure you read about that.  And, and what they did they got the police to stand down there and they hired police just to stand down there and keep those kids from accumulating there.  And then they called us and said what do you think?  And we said, well, why should we get excited about that when we have the same problems out here in Gatlinsburg [ph.], (unclear) you don't have no police coming out there to take care of it out there.  Drugs flourish in this little small town.  I don't know what the answer is, about why (unclear), why it's so violent.
Speaker 2: So what, I mean, it seems as though every year you get a lot of positive feedback from the Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] activities and, and the, just the idea, I mean, to me it's, it's amazing too, I mean the, the high homicide rate is amazing but it's amazing that ten thousand people, mostly youth, get out in January and march two miles down 3rd Street [Martin Luther King, Jr. Way] across the bridge to downtown for Dr. King, to honor Dr., Dr. King.  I, you know, how, how, how is that accomplished?
Speaker 1: Mr. Crowe, let me tell you, we don't go far enough.  We, we make the celebration and the legacy just that, a celebration and we throw the confetti and then we go home and go back to our areas.  But we have been preaching, SCLC [Southern Christian Leadership Conference] has been proclaiming let's don't stop there.  If you can organize that many people just in January what would happen if we extend it out through the next several months, that we bring people together and talk about loving one another and nonviolence and respect one another.  It, if you, if you make it a celebration only then when it's over, it's just like a dance, the folk go back to doing what they've been used to doing.  And so we have been saying, listen, we got more at stake than to just have it at the, on the coldest month of the year and people respond, what would happen if we use these energies and this expertise to bring people together continuously throughout the year.  Wouldn't you think that we would save some people?
Story_ID: 465199
Speaker 1: Tell me, we, we always ask this question.  When you look back on everything you've done to this point, is there any major thing that you would do differently now if you could?
Speaker 2: I don't know how major it is but there, there are a lot of things I think I would, well, several things that I would, I would do differently.  I think I would spend more time trying to get the schools and the churches committed to working in unison with the civil rights organizations and the business partnerships.  I think I would spend more time trying to do that.  I think I would spend some time trying to say to the, to the Area Progress Council [Area Progress Council of Warren County], do you know what that is?  The Area Progress Council are generally those people that meet in secret, that runs the city, (clears throat) that, that hands down the directions.  At one time we had started to get in the bankers and the, and the church ministers and the CEOs, we would, we would, we would meet once a month and talk about the needs of the community from that perspective, from the ministers perspective, from the business perspective, from the schools perspective, and we were doing real good.  I would spend more time trying to get organizations like that together and probably less marches, less demonstrations.
Story_ID: 465200
Speaker 1: Now, what's the relationship now between the SCLC [Southern Christian Leadership Conference] and Jesse Jackson's [HistoryMaker Reverend Jesse L. Jackson] Operation PUSH [Rainbow/PUSH]?  I know that they split years ago, I mean, or PUSH kind of morphed out of SCLC.  Is there a working relationship now?
Speaker 2: Yes, there is.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Right.  But, you know, Jess- Jesse, let me tell you, Jesse had, can draw a, a camera on him if he went to the deepest part of the jungle, they'll find their way there to film Jesse.  He, he, and but there is a relationship between Charles Steele [Charles Steele, Jr.] and Jesse and Al Sharpton [HistoryMaker Reverend Al Sharpton].
Speaker 1: Okay.  And are, are you, do you have a close working relationship with, or, or, or how active now is Joseph Lowery [HistoryMaker Reverend Dr. Joseph Lowery] in SCLC?  Is he still--
Speaker 2: Joe, does not participate in SCLC except he'll call me and tell me what I need to do and but, but I have a good relationship with him.  SCLC now is a board driven organization now, and I hope you know that.
Speaker 1: Okay.  No, I, I don't think the public really knows either, you know.
Speaker 2: Yeah, it is a board driven organization.  It is no longer a president driven organization.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you're chairman of the board, right?
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: All right.  And how, how many members?
Speaker 2: Fifty-two.
Speaker 1: All right.  And they're from, are they from all over the country?
Speaker 2: Yes, um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  Well, what's the, what, what would you consider to be the bastion of SCLC right now?  Is it still the South or--
Speaker 2: Yes.  Right.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  Is it difficult for you, now you are like from the South and went--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --to school at Clark [Clark College; Clark Atlanta University, Atlanta, Georgia] is, so does, does that make it easier for you to be the board chair than if you were from Dayton [Ohio], you know, originally or something?
Speaker 2: No.  My being chairman of the board has nothing to do with my being from the South.  I think our having brought SCLC north, the way we brought it north, we had, and it, we had what was called the best celebration, the best convention ever here in Dayton in '92 [1992].  Jesse Jackson and those came here and proclaimed it was the best one they'd ever had and been elevated to another level.  It is because of the way we do things in Dayton.  Dayton has led the SCLC for many years, I think you will see up on the wall a couple of (unclear) where we have won the chapter of the year award.  It's the way we do things in Dayton, the way this whole organization of SCLC work here that, because I served as the vice chair to the board for eight years before I became chair.
Story_ID: 465201
Speaker 1: Now, when you look back on everything you've done to this point, again, what today would you consider to be your legacy?
Speaker 2: I think the people of Dayton [Ohio] has given a great deal of support to the leadership of SCLC [Southern Christian Leadership Conference], and in such a fashion that we have been able to put together the leading Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] celebration in the country and it is modeled throughout the nation and I'm proud of that.  It was not just me, it was all the folks that we bring together.  The--we, we have what is called a Martin Luther King committee for which I chair, we bring 'em together and we sit down and plan the celebration.  I am really proud of that Martin Luther King celebration because people look forward to it.
Story_ID: 465202
Speaker 1: What are some of your hopes and concerns for the black community today?
Speaker 2: (Pause) I believe that, I, I, I believe that black people have historically been church oriented people and I wish that we could return to the challenge of the church because just about time, I believe, that we were making really good strides as a people, we were, we were conscious of who we were and where we fit in history, we start leaving it, leaving the church.  And I, and I, and I just, Mr. Crowe [Larry Crowe], I just strongly believe that in addition to a educational need, in addition, in addition to a social need and a historical perspective, you need a good spiritual foundation.  And I think that's the, that's the thing that has carried the African American through the ages and through the struggles is because they had a good spiritual foundation.
Story_ID: 465203
Speaker 1: Can you tell us a little bit about your family now?  You, you have, do you have any children?
Speaker 2: Yes. I have two, two daughters and I have a wife.
Speaker 1: Okay.  What, what are your daughters' names?  What, what are their names, if you care to give them (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) My oldest daughter is named Angela Goodwine [Angela Trammell Goodwine].  And the youngest is Cheryl [Cheryl Trammell Spencer],   C-H-E-R-Y-R [sic.].
Speaker 1: And have you been married a long time?
Speaker 2: Not very long, I, I think I'm celebrating my forty-ninth--
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Okay.
Speaker 2: --year.  That's, that's not very long is it?
Speaker 1: Right (laughter).
Speaker 2: I had one wife.
Speaker 1: What's your wife (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) My wife is named Ann [Ann Walker Trammell].
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  And so, okay.  We should, I guess, we should pause here and change.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Two minutes.
Speaker 1: Two minutes?  Oh, okay.  Well, I do have one last question.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: That is similar to legacy but a little bit different.  Sir, how would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: That I made a difference in the lives of my fellow men.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well, thank you very much.
Story_ID: 465204
Speaker 1: That's Raleigh Trammell [HistoryMaker Reverend Raleigh Trammell].
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Aha.
Speaker 1: The guy that's--
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  What year was that taken?
Speaker 1: I, I think that was taken in 1990.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.  Good.
Speaker 1: Are we ready?
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Yeah.  Put up another one.
Speaker 1: Here's another one.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 1: That's Raleigh Trammell.  And that's a 1983 picture with a suit.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.  That's all we gotta do is just--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  --keep rolling through these.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  How about this?
Speaker 1: Are these your daughters?
Speaker 2: I, I can't see, can, can--
Speaker 1: You with the babies, you got two babies.
Speaker 2: Can you see?
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  I'll let him look at it.
Speaker 2: Let me look at it.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  We've got it on both cameras so he--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  --he speaks to it now.
Speaker 2: The one with two babies in your arms, are those your daughters?
Speaker 1: No, the--this is, this is at the church [Central Missionary Baptist Church, Dayton, Ohio] and I blessed two babies.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Well.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 1: That looks like in the '70s [1970s], look at the Afro in that.
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, it's that, that is '70s [1970s] or '60s [1960s] or something.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.  Now, we'll move to this one here.  (Unclear) very clear, okay.
Speaker 1: About the best I can do.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  All right.  How about this one, sir?
Speaker 1: That's my wife [Ann Walker Trammell] and myself and that was in the '70s [1970s].
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.  Any particular occasion for that or--
Speaker 1: San Diego, California, is above your head, I don't know (unclear)--
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Vacation behind your head.
Speaker 1: Vacation.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.  Next.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: Let me get a little closer, I can't see that.
Speaker 1: This is a march isn't it?  It look like that's a picture of a march.  (Unclear).
Speaker 2: See can you see.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 2: Can you hand it to me?
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Yeah, we've got it recorded, Larry [Larry Crowe], so if you wanna just--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  We'll do it through the monitor when he needs to look at it.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: I don't know what year it is but, can you see it?
Speaker 2: That's one of the Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.], that's one of the Martin Luther King marches and that's in the '90s [1990s], I believe.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Good enough.
Speaker 1: Here's another saying march, I think.
Speaker 2: Okay.  This is a Martin Luther King march in the '90s [1990s].
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.  All right.  Next.
Speaker 2: It's you, your wife, and Hillary Clinton [Hillary Rodham Clinton].
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Yeah.  That's Mrs. Trammell, Raleigh Trammell, and Hillary Clinton, and that was in May of '07 [2007].
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 1: And this looks like Tyree Broomfield, Jesse Jackson [HistoryMaker Reverend Jesse L. Jackson], and you, and I don't know who's on the end.  Is that Ty- Tyree Broomfield up front?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  The police chief of the City of Dayton [Ohio] back in those days.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.  You gotta get him to say that.
Speaker 1: Yeah, go ahead and say it.
Speaker 2: You need to let me see it because I--
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  (Unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) (unclear) see who the rest of the people are.
Speaker 1: Jesse Jackson next to him speaking, right there (unclear) to his face, that's Jesse and then you and who?
Speaker 2: Taylor Jones [ph.].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: You just said that you were--
Speaker 2: And Tyree Broomfield, Jesse Jackson, Raleigh Trammell, Taylor Jones, the newsman.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.  Good we got those.
Speaker 2: All right.  Here we go.  That's a family reunion it looks like, yep.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.  Just tell us (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It has, it has the sign that can explain it.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  You want me to hand it to you.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I think it's--
Speaker 1: Taylor [ph.], Trammell, Hill [ph.], Smith family reunion.
Speaker 2: My brother, Richard [Richard Trammell], and my sister, Barbara [ph.] at a family reunion, Trammell, Smith, and Hill.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.  Okay.  We got 'em.  If you wanna hand 'em to him it's okay.
Speaker 1: (Unclear).  You, Jesse Jackson and who is that?
Speaker 2: That's Mrs. Trammell with me and Jesse.
Speaker 1: Who is this on the outside?
Speaker 2: Okay.  Don't know who it is.  That's probably somebody with Jesse, I believe, and that was in 2008 or 2007.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I know who that is too and I can't think of who he is.  And I've seen him before.  I know (unclear).
Speaker 2: I got the wrong glasses, I can't (unclear)--
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 2: Let, let me see 'em first and I can--
Speaker 1: I see, Joseph Lowery [HistoryMaker Reverend Dr. Joseph Lowery]--
Speaker 2: Yes, and--
Speaker 1: --and you and (unclear)--
Speaker 2: John Darragh [John K. Darragh].
Speaker 1: John Darragh, okay.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Well, that's a good description.  Okay, just say that for the camera now.
Speaker 1: Joseph Lowery, former president of SCLC [Southern Christian Leadership Conference], Raleigh Trammell, and John Darragh, former CEO of Standard Register [Standard Register Company; Taylor Communications].
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.  And I got it.
Speaker 1: This is you and your wife.  (Unclear) it's like the '80s [1980s] maybe, I don't know (unclear).
Speaker 2: Hm, okay.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  All right.
Speaker 2: That, that was about my wife, Ann, and myself and I think that was '86 [1986].
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.  Next.
Speaker 2: This is, oh, from the RTA [Greater Dayton RTA, Dayton, Ohio], I know him, you know--
Speaker 1: Whitmore.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, Anthony Whitmore.
Speaker 1: Yeah, okay.
Speaker 2: Anthony Whitmore, Raleigh Trammell.  This is recently it looks like.
Speaker 1: Yes.  That's Anthony Whitmore and Raleigh Trammell and that was in 2008.
Speaker 2: And Anthony Whitmore is with the--
Speaker 1: RTA.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: You know, Anthony, huh?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I know Anthony.
Speaker 1: He's a good man.
Speaker 2: (Unclear) yeah, he was, he was a good man.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.  What else?
Speaker 2: This look like Pops Staples but I know it's not (laughter).
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  What else do you have here?
Speaker 2: (Unclear).
Speaker 1: Oh, yeah, that's Raleigh Trammel, and Dr. Shaw [William J. Shaw], president of the National Baptist USA, Inc. [National Baptist Convention, USA, Inc.] (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): (Simultaneous) Woah. Okay.  Now, we gotta, yeah, we gotta--
Speaker 1: Right, yeah.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  --not have the old photo up when he says that 'cause then they'll get confused.  Okay.  So again say who that is.
Speaker 1: That's Dr. William Shaw president of the National Baptist USA Incorporated and Raleigh Trammell.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.  Good.  Thanks.  Next.
Speaker 1: Okay.  You want it in the frame?
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Yeah, take that out of (unclear) we got a blank slate next to it.  Okay.  Good.
Speaker 1: Hm.
Speaker 2: It's the SCLC convention looks like, I--Yes.  This, Raleigh Trammell and, and that's my sister, Alice [ph.] and we are, my daughter, Cheryl [Cheryl Trammell Spencer], we're at the SCLC convention.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I don't know who that is.  Better leave that one.
Speaker 2: I know Clarence Bowman is the only one I know.
Story_ID: 465205
Speaker 1: That's Raleigh Trammell [HistoryMaker Reverend Raleigh Trammell].  That look like one of my school pictures.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Yeah.
Speaker 1: I was trying to rest.
Speaker 2: Were you at Morehouse [Morehouse College, Atlanta, Georgia] then?
Speaker 1: Clark [Clark College; Clark Atlanta University, Atlanta, Georgia].
Speaker 2: I mean, Clark, right, yeah, all right.  In the '60s [1960s], '60s [1960s].
Speaker 1: Look at that haircut.
Speaker 2: Between '50 [1950]--
Speaker 1: Oh, about '57 [1957].
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Good enough.  Next.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Oh, yeah, you on this.  You, that's Darragh [John K. Darragh] , Lowery, and the reverend on the end (unclear) who's now in Cincinnati [Ohio].
Speaker 1: That's Raleigh Trammell, Bill Ogman [ph.], and Joe Lowery [HistoryMaker Reverend Dr. Joseph Lowery].
Speaker 2: Well, yeah.  Oh, I'm working, right?  Yeah, I'm working right
Speaker 1: And John Darragh.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Well, I thought it was--
Speaker 1: And we are at the--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] celebration.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Very good.  We got that one.  What else?
Speaker 1: Here we go.
Speaker 2: You ought to have a family picture over there somewhere.
Speaker 1: You have one of the whole family?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  That's Raleigh Trammell in one of my robes, church robes, and that would have been in '93 [1993].
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  All right.  Very good.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Let's see.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Whoa.
Speaker 2: (Unclear).
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 2: And this is--
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  And that's gonna be the finger on the edge.
Speaker 2: Yeah, old finger on the edge thing here.  Let's see.  Right.  That's like new.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  (Unclear).
Speaker 2: That's the late Reverend Saxton [ph.], the late, late Reginald Byers [ph.], that's Raleigh Trammell bending down and that's at Central Baptist Church [Central Missionary Baptist Church, Dayton, Ohio] where, where the church is, is--
Speaker 1: That's your church?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Can we get a timeframe perhaps?
Speaker 2: Yes, I, I'm sorry.  I should have told you.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Well, that's okay.  I know you were working.
Speaker 2: Nineteen sixty [1960].
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 2: Sixty [1960], no, it's in the '70s [1970s], look at the Afro.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  (Laughter).
Speaker 2: Everybody's got a big Afro that's why it would be after '68 [1968].
Speaker 1: (Unclear).
Speaker 2: Around here, around in Dayton [Ohio] we didn't have those Afros.
Speaker 1: Okay.  I'll have to take your word for it but I think it was the '60s [1960s].
Speaker 2: (Unclear) it's not '60 [1960], you know, people had the short Afros (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  (Simultaneous) All right.  How about this one?
Speaker 2: That's Raleigh Trammell.  And that was in '94 [1994].  I was being inducted into civil rights--
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.  Next.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: That's a friend of mine, Reverend Dr. Willie Wells [W.O. Wells, Sr.] and Mrs. Wells [Anne Ruth Wells], my wife, Ann [Ann Walker Trammell], and Raleigh Trammell.  We're on vacation and, and, that that should have been in the '90s [1990s].
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So we'll do one in, what, well, we'll do this one, everybody's in that one (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  (Simultaneous) Yeah, let's do that one.
Speaker 1: (Unclear).
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Go ahead.
Speaker 1: That's my wife and my daughter, Angela [Angela Trammell Goodwine], and my daughter, Cheryl [Cheryl Trammell Spencer] and myself.  And that is a 1990 picture.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Very good.  Next.  That's a (unclear) big one.  Okay.  Tell us about this one.
Speaker 1: That's my mother [Tommie Smith Trammell] and father [Walter Trammell].  And, and I have no idea--
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  (Laughter).
Speaker 1: --when that picture was made.
Speaker 2: Nineteen twenties [1920s] it look like, Reverend, because of the clothes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  All right.
Speaker 1: Twenties [1920s] or '30s [1930s].
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.  Then good.  I have it.
Speaker 1: You really, really can't tell can you (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Unh-uh, unh-uh.
Speaker 1: They're fairly young in here, they're not that old (unclear).
Speaker 2: (Unclear) in that.
Speaker 1: Oh, are you sure I didn't jump in there and--
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.  Tell, tell us a little bit about this photo, when it occurred and what the event was?
Speaker 2: This is the Martin Luther King march.  And it's, looks like about '90 [1990], '95 [1995] or thereabouts.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  There's a big shadow on the lower right.  Do we know, is that like a (unclear).
Speaker 2: No, it's Larry Crowe (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  (Simultaneous) Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: (Unclear).
Speaker 1: (Laughter) (Unclear).
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  (Laughter) All right.  Are, are, you in there?  Can we identify your location or can you even, can we even get you closer (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yes, he's in the sixth row wearing a blue--
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  (Laughter).
Speaker 1: No, (unclear) I have no idea.
Speaker 2: Let, let, let me get closer to that, I can see, I can tell, I'm sure I'm in it.
Speaker 1: 'Cause you're probably wearing your hat and everything, right?
Speaker 2: Well, I don't know, I usually dress up with--
Speaker 1: Yep, a hat and tie match, I know that but I can't see.  Let's see.  Scan across here.
