Story_ID: 70767
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe, I'm the interviewer today.  Our videographer is Scott Stearns.  Sir, could you please state your name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: My name is Harry C. Tartt, H-A-R-R-Y, C as in Charlie and the last name is T-A-R-T-T.
Speaker 1: And what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: Date of birth was October the 16th, 1908, Biloxi, Mississippi.
Speaker 1: And, what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: My occupation is public relations officer at the Gulf Coast Community Action Agency.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And you are retired from a number of other occupations which include?
Speaker 2: To include the United States Army, the United Methodist Church, Mississippi Public School System, those three.
Speaker 1: Okay.  You did have a career as an actor too for a while?
Speaker 2: Mm-mm.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And tell me what is today's date?
Speaker 2: Today is November the 12th, 2002.
Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: We are in Gulfport, Mississippi at St. Mark United Methodist Church in Gulfport.
Story_ID: 70768
Speaker 1: Okay, now, Reverend Tartt, before we get into depth, there are five "People" Magazinish-type questions that we always ask, and they just require a brief answer, and the first one is, what is your favorite food?
Speaker 2: Favorite?
Speaker 1: Food.
Speaker 2: Food?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Oatmeal.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: Color?
Speaker 1: Uh-huh.
Speaker 2: I'll say blue.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, do you have a favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Yes, spring.
Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Easter.
Speaker 1: I didn't say holiday, but what is your favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Monterey, California.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Beautiful.  And do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: Yes.  "Keep a green branch in your heart and for sure, a robin will come."
Story_ID: 70769
Speaker 1: Okay.  Reverend Tartt, can you tell us the names of your parents and spell them for us and can you give us the dates and their birthdates and place of birth as well?
Speaker 2: My mother's name is Beulah Tartt, B-E-U-L-A-H, she was a--maiden name, Charles, C-H-A-R-L-E-S, T-A-R-T-T, my father's name is Seth, S-E-T-H, T-A-R-T-T.  I don't recall their date of birth.  I'd have to go back to my calendar for that.  Both deceased.
Speaker 1: Were they born here in Mississippi?
Speaker 2: My mother's born in New Orleans [Louisiana], my father's born in the Meridian area.  He never did tell me what specific place.  Meridian, Mississippi.
Speaker 1: Now, did they tell you stories or pass down stories about how they were brought up or any stories about your ancestors going back into the 19th Century, I mean, how far back can you take your ancestors?
Speaker 2: Unfortunately, they didn't tell me anything. I knew my grandmother.  In fact, I lived with my grandmother.  She used to be with us a time.  She never did tell me anything about her life in New Orleans.  My mother never told me anything about her life in New Orleans.  And my father, who grew up in the Meridian area, never did tell me anything about his life.  Only thing I knew about what they did then he was an organist.  He couldn't read a note, but he could play anything that he has heard.  Neither had finished a grade school education.  There was a struggle for life, and we were busy, it kept me busy, and we didn't have time to reflect upon or sit down and talk, except we read the Bible, kept up with that, both belonged to church, very religious people, but they never discussed with me anything about their background, unfortunately.  So I'm left in the dark as to where they came from, except that I know they must have dropped out of school very early to start work as it was for most African Americans at that time.
Speaker 1: Do you know anything about the origin of your name, Tartt with two T's?
Speaker 2: No, I don't know what that name--first time, last week, I saw a writer by the name of Tartt, a Caucasian, first time I've seen that name, even in Chicago, when I was living there some years ago, in 1937-38 (1938), there were only three Tartts in the telephone directory of Chicago [Illinois].  But what that name is rather its German or whatever, I do not know.
Story_ID: 70770
Speaker 1: Okay.  Can you tell me something about your father [Seth Tartt]?  You said he was an organist?
Speaker 2: He was an organist.  He could play anything that he would hear it one time and he'd go right to the organ or the piano and play it, reproduce it.
Speaker 1: He had no formal training?
Speaker 2: He had no formal training.  His background, he didn't finish the sixth grade, but he could--he could play music, by ear, play it by ear.
Speaker 1: Okay, he could read and write and everything, right?
Speaker 2: Oh, yes, both were literate, they both could read and write and very active in the community.  They belonged to all the-the Knights of Pythias and the Odd Fellows and all that kind of thing and taught Sunday School, superintendent of Sunday School, very active. I remember a time we'd go to prayer meeting, sometimes he and I were the only ones at the prayer meeting.  My mother [Beulah Charles Tartt] was a Sunday School teacher also, very religious people.  My grandmother, I know, was Catholic.
Speaker 1: Is this your mother's mother?
Speaker 2: Yeah, that's Theresa Charles, my grandmother.  I do not know my grandfather's name.  I never heard--no one spoke of a grandfather.  But Theresa Charles is my grandmother, and she lived here in New Orleans and finally moved to Chicago and started working in the stock yards at the present in Chicago during the '30s' [1930s].
Speaker 1: Your grandmother?
Speaker 2: My grandmother.  Moved to Chicago during the '30s' [1930s] along with thousands of others who left the State of Mississippi to go find work in the stock yards of Chicago and also in the steel mills of Chicago at that time.
Speaker 1: Now what denomination were your parents?
Speaker 2: My father's A.M.E., African Methodist Episcopal, my mother was Catholic, but she turned to join with my father.  My mother was Catholic, naturally, because of her mother was Catholic, and I was christened Catholic, but I grew up under my father's roof, who was Protestant so we all became Protestant.
Speaker 1: What was the name of the A.M.E. Church you all attended in Biloxi [Mississippi]?
Speaker 2: St. Andrews in Gulfport [Mississippi], St. Andrews A.M.E. Church in Gulfport.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That's where we--
Speaker 1: Gulfport, okay.
Speaker 2: --In Gulfport, right.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I don't--I do not remember anything about Biloxi except they told me I was born there, that's the only thing I knew about Biloxi.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you remember any outstanding personalities at A.M.E. Church when you were growing up that came through the church?
Speaker 2: Mrs. McGougan.  She belonged to St. Paul A.M.E. Church in the principle part of Gulfport, the main part of Gulfport.  She was an outstanding missionary as I heard, had gone to Africa, gone to other places.  She's the most outstanding woman that I heard of during that time.
Speaker 1: And how do you spell that?
Speaker 2: McGougan.
Speaker 1: Yeah, how do you spell that?
Speaker 2: McGougan, M-C-G-O-U-G-A-N, McGougan, as I recall.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 70771
Speaker 1: And, can you--what about your mother [Beulah Charles Tartt]?  Can you tell us something about your mother, what kind of a person was she and what did she do?
Speaker 2: My mother was the kind of person who was very religious also.  She--coming from New Orleans [Louisiana], she sort of dealt with voodooism too.  She believed in--if you put blue something on you or somebody came to your house on Monday before twelve o'clock, that was bad, if you met a cross-eyed person, that was a bad, but she--she had that kind of thing.  I supposed that's because most people during that time were touched by this voodooism that they had in New Orleans.  But she was a staunched--she became a Protestant though and very religious person.
Speaker 1: Did she ever make any potions or any voodoo?
Speaker 2: No, she never did, but she just believed in all that kind of thing.  And see anything that happened, she tried to trace it to some kind of background of voodooism why this happened.
Speaker 1: All right.  How did your father feel about that?
Speaker 2: Well, he ignored it completely.  But he came from a region where they didn't know anything about that kind of thing so he--it just--it was foreign to him, so he just ignored it completely.  But I would hear my mother speak about what happened here, that "somebody must have put some blue something under--under the steps," this kind of thing and that's why this happened.
Speaker 1: Now your mother, she was basically a housewife?
Speaker 2: Basically a housewife with six children.  At that time she spent most of her time at home.  Now and then she would take in washing, that is go down on the beach and bring some clothes and come back and wash em then take them back downtown.  But basically she spent most of her time with her children.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now there are six of you and what are the names of your brothers and sisters and where do you fit in the order?
Speaker 2: I'm the oldest and Leo, the second, he's deceased then Hazel is in San Francisco, my sister, and she's ill now.  Julius is in San Francisco also and Edward, the youngest is in San Francisco, Paul, deceased, he served in military for a short, short while.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 70772
Speaker 1: Can you tell us about the neighborhood you grew up in and Gulfport [Mississippi]?  And tell us about some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up in that neighborhood in Gulfport?
Speaker 2: In what is called North Gulfport I grew up in, and very few families there, about twenty-five families.  Everybody knew each other.  There were no roads or no streets, no lights, just had a path, you make a path from one place to another.  I remember we had wood stoves during that time, so we had to go out and chop wood, bring wood in for the stove, clean the soot out of the chimney on certain times.  Each family or each house had a pump.  Everybody had to pump the water.  Each person has its own water system, but that water could not be used for washing clothes, it would turn what our elders said were yellow.  So we'd have to go to a pond somewhere and get some--bring some water in for washing clothes.  The clothes were brought in--the water was brought in and put into a large pot on the outside, and the clothes were boiled and get a broom stick and start churning in the clothes, put bluing in it, what was called, it was a blue chemical they had and start churning the--churning the thing.  During hog-killing time they kill a pig or a hog and when it's real cold, that and if you kill a hog you called your neighbors in and give them some of this or whatnot then they take the rest of it and salt it down, salt and then whatnot, nothing was left, used everything.  You take the oil from the animal and mix it with acid, it makes soap, and I don't know what they did with the hair.  Oh, I think the only thing was lost was the voice of the animal.  Everything else was used.
Speaker 1: That's pretty efficient use.  Efficency.  Well, go ahead.
Speaker 2: Oh, yes.  School was two miles away, and you go right straight down the railroad track, and I counted those cross ties from my house to the school.  I knew exactly how many they had, everyday I'd count them, I know how many they had.  There were no free books.  You had your own book or you didn't have any or you borrowed one.  There's no such thing, and of course you had to fight the snakes too.  A snake-bitten me once or twice and--but that was just a normal thing.  We had steam engines running during that time and then you had to be careful because they hit a animal, cattle or whatnot, then you'd have to steer clear of that.  The people are very friendly.  Now nobody went hungry.  If you ran out of food then all the neighbors would come and pound you.  That pounding mean, I suppose that mean a pound of sugar, pound of this and a pound of this, so that everybody looked out to somebody else.  Nobody would say, well, that's his business, no.  And I remember a time they pounded us.  My father [Seth Tartt] was out of work.  He used to go out and dip turpentine.  What that mean by dip turpentine is that a pine tree you take a certain kind of special axe, cut it so that the oil would run down and from that would be made turpentine from that all kinds of chemicals to be made out of that.  All your work--manual labor was very common during that time on the railroad track, everything was done by labor, the cross ties, the rails, everything was picked up and the spikes were driven by hand, everything was manual at that time.  They had--they had in my community, one man owned a car.  And it's strickly African American Community, but only one car--man owned a car.  Our family was very poor, we didn't even have a horse and buggy or--I didn't even have a bicycle.  I used to dream about it, but I never had one, uh...
Story_ID: 70773
Speaker 1: We had shotguns where we go out and hunt birds and get birds or rabbits if we could then come back and then go fishing.  Go fishing and catch crab, there were abundance of seafood at that time, so you would have a--so nobody went hungry.  And each family had a little garden so you'd had your own supply.  Each family had chickens and pigs.  We had a cow, one cow and we had many pigs, many chickens, so you was self-sufficient there in the community.
Speaker 2: Now, was your father [Seth Tartt] sharecropping or did he own--
Speaker 1: Oh, no.  See, he worked at a fertiliz--what they called a fertilizer factory, where they made fertilizer that was shipped up in the inner part of the state [Mississippi] where they do a lot of farming.  And he tested the chemicals.  His job was sort of a special job there. He tested the chemicals.
Speaker 2: --So basically they rent the place that they lived on or did they own it?
Speaker 1: We owned our place.  We bought a house of our own.  We lived on a company property.  This fertilizer had some houses, we lived there for a while, but then he finally bought his own little house.  We never did get enough money to buy paint to paint the house, I remember that.
Story_ID: 70774
Speaker 1: So, that, you know--so you, so you were born in 1908 and you were raised, I guess, before 1920, you were pretty much--you grew up--
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.  Went to school in what they call Gulfport School (Colored). And teachers at that time, the black teachers, you could teach here in this state when you finished high school.  You'd go down to a place called Gulfside and take the examination and then some of you teaches.  Some of em hadn't even finished high school were teaching, but you had teachers teaching in schools who had only a high school education.
Speaker 1: --Did you feel that some of teachers weren't qualified really to teach anybody?
Speaker 2: Well, in a sense, technical, they weren't really qualified because they didn't know anything about child psychology or hardly about school, techniques, management of children whatnot, but in their heart, they had the children at heart, and that made the difference.  I think that made up of some of the difference.  They had high expectations of their children and that makes the difference in the classroom.
Speaker 1: So the community you described really seemed to be one where people kind of stick together and looked out for one another?
Speaker 2: It was a community.  They weren't individual families, they were really a community that when one person got in trouble, the whole neighbor moved in that direction to find some kind of relief for that family.
Story_ID: 70775
Speaker 1: Now, what kind of a little boy were you when you were little?  What did you like to do?
Speaker 2: I liked to shoot marbles when I was a little boy and shoot marbles that I was so anxious that you'd get on your knees and little marbles and draw a ring and shoot marbles and that was the only shooting we did during those days.  Unlike today, shooting marbles.  And the greatest offense was shooting marbles on a Sunday.  But some adult, didn't matter who it was would come to say, "You get off your knees right now," and it doesn't matter whether they were related to you or not, you will have to.
Speaker 1: So what were the expectations of youth on a Sunday, I mean, what were the youths supposed to do on a Sunday?
Speaker 2: A Sunday, that meant all day, you go to Sunday School.  It's forbidden to go to a movies on a Sunday, so you went to--the only place to go was Sunday School and the church and then you go back to church that evening.  They had no movies, they had movies but, I mean, you wouldn't dare go to a movie on a Sunday.  So the church [St. Andrews A.M.E. Church in Gulfport, Mississippi] was the center, social center, even the community center.  You either went to church and socialized, that's where you met your girlfriends or you didn't meet anybody at all, because there was no other place.  They didn't have any black theaters--movies.  They did have one but it was depressed, wasn't the kind of thing, but even so the community was so religious until they watched every move and they watched where you were going and where you--how you acted.
Speaker 1: What other things that you liked to do when you were a little boy, were you involved in church activities?
Speaker 2: Oh, yes.  I was very much involved from the very beginning, I was always in Sunday School, I took my niece to programs, I was in programs even though I didn't have any shoes, but I would make speeches and I was a--I was a good little boy in the community.  Sometimes the other boys were sort of naughty and whatnot, but I was considered the good little boy in the community.
Story_ID: 70776
Speaker 1: Okay.  What about school.  Did you like school, I suppose you did?
Speaker 2: I was crazy about school, even snake-bitten I still asked her to send my books to me because I wanted to keep up with all the class.  We had during those days spelling.  You stand up and spell, if you--one missed a spelling on--move ahead of you.  Well, I must say that I was one of the top students.  I was the only--in North Gulfport, I was the only male to finish high school, rest of em had dropped out to go to work for various reasons.  Sometimes they had to drop out to help their family out and sometimes they dropped out to help another member to finish school and sometimes they dropped out because they lack of interest.  But I stayed in school.  And they used to ask me, "When are you gonna finish school?"  I was carrying my books and I was in the twelfth grade and that was--I was the only one--during the time that I was going to school there, Gulfport School-- Colored School, only three people graduated from that school in 1925, I think it was.  But I liked school and I excelled in school.
Story_ID: 70777
Speaker 1: Now what about when you were a young man, did you experience racial agitation and that sort of thing when you were coming up in Gulfport [Mississippi]?  Was there a lot of racial conflict in the community?
Speaker 2: Well, the community was so segregated until you didn't feel any kind of racial because there wasn't anything for you to say, if a black community kept silent.  Every white man was authority in himself, so there wasn't any racial conflict, not if you wanted to survive.
Speaker 1: Did you ever hear of any lynchings or any beatings on black people or mistreatment at the hands of racists?
Speaker 2: I'll give you an incident.  Mr. Aleck (ph) Smith used to come and milk our cows when I was a little boy, but the cow would kick, come over about ten o'clock.  He was late this morning.  My mother [Beulah Charles Tartt] said, "Harry, go and see where Mr. Aleck is."  Mr. Aleck, run a path across to Mr. Aleck's house, he was about 50 or 60 years old, I can't remember.  I went to the house, the house was open, there're ladies in the house.  This man, Aleck Smith, was single.  Said, "Harry, they took him out last night and hung him on the Turkey Creek Bridge."  Even as a child I could remember I couldn't eat my breakfast because Mr. Smith wasa--he's a dear to us, he's the man who come around and help my father [Seth Tartt], was out of town working, he'd come out and help the family.  Mr. Smith, from what I can see, that he had been a very prosperous man because he had the best looking house in the community, had lightening rods on (unclear) so he was doing--he must have done well.  What was his penalty?  Well, the white men who didn't want their wives to know what they were doing, they come out to his house to meet their girlfriends.  Well, the action in that time is that if the white man did something wrong, the black man paid for it, so they didn't get the men who came out there to escape their wives notices, but because he offered the place.  At the same time, Miss Ella Booth, who also had a very nice house was doing the same thing.  They ran her out of town.  I never heard about her again since.  That's my experiences with that.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 70778
Speaker 1: Okay, sir, so what you're describing is a pretty tense kind of a situation, but I mean, a situation where black people coped by trying not to make any waves, right?
Speaker 2: That's right.  Someone in authority and someone subjugated, there no conflict, like [Adolf] Hitler where he had charge, there no conflict there, he's in charge, no resistance.  There was no resistance, no conflict.
Speaker 1: You can't think of an incident where black people resisted or did anything?
Speaker 2: I can't think of any time where any black person resisted or said "We're going to this or we're going do the other, but we don't want that."  Because even the semblance of a thing like the place in Wiggins [Mississippi].  A black man was out in his garden plowing and they came and picked him up because someone said that he had assaulted a white woman, and they killed him, dumped him on his grandmother's step.  No conflict, yet helpless, no nothing to do.  So you're certainly not gonna rise up in that kind of situation.
Speaker 1: Now did you have access to papers from the outside, newspapers, like the [Chicago] Defender and the Pittsburgh Courier?
Speaker 2: Marcus Garvey was getting his papers through at that time, you know.
Speaker 1: The 'Negro World.'
Speaker 2: Yeah, 'Negro World' was coming through, but they had to be very secretive about that kind of thing, and the Chicago Defender was coming through, but the man who received it had to be very careful about handling and distributing.
Speaker 1: So white people were always on the lookout to find out who was--
Speaker 2: Even when you think they were not paying any attention, they know you, they know what's going on.  You think they don't even know you, but they know everything about it.  Then you have a certain class of blacks who were informing them.  And a white man could tell a black man, "Want this house burned down and I'll give you $100."  He did it on credit.  But he wasn't successful in doing the job, so he didn't pay him the $100.  That's the kind of atmosphere you had.  The police would stop me, he said "You were speeding."  We were just coming from college then in New Orleans [Louisiana], I was in College [New Orleans University, now Dillard University].  And when they had no way of checking it, he just saw me coming and I said "Well, I wasn't speeding, I was only going 40." He said "Well, 40, what do you think the speed limit is?"  I told him, "I think it's 90."  He said "No, that's the highway number.  This is (unclear)."  So that's the kind you had to play with them to get by.  Said, "No boy, this is a highway number and this is a speed limit on it."  I said, "I thank you very much, sir."  But that's the kind of survival technique you had to use to get by.
Speaker 1: Now, you mentioned Marcus Garvey's paper, what was the general reception to people in your neighborhood to Marcus Garvey and his ideas?
Speaker 2: Well, they had accepted, this is a good idea.  Anything was a good idea in the situation what you lived in, but what could you do about it.  It's just a concept, that's as far as they could go with it, a hope, a dream, but nothing that moving toward reality.
Story_ID: 70779
Speaker 1: Now, you're in this community, you got like a good side of it, you have black people sticking together, but you got this shadow hanging over.  What were your aspects as a youth, were you dreaming about leaving the community or changing the community, what were you thinking about?
Speaker 2: At that time?
Speaker 1: Uh-huh.
Speaker 2: Oh, no.  I was thinking about, I just wanted to go to college and that was unusual for black boys in that community at that time.  None of them particularly--wanted to make a dollar, but I know, work, make the money.  But I wanted to go to college and save the money, but then we had to use it.  Then I worked in the fertilizer factory and made some money and then I finally made enough for tuition and for university in New Orleans [New Orleans University in Louisiana, now Dillard University], but I didn't have enough money to get train fare.  And a buddy of mind who's already at school was over here during that time, so we got in a freight box car and started out, and then we got to Gulfport [Mississippi], at the base of Louisiana, they said we could get off here and get a stage plane.  Policeman said "Don't get off here."  This was during the depression, 1930.  I said well gosh, nobody, no police won't let you get off in this town.  Men were in the box cars, on top of the box cars, between the box cars and under the rail.  That's the way transportation was.  But then our problem was, how we gon get off in New Orleans if nobody gon let you off?  You get on the train, but they didn't want you to get off.  So we had to sneak off the train.  So that's how I got to New Orleans and I had my tuition there.  But I didn't have transportation money.
Speaker 1: So what school did you attend?
Speaker 2: New Orleans University, which is now Dillard University.  And I had money for the first quarters on a quarter basis.  And I got a job as a waiter for a postmaster general out in the community.  Not a waiter for a family, but a waiter for three German police dogs.  I was to feed them about three times a day, and I had my feelings that sometimes I was gonna be the meal.
Speaker 1: They're pretty mean dogs.
Speaker 2: I finished the first quarter and slide my suitcase down the school and a professor asked me what was I doing.  "I'm going, I only had money for one quarter."  He said "No, nobody comes to this school here and makes the grade that you made and leaves."  He said "somebody's paid your tuition."  I never found out to this day who paid my tuition.  I went on to finish in three years, but I went summer and winter and finished Summa Cum Laude.
Speaker 1: Well, that's great.  That's a great--
Speaker 2: And then wanted to come back and share what I'd learned with the people in Gulfport [Mississippi], and I did.
Story_ID: 70780
Speaker 1: So you taught school here [Gulfport, Mississippi]?
Speaker 2: I taught--came back to start teaching school at Gulfport- at colored school.
Speaker 1: Okay.  How long did you do that?
Speaker 2: Three years, from 1934 to 1937.  And then I had another dream, I wanted to go to Chicago [Illinois], but I had only enough money to go to Memphis [Tennessee].  So I went and bought a ticket for Memphis, but I was determined to go to Chicago.  I got to Memphis, a man said "Your ticket's for Memphis," I said, "Yeah, but I'm going to Chicago."  Had black porters on the train, so I gave him the handshake of one of our secret organization, went on to Chicago.
Speaker 1: That's a great story.  The alternative way.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I said, "I'm going to Chicago," "But your ticket says Memphis."  I said, "Yeah, but I'm going to Chicago."  I gave him the handshake, and I got in Chicago.
Speaker 1: Now what prompted you to want to go to Chicago, I mean, was it the reading of the Chicago Defender paper?
Speaker 2: Well, at what is now Dillard [University in New Orleans, Louisiana], I studied Black History, I went in for it, I met Langston Hughes there, I met George Washington Carver there, I was on fire.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I was on fire, I wanted to move up.  In New Orleans, I was liberated, I feel free, I wasn't afraid of white people.  I could talk to white people, I could curse em out if I want, like the--I worked on St. Charles Boulevard there for a rich white woman and she sometime would get after me and I'd tell her, said now if you--speak it up to her--now couldn't do this in Mississippi.  I said, "Now if you don't like my service, I don't want you to let me go next month, next week, but today."  That's the kind of talk I did.  Said "No, Harry, we are right." Or "Harry, I want you to draw this chicken."  So I said, "Okay, I'll draw the chicken."  So she went away, came back said, "You draw the chicken?" I said, "Yes."  I had a beautiful drawing of a chicken there.  She said "Harry, don't be facetious, I told you to draw the chicken."  I said, "Well, here it is right here."  I didn't know it meant-see in Gulfport, we called it cleaning the chicken.  And I thought she meant--you said draw the chicken.  I (unclear) know she meant to get a pencil and draw a chicken.  So that's the kind of exper--but I wanted to go, but I--but I had a dream there, James Weldon Johnson, I had just read his book, "The Longest Way" and there I met a Jewish Rabbi there, Bernard, he spoke at our church and I was on the program with him to speak too, so my ambition was wrote, and I said I had to move onto higher ground.  So that's why I wanted to go to Chicago and get in the University of Chicago where Robert Hutchins was the golden boy of education there.  And (unclear), you didn't have to go to no compulsory class attendance.  At anytime you said "Look, I want to take the test."  And one black gal came up there and took the test and finished and got her a degree in one year.  So that's the kind of school I wanted to go to.  And that's where I went.  Then the military picked me up.
Speaker 1: Okay, now what year is this?  Now you went to Chicago in 1937, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah '37' (1937), yeah, at the end of that school year.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 70781
Speaker 1: And when did the military pick you up?
Speaker 2: June of '42' [1942].  I was out there playing in the, I forget the name of the park, and why I was playing so hard because I received a letter that my comrades had chosen me to go to the United States Army, but I was devastated because I was making about twenty or thirty dollars a day only driving a Jitney and now I would go in as a private fifty dollars a month.  And I just bought a saxophone and we just had moved into a six-bedroom apartment, built furniture and everything.  And so this was this and so I was out there in the park trying to get my heart out of shape because I'd had a heart murmur, doctor told me when I was a senior year in college [New Orleans University, now Dillard University in Louisiana].  So--but anyway had to go down to the medical center, and I knew I would be turned back because of my heart.  So went down to the medical center in Chicago [Illinois].  In fact, first they had put me on a street car and put me in charge of the street car, but I thought that was a bad sign right there.  Early in the morning, five o'clock in the morning, say "You in charge of the street car."  Of course, I didn't want to be known or anything like that.  Get down to the medical center and the doctor put his hand up and said--I said, "What do you feel, doctor?"  "That feel good."  I said, "Well doctor, what should I feel?  I say, "It should be a heart murmur, should almost a heart attack because I had a heart murmur some years ago and I'd been over exercising by mistake."  And he said, "Well you corrected it.  You in good shape."
Speaker 1: Now we know exercise improves it.
Speaker 2: Yeah,  Said "You in good shape."  So off to Fort Custer [Training Center in Michigan].  Off to Fort Custer.
Speaker 1: Fort Custer, out in Dekota?
Speaker 2: I mean Michigan.
Speaker 1: Michigan, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah (laughs).
Story_ID: 70782
Speaker 1: Now let me back track just a little bit, back to Chicago [Illinois].  I read that you were a writer with The Chicago Bee?
Speaker 2: With The Chicago Bee that's right.
Speaker 1: That's right.
Speaker 2: I don't remember the address or the name goes back.  But I was interested in journalism, in fact, I took journalism in Africa from the University of Chicago by correspondence while I was in the fox hole, that's how much I like journalism.  I really wanted to go into that.  So I did write for that, but very briefly, because of course things are moving so fast there.
Speaker 1: You met some of the big time Chicago politicians there?
Speaker 2: Yes, I certainly did.
Speaker 1: William Dawson?
Speaker 2: Congressman Dawson was one of them that I met and I knew some of his people and Oscar De Priest's son [Oscar Stanton De Priest, Jr.].  I didn't know Oscar De Priest, but his son. I met his son and worked with him in politics, I certainly did.  So that was quite an experience.  And by the way Oscar De Priest, Sr. has been down here to Gulfport [Mississippi] and stayed with J.T. Hall, who's the undertaker here, during the time that he was here.  That's because he couldn't stay in any hotel there, so he had to stay in a private home.
Story_ID: 70783
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well tell me about the [United States] Army then, what was the Army like?  You--
Speaker 2: Army was--
Speaker 1: Fort Custer [Training Center in Michigan]?
Speaker 2: --Oh, yeah, Fort Custer, and the next thing I knew, I was in Fort Warren, Wyoming at 17 below degrees, take my basic training and the next thing I knew they had my name up there to go to officer candidate training school.  I said "Well, I didn't apply."  He said, "You don't have to."  Other people were applying and turned down and there I hadn't even applied and say that's where you going.  And so I finished second lieutenant in December of '42' (1942) as a second lieutenant moved from private in June to second lieutenant in December '42' (1942).  Officer Candidate Training School was thoroughly integrated.  White and black officers slept together, worked together, ate together whatnot.  So that's my first view of total integration.
Speaker 1: How did you feel about it?
Speaker 2: I was excited about it.  Felt that as an individual, because I always felt, as a boy, that each individual should stand on its own not whether you'd like to put em categories, but just each individual stand for itself, without these other barriers or artificial barriers put up there.  So I liked that part of it.  Then from there next thing I knew I was on a ship going to, we didn't know where, they wouldn't tell you where you were going.  There were eighteen ships and I was on one of them, and one of em blew up.  We saw one of em blow up.  But we had high morale.
Speaker 1: You saw one of the ships actually blow up at sea?
Speaker 2: Yeah, one of the missiles hit it.  Germans were--
Speaker 1: Was it a torpedo from a U-Boat
Speaker 2: Yeah, torpedoes, right, yeah.  In the army you can't get frightened otherwise you won't do it.  So we kept on.  I had singing, I kept the morale up. Next thing I knew I was getting off in Oran Tunisia [sic, Algeria].  And there it looked like I walking to the Bible, these people with long robes and the mask and that kind of thing, and Tunisia then Algeria, fighting the Germans and picking up the P.O.W.s [prisoners of war] who were left behind.  And the next thing I knew I was on a boat going to Salerno beachhead in Southern Italy, twenty-five miles south of Naples.  From there we had to walk ashore, and I saw men on my right and my left falling, but somehow or another I came aboard.  And then we stayed in Salerno, from there we moved to Naples and were held up there for nine months because the Germans had all the area mines so we couldn't move forward.  And that's where in the day I was command of a ship--of a truck company and at night, we see--from the night we see these Tuskegee Airmen coming back, we're in the bivouac in the same area with them.  They would be coming back in, off their flight and we'd be moving out in the morning to carry supplies front line, take them off the ship from the port in Naples there.
Speaker 1: What kind of conversations did you all have?
Speaker 2: We didn't--you know we didn't have the time you know for that kind of thing you know.  They were coming in off of a (unclear).  We'd get ready to move out and so we didn't have much time for that.
Speaker 1: Sir, what was the name of your unit?  And you all were quartermasters?
Speaker 2: Quartermasters, 28th regiment quartermaster in the company, whatever is the Company D, I had Company F.  I think I had Company F.  Wasn't the famous--
Speaker 1: Red Ball[Express]?
Speaker 2: --Red Ball, wasn't the famous--we didn't build up a reputation like that.  And then in North Africa we found that they didn't have any chaplain so then they appointed me as a chaplain.  I had to act as a chaplain.  And they got to Germany the same thing happened there.  The chaplain was dismissed and sent back to the Unites States for whatever reason, I don't know.  The General said "You are the chaplain."  So I served in chaplain in North Africa and Germany because they had no chaplain.  But I never was taken to that corp, still remained in the quartermaster transportation and service.
Story_ID: 70784
Speaker 1: And then after the war [World War II] we had the G.E.D. classes set up for soldiers who hadn't finished high school, brought them in and taught them until they waited to go back home.  Then while I was there, after duty hours I'd take part in the opera--movies rather, 'The Life of Emile Zola'-'Lola Montez,' that was a movie made there, made in three different languages in Munich--Munich, I think.  Munich is was.
Speaker 2: That was the life of Emile Zola?
Speaker 1: 'Life of Lola Montez.'
Speaker 2: Lola Montez.
Speaker 1: Lola Montez, that's the what it was.  Then after that, 'Alexander the Great,' a comedy and 'Maid Without Honor,' those were some of the ones that I played in.  And then I played on the stage in Munich in opera of 'Fanny.'  That ran for about three months, in 'Fanny,' that was adopted from Broadway in New York.  And I was a--I was a Arab sailor in that play.
Speaker 2: Now these are German productions, right?
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: And did you speak fluent German, did you have to speak at all, did you have to speak German?
Speaker 1: Well, I knew German very well in college.  I took German.  In fact, when the professor who was over German had to have a leave for a while, I taught German there then I followed through on it and then I kept on following through on German so I was pretty fluent in German so I could carry on--
Story_ID: 70785
Speaker 1: And then I was in the--after the war I was in the newspaper business again writing for the agency newspaper.  And by the way in Korea [Korean War], I was editing of seventeen army newspapers and in charge of three radio stations there.  So journalism has been my field there a long time.
Speaker 2: So when did you come back to the United States?
Speaker 1: I came back in '54' [1954], I think.  Seattle, Washington, where I stayed for six months and then to Fort Ord, California, where I stayed ten years, consecutive years.
Speaker 2: So you stayed in the Army another ten years after you got back?
Speaker 1: I never been out of the Army.
Speaker 2: Okay.  All right.
Speaker 1: Oh, yeah, I got from overseas you know.  But 30 years--30 consecutive years.
Speaker 2: Okay.  So you stayed there from 1942 to 1972 [sic, 1964]?
Speaker 1: Yep.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: See because you get out, but see, you're still in the Army as an officer even though you're in civilian clothes.
Speaker 2: Okay.  So what was your highest rank you achieved?
Speaker 1: I came out as a major.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  I retired as a major.
Speaker 2: All right.  And are there any other experiences?  Now you're in the army during World War II, the Korean war and you're in the Army during the--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --The Vietnam War?
Speaker 1: Yeah, that's right, I was still at Fort Ord, that's right.
Speaker 2: Are there some other experiences in the Army you want to tell us about?
Speaker 1: Well, in Korea I received the highest peacetime award that the military gives [the Army Commendation Medal] cause I worked there.  If I didn't engage in--see you had a flood there in Seole [Korea] where I was stationed, it's eighth army headquarters.  And I was instrumental work--there, working with the children and orphans and whatnot and so in promoting the public relations between the Koreans and the military and so I received the highest award in that category.  That's my highest experience in that.
Speaker 2: You received five battle stars too?
Speaker 1: That was in North Africa and Italy.  Because there's really--there's no front line even during World War II, there's really no front line because if you take a truck to the port, they bombing the port, and if your trucks in convoy, they bombing your convoy, so you're exposed all the time and no such thing say well you're in the back here so you don't, no such thing.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Story_ID: 70786
Speaker 1: --You were stationed at Fort Ord for about ten years, you said?
Speaker 2: Exactly ten years.
Speaker 1: And we're rolling again, I just want to let you know.  So that's in California, near Monterey?
Speaker 2: In Monterey, 100 miles south of San Francisco [California].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: All right.
Speaker 1: Now, let me ask you about your wife.  Where did you and your wife meet, what's her name?
Speaker 2: My wife's name, O-R-L-E-A-N, O-R-L-E-A-N, Orlean.  I met her in eighth grade, but I didn't pay any attention to her in eighth grade, and I didn't pay any attention to her in the twelfth grade either because I had another girlfriend, but I gave plenty attention to her when I finished college.  Came back and then we married in St. Louis [Missouri].  We couldn't get married fast enough in Chicago [Illinois].  So we went to St. Louis maybe we'd get married right away.
Speaker 1: Now what caused all this interest after all these years of neglect?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Because she had made such wonderful changes.  She didn't look like the little eighth grade girl that I knew.  Yeah, she was a wonderful girl.  And she played also in the same movies that I played in, played also in 'Fanny.'
Speaker 1: Okay, so she was an actress too?
Speaker 2: Yeah, she was that.
Speaker 1: Now, tell me about that.  Let's explore that a little bit, because that is so unusual.  How did you get chosen, how were you chosen to play these roles?  Did you go audition for these roles?
Speaker 2: What happened is that they called militaries said they want the military man in a play.  Well I'm in public relations and the newspaper business, I said "Okay I'll get--how many you want?" said "eight."  I said "Okay I'll get you six more."  I count myself and my wife.  That's how.  But they thought I was an actor because they had the--they brought the army out said, they gon have this scene here.  The army's gonna be playing.  And then said "Look, cut, look, beat the drum like this, cut again.  Okay, Tartt, you take it."  I said, "I can't beat a drum," said "but you could act."  And I got on that drum and said, "Oh, that's what you want."  They had the background beat the drum, I'm in the front acting, cutting up.  That's how it happened.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you were going through the motions but (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, yeah, I'm going through the motions.  I mean, I'm a little excited about this thing.  The real drummer couldn't do that.  He's just (making noises), but I'm going like this thing is on fire.  So that's the kind of thing we want.
Speaker 1: What else did your wife do, I mean, tell us more about her?
Speaker 2: Well, with the top English player, Peter Ustinov, she played with him, in the top French female actress, she was in that and she played along with him.  I was masseur in 'The Life of Lola Montez' and the masseur would do the massages and all these dances before they go on the thing, but she was very--and my wife has worked with the German--American (unclear) they got together and had their monthly.  She was an expert bridge player.  And then the bridge would sometime--the club would meet at our house and they started in the evening, six o'clock and they served breakfast at seven o'clock.
Speaker 1: They played bridge--
Speaker 2: All night long, all night long.  But then she became a very--very active in all community work.  Anytime there's work to be done, help to be done in the community, she was always there.
Story_ID: 70787
Speaker 1: Now, now what were you doing during the Civil Rights Movement here?  You were here, I guess, during part, during--I don't know if you were here during the late '50s' [1950s], early '60s' [1960s], but--
Speaker 2: No, I was in California.
Speaker 1: --California, okay.
Speaker 2: In California and then [Dr.] Martin Luther King [Jr.] came out there.  I can tell you about that.  And I had a chance to be in a house meeting with him.  And picked up him and my wife [Orlean Grace Tartt] together.  A small group meeting in their--I had a personal talk with Martin Luther King on things and he told me some things and that time the Baptist--National Baptist Convention, one of them, or the Black, when they met in San Francisco during that time, there were not--no church invited him to speak.  He spoke at a white church and some of the top people in the Baptist community told me that he was not following the gospel.  They didn't call it a Civil Rights Movement, the gospel.
Speaker 1: That was the Reverend Joseph [H.] Jackson was a--
Speaker 2: That's right, Jackson was the only man who could come during that time, black man leader, who could come to Mississippi without a guard.  And when Martin Luther King came there he had--he didn't have to have a guard each time in California, but he was escorted in--this was in Monterey where I saw Martin Luther King, Jr.  And at the house I would talk with him about issues and things.
Story_ID: 70788
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, how did you yourself get involved in the ministry?  (Unclear)(Simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, as I said, you know, I grew up in the church and I just knew the church in and out.  I was secretary of the church when I was quite a youngster, and during my college years I still was involved in church work and then Bishop Jones, Robert E. Jones, inspired me to come into--he was a black bishop, I said he's black, but he really was white.  You couldn't tell him from any white man.  He could move anywhere as white whenever he wanted to.  He was at my graduation.  Told me he wanted to go--me to go to Gulfside [United Methodist Assembly] and work over there and so--being associated with these ministers, like Farmer [James Leonard Farmer, Sr.], not the Farmer now [James Leonard Farmer, Jr.], but Farmer's father was one of my teachers.  And that's the kind of thing that association with these people here brought me into it.
Speaker 1: So you, you got involved in the ministry here in Gulfport [Mississippi]?
Speaker 2: Yeah, right, yeah.
Speaker 1: This was after you (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, yeah, yeah, right, yeah.
Speaker 1: --Retired from the military?
Speaker 2: Oh, no--
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: --Before.  When I was in military, I was ready to preach.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That's why they appointed me chaplain at different places, right.
Speaker 1: So are you--you're ordained in the United Methodist Church?
Speaker 2: I'm ordained in the United Methodist Church, the A.M.E. Church, African Methodist Episcopal Church, the C.M.E. [Christian Methodist Episcopal] Church, and the Baptist Church.  I have all relations in all four of those.
Speaker 1: Well can you--I didn't know that was possible that you would have all of those?
Speaker 2: Yeah. You can--so for example a Baptist minister come say I want to join this, but he already is a Baptist minister ordained, he comes in the Methodist Church so he is ordained there.
Speaker 1: Well, is there a conflict of interest in that?
Speaker 2: No.  Because a difference, you don't have--their Protestants, they're all Protestants.  The only difference were to have--you move to a Catholic then you--that's not possible.  You'd have to be completely converted and changed over.  But the Protestants, sometimes it's just a matter of management, district, administration.  There's no difference between the C.M.E., A.M.E. and the United Methodist in their theology, nothing separate.  And the Baptist, very little, but the average Baptist doesn't know why he's Baptist or Methodist doesn't know why he's Baptist, or the Methodist doesn't know why he Methodist.
Speaker 1: Now people often get confused about what the difference is between the different Methodist branches.  What is the difference between the United Methodist, the African Methodist Episcopal and the Christian Methodist Episcopal, which is formerly the Colored Methodist Episcopal?
Speaker 2: Right.  The only difference is that in administration, the United Methodist is a part of the total Methodist Church, the C.M.E., which was--really came out of right after slavery that the Methodist asked a group of people would they form their own church, invited them out.
Speaker 1: Invited them out of the church?
Speaker 2: Out of the church.  Richard Allen protested and say "Well I wanted to get out because of discrimination."  That's the A.M.E. Church and so--
Speaker 1: So--
Speaker 2: --But a C.M.E. invited to get out.
Speaker 1: --So the main body is--
Speaker 2: Is the United Methodist, right?
Speaker 1: --Methodist.
Speaker 2: And out of that--
Speaker 1: And the C.M.E. is the group that--
Speaker 2: That protested--
Speaker 1: --Wanted out?
Speaker 2: --Yeah, wanted out.
Speaker 1: And the C.M.E. is the group that got put out?
Speaker 2: Invited out.
Speaker 1: --Yeah, invited out.  Okay.  Well, I've never heard it put quite like that.  That's probably a good description of it.  So, did you pastor at church at all?
Speaker 2: Oh, yes, I pastored the--several churches in Gulfport area, in Bay St. Louis, and other areas.  Each you had a Bishop appoint you at different places for you to go.
Speaker 1: Did you pastor mostly as a United Methodist pastor?
Speaker 2: Well, I pastored a Baptist Church for six years.  (Unclear)  As, as Methodist minister you had to--course I don't have a license for a Baptist.  They called me to preach there then finally ended up at United Methodist and retired, a mandatory retirement, seventy years old in the Methodist Church.  So I'm retired United Methodist Minister.
Speaker 1: So you've been retired as a minister for over twenty years, right?
Speaker 2: No, you had to be seventy to be mandatory retirement.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, right.
Speaker 1: And you're ninety--
Speaker 2: I'm ninety-four.
Speaker 1: Ninety-four.  So that was like twenty-four years ago?
Speaker 2: Yeah, that's right, that's right.  Yeah, that's right.
Story_ID: 70789
Speaker 1: So sir, what do you do now to occupy your time?  This is a facetious question because I read your resume, but I just want you--I know you're busy.
Speaker 2: Well, mainly I don't have to make that decision, the community makes that decision.  Sunday morning at eight o'clock, I was a speaker at Beau Rivage [Mississippi] in the Bishop's School of Food activities whatnot, I ran a revival at the Riley Chapel [United Methodist Church] last week, I was a speaker at Greater Mount Olive for a Brotherhood this coming Saturday in Methodist Church, so I'm always called upon to make speeches.  They call me an inspirational speaker and a preacher, so the only inspirational speaker and I'm called up quite frequently.  So I don't have to make any decisions, they make em for me (laughs).
Story_ID: 70790
Speaker 1: Sir, what do you see for the black community?  What are your hopes and concerns for the black community?
Speaker 2: My hope for the black community is to make a 180 degree change.  As it is now we have over half of the women in prison are African American and more than 2,000 black males between the ages of 10 and 40 are killed each year.  And it could go on and on of that kind of statistic.  And I want that changed because we find in prison and in this state here, we have more black males of college age in prison than we have in the colleges, and I want to see that changed, a Russian pointed that out.  And I'm appealing to churches and organizations where I go that we got to make--we have to make that change.  We can't move-(unclear) keeping that direction.
Speaker 1: How do think we can do it?  How do you think we can make that change?
Speaker 2: I think we can move it by integrating the black community.  Right now the black community is separated.  We have those who have moved up the ladder, moving to white neighborhoods, suburban neighborhoods and forgetting about the brothers back there.  Unlike the early community where everybody was in a community, everybody helped each other.  We have to come back to that.  Those who have moved in Swan Lake [Mississippi] here for example in Gulfport [Mississippi] doing very well, very, very well, except they've forgotten about the people in the low-income housing areas.  I work for this agency which is concerned about that, about low-income people.  And we have to help with the light bill and everything you have, locating houses for them.  But the people, our black people, in the suburban areas don't have a great concern about that.  They have their own place where they've accomplishes, they reach (unclear), they comfortable.  I have them Ocean Springs [Mississippi], I have them here in Gulfport.  They may not try to relate to them what's happened to their brothers, they've forgotten that they have some brothers here, and till we need to bring that together and have to find the strategy to bring those two groups together where we have a community.  Right now we have two different black communities.
Story_ID: 70791
Speaker 1: Let me ask you this.  You have lived a long life already and you're still active in doing a lot of things, but, Sir, what do you see as your legacy?
Speaker 2: Legacy is that to have a concern for other people like one of those black leaders said that "I'll leave you a law, I'll leave you dedication."  One of my favorite students that I taught was Dr. Felix Dunn, he's not only a physician, but an activist.  He organized the first NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] group on this coast [Gulf Coast] during a very dangerous time, very dangerous, because at one time NAACP was equivalent to complete ostracizing you.  The first question they would ask you when you apply for teachers school, "Do you belong to the NAACP?" and if you did you could walk out of the door, you didn't have to do any of the questions.  So my legacy is to leave a deep concern for your brother and that's what I like to see done.
Story_ID: 70792
Speaker 1: Sir, how would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: I'd like to be remembered as Harry Tartt who lived a joyful life and tried to pass that life on to others.
Speaker 1: You certainly brought us some joy today you know.  Thank you very much.
Speaker 2: Alright.
