Story_ID: 283529
Speaker 1: Good afternoon.  Mrs. Thomas [HistoryMaker Hannah H. Thomas], we're gonna get started by slating.  My name is Regennia Williams and I'm the interviewer for The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer today is Matthew Hickey and we don't have any observers for this interview.  I want to get started by asking if you would please state and spell your name, your first, middle, and last name for us?
Speaker 2: My first name is Hannah, H-A-N-N-A-H.  My maiden name is Hawkins which I use, it's, H-A-W-K-I-N-S.  My last name is Thomas, T-H-O-M-A-S.
Speaker 1: Thank you.  And would you also please state your date of birth and the city and the location of your birth?
Speaker 2: December 25, 1916, Florence, Alabama.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And please state today's date for the record.
Speaker 2: Today is March 12th, (unclear)--
Speaker 1: I think it's the 15th.
Speaker 2: --15th, I'm sorry, March 15, 2005.
Speaker 1: All right.  Thank you.  And the location of this interview with the address?
Speaker 2: Cincinnati, Ohio, and the address is 1059 Loiska Lane.
Speaker 1: All right.  And your occupation, please?
Speaker 2: Retired teacher.
Speaker 1: Now were you elementary, secondary school teacher, or postsecondary?
Speaker 2: Both.
Speaker 1: Oh, all right.  Okay.  But primarily one through twelve?
Speaker 2: My undergrad was home economics and a minor in social studies.  And I taught grades eighth, ninth, and tenth, biology, science, but my major work was working with the elementary education when I did my transfer from secondary to elementary education.
Story_ID: 283530
Speaker 1: I have next a series of People magazine-ish type questions we like to say and so there are five questions in the series.  The first asks, what is your favorite food?
Speaker 2: Oh, my favorite food?  Chicken (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.  And do you have a favorite time of year?
Speaker 2: Yes, my favorite time of year is spring.
Speaker 1: All right.  And how about a favorite color?
Speaker 2: Purple (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.  And do you have a favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Well, no, just where ever I decide to go, that's where I go for my vacation.
Speaker 1: All right.  And how about a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: Well my favorite phrase is that you can be anything you want to be, if you work hard towards it.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Thank you very much.
Speaker 2: And where you are is not necessarily where you have to stay.
Story_ID: 283531
Speaker 1: Now in this next section we like to talk about the HistoryMaker's family background. So I'm wondering if you would please tell me about your mother.  What was her name?
Speaker 2: My mother's name was Evernee and her maiden name was Hubbard and, of course, her last name was Hawkins.
Speaker 1: And do you know where she was born?
Speaker 2: She was born in Lauderdale County, Alabama.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And where did she grow up?
Speaker 2: She grew up in Lauderdale County, Alabama.
Speaker 1: And now is that, well just (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) The city was--
Speaker 1: --for geography sake?
Speaker 2: The city was Florence, Alabama.
Speaker 1: Florence--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --okay, also near Florence.  All right.  And which was the city of your birth?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And did she talk with you at all about her childhood and, or the years she grew up in Alabama?
Speaker 2: Yes, she did.  My mother did quite a bit of talking.  In fact, she was the one that told us so much about our back, you know, history, and the family history.  My father [Everett Hawkins] wasn't much of a talker but she'd fill us in about the families and who they were and some of the things they did, you know, growing up and she was a very talkative lady.
Speaker 1: Now do you know when she was born?
Speaker 2: She was born in, I believe, it was 1888.
Speaker 1: But right there in Alabama?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And did she describe pleasant experiences associated with her childhood in Alabama?
Speaker 2: Yeah, it seems that she had a very nice childhood as I said.  Her mother died when she was ten years old, her father died when she was four, so she was raised by her older sister and she had very good memories of her, of her sister and the family growing up at her brother's and the people around her.
Speaker 1: And did she come from a large family?
Speaker 2: No, not a very large family.  It was six, she was from a family of six.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what's the name of her sister who, who raised her?  Who was--
Speaker 2: Her name was Mary [ph.].
Speaker 1: Oh, okay.
Speaker 2: Mary Lee [ph.].  And she married a person that was a Nelson [ph.] so her name was Mary Lee Nelson.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now did your mother also talk about her parents, your grandparents, do you remember their names?
Speaker 2: She didn't talk too much about her parents, she talked more, more or less about the sister who raised her.  But her mother's name was Desi, Desi Herbert [ph.].  And her father's name was Charlie [ph.].
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.  And how, how would you describe your mother?  Did, was she a hardworking person, homemaker (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) She was a hard, she was a hardworking person and a good homemaker and a good neighbor.  When people wanted a favor they called her, my mother, and she was always there, whatever she could do for people she was there.  And most of the time they didn't have to ask her, if she just felt like they needed her service she was there.  She was a, a very giving person, very giving.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now I'm not familiar with the town of Florence but can you tell me is that a rural community or is it a, a bit of a town or a city, you know?
Speaker 2: It's a small town.  When I left there in 1958, in fact, I was one of the persons that took population census, I think it was thirty-five thousand plus people there.  However, since that time it has really grown.  So it's much larger now but it was just a little medium sized town.
Story_ID: 283532
Speaker 1: Can you tell me at all about your father?  Was he also from Alabama?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what was his name?
Speaker 2: His name was Everett, E-V-E-R-E-T-T.
Speaker 1: And do you know when he was born?
Speaker 2: He was about ten years older than my mother [Evernee Hubbard Hawkins] so he must have been born some time in 1978.
Speaker 1: Or 1878?
Speaker 2: I'm sorry, 1878.
Speaker 1: Yes.  Okay. But also born in Alabama?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: All right.  Do you know what town he was born in?
Speaker 2: He was born in Lauderdale County [Alabama] too (laughter) and that was (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Which is, is that where Florence is?
Speaker 2: That's Florence, Alabama, um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  And, and how about his childhood, did he share any stories with you about growing up?
Speaker 2: Oh, yes, he did.  He had a brother and a sister and he was the oldest and they were very fond of him and it was a close family, those three people were very, very close.  It seem like that he had an enjoyable time.  He had a lot of cousins.  And oh, and they would talk about when they would get together and they'd have their picnics outdoors and all that.  So he had a nice childhood too, very pleasant.
Story_ID: 283533
Speaker 1: Did your parents [Evernee Hubbard Hawkins and Everett Hawkins] talk at all about their educational experiences in Alabama?
Speaker 2: Yes, they said that the school system were very poor.  And their education ranged from about four or five months in a year, and they both got to the fifth grade so to speak.  But later on when we moved to the city, they went back to school and did some extra work study.  My father was a very smart man with his limited education.  He was very smart.
Speaker 1: So formal schooling ends at the fifth grade?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Now you said they only went to school a few months out of the year?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: So were they combining work with school?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And what kind of work did they do as children?
Speaker 2: Farming.  And that's what I did too until I was about fourteen when we moved from the farm to the city.  But it was, it was farming.
Speaker 1: So did the family have their own farm or did you work land owned by other (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No we weren't, we were sharecroppers.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And it was a very hard life but we were used to it because we, we started very young, you know, working in the fields and we knew it, nothing else to do but that so it was just a life.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well I wonder if you could just spend a few minutes just stating for the record what that entails, being a sharecropper.  How does that whole growing, seasonal work, what are people doing?
Speaker 2: Well we, we moved quite a bit when I was growing up from farm to farm.  I think I was counting, and I think we moved five times before we moved to the city.  And well sharecropping was, you didn't own the land, the landowner owned the land and he, he supplied you with the, the food and everything and then when you did the cropping and he got half and you got half and he, he got half, whatever bales of cotton you made if it was ten, he would receive five, and you, you receive five.  And it was more or less cotton that people raised in the area where I was.  Very little peanuts or anything like that, it was more or less just cotton.  And, of course, the, describe a typical day, you got up early in the morning and you went to the field.  And when you was chopping cotton you had these hole you, you see like you're digging, and you would cut the grass from around the cotton and you would get the, and you would space the cotton about that far apart because when it grew up it would spread out and that's what we did in the early part of the spring.  And therefore picking cotton, I think everybody have seen pictures of that you, you had that long sack and you would pick the cotton and then you would weigh it and all like that.  So that was a typical day on the farm.  My mother raised us, she always have a garden, a big garden.  And she canned a lot, in fact, most of the people in rural Alabama did do a lot of canning because during the winter months, you know, we, and we weren't too close to stores, so you had your beans and potatoes and everything.  My mother canned everything that she could get her hands on.  And that's what we lived on during the winter, we had all our food and the peanuts and your potatoes (laughter) and, and the canned beans, et cetera, et cetera, even she did preserves also.  It was, it was kind of a little store, everybody had their own little store, you know, of food.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It, it was, it was a nice life but as I said we had a lot of friends in, in rural Alabama.  And that people were friendly.  And also people were very friendly in Florence [Alabama] too, it was like a village, they, people was interested in each other.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now which months during the growing season then were you allowed to, to go to school?  Or, or for those children who were like your parents, making it through elementary school perhaps, which months did they go to school?
Speaker 2: Well they didn't say but evidently it was during the winter months.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Because the season for planting was sometimes in March so they would go perhaps maybe October, November, December, January, February, March they was out, you know, maybe four or five months.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And it was about the same, you know, when I, when I grew up.  School was not nine months like it is now.  You went during the season when you were not working in the field which was more or less the summer months.
Speaker 1: All right.  Now you said you, you worked under the sharecropping system until you were about fourteen?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Were there other children in the family working alongside you?
Speaker 2: Oh, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Neighbors children too.  Like our farm was over here and then the neighbor's farm was there and it was kind of like I call it a plantation that was converted into a farm.  You know, we lived on scattered little, little houses and, and all the people that worked on that particular time they were sharecroppers.  Only a few people at that time had their own farms.
Story_ID: 283534
Speaker 1: How many children were in your family?
Speaker 2: There were ten children born to the, the union but two died as babies but eight of us lived to get grown.
Speaker 1: Would you like to state the names of your brothers and sisters as part of the inter- (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Four girls and four boys.  My oldest sister's name was Daisy [Hawkins]; my oldest brother's name was Everett [Hawkins, Jr.], he was named for my father [Everett Hawkins]; my next sister was Lizzie Lou [Hawkins] (laughter); the next brother was Willis Nelson [Hawkins]; and my sister next to Lizzie was Pauline [Hawkins]; and then me, who is Hannah Thomas, Hannah Hawkins [HistoryMaker Hannah H. Thomas]; and then I had two brothers younger than me and one was named Joe [Hawkins] and the baby brother was named James Francis [Hawkins].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So there was eight of us.
Story_ID: 283535
Speaker 1: And what school did you all attend when you were living in Florence [Alabama]?
Speaker 2: The first school I attended was a Rosenwald school.  You probably read about that.  It was a wealthy man [Julius Rosenwald] from the North and he built schools and this in the South all during that time, you know, that we would have a place to go.  It was a two room school and it went from one through eighth grade.  And there were two teachers and, of course, they divided it up, you know, the, the grades.  And that was when I was in the first and second grade.  Then we moved (laughter).  And at that time we weren't close to the school that I started out with.  And I remember very distinctly my father [Everett Hawkins] and other men they got in the neighborhood, and the neighbor had a, a large barn and they cleared out some of the barn and made a little school and put the desks there at the hay so for two years I went to a barn for a school.  Then we moved and the church was the school there and I went there for four years.  And then we moved to the city.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now what church school was that?
Speaker 2: It was a Methodist church but it was a school also.  So we went to the Methodist school and we also went to the Methodist church, however, I'm a Baptist but we went there and worshipped with them because it was the closest church in that neighborhood.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Do you remember the name of that church?
Speaker 2: Pisgah, P-I-S-G-A-H.
Speaker 1: Pisgah Methodist Church [Lauderdale County, Alabama]?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now you said your first school was a Rosenwald school?
Speaker 2: Yes it was.
Speaker 1: Was that named for Mr. Rosenwald?
Speaker 2: Yes, it was.  And it was a nice school.  It was two rooms and they were large rooms.  Very nice school.  And incidentally, when I started teaching I taught at that school and I could remember now here I am, I went to this school, and it was still preserved, it was still a nice school at that time, you know, when I taught there, so many years later.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now in that two room school then, are there all of the grades, all of the elementary school grades when you were there?
Speaker 2: Yes it were.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And so in different parts of the room there were different lessons being taught?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Depending on the age level?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  Do you know if the school is still operating, just curious?
Speaker 2: No, it isn't.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  Now again you said there were eight children in the family when you were growing up and eventually you moved to the city?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: And now what city is that that you're moving to?
Speaker 2: That was Florence, Alabama.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So this is all in the outskirts of Florence?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes, uh-huh.
Speaker 1: So you're moving into town?
Speaker 2: Yeah, that was the rural area.
Speaker 1: Uh-huh.  Okay.  Were there major changes then and in the schooling and the work schedule once you moved into the town?
Speaker 2: Yes, it was.  My mother [Evernee Hubbard Hawkins] was, she was a good cook and she got a job working on the campus, educator campus for white kids, it was called, I think it was called Florence Alabama State College [Florence State Teachers College; University of North Alabama, Florence, Alabama] and she got a job cooking there.  My oldest sister [Daisy Hawkins] also went into cooking, she worked for a family.  My father and my oldest brothers they did little odd jobs, you know, that they could pick up.  And then we enrolled in school, in the school, the elementary school I went to there was Slater School [John F. Slater Elementary School, Florence, Alabama].  And it was also given to the school by a wealthy white man to be used for black kids' education, Slater,   S-L-A-T-E-R.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And that's where I finished elementary school from.  Then when I finished elementary school, I went to a school called Burrell [Normal School, Florence, Alabama], B-U-R-R-E-L-L.  The first two years it was a private school and it was operated by the A.M.E. church [sic. American Missionary Association (A.M.A.)] from New York.  So we were exposed to people from there, they sent people, they sent teachers from different parts of the country.  Our principal was from New York, and then we had one teacher she was from Delaware, and then we had one from Birmingham [Alabama], then we had, and we had, well, it was a small town but we were exposed to people from, from out, so we got culture from people out of the city for those two years.  And then the city after two years, the city, you know, took it over and we got local teachers for the most part.  But it was a nice experience, you know, both, both was nice experience.  In fact, I have some pictures of my high school that you probably will put in the--
Speaker 1: Sure.
Speaker 2: --in the--
Speaker 1: Okay.  So when you're in high school is the school within walking distance of your home or are you bused?
Speaker 2: Yes, it was in walking distance.
Speaker 1: Oh, it was in walking distance. Okay.  And how large was the school?
Speaker 2: It, it wasn't very large.  If I can remember correctly I think there were, well, four or five rooms and it was from the 7th grade through the 12th.  I think there was five rooms in that school.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And about how many students?
Speaker 2: At that time, I think it was probably something around about 350 kids, later on it grew but at the time when I was there it was probably about 350 children.
Speaker 1: That's sounds crowded.  Was overcrowding a problem in the school system when you were going (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, we were used, we were used to, you know, working together in closed, in closed group and it, it wasn't.
Story_ID: 283536
Speaker 1: Now you said your mother [Evernee Hubbard Hawkins] and, and your older sister [Daisy Hawkins] were both very good cooks.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: And so I'd like to ask at this point what are some of the smells and the sights and the sounds that remind you of growing up in Florence, Alabama?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah (laughter).
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: So, so many.  I remember, and we was crazy about salmon croquettes and my mother could make, cook some of the best ones, and incidentally just a couple of days ago, I cooked some but they weren't as good as the way, you know, she would cook it.  And there were certain other things, when I see preserves I always think about, you know, how she would can, you know, these, these fruits and stuff like that.  And it, just so many things remind me of my mother, so many things.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: And so many things reminded me of my father [Everett Hawkins] too.  He was an outgoing, very friendly type of person and people just loved my father, they just loved him.  And more or less they, they would seek his advice, they seek his advice, even people that had more education would seek his advice.  My father was, was a very talented man, very talented.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now and again, I know you've described, well sorted of painted a picture for us of the cotton fields and the sack and the picking up cotton and chopping cotton and so that's a sight for the rural part of Alabama but how about some of the sights of the City of Florence.  Was the, the pace a lot faster, traffic, or (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, it--
Speaker 1: --everything?
Speaker 2: --yes it was.  It was--
Speaker 1: What did Florence look like growing up?
Speaker 2: Florence was just a little medium sized town.  It had a few stores and they were sort of close together, not a lot of stores.  And then the, the, the, the people lived around the town, you know, they was around the town.  The town wasn't very large, the town proper wasn't very large.  And we had a theater, and we had, I'm trying to think of some of the other things that, well there was a courthouse, of course, and a post office, and they all took up this, there were about five blocks that composed this, the inner, the inner part of the city and then out was little, it, outlying stores and maybe something, and then the houses around that part.  It was nice.  But it wasn't very large.  You could, you could walk through it in, oh, it would take you a couple of hours, it wasn't a big town.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But it, it was very friendly.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: Very friendly.
Speaker 1: And, and some of the sounds of Florence?  Was it a quiet town or a lot of action there?
Speaker 2: It was quite a bit of action for a small town (laughter)--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --quite a bit of action.  We had, well there were a lot of programs, we had a lot of programs at the school and also the churches.  Now we lived very close to the church that we joined, it was right around the corner from where we lived, and then there were another corner, up the street.  So it was always some activities.  If one church wasn't having something, another church, and we made no distinction between Methodist, and Baptist, Presbyterian, we was friends at school and when they would have something we would go and be part of theirs.  And, and so it was this kind of like, you know, they say it take as village to raise a child, well I was really raised by a village, Florence was like a little village.  And the people, the older ladies was like my mother, I obeyed them just like I did my mother or they were my big sisters, and the same thing with my mother that their kids obeyed her too.  So we were, we were kind of just like a, a big family in Florence.  And the teachers was the same way.  In fact, two of my high school teachers [at Burrell Normal School, Florence, Alabama] also attended the church and they taught Sunday school, so you see I had them in school, and I had them in church and you better not act up because if they told your mother, you know, you got it.  You really got it when you got home.  But it was, it was really a nice experience.  And although I tell people I grew up poor, I didn't grow up in poverty.  It's a difference between poor and poverty.  Poverty kind of gets your spirit but poor you, you don't have some of the material things you would like to have.  So although we were poor, we, we didn't know we was poor because we was happy, you know, and we had so many, much, you know, going for us in Florence, just so many good things going for us.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: I love the little old town.
Story_ID: 283537
Speaker 1: Well, you were there in high school [Burrell Normal School, Florence, Alabama] in the 1930s, during the Great Depression.  Did, economically, did Florence [Alabama] really feel the effects of the Depression?
Speaker 2: Oh, yes.
Speaker 1: Really?
Speaker 2: Oh, yes.
Speaker 1: What were the, the clear signs of, that there were really economic problems in the country for you?
Speaker 2: The clear signs was that your wages was very low.  I think my oldest sister [Daisy Hawkins], I think she was working a whole week for $3.50.  Of course, my mother [Evernee Hubbard Hawkins] was getting more, you know, out there at the college [Florence State Teachers College; University of North Alabama, Florence, Alabama] and I think her, I think her salary was something around about ten dollars a week, which at that time was a godsend because so many people didn't even, you know, didn't even have a job.  And it was, it was hard times for a number of years.  And then it started picking, you know, when, when [President Franklin Delano] Roosevelt came in with the Great Society [sic. New Deal] and things started, you know, working up a little bit better.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But as I said we grew up poor, but we didn't grow up in poverty because poverty is a spirit and we just really had a good time.  We didn't even realize we was poor, we just knew it was things we didn't have (laughter).
Speaker 1: Now what were, do you recall any of the Roosevelt programs like the WPA [Works Progress Administration] or the--
Speaker 2: My brother [Everett Hawkins, Jr.] finally went into that program, my oldest brother.
Speaker 1: Oh, did he?  Okay.
Speaker 2: And also I'm trying to think of what this other program that he went into, to and I think he came to, I think he worked in Cincinnati [Ohio] but it was a program that they had for young men and he--
Speaker 1: Was that the Civilian Conservation Corps?
Speaker 2: That that was the name of it, uh-huh.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And so you had one brother who benefited directly (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) My, my oldest brother.
Speaker 1: --from that?
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And then later on he got a job at the stove foundry, you know, where they made stoves and everything.  So things started picking up, you know, a little bit better--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --later on, you know.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: And that's how they were able to send my sister, me, and my, not younger brother, but my next to the youngest brother to college.  So out of the family of, of, of eight, three of us went to college.  And then my oldest sister later on when she came to Cincinnati, she went into nurse training.  And then my other sister who was smarter than I but didn't want any more education, she went into real estate for a while and then she went back into nursing too.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So we all did fairly well for, for poor country people (laughter).
Story_ID: 283538
Speaker 1: I wanna come back to the subject of education, especially since that's where you, you made so many inroads as far as your career is concerned.  But I wanna ask also about work in politics during the Great Depression because so many of our textbooks say that because of [President Franklin Delano] Roosevelt's New Deal, and black Americans' gratitude to Roosevelt for the New Deal programs, a lot of Republicans became Democrats during the Great Depression.  Did you see that kind of switching of political party affiliations in your family or among the other folks in town?
Speaker 2: No, it was not--
Speaker 1: No?
Speaker 2: --surprisingly.  And I didn't know too much about, you know, politics at that time but people there, they were Republicans and most of us in Florence [Alabama] were Republicans until I came to Cincinnati [Ohio].  See the Republican Party was different in those days from what it is now.  A lot of Republic, the Democrats, do you remember when, I think it was when, Fannie Lou Hamer--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --got the black delegation, you know, a seat and they walked out.
Speaker 1: In the '60s [1960s], yes.
Speaker 2: In, in the '60s [1960s].  And they formed a party called the Dixiecrat and it couldn't get anywhere so later on the Republican Party was kind of, you know, dying, so a lot of the Dixiecrats went over.  Now the Republican Party is not truly the Republican Party it was at that time because a lot of the Southern Democrats went to that party and they sort of took over and made it a little bit more conservative.  But in, in Alabama, we, for the most, people did their voting Republican.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Were, so people at that time still calling it, the, the party of [President Abraham] Lincoln?  And--
Speaker 2: Yes, Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So the Republican Party still believed in the 1930s to be a friendly party--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --towards--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --African American people?
Speaker 2: Yes, Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Oh, okay.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Well thank you for clearing that up for me.  (Laughter) Okay.  So not everybody bid fare, farewell to the party of Lincoln?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: A lot of blacks--
Speaker 2: But not at that time.
Speaker 1: Now you said you were loyal to the Republican Party until you came to Cincinnati?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Oh, okay.  And that was in--
Speaker 2: Nineteen fifty-eight [1958].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And then (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So that's a long time after Roosevelt?
Speaker 2: Yes, (laughter) a long time.  And when I said I'm Republican they said, you're Republican, (laughter) you know.  And then they started painting the picture, you know, a little differently from what we had, you know, in rural Alabama, I mean, in Florence, Alabama.  And then later on when I did decide, you know, to get into politics, I, I went Democrat.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Went Democrat.
Speaker 1: All right.
Story_ID: 283539
Speaker 1: I said I would go back to education.  So let's do that now.
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Okay.
Speaker 1: But, and maybe more about politics later.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: But again in Florence [Alabama], you said you attended the, the Burrell High School [Burrell Normal School, Florence, Alabama]?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what year did you graduate from the high school in Florence?
Speaker 2: Nineteen thirty-nine [1939].
Speaker 1: All right.  And did you go to college right after that?
Speaker 2: No, because my sister was ahead of me and she was in college and they couldn't afford to send two of us, so I had to wait until she got two years.  At that time they could come out in two years and get a job.  And after she came out then I went in (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And she got a job teaching, so that was a little extra income coming in to see that I would get through, get through college too.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And did you plan to major in education right away when you went to college?
Speaker 2: Oh, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  And when did you finish up your training as a teacher?
Speaker 2: Well in the interim I got married, came to Cincinnati [Ohio] and got married, and it was a little later, it was 1951 when I went back.  And I did it in the summer because I got a job when I went back, teaching, and I did that last year in summers which through mid-1951.  So that's--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --the year I graduated from Alabama A&M [Alabama Agricultural and Mechanical College; Alabama Agricultural and Mechanical University, Normal, Alabama].
Speaker 1: So bachelor's degree from Alabama A&M?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: In 1951?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now you said you got married in the interim.  So you went to college for a while?
Speaker 2: Three years.
Speaker 1: Three years.  And got married?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And were a full-time homemaker for that--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --time period.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Would you like to mention your husband's name as part of the interview?
Speaker 2: His name was Monroe Thomas [ph.].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: All right.  And, and you were married to him here in Cincinnati?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  When did you get married?
Speaker 2: Nineteen forty-five [1945].
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  And then you went back south to finish your degree?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Any (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Of course, 'cause--
Speaker 1: --special reason for that?
Speaker 2: Well we separated and later on we divorced.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you went back home to family and--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --and schooling?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  And, and why Alabama A&M?
Speaker 2: Well that was the closest college to where we lived and also it was a very accommodating college.  It gave us jobs that we could work, you know, and pay part of our tuition.  Because most of the people, as you said during that time, they didn't have the type of jobs then that we have now, so most of the kids they gave us some little part-time job to help us, you know, to help us through school.  And I just love 'em for that.  I just love 'em for that.  And it, it was beautiful.  It was, it was sort of like a home away from home too, it was another extending of the village.  It was a small college and you lived on it, the instructors, and they learned you, and you became a part of, of a big family there.  So it was really nice, Alabama A&M.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: A school that sat on a hill and then the nickname was The Hill.
Story_ID: 283540
Speaker 1: All right.  Mrs. Thomas [HistoryMaker Hannah H. Thomas], we were talking at the end of the last segment about your experiences at Alabama A&M [Alabama Agricultural and Mechanical College; Alabama Agricultural and Mechanical University, Normal, Alabama].  And I just wanted to ask for the record, what do the A and the M stand for?
Speaker 2: Agricultural and mechanical.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So was it a technical school at the time that you were there?
Speaker 2: Yes, it was.  That's why I went into home ec [home economics], it was the, the going thing at that time.  And, of course, they had a lot of farm equipments and many of the young men went into the farming and all like that so it was a agricultural and mechanical college.
Speaker 1: Okay. Now were those pretty popular for the, now that's a historically black institution [HBCU]?
Speaker 2: Yes.  Were those pretty popular in the South among African Americans going to college?
Speaker 1: Yes it was.  And Tuskegee [Institute; Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, Alabama] was also similar, similar, um-hm.
Speaker 2: Also in Alabama?
Speaker 1: All in, in Alabama.  But Tuskegee was different, it was more or less on the educational type.  So we had, the colleges were different.  There were some with the agriculture, you know, flavor and then there were some with the, the educational part where they went into, you know, the science, the reading, literature, and all like that.  So there were different types of colleges in the South.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Well now if I'm not mistaken at one point Tuskegee had, was an industrial and normal school--
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: --for training teachers?
Speaker 1: Yes, uh-huh.
Speaker 2: Now did Alabama A&M also have a normal school for teacher training?
Speaker 1: No they didn't at that time but I think now they have.  Um-hm.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Now what city is Alabama A&M in?
Speaker 1: It's in Huntsville, Alabama [sic.].
Speaker 2: Huntsville. Okay.  All right.  And, and I wanted to ask also about your experiences there.  You said it's, it's more of a technical school than necessarily a teacher training school but were there opportunities for studying literature and fine arts at Alabama A&M too?
Speaker 1: Oh, yes.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Now my (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Were you able to take--
Speaker 1: --my sister took elementary education, I went into home ec but she went into elementary education.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: So even though there's no normal school, you can become a teacher--
Speaker 1: Oh, yes.
Speaker 2: --in training?
Speaker 1: Yes, it was, it was, it was more than, the home ec, was not as large as if it was a regular elementary, you know, type of, of program.  But in, in secondary, in the, in the college that I was in home economics, we had a lot of art too.  It was kind of a homemaking course too and we learned to decorate and, and all like that and, you know, and everything, and sew and cook.  It was, it was lovely.  It was very lovely.
Speaker 2: So now in addition to the decorative arts were there opportunities for performing arts, music, or, or other performing arts?
Speaker 1: Oh, yes.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Were you able to take advantage of any of those opportunities to study the arts?
Speaker 1: Well I didn't.  But there were, there were those who did.  I didn't sing in the choir either because I can't sing but we had a traveling choir, Alabama A&M choir, went all over the state, you know, singing.  And one thing I liked about it, we, we brought in so many people.  In fact, I tell people I'm one of the persons that probably met Dr. Mary McLeod Bethune, she was one of our Founders Day speaker.  We had people, people like Dr. Mordecai Johnson, had the people that would come in, you know, during or Founders Day program.  So we were, at Alabama we was exposed to the world, we was exposed to all kind of speakers that that came in.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Now, I, I think Mrs. Bethune lived 'til about 1955, so when she was speaking at Alabama A&M was she, were you still a student there or--
Speaker 1: No.
Speaker 2: --working in the community?
Speaker 1: It was 1952 when she came there.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: Okay.  And--
Speaker 1: She, she was, she was, she was walking on a cane at that time but she wasn't exactly too feeble but she could get around at that time.
Speaker 2: Do you remember--
Speaker 1: Oh, incidentally, when you spoke about her, a friend of mine went to Bethune-Cookman College [Bethune-Cookman University, Daytona Beach, Florida] and one time when I was visiting there I did spend a night on their campus and I saw her house too, she took, they took me to see her house but I was on the campus of Bethune-Cookman College.
Speaker 2: Okay.  In Florida?
Speaker 1: In Florida.
Speaker 2: All right.  Now I'm just wondering, do you remember the content of the speech that she gave at Alabama A&M?  Do you know what she talked about on that day?
Speaker 1: Well it was Founders Day and she more or less talked about her starting this school because the, the president that started the school there his name was William, William Hooper Councill and they have a hall named the Councill Hall and that was for, where the freshmen stayed the Councill Hall.  And she talked about education and founding schools, and the school she founded because as I said, it was Founders Day, so she talked more or less on the subject of that and education.
Speaker 2: Okay.  And you say that was 1952 (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And I got a chance to shake her hand (laughter).
Speaker 2: How wonderful.
Speaker 1: Yes, it was.
Story_ID: 283541
Speaker 1: I know you said you were teaching now in Alabama in the 1950s.  How long did you teach in, is it all in Huntsville [Alabama] that you're teaching?
Speaker 2: No, Florence, Alabama.
Speaker 1: Oh, Florence.  Okay.  So you go to school in Huntsville?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Go back to Florence to teach?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So how long did you teach in Florence?
Speaker 2: Ten years.
Speaker 1: Ten years.  Okay.  All at the elementary school level?
Speaker 2: No, some at the elementary level.  I taught at a high school and I taught biology and science, eighth and ninth grade science, and tenth grade biology.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.
Speaker 2: And I did, I think, four years out of the ten years I was there.  And the other part I was teaching fourth and fifth grade, had two grades.  I was teaching, um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Did you still have a lot of family in Florence at that time?
Speaker 2: At that time, all was there except two sisters.  Um-hm.
Speaker 1: So when did you decide to migrate away from the hometown of Florence?
Speaker 2: Well I had been visiting up here, you know, after my sister came and I think it was in 1944 that I like, I kind of like Cincinnati [Ohio], I would just visit during the summer when school was out.  And I decided to come up here in 1958.  And for several reasons, one that I know they were close to the campus and I could, you know, continue my education and I wouldn't have to go to boarding school.  And the second, that I always wanted to live in a bigger city than Florence (laughter).
Speaker 1: So migrating to Cincinnati then you said around 1958?
Speaker 2: Yes, it was.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Did you enroll in, in college right away (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right--
Speaker 1: --when you came to Cincinnati?
Speaker 2: --right away (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what school was that?
Speaker 2: That was school of education.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: College of Education.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Was that the University of Cincinnati (Cincinnati, Ohio)?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And that's where I did my retraining for elementary education.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And when did you finish that program?
Speaker 2: Nineteen sixty-four [1964].
Speaker 1: And so that was, was that another bachelor's degree or--
Speaker 2: Masters of Education.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: M.Ed. (laughter).
Speaker 1: All right.  In 1964.
Speaker 2: Master of Education.
Speaker 1: Now were you working and going to school at the same time?
Speaker 2: Oh yes, I was.  I did that during the summers.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So tell me about your work with the schools in Cincinnati.  When did that begin and how did you combine the work with the schooling at the grad level?
Speaker 2: In 1958, I was working in a little suburb of Cincinnati called Lincoln Heights [Ohio] and it was practically all, you know, black.  And it was a small school and the people was friendly like I, I made many friends there.  And I worked there six years and they were six beautiful years, six beautiful years.  But the pay was better in the city and when I got my master's [degree] and then I was able to come to the city (laughter) so then I came to the city and seventeen years was in the city and six years was in, in Lincoln Heights.  And that was, I was working in the elementary education there.  But it was nice, the people were very friendly.  And it reminded me so much of my hometown, Lincoln Heights did.  It was, it was just a little village but the people was very nice.
Speaker 1: You know, I don't visit Cincinnati often but when I'm here, it feels very much like a southern town, especially when I (laughter) had listened to the voices of a lot of the people.
Speaker 2: Well, it really does.  It really is a southern town, more than a northern town (laughter).  I laugh about that, I say, you know, it has all the flavor of a southern city, it's just larger but it's, it's really, it's definitely a southern town.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now it's interesting that you say that, and since you're a native southerner from Alabama and a lot of people think Ohio is Alabama north.  But (laughter) what do you think, what is it about Cincinnati that, that reminds you of, of the small town, especially Lincoln Heights?  Since you made that comparison.
Speaker 2: Well Lincoln Heights was, as I said it was a very small neighborhood and for a number of years it's, it was struggling, a very poor place.  I don't know exactly the history of Lincoln Heights but when I came here I know it was very poor, it's, you know, at that time.  And I think it's a little bit advanced now.  But as I said the people, and I don't know whether they left Cincinnati or whether they came from, from some other place, you know, and migrated there but I think it was more or less, some of the people from Cincinnati, you know, started a little village out there.  But as I said the people was friendly and the kids was very nice and, and they, they were very smart too.  But it was, as I said, the circumstances were, they were real poor.  They didn't have a lot of factors to give them a basis, you know, for the education, so they didn't have a lot of equipment that, you know, the better schools had.  But some of our kids, even one girl that I taught, she's a doctor now and several of them went on, you know, to do well.  Learned to do well there in Lincoln Heights.
Speaker 1: Do you remember the name of that star pupil who's a doctor now?
Speaker 2: I'm trying to think of that little girl's name and one thing it was so funny I taught her in the fifth grade and she was always losing the little bow on her hair and coming for me to tie it back, (laughter) I remember that.  I never thought she'd be a doctor.  I can't remember, I can't remember her name but she was a cute little girl.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well I'm sure there are a lot of students (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) But, but, but very clingy.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: (Laughter) She was very clingy.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: You never know what kids are gonna be, you know, when they grow up.  You never know.
Speaker 1: But you said you were six years in Lincoln Heights?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Story_ID: 283542
Speaker 1: And seventeen in the Cincinnati Public Schools.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: You find the, the Cincinnati [Ohio] school experience was as positive as the one in Lincoln Heights [Ohio]?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: No?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: And, and what were some of the, the reasons for that?
Speaker 2: In the first place it was, it was larger and you had a, a lot of different type of people there.  At Lincoln Heights you had more or less the same type of teachers that were children, you know.  We, we was from the city, most of us was from the city, they had some out of town teachers to, but we carried there the flavor like you said of the southern people because we, we dealt with the kids where they were, you know, on that level.  But when I came to the city, the supervisor and things were different, the curriculum, you know, was different.  And I, the first year in, in the city I had a little difficult time, you know, adjusting to the change from, from the southern, you know, teaching in Lincoln Heights which was similar to, you know, my hometown [Florence, Alabama].  And then you come to the city here it's a different curriculum, you know, all together.  But I finally mastered it and I'm, I did pretty well in the city (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Did pretty well.
Speaker 1: Did you ever go into counseling at all or did you prefer the classroom teacher responsibilities that went along with that?
Speaker 2: Yes, I think more or less, the latter one.
Speaker 1: Enjoyed the classroom experience?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Story_ID: 283543
Speaker 1: Now, Mrs. Thomas [HistoryMaker Hannah H. Thomas], we have a beautiful background for this interview, there are all these pictures of children behind you on the piano.  But do you have children?  Did you raise children here in Cincinnati [Ohio]?
Speaker 2: No, I had one but it died as a baby.  It was sort of premature so, I really didn't experience raising mine, but I said my motherhood was with my brother's children and they feel like mine--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --because I raised them, you know, practically.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you raised two children?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what are their names, please?
Speaker 2: Carolyn Theresa [Hawkins (ph.)] and she went into music, she graduated from Hampton [University, Hampton, Virginia] and she got her master's [degree] from Rutgers University [The State University of New Jersey, New Brunswick, Jersey] and she went back and got her law degree from Rutgers University.  The boy went one semester at the University of Cincinnati [Cincinnati, Ohio] and dropped out (laughter).  And now he has his own little business in Cincinnati, Ohio.  He's in, in landscaping and tree trimming.  And, of course, she went into law when she went into, went back to, and she's married and she has three little girls.  And the two younger ones, the older one has graduated and she is in law, she is at school in, in New Jersey.  The younger ones, which was much younger than the older one, they're in Pennsylvania going to a school there, boarding school.
Speaker 1: Okay. Now did you mention your adopted son's name?  I know you mentioned--
Speaker 2: No, it wasn't adopted they were, they was my brother's children.  I never did adopt them, I wanted--
Speaker 1: Oh.
Speaker 2: --I wanted them to keep their name, the Hawkins because I was a Thomas at that time.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So they kept the Hawkins, the father's name.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But I raised them.
Speaker 1: All right.  And, and the young man, what's his name?
Speaker 2: Kenneth [ph.] (laughter).
Speaker 1: Kenneth Hawkins.
Speaker 2: Kenneth Hawkins.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  Thank you.
Speaker 2: And he just left, he was up here this weekend.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: Yeah, my, my niece in Dayton [Ohio], who is my oldest sister's [Daisy Hawkins] daughter, she had a birthday, her seventieth birthday and the whole clan came up.  And the two that just left here, was two from Chicago [Illinois] that came up and the others came down from L.A. [Los Angeles, California] and New Jersey and they had a birthday party for her.
Speaker 1: Okay. So how many years then did your niece and nephew spend with you when you were raising them?
Speaker 2: Well, he was not, he was eight years old when he came and she was nine, well she was, she was ten, I believe, and they stayed here until they, they graduated and went to college and came back and stayed a number of years and then she went back to New Jersey and she married there.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And then later on he married and went to Memphis [Tennessee] and lived.  And, and then when my sister passed in 1986 he and his wife went to Alabama and they took over the family home there, we had a family home in Alabama so they went there to live.  And they loved it so that's where they are now.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And she's still in New Jersey.
Story_ID: 283544
Speaker 1: Wanna talk more about your life and work in Cincinnati [Ohio].  A lot of people here in the city seem to honor you as the mother of African American history (laughter).
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: So how did you get from the classroom experience to being, you know, Miss History in Cincinnati?  Where did that great love for African American history come from?
Speaker 2: Well it really came from Alabama, I sound like a song, (singing) "I came from Alabama with my banjo on my knee" ['Oh Susanna']. Well I brought a lot of this history and culture from Alabama because that was one thing that our teachers from elementary school up, they taught us our history and culture.  And that's one thing I found differently from the city schools, they don't teach the kids the history that I got, you know, growing up.  So when I came to Cincinnati I came with a background and I had, I had worked in Florence, Alabama, too in prompt, in programs like this, you know, I had culture programs there.  So when I came to Cincinnati I just brought all that information, you know, here.  And little by little I have been able to instill it in the City of Cincinnati, you know.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you were able to incorporate it, that into the classroom lessons?
Speaker 2: Much of it, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And then in the community did, did you have an organization then for sharing history with, with folks in the community also?
Speaker 2: Yes, the name of my organization is the Harriet Beecher Stowe Historical Cultural Association [Inc., Cincinnati, Ohio].  And we got the name Harriet Beecher Stowe because we started trying to save old schools, historic schools that were named his, Harriet Beecher Stowe School [Cincinnati, Ohio].  And then we, we charted under that name so we just kept the Harriet Beecher Stowe name but we're really, it's a cultural, educational type of organization.  And we're a 501(c)(3), we got our charter in 1981, and we became nonprofit in nineteen, I think it was 1982 or '83 [1983]--one [1981].
Speaker 1: Okay.  So can you tell us a little bit, just for the record, about the, the place of Mrs. Harriet Beecher Stowe in American history and why that name is so important to folks in Cincinnati?
Speaker 2: Well I learned about her before I came to Cincinnati, you know, she was the one that wrote 'Uncle Tom's Cabin.'  And they said when Abraham, Ham, [President] Abraham Lincoln met her, he said, "You're the little lady that started the Civil War."  I don't know whether it started or not but, you know, she wrote this, not, novel 'Uncle Tom's Cabin.'  And we had read a lot about her, you know, before I came to Cincinnati and then I finally located her home, you know, here.  And that school was named for her too and we were trying to save the school and that's why we, you know, it's had that name.  But I learned, I learned about her before I came to Cincinnati.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So well, if my memory serves me correctly, Mrs. Harriet Beecher Stowe was from a, a family of evangelical sort of, revivalists (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes.
Speaker 1: --you know, the Beecher family--
Speaker 2: Um-hm, Um-hm, yes.
Speaker 1: --and the Beecher's Bible.  But is your group an African American historical organization and because I know, that that's a white family from the 19th century, the Harriet Beecher Stowe--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --historical group here is that an African American history group?
Speaker 2: Well the reason we had that name, as I said, we started out, before we organized we started out trying to save Stowe School.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And we, we said, when we put out our advertisement we said help us save Stowe School.  So we became identified with that name.  We thought we was gonna save the school and we just gonna use that name but then after we became chartered, that was to let the people know we was still the group that was trying to save Stowe School.  So that's how we got, otherwise I don't think we would have had Harriet Beecher Stowe in there but it really came from trying to save the school.  And using that term for well about a year we was working trying to save the school and we were saying save Stowe School, save the Harriet Beecher Stowe School, you know.  So that's how we got that name, you know on that.
Speaker 1: So is that group then primarily an educational sort of general historical (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes.
Speaker 1: --group?  Okay.
Story_ID: 283545
Speaker 1: And from that we have a, a little theater called the Sojourner Truth Troupe and we go to schools.  And we organized that in 1985, we'd go to schools and we'd go to churches, and we'd even go to nursing homes and perform and we tell peoples about the rich culture.  So I really have been in many different areas of spreading culture here in Cincinnati [Ohio].  As I said, I brought it from Alabama, I got all that back, my background growing up.
Speaker 2: So now you have a second group then, named for a great woman in history?
Speaker 1: Oh, yes.
Speaker 2: So now why Sojourner Truth?  How did you come up, upon that name?
Speaker 1: Because she traveled and we'd go, we travel too, we go from school to school.  You know, it was said that her real name was, was Isabelle Baumfree [sic. Isabella Baumfree].  And she said a divine revelation came one day to her and the Lord told her to go up and down the, the country telling the people about the evil of slavery and that word sojourner means travel, so we travel from school to school and we named our little theater the Sojourner Truth Troupe.
Speaker 2: Okay.  All right.  Now I, I believe, I also read somewhere that you founded African American Heritage Day?  Is it in Cincinnati?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Okay.  And now how long has that been a regular celebration in this community?
Speaker 1: Seventeen years.  And I started that with the city's bicentennial celebration in 1988.  It seems like that we, as a group of people, were not being included in that big celebration, it was a whole year celebration, so to make sure that we, we would be a part of it, I pulled together about fifteen people and we decided now we'll have a day too and that's how the Harriet Be- the Heritage Day started, African American Heritage Day--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --for the city's bicentennial.  And we had such a beautiful time that year we decided well we'll just keep it going.
Speaker 2: So now is this yet a third organization then that that keeps this program coming to us on an annual basis?
Speaker 1: Yes, it's part of the history (laughter).
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: And how do you support all of these various efforts, just private donations?
Speaker 1: Private donations.
Speaker 2: Okay.  And, and that's been successful?
Speaker 1: It, it has, it has been successful.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: You'll see some of the pictures in your group that you will take (laughter).
Speaker 2: Okay.  Look forward to that.  Okay.  And so that's in the 1980s, late 1980s when you're starting that.  So Cincinnati is, is a thriving city then if you have a bicentennial in, in 1988, even before Ohio becomes a state?
Speaker 1: Yes it was.  And that's surprising, isn't it?
Speaker 2: Okay. And interesting too.
Speaker 1: It, it is.
Speaker 2: (Unclear) Ohio becomes a state in 1803, right?
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: All right.  So in the 1990s and if we're, we can move closer to the present, what kinds of things are keeping you busy or is that enough?  Are you still teaching?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) You say, you saying it that that's too much.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That's too much.  No, I retired in 1980 and then I could devote full time, you know, to all these other activities (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.  So the cultural programming then becomes your full-time job--
Speaker 2: Oh, yes.
Speaker 1: --after you leave teaching, so--
Speaker 2: Oh, yes.
Speaker 1: All right.  So leaving teaching then with, with a total of over thirty years?
Speaker 2: Thirty-two years.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Including the Alabama experience, Florence, Alabama, Lincoln Heights [Ohio], and Cincinnati?
Speaker 2: Yes, um-hm.
Speaker 1: Thirty-two years.  Okay.  And, and then full time with the cultural programs?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Toward the end of the 1980s.  All right.  And so does that continue pretty much in the, in the 1990s?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you get ever support from the city to launch any of these programs?
Speaker 2: Oh, yes, the city was very generous.  The first year we had it our total, well that bill came to ten thousand dollars, they paid the entire bill that year.  And since then whatever they charge, you know, like setup and overtime police is working, if it's $950 we pay 95 and they pay the rest.  We don't--they pay 90 percent of whatever our overhead costs is at the city.  But like if we bring speakers in we, we take care of that but the city is very generous.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And is this now just a one day celebration or does it extend over several days (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, it's--
Speaker 1: --for the African American Heritage?
Speaker 2: Yes, it's just one day.  We tried two days and it wasn't very successful so we just have one day.  But it's an all day celebration.  All day celebration with the parade and, and we have bands and schools.  And what, what, in fact, we include everybody, churches, organizations, groups, people, anything anybody want to do in good taste, they're on the square.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It's, it's our day, African American Heritage Day.
Story_ID: 283546
Speaker 1: Well there's a lot of history here in Cincinnati [Ohio].  And I think perhaps one of the reasons is its close proximity to the Ohio River and with slavery just on the other side in the 19th century.  People have come to associate Cincinnati with freedom.  So I wonder if you work at all with the, the Freedom Center here in Cincinnati, [National] Underground Railroad Freedom Center [Cincinnati, Ohio].
Speaker 2: No, I was asked but as I said my load was so heavy I just didn't have time but, but I'm very much connected with it.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I'm very--
Speaker 1: In what way?
Speaker 2: That I visited when they had the opening, I took a group of kids from my church there.  And, of course, they interviewed them and they were on television and all that sort of stuff, you know.  And later on we're gonna take them down for other programs too.  And the latest, the latest recognition that I received, one of the persons that was head of that he was also recognized as a Lion for the urban, Urban League.  So we are, and we were very, we are very good friends.  So I keep in touch with him.  And at some time I probably will become a part of it.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Hopefully.
Speaker 1: Well, of course, you know, there was some controversy nationally, about locating the Freedom Center here at Cincinnati because just before it, the ground was broken to build that, there were some problems between the black community and the police department, especially here in Cincinnati (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes.
Speaker 1: --with a number of African American men being shot and one in particular shot in the back. Did you ever have any doubts about Cincinnati's place in the history of freedom for black people and whether or not the Freedom Center belonged here?  Since you focused so much on history.
Speaker 2: Well I was sort of wondering about Cincinnati because Cincinnati is not the very, most liberal city in the world, it's not.  But since it represent the first part of freedom when they cross from, supposed to be the slave states into the free states, I guess, it would be fitting and proper to have it, because they, they made a big to do about coming across the river.  In fact, when we had our first day on the square, we did have slaves that marched across, you know, the bridge and, of course, they was photographed and all like that.  So considering that, I guess, this would be a starting point for freedom, supposedly freedom, so I sort of went along with that.  But I remember in, in 2001, that's when the policeman shot this boy and that's when they had the riots and everything.  And, of course, a lot of blacks did feel like that, Cincinnati was not deserving of it.  But in all in all, I hope, you know, I hope it does well.  And, you know, Margaret Garner, now she was from Kentucky and she was the one that they have this, this video that they making and, of course, they will be presenting it at [Cincinnati] Music Hall [Cincinnati, Ohio] sometime in the fall.  But they're having little parts of it in, in various places, you know.  And, you know, she is the one that killed her daughter rather than let her go back to slavery.
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: And well they, they have put in a lot.  And also in the, in the Underground Railroad Center they have this, I think it was a set, a barn, barn like thing where they would have the slaves, and it was brought from Kentucky too, some parts of Kentucky, and it's, and, and it's on exhibit too.  So they have quite a few, you know, in there.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It, it takes about three hours to look at all the, the various activities that they have in there.
Speaker 1: In the Freedom Center?
Speaker 2: Very impressive.
Speaker 1: So now that Margaret Garner story, that's the one that Toni Morrison used for (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah.
Speaker 1: --the novel 'Beloved' [Toni Morrison].
Speaker 2: Yes, um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And, and that was a slave escaping from Kentucky--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --coming to the Cincinnati area?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So true story?
Speaker 2: It is a true story.
Speaker 1: All right.  And she's also honored in the Freedom Center--
Speaker 2: Oh, yes.
Speaker 1: --with her display?
Speaker 2: Oh, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  And maybe we should say for the record, that Toni Morrison is from Ohio.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Lorain, Ohio.
Speaker 2: Of course (laughter).
Speaker 1: Closer to my home.
Speaker 2: Of course.
Speaker 1: Since we're talking to a HistoryMaker in Ohio, just wanted to get that--
Speaker 2: Well, not exactly.
Speaker 1: You are, you are a HistoryMaker.
Speaker 2: You know, people call me that.  And at my church they got me listed as the historian of the church.  And I said don't give me those titles.  When I think of a historian, I think of somebody, you know, kind of way up there, I don't feel like now I am up there as a historian.  But I do, you know, I do try to preserve history and culture.  And I try to teach it to the children too.
Speaker 1: Now have you been able to work with the church in order to, to promote that idea of preserving history?  Your church?
Speaker 2: Of course.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what church is that, please?
Speaker 2: Union Baptist Church [of Cincinnati, Cincinnati, Ohio] on 7th [Street] and Central [Avenue], downtown.
Speaker 1: Okay. Have you been with that congregation for a while?
Speaker 2: Forty, 42 years, or 43 years, I think.  And I started black history there and keep it going for seventeen years.  And now I'm working with the [Reverend Dr.] Martin Luther King [Jr.] celebration, I have that program every year.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So you see don't give me anything else to do, (laughter) I have too much already.
Speaker 1: Well do you, I know you said you're enjoying success with the organizations that you've established--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --and you're able to keep the programs going and to pay the bills sometimes with Cincinnati helping out with 90 percent of the bill being paid by the city.  But I'm, I'm wondering too about those difficult moments in Cincinnati's history, like the rioting in 2001.  Do you, you think the Queen City has come back from that period, have they, has there been enough healing as far as race relations are concerned?
Speaker 2: I think they have made a concerted effort, I really think they have and it is somewhat better.  But, you know, it takes a long time for people to give up the prejudice and the feelings and all the other things that they have but so far it seems to be sort of healing, somewhat.  And I'm hoping the Underground Railroad Center will, will do a little bit more, you know, towards it.  Because there are a few people against it but there are quite a few people are proud to have it, you know, proud to have it here, black and white.
Speaker 1: I know for a time there was a movement at the national level encouraging people to boycott Cincinnati--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --and the Jazz Fest [Cincinnati Music Festival] and, and everything else (laughter) that they have, the River Festival (Riverfest] because of the problems with race relations.
Story_ID: 283547
Speaker 1: Mrs. Thomas [HistoryMaker Hannah H. Thomas], at the end of the last segment we were just beginning to discuss Cincinnati's [Cincinnati, Ohio] recent history and the rioting right at the beginning of the 21st century and the problems with race relations.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: But you started to suggest that folks are beginning now to come back to Cincinnati including some of the jazz musicians.
Speaker 2: Yes (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.  So what are, again some of the other signs of progress, in addition to talking about the, the jazz concerts?
Speaker 2: Well it seems like that we don't have as many arrests as we had.  And I don't think we've had more than one maybe killing by police, if we've had one, we don't, we don't have that.  And it seem like they are trying to treat us a little bit better, you know, the arrest record is better.  And I haven't heard too many complaints about stopping, you know.  At one time they were doing a lot of stopping, you know, motorists, I heard that that had improved.  'Cause they stopped me a couple of times because I was speeding (laughter) but they didn't give me a ticket (laughter).
Speaker 1: Is that because you were Miss Cincinnati History or what (simultaneous)--?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No this is, this is an incident that I laugh about.  I was on my way to church [at Union Baptist Church of Cincinnati, Cincinnati, Ohio] and see, well it's a hill that I have to go down and it's pretty high and of course your car accelerates going down a hill and I have a pretty heavy car, when I got to the bottom I guess I was doing about sixty, it was forty-five miles and I had accelerated a little bit higher and he stopped me.  I said, oh, my, I was on my way to church and I was running a little late and, of course, I was dressed up in my purple, which I love, and the first thing he say, he said, "Are you on your way from church?"  I guess he thought I was Catholic and I had gone to early service.  And I said, "No I'm on my way to church."  So he said, "Well, you know, you were speeding."  I said, "I was?" You know, I'm acting all innocent and everything, you know.  And he talked a little bit, but and he said, "Well you have a good day," and he said, "You looking lovely."  And I said "Oh my gosh, thank you."  (Laughter) And he said, "Slow, slow down now."  I said, "Thank you, I will."  When he turned his back I got my speed back up again but that was an incident that I was stopped.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But it was a pleasant one.
Speaker 1: All right.  So you said the, the police community relations are better (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It, it--
Speaker 1: --for African Americans?
Speaker 2: --it is better.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: A lot of improvement but better.
Speaker 1: Is there a civilian review board for the police department here?
Speaker 2: Yes, it is.
Speaker 1: And that's made a difference?
Speaker 2: I think it has.  There's been some controversy about that.  They didn't want to adhere to some of the things that they had but they have no other choice.  So it's, it's working.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: And you said the music is coming back?
Speaker 2: Oh, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now that's Cincinnati Jazz Festival [Cincinnati Music Festival]?
Speaker 2: Jazz Festival.
Speaker 1: An annual event, I guess?
Speaker 2: Yes, (laughter) yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And when should we look forward to the next one?
Speaker 2: July.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: No, it's August this year.
Speaker 1: But summer (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It's coming, it's coming back in August.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I think it's 4th and 5th.  And we're still having the black family reunion which draws two and three thousand people.  It is one of the big events.  And it's been going on now sixteen years.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now is that a part of your [African American] Heritage Day celebration or is it something separate?
Speaker 2: It's not a part of mine but it's, it's Cincinnati, well it's not Cincinnati, it's regional, Detroit [Michigan], Chicago [Illinois], Louisville, Kentucky, and the smaller states in between, cities in between, they come here, this is kind of central, Cincinnati is a central place and they come from all, they convene from other places here and they have, they have a three or four days, it's called the Black Family Reunion [Midwest Regional Black Family Reunion Celebration] where families come together and they, of course, they have a beautiful program and they have speakers.  Now Florida [Evans] on 'Good Times' was one of the speakers a number of years ago.  In fact, they have brought many different type of people, personalities here.
Speaker 1: Oh, Esther Rolle?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Who played Florida?
Speaker 2: Yeah (laughter).
Speaker 1: Oh, okay.
Speaker 2: And I'm trying to think of, well, just the usual celebrities have been here, you know, for the Black Family Reunion.  And for our Day on the Square [African American Heritage Day] we have, we've had a couple too.  We had the president of Philander Smith [College, Little Rock, Arkansas], he was our fifth day speaker.  So some, sometime we get out of town speakers and sometimes we get local speakers from here, people that bring our message.  And also we had Hosea Williams, you know, he was one of the, [Reverend Dr.] Martin Luther King [Jr.], he was a speaker too for one of our Day on the Square.  So we have quite a time for that Day on the Square, quite a time.
Story_ID: 283548
Speaker 1: You know, a lot of the cities in the Midwest, and I include Cleveland [Ohio], have had some really colorful politicians (laughter) that come out of the black community, and for us it was [Mayor] Carl Stokes in the 1960s--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --in 1960s as the first black mayor of a, a major city.  And, and then, then we had [HistoryMaker] Richard Hatcher in Indiana, and then we had [Mayor] Harold Washington--
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.
Speaker 1: --in Chicago [Illinois].  Now does--
Speaker 2: Well now, I'll never forget him (laughter).
Speaker 1: Yeah.  And if we know, why do you suppose then that these individual mayors of all these different cities have earned this national reputation and is there anyone comparable in Cincinnati's [Cincinnati, Ohio] history as far as the political leadership is concerned?
Speaker 2: We've had Ted Berry, you know, Theodore Berry, he was one of our, our black mayors, he was the first one.  And I'm trying to think if we've had another one.  We've, we've had several vice mayors.  And the young lady [Alicia Reece] that's running now for mayor, it's all probability she will get it, and she is in her early thirties.  We had a, we have a young council now on, on city hall, very young.  But we have had some very influential politicians here in Cincinnati, some very influential ones.
Speaker 1: Okay. And have you been able to find the time in recent years to be active in politics?
Speaker 2: No, I'm not very active, I support, I support the, the, the program but I haven't found very much time.  And that's one thing I said I'm gonna get involved in but every time I think I have a few minutes for that something else, you know, divide my attention so I'm just content now to support, you know, whoever.
Speaker 1: Now I'm wondering you've been busy for so many years working on various cultural programs, are you, and you don't have the opportunities to mentor students anymore in the classroom, but are you grooming folks in, in the next generation to, to take over some of the work that you're doing or to, to work with you (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, I'm trying--
Speaker 1: --in keeping these programs?
Speaker 2: --I'm trying to do that at my church [Union Baptist Church of Cincinnati, Cincinnati, Ohio] and also in the organization [Harriet Beecher Stowe Historical Cultural Association Inc., Cincinnati, Ohio], I'm trying to bring up people and tell them about the history 'cause especially the Day on the Square [African American Heritage Day] so someone can take it over.  In fact, I've been trying to find someone to take it over and they, we can't walk in your shoes, I think they're afraid to come behind me, you know, how people are.  And I say well, don't try to walk in my shoes, you walk in your shoes and do whatever you see, you know, is best.  And I think this year I might be able to get someone, you know, to take it over and kind of be a understudy because then I can have time to do some of the other things too.  See I want to write a book about, you know, my life, my experience, and I also write poetry and I write songs too so that's sort of my hobby, um-hm, writing poetry.  Songs (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And you said you're not a singer so are you, you're writing songs for other people to sing?
Speaker 2: For other people to sing (laughter).  My family always, and we do a lot of, when Theresa [Carolyn Theresa Hawkins (ph.)] is here she plays the piano, and we get around the piano and we, we say, they say, Aunt Hannah [HistoryMaker Hannah H. Thomas] you just hurting, we'll sing your part (laughter).  I don't think I'm that bad but they always, you know, they tease me about my singing so, I don't sing (laughter).
Speaker 1: So what style of music do you write?  Are these sacred songs?
Speaker 2: Sacred songs, more or less sacred songs.  And the poetry, I'm writing a book of poems for children.  I have about twenty, I have about twenty-six or twenty-seven, when I get thirty-five I'm gonna have 'em published, that'll be large enough to be in a book.  And I'm trying to find time to get back to that.  I haven't, I haven't written a poem now in about a year because I've been so busy, you know, with other things and not too well either, you know.  But I'm gonna get back because I do want that book of poetry to be published.
Speaker 1: So there are other things that you still want to accomplish?
Speaker 2: Oh, yes (laughter) oh, yes.
Speaker 1: So still not officially retired?
Speaker 2: Not (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.  So in addition to the writing then of the songs and the poetry, are there other goals that you've set for yourself?
Speaker 2: Hmm.
Speaker 1: In the foreseeable future?
Speaker 2: To retire (laughter).
Speaker 1: To retire?
Speaker 2: To retire, to retire and just take it easy.  And I don't know when that's gonna happen (laughter) but that's my goal.  I feel like that all the years I've worked and raised a family and taught and then the twenty some years that I have been working, you know, diligently working here in the community, that I need, I need to retire.  I need some time to just be me, you know, and maybe have fun and travel and do a lot of other things that I haven't been able to do because I've been tied to so many, you know, different activities.
Story_ID: 283549
Speaker 1: Well, Mrs. Thomas [HistoryMaker Hannah H. Thomas], when you, you look back over your, your life, especially here in Cincinnati [Ohio], what are some of the things that you're most proud of?  The accomplishments that you're most proud of?
Speaker 2: There are so many things, I'm just trying to think of which might be the most important one.  Well one, I, when I was teaching at Lincoln Heights [Ohio], as I said that was a very poor, you know, area, and I always told the, the children that the world is bigger than Lincoln Heights.  So I was teaching just fifth grade then we had, I was teaching a division and I was teaching language arts for fifth graders, and I decide now we need to take these kids, you know, out of Lincoln Heights, take them somewhere.  So I arranged a trip to take them to Columbus, Ohio, and we went to the governor's and they, each child they let through the line, I think we took about a 105, we had a 125 but all didn't go, and each child had a chance to go through and sit in, they let them sit in the governor's seat so they were governor, they were governor of Ohio for one second (laughter).  And then we toured the city and we had made arrangements to have lunch at The Ohio State [University, Columbus, Ohio] and that's where we went.  Little country kids from Lincoln Heights and I don't guess they'd ever been to a university, we took.  And that was one of the things that I was very proud of because I at least exposed those children to more than just the little part that they had there in Lincoln Heights.  But it, it's been a lot of good memories that I have here in Lincoln Heights.  And I think the Day on the Square [African American Heritage Day] would come in too as one of the important days that I, I feel like it was really an accomplishment and some of the others were just things I felt like I was doing but I feel like those was two pretty, pretty major things.
Speaker 1: 'Cause when I look over some of the articles based on your record of service, you were named Woman of the Year for more than one year.  Now, now what led to, to those honors and, and who's bestowing the honor on you?
Speaker 2: Well it's the Cincinnati Enquirer Women of the Year, the Enquirer Women of the Year is done by the Cincinnati Enquirer.  And, of course, they have a staff and names are submitted and the write-up of their bios, what they have done et cetera, et cetera.  At the year when I was nominated there I think they said there was eighty-four names that was submitted and they reduced them down to thirty and then out of the thirty they pulled out ten.  And I didn't have any idea that I would be that, I was hoping I would, but I was one of the ten.  And after that year they were, I guess, they were impressed with me or whatever they said about me, so the next year when they was ready to advertise so to speak for the next Women of the Year, the next ten, they asked me if they could use my, my name and they said we are looking for more Hannah Thomas and that's what they trailblazer, you know, and they said that I was trailblazer, you know, that kind of stuff.  And I figured that that was more important than being woman of the year that they felt that they wanted other women, you know, like me, it was, it was really, it was really, touching (laughter).
Speaker 1: And what year was that, please?
Speaker 2: Well I was a Woman of the Year in 1992 and it was in 1993 that they wanted to use my picture to advertise for the next ten women of the year.
Story_ID: 283550
Speaker 1: I know you're very busy with the, the cultural programming and the work in the church [Union Baptist Church of Cincinnati, Cincinnati, Ohio], but do you have any time for social organizations, sororities, or (laughter) benevolent associations--
Speaker 2: (Laughter)
Speaker 1: --anything like that?
Speaker 2: No, I'm not, I'm not in any sororities.  And as I said the block club and I work with the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People], I'm a member of there, the local one and also the national one.  But I haven't been affiliated with any of their sororities though or any of the other clubs.
Speaker 1: Now I wonder if you would comment for, for our listeners and viewers since this is a video tape, on the history of the NAACP, what its function has been and, and also to say whether or not you're optimistic about its, its being a central civil rights organization in the 21st century?
Speaker 2: Well I was a member of the NAAACP when I grew up in Alabama soon as I, you know, became an adult, and then when I came to Cincinnati [Ohio] I joined, you know, the local chapter here.  And, of course, being steeped in history and reading about different cultures, when they organized, and the struggle that the NAACP has had.  I think that's what endears me to it, the reason I'm very supportive, the struggle that we have had and the, the help that they had, have given.  And although of late it seems that that is not the progressive type that it was, you know, in the early years, it is still there to kind of take care of us to some extent and I support it for that.  But I read a lot about the history, you know, the organization, I think it was 1907 or 1909, when I get my dates sort of mixed up, when it was organized.  And through the, through the years, you know, that it has been very progressive.  Especially during the, of trying to desegregate the South, you know, in the '60s [1960s], and the '50s [1950s] and the '60s [1960s] they were very prominent in support there, and in some other places, you know, where there were lynchings and things going on, the NAACP.  In fact, at one time it was our only voice, it was our only voice.  So I think we, we appreciate it for that but of late it's not the NAACP.  It seems that the people are not as dedicated.  I might be mistaken about that but it seem like they don't have the dedication that they had, you know, in the early years of the organization.
Speaker 1: Well, may I ask you then about some of the specific achievements or activities of the NAACP in your lifetime, just to, to get your assessment of, of whether or not those things continue to matter to folks who are associated with the group today?  You said you were born in 1916?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Right around the, the time that the United States was entering World War I [WWI] and the NAACP through W.E.B. DuBois is encouraging black men to close ranks with white Americans and make the world safe for democracy.  You think that was a, a smart move for the NAACP to take?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, I didn't, I don't remember that (laughter).
Speaker 1: Well just looking back on it, as someone who taught social studies, to close ranks in the time of war and forget about segregation he said, and discrimination in America, it's important that we make the world safe for democracy.  The NAA (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) He had a, yeah, he had a point there.  And sometimes you have to forget the difference because like they said we, we'll all hang together as friends or we'll die as fools, we'll separate and we'll hang as fools, so something like that, I might not be quoting that that quotation exactly right.  But there comes a time when we have to forget about age, sex, race, and all that kind of stuff and work together for the good of the whole.  So he had a point there that we have to close ranks because at that time they had an enemy that they were, was trying to fight so you had to come together for that.  And I admire President Truman [President Harry S. Truman] for desegregating the [U.S.] Army, you know.  If you're gonna work to, to protect your country work together.  And I was glad that he did that.
Story_ID: 283551
Speaker 1: Can we go back a little bit further with the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People]?  About the time you were in high school [Burrell Normal School, Florence, Alabama] in the 1930s, [W.E.B.] DuBois was saying that perhaps black people should forget about integrating this society and work on supporting your own businesses in their own black neighborhoods.  And its sounds like some of that was happening in Florence [Alabama].  Is that accurate to say that there were small self-supporting enterprises in communities in the South at work to the advantage of black people?
Speaker 2: A.G. Gaston is one in particular.  He didn't live in Florence, he was from Birmingham, Alabama, but, you know, he built that motel [A.G. Gaston Motel, Birmingham, Alabama] and, of course, he had schools and everything.  He was, he was a very, a very intelligent man.  In fact, he has come to our church [Union Baptist Church of Cincinnati, Cincinnati, Ohio] one time, of course, he's dead now, and spoke and I have gone to his hotel when I visit in Birmingham with some of my friends I stay at that hotel.  And it is a point of, of separate and I think we lost quite a bit when we integrated.  We integrated with another race but they didn't integrate with us.  I know here in Cincinnati [Ohio] they, they integrated our school, they took our children more or less from their schools and they took them to the white school, which they were not really truly integrated because I heard that they had separate, you know, lunches periods and play periods and all like that.  But we lost something, we lost some of that together, we lost some of our history and some of our culture.  I don't guess anything is all good and all bad and sometimes you have to wait and see what is your advantage.  To me I think that we lost too much.  As I said, I grew up and I went to all southern school, black school, college [Alabama Agricultural and Mechanical College; Alabama Agricultural and Mechanical University, Normal, Alabama] and I feel like that some of my strength came from that because I was given the motivation that I could be somebody, you know.  And that was what I passed on to my kids and I always told them where you are, is not necessarily where you have to stay.  And I told them that all the time, where you are now is not necessarily where you have to stay.  And I tell 'em about my life, I didn't stay in, in rural Alabama (laughter) in the cotton field and that I had to work my way through, partly through high school and college but where you are, you can, you can improve yourself.  And I taught that to the kids and I'm still teaching that in my church when I have programs for young people, I tell 'em, you know, go to school, study hard, make something of your life, don't throw it away.  But I don't know, to get back on integration, it was good in a way but we, we lost a lot.  And I think sometimes you have to wait and see did we lose too much in trying to become assimilated, did we assimilate too much.  I guess, that's debatable (laughter).
Speaker 1: Well, you know, in this past year especially there, a lot of folks have been debating (laughter) among themselves and sometimes very publicly about the legacy of the Brown decision [Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka, 1954] and the 1954 victory--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --for the NAACP and for African Americans in getting that [U.S.] Supreme Court ruling saying that segregated schools were unconstitutional.  Do you remember when that decision was handed down in '54 [1954]?
Speaker 2: Yeah, and, and they were, because our school was always inferior, not in personalities but in the building, our building was always shabby.  'Cause there was times when I grew up, the white school was much more, you know, together.  And ours was either in a church or a barn or a school or something like that.  Even here in Cincinnati in the poor neighborhoods they didn't have the equipments and all those things like the scientific equipments, you know, like they had in the better, you know, white schools.  So that was one advantage our kids was exposed to more educational learning and better schools because some of our schools was very inferior, poor schools, raining inside, cold, and all like that.  So it was one advantage.  And they did get exposed to other things that they were not teaching in the, in the poor neighborhood but then they lost some of the, the culture and the history which makes a race because most races gone keep their culture, the Italians keep their Italian thing, they just had St. Patrick's Day, you know.  And Germans they have a, now what do they call that day?  But they have a big, they, they have three days out on the square.  And most people want to keep something of their heritage going.  It's like your family, you know, you want to keep your family name and some of the things your family did, you know, you want your kid, kids, children, your grandchildren, to remember just like my mother [Evernee Hubbard Hawkins] and father [Everett Hawkins] passed down some things to me.  And I feel like that when we integrated we lost passing down some of our history and culture to our kids and in a way we might have weakened them in some of the things that we got strength from, you know, in our segregated school.  So it's debatable whether we gained or whether we lost, weighable (laughter).  Call it a good word, weighable (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay, gotta weigh it in the balance.
Story_ID: 283552
Speaker 1: We've had fifty years now to reflect on the significance of Brown [v. Board of Education of Topeka, 1954].  And in most cities, in Cleveland [Ohio], I've heard, in Cincinnati [Ohio], in Chicago [Illinois], in most urban areas, folks are saying that that most of the black children, working-class black children in any case, are attending separate and inferior schools, and along with them now a lot of Appalachian whites who migrated to the city and Hispanic children now in growing numbers.  So if it's not in crosstown busing, where are we gonna find the answers to the problems that plague our schools today?
Speaker 2: That's a, that's a question we have to ask.  Because I know in the inner city most of the wealthy white people have moved out and they left it very poor and very black, like you said, very inferior.  And you, you wonder because if you bus kids from their neighborhood, then the parents are too far away to have, you know, too much input into what is happening.  But on the other hand if you let them stay in their school, it's inferior too, so, (laughter) so you, you just wonder which is best, and, and how much you're supposed to do.  And if, as I said if it was, it was equal now I'd go back to Florence, Alabama, when they were, and I wasn't living there at that time but when they were, found out that they had to integrate, where the schools, the Burrell School [Burrell Normal School, Florence, Alabama] that I went to, that I told you was on old school, they built a beautiful, a beautiful high school there to make sure that we would be content to let our kids go there and not fight for integration.  And then when they found out that they had to integrate, instead of busing the white children that lived in that neighborhood to that brand new school, they bussed those school children from there to an inferior white school that had been built about ninety years ago rather than let the whites come to the black school which was brand new and a beautiful structure, beautiful structure.  So we just wondered if it was done, integrate, integration was done correctly, whether bus white kids to this beautiful school or whether to bus all our kids to their school because sometimes when you go, just like if I'd go to your house, I wouldn't feel very comfortable there because you've been there maybe ten years or five years and it's your school, you know where the lunch room and everything and I come in, I'm sort of on outsider.  And a lot of our kids dropped out due too that fact that they felt like that they were not a part of the, the school system.  So you, you just wonder, you just wonder.  And I don't know whether, whether we'll ever know the answer or not but you wonder.
Speaker 1: Well since you spent more than a, a quarter of a century as an educator in Ohio, I wonder now if you would speak to some of the special concerns that parents especially and taxpayers too, have about education in the State of Ohio.  A lot of folks for example are, are challenged by our funding system here.  It's based primarily on property taxes.  It's been declared unconstitutional several times and still that's the basis for the funding of the schools.
Speaker 2: It is.
Speaker 1: Okay.  How do you explain that?  Is that strange politics in Ohio or just resistance?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, strange as you might say, it was something in the paper this week about the funding.  And they're going back now saying, hey, we're supposed to have done away with that.  Because in the more wealthy areas, like I said about Lincoln Heights [Ohio], Lincoln Heights didn't have a basis there, you know, factories and things that would, would create money for them.  And it's the same thing with the inner cities, no factories, no business there that's gonna be a revenue for those kids so naturally their schools are not gonna get the equipments and other things that they get in the more affluent neighborhood schools.  And so many people are moving out in suburbia where the school system is better.  And I don't know, I guess, that will have to be fought through with the political party.  And maybe when enough people complain but they are beginning to question now, when are you gonna change that system because it's too many, they feel like to many children are being shortchanged because of the economic base, basis that they have.
Story_ID: 283553
Speaker 1: And another thing that we're struggling with here in Ohio, and in other places certainly across the country too, is this idea of no child being left behind and so many children, especially in the black community in Ohio being left behind.  Are you optimistic, even cautiously optimistic that we might be able to come up with programs that would indeed move all children forward?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, I think, I think we're going about it a little bit too strongly.  To say that this child from a poor neighborhood, poor school is supposed to compete with a kid from a good school and maybe a background too because economics has a lot to do with it, if you have a computer in your home your kid's gonna know computer, I'm too poor to have a computer, my kid might be just as smart as yours but he will come to school and he will be completely ignorant where this other kid will have it.  It's the same thing with a more affluent neighborhood, they might have encyclopedias, they might have access to a lot of other things, they might travel, and their kids get exposure to a lot of things, which is learning.  And here's this poor child that maybe during the summer, he's in the ghetto and maybe going in garbage cans to get maybe something to eat, you know.  So it's, it's unequal to think that overnight you're gone make these kids be equal.  It will probably take forever because in, in fact, if you can change the economic situation, if you can change that that will go a long way towards helping these children.  And I think well, it sounds good when you're saying no child left, left behind but then, then you're gone set a standard that says everybody got to do this.  I was looking at a fourth grade test that they had a sample in the paper the other day I said hey, I got a master's degree and some of these things is kind of puzzling me.  Well you take a child who comes from a neighborhood or come from a home where it's not any reading going on, another child come from a home where he got all kind of reading exposed a lot, he would know how to read and maybe pick out A, B, or C.  But here's a child maybe just as smart but has not been exposed to that because he comes home, there's no learning, no, and many of our families, black and white, it's not any learning.  'Cause I taught, I always taught in neighborhoods where they were not very, not a very rich neighborhood.  And I had children that came from very poverty homes and sometimes we'd have to make home visits and some of those homes were very deplorable, you know, when it came to anything and I just wonder sometime how those kids just even made it.  So if you're gone set a standard, I can see where you work hard to give these kids the same advantage but then you're gone set a test and say that Johnny got to get up here with Frank when Johnny has, doesn't have the background that Frank has had from birth, that's kind of discriminating against that child and penalizing that child.  Now I know an example in Cincinnati [Ohio], a young lady she tried twice to get her high school diploma, and each time she failed, she could not go to college, she could not do much more advancement.  If a child has done very well during the year that should count for something not just that test.  And even some colleges now are beginning to, to complain, that was in the paper too, that they feel like that, hey, don't set a standard too high because you gone miss out on some very smart people.  Now in my hometown [Florence, Alabama] they have a saying that you're not college material, I don't know what they meant by that.  And a girl that finished college, finished high school with my sister, they said she wasn't college material, she's very slow, that girl went to Alabama A&M [Alabama Agricultural and Mechanical College; Alabama Agricultural and Mechanical University, Normal, Alabama] and came out tops.  Sometimes kids be very slow, you know, in developing.  So if you're gone put a label that you got to do this at this particular time, you might be thwarting some kid that can go on to college, you know, and do well.  So I feel like that sure don't leave any kids behind, make sure that every kid get every opportunity but then you gone set a standard say you got to do this, and, and my equal, I'm not equal with you here, then how can I be equal with you there.  So that's my complaint and I said maybe I'll get on my soap box and start saying that (laughter) that no we don't want a child left behind but then don't set this standard and say that this child can't make it and you gone penalize that child and he's doing the best he can and maybe could make something of his life, you know.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So that's, that's my feeling about No Child Left Behind [Act of 2001].
Story_ID: 283554
Speaker 1: Mrs. Thomas [HistoryMaker Hannah H. Thomas], again, at the end of the last segment we were talking about No Child Left Behind [Act of 2001] and you gave us your opinion on that but there is a, another challenge that educators in Ohio are grappling with right now and that's just this whole idea of proficiency testing and, and children being required to pass those tests, sometimes to advance to the next grade level or in fact to graduate from high school even after they've completed all the other requirements not getting their diploma if they can't pass the test.  So how do you feel about this whole idea of having so much depend on a test score?
Speaker 2: I think too much is on the test score, just entirely too much.  If a child has worked twelve years and maybe had fairly good grades up to that point and then just maybe by two point, miss, it's just like everything is just gone, everything is gone.  And it's discouraging too.  And I also was reading that children get tense because they know they're gonna take that test.  And some who probably could do better but they're so tense and frightened and they say even kids that are very qualified, very smart, they get all uptight because they want to make sure they pass, you know, the test.  And I think we're putting too much emphasis on it.  And I think it's a discredit to the children.
Speaker 1: Do you see them doing away with the proficiency testing any time soon or is this something we're just gonna have to learn to live with?
Speaker 2: I think in time, if they don't do away with it, I think it'll be modified somewhat.  And I think they will let the grade, the year grade count towards something too rather than just the test itself.  Maybe you'll add that in as, and divide it by two or whatever, you know.  I'm hoping that they will consider that this child probably have that senior year made good grades, did all the requirements and just by something, some quake of fate missed one or two questions or maybe five and then you're gone penalize that whole year's work and that whole twelve years for that child.  I think in time, people with become conscious of that and maybe they will protest enough that they either will do away it, not completely do away with it but will modify it and not depend just wholly on the efficiency test or the, that will not be the requirement for graduation or acceptance into college.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So just to summarize the things that we've talked about in the last half hour or so, you think that economics okay, will be key to improving the schools, the public schools in the State of Ohio--
Speaker 2: Of course.
Speaker 1: --improving the state of the economy here for working parents--
Speaker 2: Of course.
Speaker 1: --and then you said, perhaps we're putting too much emphasis on these proficiency tests and, and maybe that'll be modified--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --in the future?  And so--
Speaker 2: Indeed (laughter).
Speaker 1: --so the economy and the proficiency, proficiency test, two great challenges facing Ohioans.  Do you see any other challenges out there right now as for public school educators in the State of Ohio that will have to be overcome if the schools are to be improved greatly?
Speaker 2: Well those are about the two main ones, the other might be very minor.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: How about proficiency testing for teachers?  Now that's been proposed several times and with great resistance from the teachers union.
Speaker 2: I know (laughter).
Speaker 1: But what are they saying about that here in southern Ohio?
Speaker 2: About, about the same thing there, some for it but most again, against it.
Speaker 1: And why do you think that is?  Why would the teachers resist the idea of a, of having to prove competency in, in order to be allowed to teach?
Speaker 2: Well I think that goes to the same reason that we said about the children, that some teachers would, would be very, very adept in taking that test and some would not.  And I think it goes back to the schooling that you had, the neighborhood you lived in, the advantage that you have, you know, for traveling and also for, you know, gathering material.  And I think travel is a big advantage for children.  Say for instance I took my kids to Washington, D.C., if a, if a test came up, you know, where the governor lived or where someone, they would know that just from traveling.  So it's a lot of difference in, in even the quality of education that children get because of different neighborhoods and different economic situations they live in.  And I think the same thing goes for teachers too.  Say for instance I came from a school that would, a college that was not equipped like the college you came from, no matter how smart I would be, I probably would miss some of the things on the test than you would because of the time and maybe your home life would give you some advantage over my home life, you know.  So I, I think we need to be accountable but I think sometime we can stress it, stretch it just a little too far.  Yeah, I think just a little bit too far.  And I think the proficiency test has been stretched just too far (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.  And perhaps we've talked about that enough.
Speaker 2: I think we have.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: I hope we get over it (laughter).
Speaker 1: All right.
Story_ID: 283555
Speaker 1: I'm wondering as we come to the end of this formal part of our discussion, and your, the story of your history, if there's anything else that you'd like to add about your life and your work and your, your legacy, especially here in Ohio?
Speaker 2: Well I don't consider that I have so much of a legacy (laughter) I just feel like that I'm doing good work.  So many people say when I get a, you know, an honor, well you deserve it because, and I say well don't everybody else observe it, you know, don't other people deserve what they get.  But everybody wants to say well you deserve it, I say well what am I doing differently from other people.  So I don't, I don't look at myself as any different from any, anybody else, you know, that's, that's doing good work, it's just that I'm hardworking and I've been hardworking, you know, all my life.  My mother [Evernee Hubbard Hawkins] was one that were, were very, you know, I mean she was very efficient in whatever she did and you had to toe the mark she didn't have you just, just doing anything, even if you were sweeping the floor, she made sure that you did it right.  And she instilled in us to do your best.  And I have brought that, you know, through life.  And perhaps a lot of people in Cincinnati [Ohio] have not had that and when they see, you know, what I'm doing they think I'm doing something extraordinary.  And I tell 'em that, you know, I didn't just start working when I came to Cincinnati, I was doing some of this same work, you know, all my life that was part of our growing up in, in our school and in, in our churches and everything.  So I don't see anything that I have done so outstanding (laughter) really, really.  And as far as a legacy, the only thing I'd like to leave as a legacy, even to my family, and I leave this to my family, support each other, support each other.  You might have a little difference of opinion, you might have different little arguments and little spats at time, I know we had growing up as a big family but my mother always taught us that you overcome that because you're a family.  And that's what I teach to us as a race that I don't think that we are together enough to support, you know, each other.  And if I could, get leave that as a legacy of my work is, all my work has been for somebody else, even raising my family.  And I tell 'em, I say I'm not my age, I say I'm at forty that's when I started, you know, you know, taking on the responsibility, the family responsibility.  And I tell people that if you want, they say well how you live long and how you be so happy, forget about yourself and concentrate on how you could help other people.  And when you do that you, you, you magnify your, your problems because you're so busy trying to help other people with theirs.  So if I could leave a legacy, mine would be a legacy of helping, supporting, togetherness.  And in all our little group we talk about unity.  All the editorials I write, the main thing is unity, putting all the puzzle pieces together.  We got to come together as a race of people, work together, supporting, my legacy is together.
Story_ID: 283556
Speaker 1: Mrs. Thomas [HistoryMaker Hannah H. Thomas], if that's the legacy that you would offer to African American people, what is this coming together going to be focused on?  So fifty years ago it was focused on the Civil Rights Movement, Brown decision [Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka, 1954], Montgomery Bus Boycott, and after that [Reverend] Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.] and the moderate Civil Rights Movement, but fifty years later, you know, as we come together, what's gonna be the focus of--
Speaker 2: Economic (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Economic.
Speaker 2: Economic (laughter).
Speaker 1: In the black community?
Speaker 2: In the black community.  Come together, have you some stores, have some other things of yours, don't be so dependent, you can do it.  If these foreigners can come over here and they'll stay together and in five years they got their own little town, you know.  And I think that it was due to slavery when we was separated as a people, in all these years since then seem that we have not been able to lose that plantation mentality, you know.  The house slave was better than the field slave, you know, about all that.  And the light-skinned slave was better than the dark-skinned and all of that was, was created in us and it seem that that we have not been able to shake that plantation mentality to some extent.  And if we could work together for the good of all, for the good of all, I think we would find ourselves happier and I know we'd be more prosperous.  So mine is economic and unity, coming together.
Story_ID: 283557
Speaker 1: That was my father and his name is Everett Napoleon Hawkins.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 1: I want my mother next. My mother up there, put my mother, put my mother next.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And that is my mother her name is Evernee Hubbard Hawkins.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.  Okay.
Speaker 1: And that is four of the eight siblings.  From left to right is Pauline [Hawkins]; next to her is Daisy [Hawkins], my oldest sister; the young man standing is my oldest brother, his name is Everett [Hawkins], Jr.; and the one on the extreme right is my sister, Lizzie Lou Hawkins.  This brother, Everett Hawkins.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.  That's Everett?
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 1: That's Everett right there.  And that's my baby brother, his name is James Francis Hawkins, we call him Billy [ph.].
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 1: And I don't think we did this one.
Speaker 2: I know.  And not having a pick, couldn't find a picture of my brother which was Willis Nelson Hawkins but I do have a picture of his daughter and his two grandsons.  Her name is Kathy [ph.] and the one that she's holding is named Michael [ph.] and the baby boy is named Maurius [ph.].  Kathy Jackson and her two children.  They are my brother Willis Hawkins', and that is the Hawkins family.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.  Okay.
Speaker 2: And that picture is three sisters.  On the left is Pauline, in the center is me, Hannah [HistoryMaker Hannah H. Thomas], and on the right is my older sister, Daisy.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  (Unclear) I'm ready.
Speaker 2: Okay.  That's my husband, Monroe Thomas [ph.], and that, of course, that's me, Hannah Thomas.  My high school teachers, starting left to right John Williams Reynolds [ph.], Mrs. Ruby Hooks [ph.], Miss Luvena Freeman [ph.], and the principal Mr. W.H. Lewis.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.  And on the bottom.
Speaker 2: The models who is my eighth grade class and I'm at the top where the dot is.  That was Burrell High School [Burell Normal School, Florence, Alabama], I don't know--
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  (Unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) all the name of those kids.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 2: Not the lower one.  My high school picture, 1939, from Burrell High School.
Speaker 1: Thank you.
Speaker 2: My graduation picture from Alabama A&M [Alabama Agricultural and Mechanical College; Alabama Agricultural and Mechanical University, Normal, Alabama] 1951.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 2: Picture from Alabama A&M College, 1951.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Correction on this photo, correction.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Go ahead.
Speaker 1: The bottom?  This, the bottom?
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Your master's degree.
Speaker 1: The bottom one is the high school.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I think you said this one was the high school.  But we just need the correction for that one.  Oh, yeah.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  So the--
Speaker 2: University of Cincinnati [Cincinnati, Ohio] in 1960, '60 [1960], '64 [1964].
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  It's all right.
Speaker 2: Nineteen sixty-four [1964].
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  And that was your master's?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 2: My retirement party after thirty-two years of teaching with a, on the My Faith Boat [ph.].  And that was in 1980 and I'm number one on the left.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  (Unclear).
Speaker 2: The next picture pictures with the stripes on was my principal, and the next lady was the one that arranged for the party and her husband is next, and then that's a teacher that taught with me on the very extreme right.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.  Who is in the blue, what's your sister's name?
Speaker 2: Lizzie.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 2: A picture of my church, Union Baptist Church [of Cincinnati, Cincinnati, Ohio], Richmond [Street] and Mound [Street], at that time, and my niece and nephew, the two kids I raised, the boy is Kenneth [Hawkins (ph.)], the girl in the center is Theresa [Carolyn Theresa Hawkins (ph.)], and I'm standing on the right.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.  Okay.  Tell us about that one.
Speaker 2: In 1992 I was one of the ten [Cincinnati] Enquirer Women of the Year.  And, of course, that's me standing.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.  And that's the Cincinnati Enquirer?
Speaker 2: The Cincinnati Enquirer.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 2: Every year that, ten women with outstanding contributions are recognized and I was one of the ten from, from the year of 1992.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.  Okay.  Right.  Okay.  Go ahead and tell us about this.
Speaker 2: In 1998 I was selected as one of the persons that's keeping history alive and that was the Cincinnati Enquirer.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.  I'm ready.
Speaker 2: In 1985 I started a little theater called the Sojourner Truth Troupe and that is part of the group performing for the AKA [Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority] when they had their national convention here in Cincinnati [Ohio].  And, of course, I'm in this, with the lace, second from the left, and the others are our performers.  The young man is a volunteer, the young lady is playing Harriet Tubman is Mary, Mary Battle [ph.].  And Sojourner Truth is in the center, Margaret Smart [ph.] is the woman, Margaret Smothers [ph.].  And the next lady played Mary McLeod Bethune and she was named Castella Coleman [ph.].  Our pianist is Ruth Philip [ph.].  And at the very end on the right, the man that played, excuse me, man, man that played Carter G. Woodson, not Carter G. Woodson who played, oh, gosh, Benjamin Banneker, his name is Mr. Turner [ph.].
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 2: (Unclear).
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  All right.  When you're ready.
Speaker 2: North Fairmount [Elementary] School [Cincinnati, Ohio] is where I retired from in 1980.  I taught there five years.  My room was on the extreme right.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Which floor?
Speaker 2: The first floor.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay. Okay.
Speaker 2: That's a part of the group called the Silhouettes, Silhouettes.  The lady standing in the center was the president and I am the third from the left.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 2: Oh.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.  And I'm on the top left when you're ready.
Speaker 1: That picture was taken at the Harriet Beecher Stowe House [Cincinnati, Ohio].  And it was a group from Douglass School [Frederick Douglass Elementary School, Cincinnati, Ohio], elementary school and that was Hannah Thomas standing reading something about black history to that group.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 1: And the next picture is also that we were performing at the Harriet Beecher Stowe House.  And standing left to right, I think I know all the people, people there.  That lady plays Sojourner Truth, that was our first Sojourner Truth and that was our first performance.  The man in the center is Mr. Smitherman [ph.], he played Carter, Dr. George Washington Carver.  The lady standing played Harriet Beecher Stowe.  And I'm standing in the center, the young man played, he played--
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  (Unclear).
Speaker 1: Charles, he played Charles Drew.  And the lady standing played Mary McLeod Bethune.  And the young man played--
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Paul--
Speaker 1: --Paul Laurence Dunbar.  Seated was our singers, friends from our church, Mrs. Hunter [ph.], Mrs. Smith [ph.], and my sister, Pauline.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.  Okay.  Ready.
Speaker 1: I was selected as one of the two hundred greatest Cincinnatians for the bicentennial celebration and riding down 5th Street, waving at the people (laughter) it's me--
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  (Unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) Hannah Thomas (laughter). (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 2: Are you on?
Speaker 1: I'm sorry.  Could you repeat that now that tape is running?
Speaker 2: I was also, that same year, 1988, one of the finalists for the Post-Corbett Award that's a, an award that, for outstanding community work.
Speaker 1: (Unclear).
Speaker 2: Um-hm.  (Unclear) um-hm.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Oh, sorry.  I'll stop talking.  Okay.  I'm ready.
Speaker 2: A little group of dancers from Walt--from Winton, from Winton Hill [Winton Hills, Cincinnati, Ohio] for the Day on the Square in 1996.  And, of course, I'm standing with the, the checkered dress.  One of our little groups that performed.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 2: And during the Day on the Square we have churches, schools, organizations, bands, church groups, school groups, that perform on the Square, it's an all day celebration.  And it was started in 1988.
