Story_ID: 14324
Speaker 1: First thing we're going to do is slate the interview. I'm Larry Crowe, I'm an interviewer for The HistoryMakers, our videographer is Paul Bieschke.  And, sir, could you please state your name, date of birth, and spell your name for us?
Speaker 2: Thomas N. Todd, T-O-D-D--the last name--and N is for Nathaniel--N-A-T-H-A-N-I-E-L, and the first name is Thomas--T-H-O-M-A-S. And those initials are T.N.T.  My date of birth is 9/24/38 [1938].
Speaker 1: Okay, could you give us today's date?
Speaker 2: Today is June 6th, 2002.
Speaker 1: Good.  And where are we?
Speaker 2: We are in my office, which is located at One North La Salle, in Chicago, Illinois, in the United States of America.
Speaker 1: That's complete.  And, what's your occupation?
Speaker 2: Well I'm actually trained as a lawyer, I don't practice that much anymore, and I guess I spend more time doing, what they call motivational or inspirational speaking.
Story_ID: 14325
Speaker 1: All right.  I've got a few questions that just require brief answers, but they're 'People' magazine-ish type questions. So what's your favorite food?
Speaker 2: I guess if I had to have a favorite food - do you classify milk as food?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah, milk.  Skim milk.  It used to be chitterlings, but (chuckle)--
Speaker 1: Okay, so what's your favorite color?
Speaker 2: Black.
Speaker 1: What's your favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: I don't vacation.  You know, if I could go on a vacation I'd stay home, 'cause I travel almost twelve months a year, and the last thing I want to do is get on a plane and go stay at a hotel somewhere.  So I guess my favorite destination for a vacation would be at home.
Speaker 1: Okay, do you have a favorite time of year?
Speaker 2: Spring--summer--coming from the deep South, those are the, the, the time and, you know, blossoms are out and it's cool, and that sort of thing, so yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: I guess if I said that, I guess it would be: "I don't like no snakes."  "I don't like no snakes," which is also the name of a book project that I'm working on.
Story_ID: 14326
Speaker 1: All right.  Can you, can you give us the names of your parents, and spell them for us?  And can you name your siblings in birth order?
Speaker 2: My mother was, is Mrs. Alberta, A-L-B-E-R-T-A, George, G-E-O-R-A-G-E, G-E-O-R-G-E.  My father, my biological father was Thomas, T-H-O-M-A-S, Fuller, F-U-L-L-E-R.  I was raised by a stepfather, my biological father died when I was less than a year old, and the, the father that I knew for all of my life was Cleveland, C-L-E-V-E-L-A-N-D, Todd, T-O-D-D.  I--originally, I was born Thomas Fuller, Jr.--named after my father--but then, of course, my name was changed to Thomas N. Todd.
Speaker 1: Okay, and your siblings?
Speaker 2: I have no brothers and sisters.
Speaker 1: (unclear)
Speaker 2: What you see is what you get.  I'm it.
Story_ID: 14327
Speaker 1: Okay, now, where were you born and when were you born, again?
Speaker 2: I was born in Demopolis, Alabama, 9-24-38 [1938].  Demopolis is in the 'black belt' of Alabama, in a rural area, of course I did not spend any time there at all.  My father [Thomas Fuller] died, and so my mother [Alberta George Todd] moved us to Mobile, Alabama.  And that's where I was raised.
Story_ID: 14328
Speaker 1: Do you have any--have you heard any--do you have any stories about your father [Thomas Fuller], at all, or, or, or--?
Speaker 2: My biological father.
Speaker 1: Yeah, about, about, about his family, or--
Speaker 2: I really didn't know that--noth-nothing, I didn't know anything about him, for the most part, and there wasn't a lot of discussion about him, and, and I did meet some of his, his people, at one point, his mother and some other people, but there was not a very close relationship between us.  And I think it was because, when my mother [Alberta George Todd] did remarry, you had that kind of competitive circumstances, in the home, so she discussed him, but not extensively.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I do know that he died of what they call 'sugar,' which I translate, later on to mean diabetes.
Speaker 1: Right, right.
Speaker 2: So that I have had, I've been very careful about having myself evaluated over the years, for that particular kind of disease.  His mother, I recall also, must've had diabetes, she was, she was blind; I recall meeting her as a child.  But beyond that, I have no specific memories.  All of my memories in terms of a father were of my father, Cleveland Todd.
Story_ID: 14329
Speaker 1: Okay, did your mother [Alberta George Todd] have relatives in Mobile [Alabama]?
Speaker 2: Oh, yes, my mother, my mother had--and there's still relatives in Mobile.  My mother came from a family of twenty-two children, there were two sets of children; she was the youngest of the first set of children.  And so, as a result of that, she raised the youngest of the second set of children, almost like her children.  An aunt and aunt, who happen to have been twins--Ethel and Elizabeth, called her "Lizzie".  Both of whom are still living: one of them lives in Birmingham, Alabama and the other one lives in Mobile.  In addition to that, there are just numerous--there are still, oh, one or two brothers and sisters left, but there are numerous cousins, and first, second and third, and that sort of thing, who still live in Alabama, and in Chicago [Illinois], and throughout other portions of the country.
Speaker 1: Twenty-two?
Speaker 2: Twenty-two, my grandfather--that's a--yeah, it's an interesting kind of a situation, is that, my mother had a second-grade education, could just barely read and write; my stepfather [Cleveland Todd] could not read and write at all.  But my mother's father was eighty-three when he died in 1955, and he could read and write, and did a little preaching on the side.  So it's, it was an interesting kind of era, where some blacks were given the opportunity to get access to education, where, whereas some of them were not.  So it was not universal, but he could read and write.
Speaker 1: Were there stories passed down through her family about conditions prior to the Emancipation?
Speaker 2: Well, not, not prior to the Emancipation, but my wife's--I mean, my mother's family lived - and let me say that again, so you can edit that - my mother's family lived on the plantation.  And after the Emancipation, they moved to the position of sharecroppers.  So even as a young person, in Alabama, we traveled to Uniontown, Alabama, and Farnsdale, Alabama - and stayed with my aunts and uncles, who were still sharecroppers.  They...
Story_ID: 14330
Speaker 1: They--
Speaker 2: (simultaneously) On that same--
Speaker 1: On the same plantation, they [his maternal grandparent's family] moved from the, the status of--I guess--former slaves, some of them, to sharecropping.  And I have a vivid memory of the unpainted shanties that they lived in as sharecroppers--in the shadow of the large white mansion on the hill; I don't know the names of the people who owned it, or anything, and didn't spend that much time, but usually during the summer, we'd go up, and spend some time.  So I have a healthy memory of that, very vivid.
Speaker 2: So what were some of the other sights, and sounds, and smells of growing up in Mobile [Alabama], and visiting Demopolis [Alabama]?
Speaker 1: Well, sights and sounds are very important, especially in the South.  And the, the smell of the flowers, and the greenery, and the dislike for mosquitoes and for vermin, varmints, and snakes--
Speaker 2: (simultaneously) Snakes.
Speaker 1: (laughter)-- don't like no snakes.  But also, I guess, you know, the, the, the, the greatest memories I had as a child, in terms of smells was, my momma's [Alberta George Todd] kitchen.  I mean, we came out of a tradition where we, we, we were poor, in the terms of not having any economic resources that were vast, but we had a great deal of, a great number of, resources that were rich.  And my mother was a great cook, and I complimented her, because I was a great eater--I enjoyed eating.  And she taught me to cook when I was six years old.  So, a lot of my memories are tied into what she did, and, and, and, and the kinds of things, as she was teaching me to cook.  As an only child, she was really establishing, in me, a kind of independence.  And so, as a result of that, I grew up knowing how to take care of myself, and provide for myself.  So it was her way, of, of helping me to establish an individuality.  But we, we--I lived in the, in the segregated South, not in the rural area, so it wasn't quite as oppressive, but it was oppressive.  But my childhood was a very happy childhood.  We, we, we enjoyed what we were doing, and we enjoyed our--each other, and we enjoyed family, and we enjoyed the projects, and we enjoyed the church.  So, it was not an unhappy childhood, at all.  I was--I should have said this from the beginning, I guess--I was a big child.  I mean, I weighed eleven pounds at birth.  Maybe that's why my mother decided not to have any more children.  Delivered by a midwife, at home.  And so, I was always big.  By the time I was three or four, I was big.  And, bigger than my neighbors, who were five and six.
Story_ID: 14331
Speaker 1: And, they [the neighbors] were getting ready to go to school.  I was bigger than they were, but I was younger, so I was not eligible to go to school.  So they went to school.  And when they went to school, I cried every day.  I was five years old, and they were going to school; I wanted to know why I couldn't go to school.  And I cried, and my mother [Alberta George Todd] said, "You can't go to school cause you're not old enough to go to school."  And I cried so much to go to school, 'til my mother said, "I'm taking you to this school, and either you're going to go in there, or you're going to drive me crazy."  So she took me to the public school-- Caldwell Elementary [School]--in Mobile, Alabama, when you had primer and first grade, and that sort of thing.  And so the teacher said, "Mrs. Todd," said, "he is too young to come to school."  Said, "He's big, but he's too young."  But they said, "We will take him.  If the state people come and object to it, we have to take him out."  Well, needless to say, I was in school, I was happy; the state people never came.  I went from primer to first grade, and then I stayed in through the sixth grade.  But I cried to go to school.
Speaker 2: How old were you, when you started school?
Speaker 1: Five.  We didn't have kindergarten and pre- -- man, it was primer, then first grade.  But I--and, and, and I really cried to go to school because my, my friends were going to school.  But then I, I loved school, and then I enjoyed education.  And I, so I stayed and I did--you know--even though I was younger than the people in the class, I was able to hold my own, and, and to, to be promoted, and to keep going.  My parents [Cleveland Todd and Alberta George Todd] moved when I finished the sixth grade, with my class.
Story_ID: 14332
Speaker 1: We moved-- they [Cleveland and Alberta George Todd] were progressing, and they moved into an area to buy their own home.  I should have described that.  I lived in, what we call, a double-tenement; you would call it a duplex, now, because--but it was just a room and a kitchen, on each side, where the front room doubled as my bedroom, and my parents lived on a roll-away bed in the kitchen--with a wooden stove and a fireplace.  Not to romanticize fireplace, I mean, the fireplace was for heat, and often, I would also cook a little something in the fireplace.  But that's where I was raised, so my parents wanted to have their own place.  So they bought some property, in a place called Trinity Gardens [neighborhood in Mobile, Alabama], which was undeveloped at all.  During the period that I was young, I had, at least, running water; we didn't have electrici- --we had electricity, but didn't have electrical appliances, like a stove, or a gas stove, or that sort of thing--we had a wooden stove.  But we did have running water, and did have an indoor--what I call a--quarter bath.  A quarter bath is just a commode, but it was inside.  And, although I had visited relatives in the so-called 'country,' and what have you.  They have--had outdoor facilities, we didn't originally.  When we moved to Trinity Gardens, which was undeveloped, we didn't have running water, we had outdoor facilities, had a pump and a well, and I cried again.  I mean, only because, again, it was a transition, not only from leaving my neighborhood and my, my friends, but also, you know, I had to go to an outhouse, for the first time in my life--living with it, and drink water out of a pump, and drink water out of a well.  Of course, that makes great storytelling now, when I give speeches, but it was hard when I was in the, in--going into the seventh grade.
Story_ID: 14333
Speaker 1: I changed schools at that time, and had to go to the school that was closest.  Well that was Ella Grant [Elementary School], in Prichard, Alabama, which was the closest school.  And at that time, they had middle schools, and so, Ella Grant was my seventh and eighth grades, so I left my class in the sixth grade, and went to Ella Grant in the seventh grade.  After a few months in the seventh grade, the teachers asked my mother [Alberta George Todd] to come to the school, and see, they asked my mother, they said, "Can you buy him eighth grade books?"  And my mother said, "Does he need eighth grade books?"  And she said, "If he needs them, then we'll buy them."  And she said, "Yes."  So, at the end of December, I was promoted from the seventh grade to the eighth grade, and then, at the end of June, I was promoted from the eighth grade to the ninth grade.  At that time, you had the ninth grade going into high school.  So I ended up going to high school [Central High School, Mobile, Alabama] a year before the people I had gone to elementary school with.  So, I went through junior high school in one year.  I don't think I was that smart.  I think, what it was, I was too big for the desks, so they just promoted me. (laughter)
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I'm sure it's more than that.  But, you were about twelve then.
Speaker 1: I went to high school at eleven--
Speaker 2: Eleven.
Speaker 1: I was twelve--first I went to high school, I think, it was somewhere right after Labor Day, in September.  And so, my birthday was not until the 24th of September.  So I actually, physically went to high school at eleven years old, and was interview--and, and it was really, it was the first year, in Mobile, at least, when you had a ninth grade.  The, the class before my class was the last one to go to the tenth grad--that was only three years in high school.  So I had four years in high school.  So I went to high school at eleven, and was interviewed by the, the, the radio station, at the high school, as being the youngest freshman to come to Central High School, at that particular time.  But even though I was eleven, I was big.  And by the time I was twelve--and incidentally, I should've mentioned also that my mother was six-one [6'1"], and weighed two hundred and eighty-five pounds; my family, my, my, my family--physically--was a big family.  I mean, I had cousins who were six-seven [6'7"], six-eight [6'8"], and uncles who were six-six [6'6"].  So my mother was tall, and a big woman, and we used to always tease her about it, because she said, "You know you can't get as tall as I am."  I'd say, "Yeah Momma, I'm going to catch you."  So when I was twelve, I, I was six-one [6'1"], and I caught her. I was looking at her eyeball-to-eyeball.  So, although I was young, when I went to high school, I was big.  And, I, I went into high school, and I stayed, as a matter of fact, and the only difficulties I had, while I was in high school, was that I didn't play football, or didn't play any sports at all.  And the reason I didn't is because--now here I am, eleven years old, twelve years old, six-one [6'1], 260 pounds--I mean, you know, I mean, I was naturally supposed to play football.  But you had to have parental consent.  My mother would not consent to my playing football.  To add a little insult to that injury, and to complicate my life even more, is I played in the band and eventually sang in the choir.  So here's this big guy, who doesn't play football, he's no sports, but he sings and he plays in the band.  But high school was very, very enjoyable for me.  I really enjoyed it because, first of all, it was, it was a segregated, all-black school.
Story_ID: 14334
Speaker 1: But the teachers there, just as they did in elementary school, just as they did in, in the junior high school, they taught.  And they knew that education was this thing that would take us out of some of the mess that was in Alabama.  And we saw teachers, and we looked up to teachers, and we looked up to educators.  So they taught us.  I mean, we were never short-changed.
Speaker 2: Who were some of the teachers?  Can you recall--?
Speaker 1: Yeah, one of the people, well, my, my, my first grade teacher's name was Miss Miller; I'll never forget that.  My third grade teacher was Miss Knight, and my sixth grade teacher, I remember, was Mrs. Beard, as a matter of fact.  I later found out that--John Tweedle, the photographer, here, was a good friend of mine, and Mrs. Beard--
Speaker 2: Spell his name for us?
Speaker 1: T-W-E-E-D-L-E, I believe it is, capital T.  John is the great photographer, who died a few years ago, who took that marvelous picture of Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.]--with his fists outstretched--at Soldier Field [Chicago, Illinois] in 1966.  It turned out that Mrs. Beard, my sixth grade teacher, was John Tweedle's aunt, and we later connected that whole situation up.  My high school teacher--I had a tremendous experience with the National Education Association, two years ago.  They honored one of their black pioneers, who helped to establish rights for women, and for minorities, in the National Education Association, his name was Dr. Samuel B. Etheridge--don't ask me to spell his last name, but it's Etheridge--and they, they--he died a couple of years ago.  And I had been scheduled to speak as the civil rights/black history speaker for the National Education Association's board, in Washington D.C.  He died after they scheduled it, and so, they turned the speech into a memorial and a tribute to him, and he had taught me English, at Central High School.  Dr. Willie Ed Thomas taught me chemistry, at Central High School.  Dr. Howard Creecy, who later was one of the founding ministers of SCLC [Southern Christian Leadership Conference] with Dr. [Martin Luther] King, [Jr.] in Atlanta [Georgia], was my homeroom teacher.  My bandmaster, Mr. Ed Pratt and Mr. Len Doughton, and my bandmaster--the last bandmaster I had is still living, we call him "Chief Iron"--"Chief Irons".  Those are the persons who had a great deal of impact on my life--and many, many more.  The principal, Dr. Francis--Benjamin Francis Baker--some of his children, and grandchildren are still around; he was the principal of the high school originally.  The principal when I graduated--because Dr. Baker died--was Dr. James T. Gaines [sic, Jonathan T. Gaines]--he was the principal.  My elementary school principal--seventh and eighth grade, I should say--middle school principal was Ms. Reba Thomas; we remember her very well.  And my elementary school principal was Mrs. Florence Howard, passed her house the other day, when I was in Mobile, Alabama.  Now, that's an interesting kind of a thing, now, I--these names are just in my memory, because these teachers had such a great deal of impact on my life.  With a mother [Alberta George Todd] who had a second grade education, and a father [Cleveland Todd] who couldn't read and write, all of my educational experience and exposure and direction came from educators.  Whether it was from the elementary school, or in, in, in, in high school, or in college, as a matter of fact.
Story_ID: 14335
Speaker 1: I guess, because I've always talked a lot, I was always involved.  So my sophomore year, in high school [Central High School, Mobile, Alabama], I was elected president of the sophomore class; I mean that's my little foray into politics.  My junior year in high school, I was elected vice president of the student body.  And then my senior year in high school, I was elected president of the student body.  And that becomes significant because, all during those periods, I was given the opportunity to speak; I was given the opportunity to participate in public forums.  And, in my senior year, as the student body president, I had my own assembly, once a month, where I was responsible--now I was sixteen years old, but I was responsible--for bringing on whatever the talent was, or the program, and speaking, and running it.  So early on, I got a lot of experience, in public speaking.  I also played in the, in the marching band, at Central.
Speaker 2: What'd you play?
Speaker 1: Tenor trombone.  And, I also sang in the choir; I was a baritone.  I later found out that I wasn't that good at either one of 'em.  I--but I, I was loud.  But, but I did both of them, and I enjoyed doing both of them. And they've--that experience has helped me tremendously.  I went to Southern University, in Baton Rouge [Louisiana], on a music scholarship; a lot of people may not know that.  Tenor trombone, I majored in music, as a matter of fact, and played in Southern University's band for two years, and was being prepared to be a bandmaster.  But I didn't have the exposure that I'd had earlier, and I, I really didn't know what music I loved.  But once I got to Southern, and Southern had a law school right on the campus, and they had some other kinds of things, and my, my experience was broadened.  And so, I switched from music, Mr. Teteroy Davis was the band director, who brought me to, to Southern, and gave me the scholarship.
Story_ID: 14336
Speaker 1: I switched from music to political science.  And then, an advisor, who has Chicago [Illinois] connections, Dr. Charlie Barker, who's from Louisiana, was my adviser, and he did all of the work to get me into political science.  And so, under Dr. Barker, and under Dr. Jewel Prestige, I majored in political science; the Head of the Department was Dr. Rodney Higgins.  An interesting thing about the black colleges, at that time, and to some extent now, Southern University [Baton Rouge, Louisiana] was a huge state school, so some people said, "You know the education..."  But my attitude has always been, if you learn 'one plus one equals two' at Southern or anywhere, you know it all over the world.  In the political science department at Southern University, during that time, there were eleven faculty members, as I recall, and seven of them had PhDs.  So that we had, in this department, one of the strongest academic departments that you were able to find.  So then, my education at Southern was first class, absolutely first class.  And, I think that you will find many of the graduates of Southern will say the same kind of thing.
Story_ID: 14337
Speaker 1: I went to law school, I went to law school in 1960, when, when, when we, we, we had not many black law schools left, but we still had more than we have now, and Southern [University, Baton Rouge, Louisiana] was an all-black law school.  There were only eight students, that's one digit--eight students in the law school.  And, I never went to class with more than eight students in my life, and ended up graduating with four.  So that I had, really, a first class--almost like a private school education, in law school.  As a matter of fact, and, and, and an excellent education in undergraduate school-- taught by all black professors, never had a white professor, never went to school with a white student.  I'm saying that only as a fact of the matter, as a result of that.  So that, that whole educational experience, teaching not only the basics of education, but also, the whole experience of knowing that, that, that, that this was my way to, to make a contribution.  It was my way to get into another level.  It was my way to make--to improve the quality of my life.  I say now, in speeches, that education gave me the tools, as it will, for our students now to make a down payment on freedom.  Won't free you, but to make a down payment on freedom.  And so, we went through that whole experience.  And, my, my high school days coincided with the Montgomery [Bus] Boycott [Montgomery, Alabama], and, and, and my college days coincided with the demonstrations and the sit-in, the sit-ins, my law school with the sit-ins.
Speaker 2: OFF-CAMERA VOICE:  We're rolling.
Speaker 1: Okay, we blacked out here, but you were talking about law school.
Speaker 2: Well, I went to a Historically Black Law School.  They call them "Sweatt Schools,"--Sweatt vs. Painter [1950 Supreme Court decision that a proposed state law school for blacks in Texas would not provide an equal education] was the law school in Texas--at Texas Southern [University, Houston, Texas]--it's now the Thurgood Marshall School of Law--where they established [sic, proposed] a law school that was separate.  The question whether or not it was, it was separate and equal, or separate or unequal, and of course, Brown [vs. the Board of Education, 1954] dealt with that.  But there--at one point there were nineteen black law schools in the country, I can't name them all, but at this time now, the--Howard University [Washington D.C.], Southern University [Baton Rouge, Louisiana], Texas Southern, which is Thurgood Marshall, and North Carolina Central [Durham, North Carolina].  Those are the four that I know of now that are in existence.  An interesting thing about all of those schools, now, is that--except for Texas Southern--there is a substantial white presence in the law schools.  I will talk about that at some later time.  But when I went to law school at Southern, the, the law schools were looking for students.  First of all, most of the students at Southern were in education, because education represented the opportunity that we knew we could get teaching jobs, and what have you.  But we had a school of engineering, had a school of architecture at Southern; we had all of those.  We didn't have a lot of students, because it was a matter of orientation.  I was never--I never thought I'd go to law school.  That was not something that was in my mind.  I mean, I, I was going to be a bandmaster, and I was going to major--I was going to be a teacher.  But I was speaking on campus, and I was always involved, and I was always in activities.  And so, the dean of the law school, and some of the faculty members heard me, and they saw me, and they said, "Why don't you go to law school?"  And of course, that was another three years of education, in terms of economics, and everything else, and three years of deferred circumstances [deferment from the military draft].  And I was in ROTC [Reserve Officers Training Corps], and I thought I was going to get a commission.  So law school was not really in my consciousness, until some faculty members, until some other persons, who were at the school, put it there.  They said, "You know, you, you, you, you seem to be a pretty good student, and you, you're articulate."  You know, and again now, you must understand, my, my framework--I went to Southern at sixteen, so seventeen, eighteen, nineteen--I mean, I'm a teenager.  You know, my mind was on a lot of things, and we were involved in a lot of activities, and I knew how serious law school had to be.  And so, I went--I didn't go to law school immediately.
Story_ID: 14338
Speaker 1: I was a, a Senior ROTC [Reserve Officers Training Corps] Cadet at Southern [University, Baton Rouge, Louisiana], and had done fairly well at ROTC Summer Camp, and was the third highest-ranking cadet on the campus.  Now that doesn't sound like much, but it sounds like an awful lot when you understand that I'm--I was no soldier.  I was a drum major for the ROTC Band and a musician.  So, I went, I went to summer camp, and the reason I went to summer camp, and the reason why I think that the, the ranking was so high, is because of my stature, my size, my voice.  But we got to ROTC Summer Camp, and, and, and I'll digress a little bit, it was--the schools were in, in the South, they were Texas, they were Oklahoma--a border state--they were Louisiana, so, so it was majority white.  There were a hundred and twenty-five people in the company of cadets, and all of the leadership was white, we had five blacks in the company.  And, the, the leadership positions were assigned--Texas Aggies and the people who were from the military schools--but they rotated, every three days, they appointed a new leader, a new captain of the company.  So, the first two days I got there, and, and I established myself, and I, and I was aggressive, and I was, I was loud, I was--I did a lot of things.  I was not afraid.  I had a lot of confidence.  So when they rotated the first time, at ROTC Summer Camp, I was appointed captain.  As a black captain, in charge of a predominantly white cadet company.  And I took the company into review that first week, and we won second place in the whole camp.  And I think it was second place, 'cause in my calling of cadence, and that sort of thing, my voice was hoarse, so I wasn't as, as, as effective as I could have been.  But as a result of that, I, I, I, I got a real high rank from ROTC Summer Camp, and came back as a Senior Battle Group Commander-- for whatever that means.  But I had a conflict, with one of the cadres.
Story_ID: 14339
Speaker 1: So I had conflict with a cadre--cadres meaning the staff member of the ROTC [Reserve Officer Training Corps] staff, that's--they call them cadres, as opposed to the cadets.  We had a conflict--it was a personality conflict.  And I, I really had out-performed, at one level, his favorite cadet.  And he really had a--we really had a personal thing.  But I was twenty years old, and he was my superior.  And I, I--there was no way that I could win a conflict in that situation.
Story_ID: 14340
Speaker 1: At any rate, tragedy struck in my senior year in college [Southern University, Baton Rouge, Louisiana]; my mother [Alberta George Todd] died.  I called home on Thanksgiving to speak to my mother--and I'm an only child, this is my mother, it may have, you know, there was nothing that she didn't do or wouldn't do--and so my father [Cleveland Todd] said to me that, "You know she's not--Bert."  He called her Bert.  He said, "She's not feeling well, so Junior"--they called me Junior--"she'll call you when she feels better."  Well, you know, my mother does not feel so bad that she can't talk to me.  So, I didn't have any money, so I said, "Well Dad, where's my money?"  And he said, "Well we sent it, but it was Thanksgiving, so it's in the Post Office."  And so, I didn't have any money, so I went to the dean of the dormitory, Student Life.  I said, "Dean Nash"--Dean Earl Nash, I heard about him this weekend, as a matter of fact--I said, "I need to go home, and I don't have any money."  He said, "How much is it?"  Said, "Well I think bus fare is five dollars or something."  He said, "Here's five dollars."  I took five dollars, and I had a dime left.  And I went--I caught the Greyhound Bus, I didn't pack, I didn't do anything. I just got on the bus, and went home [Mobile, Alabama].  When I got to the Greyhound Bus station and I called--I had a dime, so I could call my daddy, and he could come pick me up.  When I called, there was no answer.  That's when I thought, "That doesn't make any sense.  I just talked to him, and he said my momma was not feeling well.  But now there's nobody home.  So, the Greyhound Bus station was within walking distance of an uncle.  And so, I walked over to my uncle's house.  And so, when I got there his wife, my aunt, said, "Now we put Alberta in the hospital this morning."  And so, I said, "Okay, well I'll--I'm here now," and so, my daddy came by, they called him and they took me home.  And I said--they said, "Well no, she's not doing well, but she's going to be alright, she's in the hospital."  So the next morning, I went to the hospital.  Now I had clothes at home, or some things I could wear so, I went to--so they went in and they told them, 'cause they didn't want to excite her.  And so, there she was, I went in to say, "Hi momma."  And the one thing she said to me was that, "Boy, you home?"  I said, "Yeah."  I said--she said, "Well, I'm not well enough to cook for you.  I, I, I, I just don't feel--"  I said, "Momma don't worry about that, I just want to make sure you're alright."  So I went to the hospital that morning, I went back to the hospital that afternoon.  And finally, so she was looking good and felt good.  I went back to the hospital that night, because this was, this was on the--this was like Friday, or whatever, it wasn't--I was going to go back to school, missing no days because it was Thanksgiving, and since it was the holiday, I wasn't going to take any time out.  So I went to see her three days, and I was going to leave the next day.  So I went to the hospital that, that evening to say hello to her, and see that she was doing all right.  Got home, and had been home about an hour, and the telephone rang.  For some reason, I knew that there was something wrong.  And it was the nuns, saying to my father that, "You probably need to come to the hospital, to, to see, see about your wife."  So my daddy said to me, "Junior, do you want to go?"  And I said, "No, Daddy, I'm not going."  And so, about two and a half hours later, he comes, now teary, with her suitcase.  And in the meantime, the doctor called me, and said, "Mrs. Todd has passed."  Now, I'm twenty years old, being in all of these conflicts, and what have you.  And so, he said, "We want to perform an autopsy."  And I said, "No, I don't want you cutting on my momma."  I mean, I didn't have the sophistication, or the knowledge to know, at twenty, to know that we needed to find the cause of death, and what have you.  But I just said, "I don't want you cutting on my momma, she's gone now, she's gone."  So my stepfather came in, and, and you know, with tears in his eyes, to how he's going to tell me that Momma is dead.  And I said, "Daddy don't worry about it, I know it."  Now, at twenty years old, I'm here at home, for a day, and my mother just died.  I've got to make some serious decisions now.
Story_ID: 14341
Speaker 1: One of the things that was, that, that was happening in my life at that time was, I was taking a course in humanities, taught by Dr. Huel D. Perkins, who's the vice president now at LSU [Louisiana State University, Baton Rouge, Louisiana], but he was the humanities teacher, a marvelous teacher.  And we were taking, we were studying the Stoics--Marcus Aurelius and Epictetus--and when you're twenty years old, and you think that you know a little something, and you know, you really get into the philosophies, and what have you.  You know, [Niccolo] Machiavelli's prints, and the things that we studied, you, you--we, we debated and we argued about them, we, we, we internalized them.  And I was studying the Stoics, which, which--they taught an indifference to pain and pleasure.  To steel yourself against the difficulties, and to celebrate no more when you are joyous, than you are sad--just to have an indifference.  And, my mother [Alberta George Todd] had just died, I was twenty years old, and, I had to call on the Stoics, to, to, to get through that period, to make that academic course, at Southern [University, Baton Rouge, Louisiana], live in an experience in my life.  My father [Cleveland Todd] couldn't read and write, so I was charged with the responsibility of planning my mother's funeral; picking out the shroud, working with the undertaker, working with the insurance companies, and all of that, at twenty--away from school.  But I had studied the Stoics, Marcus Aurelius and Epictetus, and was twenty, so you, you know, you, you think that you can step up to the plate, and I did.  I had to.  My stepfather couldn't do it.  And, of course, my mother's people knew close my mother and I were.  But I, I couldn't cry, I couldn't break down--as much as I wanted to, 'cause I was the person who had to do it, and she would want me to do it.  You remember, I told you, she taught me how to cook when I was six, and she, she wanted me to be independent.  At any rate, we--I, I didn't have, even have a blue suit for the funeral, I couldn't go back; I had to just wear what I had.  And I went to the funeral, and I, at night, met with the, the insurance people, and did what was necessary.  And, the day after my mother's--the morning after my mother's death, I caught the train and went back to Southern.
Story_ID: 14342
Speaker 1: I said all that to say that when I got back to Southern [University, Baton Rouge, Louisiana], this cadre captain that I had had the conflict with, said that, "You have had--you've been absent."  I had called down and notified them that my mother's [Alberta George Todd]--of my mother's death.  And I sat down, and I--he said, "Well, that's--you've been absent excessively."  I said, "Well, I called and notified the department that my mother died, and I was at her funeral, and taking care of arrangements."  "I didn't ask you why you were absent.  You were absent."  Well you know, I'm twenty years old, and I'm not taking any mess from anybody--especially about Momma--and so, I said, "Do I understand you to say that ROTC [Reserve Officers Training Corps] is more important than my mother, and my mother's death?"  He said, "I'm not saying anything, I'm just saying you were absent."  Well, because this is polite company, and this video may be viewed by children, I will not tell you what I called him--but you could use your imagination.  But what he had successfully done, was baited me into being insubordinate.  And, it worked, because I unl--I let loose on him.  And of course, he wrote me up.  Now, I was a lieutenant, I was up for promotion to lieutenant colonel, and I had ordered my ROTC uniforms.  I was going into the military, because a second lieutenant stay would give me money right after school, and then I would be able to then, eventually go into graduate school, and that sort of thing.  But that's the way we planned it.  Well based upon that episode, they gave me an F in ROTC.  I flunked ROTC, and they washed me out of ROTC.  So then, in that year, at twenty, I'd had a mother's death, and also, the plans for a future career devastated--at twenty years old.
Story_ID: 14343
Speaker 1: I went back to school [Southern University, Baton Rouge, Louisiana], of course, and finished that semester, and I finished the year.  And because I had been in the marching band during the early part of my career, you didn't have to take physical education, because the marching was, was the physical education.  So, I didn't have any physical education courses, I didn't have a, have a freshman course.  I had finished all my senior work, and everything, and then all--to graduate in August, but the courses I took during the summer, were, were first year courses, and, and I took physical education, I took badminton and golf, and some other things, and I did have to take a course in, in math.  And I graduated in the summer of 1959, from Southern, at twenty.  No ROTC [Reserve Officers Training Corps] to go into for commission, a degree in political science--liberal arts, with no education.  So no certificate to teach, and no opportunity to teach.  To go back to Alabama, where the opportunities for blacks, at that time, were almost nil--especially if you had a college degree, or anything--if you didn't teach or work in the Post Office.  To go back to live with a father [Cleveland Todd], who couldn't read and write, with a college degree, at twenty years old.  It was a watershed year for me, and a turning point in my life.  Because, I had the opportunity to either become a thug or a hoodlum, or an outlaw, or I had the opportunity of trying to mature, and grow up, and face this challenge, and remember what my mother [Alberta George Todd] had said to me, and what I had to do.  But I was a strapping young man, at twenty, with a baccalaureate degree, who didn't have a job.  I smoked--so my daddy, who didn't have an education, had to give me money for cigarettes, give me money to live on.  But he never turned his back, he never said no.  Even as friends of his, as people will do, would say that, "This, this boy is going to get up there on his feet, and he's going to leave you."  He said, "He's my son."  So I sat that whole year, and it was a difficult year.  I mean, it was a year of reassessment, and a year of, of trying to grow up.
Speaker 2: Well your, your stepfather was a real father.
Speaker 1: He was a real father.  And so, I, I had two years, because I had gone to school a year early, and I also had that year.  So I was just twenty-one, but I, I was able to use that year to grow up, and I, and I did grow up.  And I worked in the church, and I did do some things.  And I did--I found myself, as a matter of fact.  And so I, I had to use that year.  It was, it was, it was perhaps, one of the lowest periods of my life, in terms of, of, of a, of accomplishment and achievement, and also personal self-worth--because, I mean, I tell you, every day, I mean, I didn't have a job; I didn't do anything.  I tried and tried, I couldn't get a job, so, and I had to depend upon this father to help me.  And then, I, I didn't realize, until later on, that it was a molding, fashioning kind of experience.
Story_ID: 14344
Speaker 1: So I volunteered for the military, and he [Cleveland Todd] begged me, "Don't go in the military."  He said, "I didn't go in the military."  So, we had a little group of people, who would work in the church with kids, and they were all teachers and all business people, and they had jobs, and we'd work with the kids on Monday night.  And on Monday night, we'd have a little session, where we'd all ante-up, and get a little hot sausage, to eat, a little gin to drink.  And we'd sit around and there were people there from Fisk [University, Nashville, Tenn.] from Tennessee State [University, Nashville, Tenn.], and from Alabama State [University, Montgomery, Ala.], and the University of Michigan [Ann Arbor, Mich.]--all educated--so we would, we'd have these great discussions.  And I mean, I enjoyed that.  So, one of the guys, a businessman, by the name of, John Tyus, said to me, "You wanted to go to law school, why don't you apply for a scholarship?"  I said, "Well, I, I don't know what, what that means."  He said, "Oh."  He said to me, "Alabama--see, see Alabama and Mississippi and Louisiana, where the--I mean Georgia, and those places, where they didn't have law schools for blacks, had what they called an out-of-state tuition, to send their black citizens to law schools in the states where they had law schools.  So, I first applied to the University of Alabama [Tuscaloosa, Alabama], and was turned down.  And then, I applied for the scholarship.  And they wrote me and said, "Okay, it's a reimbursement scholarship, and if you are--if, if you get into law school, and you get your documents and send them back, we'll, we'll send you the fellowship money.  So I took the letter from Alabama back to Southern [University, Baton Rouge, Louisiana], where people knew me, and where I knew them, and on the strength of that, and the affidavit of the dean that I had graduated, until they got my transcript, they admitted me to law school.  Well, I went into law school with no books, with no--nothing, no clothes, no anything.  But it didn't make any difference.  Because I had made the decision that I was going to law school, and that the only thing that was important was law school--how I looked, what I ate, it didn't make any difference--I was committed.  And I must say that during my undergraduate school, I, I knew I could do some things and I could get by, so I didn't apply myself as much as I should have.  But law school was going to be different.  And so I got into law school, and I started going to courses, and I enjoyed it as a matter of fact.  And--but I didn't get any money from Alabama.  I was living in faculty housing, because that's where graduate students lived, and the students--the university was carrying me on credit, but I didn't get any money from Alabama.  And I didn't get any money from Alabama in October, and in November, and in December, we called, and they said they're working on it.  So in January, when we're getting ready for final examinations at Southern's law school, I got this fat letter from the state of Alabama.  And I said, "Well my money is here finally, so this pressure can be taken off of me."  Remember, I'm going to classes now, with no books and no money, and, and with the pressure of owing money, because I don't know how I'm going to pay for it.  When I opened the--I mean hurriedly--opened the letter from Alabama, they had a check in there.  And I said, "Oh man, I'm, I'm rich."  The check was for five dollars and forty-five cents ($5.45), which represented train fare from Mobile [Alabama] to Baton Rouge--less taxes.  And the explanation was, that I had chosen a law school that was cheaper than the University of Alabama, and what they paid, was not the tuition, but a differential tuition, so that you wouldn't lose any money.  And since Southern was cheaper than the University of Alabama, they didn't owe me anything but train fare.  So I went to the dean, I said, "Dean, this is what my situation is."  He--the dean of the law school, his name is Aquinaldo Alphonso LeNoir--he's dead now, and don't ask me to spell any of that--but dean--we called him Aggie, he said to me, "Don't worry about it.  You take your exams."  I said, "Well Dean, how can I take my exams and all this--"  He said, "You take your exams."  And so, I said, "Fine."  I said, "Dean, and whatever happens, I want these grades," because to me, I had committed, I mean, I had become obsessed with law school--working from eight o'clock in the morning until ten o'clock at night, and, and, and seven days a week--and I mean, I, I was obsessed with it.  And I was finally the student that I knew that I could have been.  And in law school, at Southern, at that time, you took one exam a semester--it was 'sudden death.'  If you passed that exam, you passed the course.  If you flunked that exam, all of the months that you spent before, didn't matter.  The dean said, "Put it behind you, I want you to take this exam--your exams."  And so, I went into my examinations with this burden over my head.  And I had to find the strength--by this time now at twenty-two--to put that behind me, and take the exams.  The exams were four hours--except for one that was six hours.  So, I took the exams, and then waited.  Well, I told the dean, I said, "Well, Dean I'll go out, and I'll get a job."  I said, "But I want to make sure, because they're not going to release my grades, and they're not going to let me back in school until I pay the old debts--and then they gone far enough.  So I couldn't get back in school.  The dean said, "You can't get back in school now, but I'll tell you what, you can monitor the courses until we clear this up."  So, while I started monitoring the courses the grades came out.  I had five courses in law school, the first year: I got four A's and a B.  And the B was a B because the guy said, "If I had known you were getting all A's, I mean, you know, you did B-work, but I didn't want them to think that I was biased toward you."  I said, "That's alright, four A's and a B."  The dean took those grades up to the, to the to the vice president and said, "This man is one of ours, so we can't put him out."  To make a long story short, they made arrangements to keep me at Southern's law school; they put me in housing, and they gave me a scholarship, and then they took all my money because they--I owed it.  But that's okay, it didn't make any difference--I stayed in law school.  To make a long story short, the next semester, I got five A's, in law school.  Needless to say, I got scholarships, and everything else, and they had faith in me.  And, just for the record, I graduated from Southern, Magna Cum Laude, with almost a--with a 3.899 scholarship--I mean grade point average.  It was a funny kind of a story, because the dean, who had always been in my corner, and many of the faculty members too, and the students--I mean, we were a small family.  Summa Cum Laude, at Southern undergraduate, was a 3.8 to 4.0, now, I mean, that's generally the practice.  Magna Cum Laude in the law school was 4.0--you had to have all A's.  I had a C and a B, but I was within the 3.899, and the faculty had the authority to vote me Summa, which was the highest honor.  And so, the faculty met, and they said, "No, we have in our catalog 4.0, so we're not lowering our standards to 3.899; he will graduate Magna Cum Laude, and I did graduate from law school, fortunately, Magna Cum Laude.  On the other side of the coin, once I finished high school this time, I--I mean, once I finished law school this time, I had twenty-five job offers--including the offer of a faculty position at Southern.  I should also say, that during the time that I was in law school, that the fourth army headquarters investigated my being put out of ROTC [Reserve Officers Training Corps], found that I had been, actually harmed, and been treated unfairly, and offered me an, a, a, commission on the spot.  And of course, I laughed at them, because I knew that with a law degree that I would then get a commission if I had to go in as a lawyer.
Story_ID: 14345
Speaker 1: So I graduated from Southern [University School of Law, Baton Rouge, Louisiana].  That wasn't over then.  One of the people in my class, who graduated from Southern, had been in Southern before, in the law school before, and he went into the military, so he was grandfathered.  Prior to 1959, in Louisiana, you didn't have to take a written Bar Examination to be admitted to the Bar.  If you graduated from an accredited law school, you were automatically admitted--called diploma, diploma privilege.  So, everybody who was in before 1959 just finished, and opened up, got their license.  However, they changed the rules--and the reason they changed the rules is because, the demonstrations at Southern--I mean in Baton Rouge, had been led by law students from Southern.  And so, to make it more difficult for, for lawyers--black lawyers to get into the Bar, they instituted a written Bar Examination.  And my class was the first one to take it, in 1963--twenty-one and a half hours--a Bar Examination conceived and written by all white lawyers, and graded by all white lawyers.  Because of the law in Louisiana, no black law professor, or no black lawyer could serve on the Bar Examining Committee; we had no Bar Review.  I think LSU [Louisiana State University, Baton Rouge, Louisiana] had a hundred hours, my Bar Review Constitute was, was, was, was sitting in the law library eight hours a day, studying on my own.  And the Bar Examination was given at Tulane University [New Orleans, Louisiana], a white school, so that we went into the Bar Examination with about five or six hundred people, only about ten or fifteen of them were black--for twenty-one and a half hours.  And I knew then, that, that my being the first from the law school to take it, that there was more riding on the Bar Examination than just my taking it.  So I wrote for twenty-one and a half hours, I wrote so much that my hands cramped.  But in July, we took the Bar, and it was a quick turn-around, and somewhere around August 9th, I got a letter from the Louisiana Bar Association--and of course, for that brief moment, you just kind of take a deep breath, and wonder what's going on.  I, I never finished the letter, all I finished was: "We are pleased to advise...," and that was it.  I mean, that was, they had either--it was a form letter.  And then, I, I, I was sworn into the Louisiana Bar on August 28th, 1963.  Now that should ring a bell, because after the ceremony, the dean of the law school [Aquinaldo A. LeNoir] took us to a restaurant in New Orleans called Dickey Chase, a black-owned restaurant, and we sat there, and we watched, on August 28th, 1963, a minister from Montgomery, Alabama [Dr. Martin Luther King Jr.], deliver a speech at the Reflecting Pool [Washington, D.C.].  So I was sworn in on the day of the historic March on Washington, in 1963.
Story_ID: 14346
Speaker 1: And so, and I just, I just thought that was symbolic for me, and, and not only that, but two weeks later, I would go to Washington [D.C] to work--in what was billed as the 'New Frontier' in the [John F.] Kennedy Administration, on the Solicitor's Staff of the Department of Labor, in Washington, D.C.  So that, my whole educational life, and other life, all centered around events and things that happened in the Civil Rights Movement.
Speaker 2: That's a, that's really a remarkable window there, you know, into that, you know--  How'd you feel? You know.
Speaker 1: Well, you know, I felt, I felt conflicting.  Because, remember going back, I told you I had been very vocal on, on, on the campus.  So, when the demonstrations were led out of the undergraduate school at Southern [University], into Baton Rouge [Louisiana]--sit-in demonstrations, led by students--the student leaders, who knew me as a student leader, and a participant at Southern, came to me, and asked me to join the demonstrations.  Well, this is my last opportunity.  I knew that if I didn't make it through law school, there would be no other opportunity.  So, I had to agonize over the decision: Do I stay in law school, which is relatively comfortable and safe, or do I go on the line?  And if I'm arrested, I know that I would never finish law school, and never--if I did finish law school, they would not allow me to take the Bar Examination.  Do--these students are going every day, they're coming back--the smell of tear gas, dogs--you know.  What do I do?  What is my responsibility?  I'm twenty-one.  Again, another decision that I had to make.  I mean, I agonized over it, and I decided that they had 1500 to 2000 students marching every day--they were all black.  And I decided that they had enough black students, they had enough black people in Baton Rouge, and they had enough black people in Louisiana, but they didn't have enough black lawyers.  And so, I decided to stay in law school, it was a tremendous decision, and to do what I could behind the scenes.  And what we did--behind the scenes--is we worked with CORE [Congress of Racial Equality].  And when James Farmer came in and had difficulty, lawyers for the--on the law school faculty worked with him, but the law students worked with the law faculty members.  We worked on an open letter to the community signed by CORE.  When the demonstrations took place in Baton Rouge, the first case to get to the Supreme Court of the United States was [John S.] Garner v. Louisiana [1961], which was the first sit-in case.  And it was handled by a Southern graduate, Johnnie [Anderson] Jones, Attorney Johnnie Jones, who was a sole practitioner.  So, what we did, in the law school, the students, on our own time, we worked on the Supreme Court brief.  We worked on the case; we got the practical experience, but we also contributed to his being able to have some legal resources.  That's what I did behind the scenes, until I could get into a position to get past the Bar, and get into the Bar, and get into the practice of law.  But during that period, the way I made that decision, was that I made a contract with myself.  I made a compact with myself--that I wouldn't leave law school to go into the Civil Rights Movement now.  But every day of my life, for the rest of my life, wherever I would be, and whatever I would do, that some of that time would be spent on the civil rights of other people, and Civil Rights Movement--to give back to the community.  So, I went to the Department of Labor, we got involved.  I tried to get into the Justice Department; I couldn't get in.  But I got into the United States Attorney's Office, established a Civil Rights Office.  And so, since that time, all of my life, everything that I've done, some portion of that life has been dealing with civil rights, and human rights, and giving back to the community.  But I'm fulfilling, not a, an obligation to anybody else, I'm fulfilling a contract to myself--something that I agreed with myself to do, back in the '60s [1960s]--and I'm still doing that.
Story_ID: 14347
Speaker 1: Okay, so you went directly to Washington [D.C.]?  Didn't you say to Washington?
Speaker 2: After law school, yes.  I went into the Solicitor's Staff of the Department of Labor, in Washington D.C., that's the law department.  And I had, I had been admitted to the Bar, had a license to practice law, had honors grades, got into the office, had a white office-mate, who was a graduate of Yale's [University, New Haven, Conn.] law school, but who had not been admitted to the Bar.  He was making two grades of a salary higher than what I was making.  I was hired as a GS-7, as a lawyer; he was a GS-9, as a intern--as an intern.  And so, we were talking and he said to me, he said, "I'm waiting for the Bar results."  And then, we were talking about--and I found out, that he was making more money than I was making, and I was a licensed lawyer.  Well, needless to say, we upset the Justice Department.  I filed a complaint, and I went to the black lawyers who were there, and we challenged them.  And, and of course, we won the challenge, because it was wrong.  And what their explanation was, was it was the first time they had ever had experience with a graduate from my law school [Southern University School of Law, Baton Rouge, Louisiana], which was an all-black law school.  So, they didn't feel, they didn't, they didn't value my education the way they did a Yale's.  They never did that again.  But, but they couldn't promote me, because there was a freeze on, so I went into the military.  But by going into the military, they kept me on the payroll, and I was promoted every year, and then they did eventually try to correct it, but I didn't go back to the Department of Justice.  So, even in that situation, and the so-called 'New Frontier'--whatever [John F.] Kennedy had, and what have you--
Speaker 1: Robert Kennedy--
Speaker 2: Bobby Kennedy was the Attorney General, [John F.] Kennedy was the president, there was that kind of rank discrimination.  But even worse than that, I went into the Justice Department, where Bobby Kennedy was the Attorney General, and I wanted to apply to the Civil Rights Division, because that's what was involved.  And I was interviewed by John Door, and Burt Marshall--the top civil rights people there--I couldn't get in.  Now, I had honors grades, I had everything, I couldn't get in.  And at that time, I think, they may have had one black lawyer at the Civil Rights Division.
Speaker 1: Who was Martin?  Wasn't it--
Speaker 2: No, no.  No, no, this may have been Louis Berry.  But he was the only one who was there.  And they said to me, said, "Well, you know, this is a high-profile kind of a thing."  Well, the bottom line was, they did not hire me, and my qualifications were impeccable.  But it was because, the lawyers who were there were white, young, mostly male, and most of them from Harvard [University, Cambridge, Mass.]--that was the Civil Rights Division.  It later changed, but I was not allowed to get in.  So, at every step there's been something involving civil rights, and that sort of thing.  I later rectified that, when we come back to that, when I went into the United States Attorney's Office here in Chicago [Illinois].
Story_ID: 14348
Speaker 1: Like I said, I made an agreement with myself that I'd be involved in civil rights for the rest of my life.  So, I had to go into the military, because I had gotten a deferment from the Draft Board in Alabama--an all-white draft board--and they determined that they were going to draft me.  So I ended up taking a commission in the Judge Advocate General's Corps, in the United States Army, in 1967.  And, was originally scheduled to go to Korea, but through some maneuvering, and some other kinds of things, was given a choice of going to Korea or coming to Chicago [Illinois].  And I went to Chicago, and actually--the first time I'd ever been to Chicago--and I was actually at Fort Sheridan, as probably the first black lawyer in the United States Army at Fort Sheridan.  But, having heard so much about Chicago, I wanted to move into Chicago, I didn't want to live on the North Shore.  So, I got here in February of 1965--the same weekend that Nat King Cole died, as a matter of fact--and I moved into Chicago in May.  And found out that I was the, like the second black person to move into the Carl Sandburg Development, on the near North Side.  Now, of course, as I was growing up, and people talked about Chicago, and what have you, and 'cause they--I won't go into that story, but they talked about how free blacks were in Chicago, and how much better they were doing in Chicago than they were in Alabama.  I remember my friends, who were professionals said, "Well if you go to Chicago, you should live in Lake Meadows, or Prairie Shores--that's where young black professionals live, and that's where I think it's a nice area."  I didn't know anything about Chicago at all, but I, I had friends who lived in South Shore, and who lived in Lake Meadows.  And I, and I tried to drive from Prairie Shores, Lake Meadows to Fort Sheridan one morning--it took almost two hours--I, I knew that was no good.  So I said, "I, I've got to live closer to where I work."  Not knowing Chicago, and not understanding how segregated Chicago was, and people have--had come back and lied to us, about how free black people were in Chicago.  I took the Chicago Tribune and I started going through apartments.  So I went up on the Northwest Side, only because it was close to the expressway.  The guy opened the door, he looked at me, and I looked at him, I knew we both had made a mistake.  So, eventually, I was asked--I was told about Carl Sandburg Village, which had just been developed.  And I applied there, and I was a--an officer, and I was, I was given an apartment, a, a studio apartment.  And I moved into Carl Sandburg Village in 1965--in May.  It was close to the expressway, and I could get out to Fort Sheridan in, in a reasonable amount of time.  So I've lived on the near North Side of Chicago all of that time, as a matter of fact.  So, I was in the military, again at Fort Sheridan, as a black lawyer, in JAG [Judge Advocate General's Corps]--the only one--and the civil rights lawyer was a black major.  And of course, the North Shore was the North Shore.  I mean it was as discriminatory as Chicago.  And so, what we found out, in the--this is 1965, is that black soldiers were not allowed housing, right in their immediate area, or in Lake Forest or Lake Bluff--they were sent to Waukegan [Illinois], or North Chicago.  And so, in 1965, I did some testing.  I sent a white--I sent a black major out to get an application for an apartment, right in the immediate area of Fort Sheridan, and the black major, they'd tell her it was filled.  Then I sent a black--the white lieutenant out, for that same apartment complex, and they gave him applications.  And so, I, as, as, you know, as a person working with the Civil Rights Office, and I said to them, "This, this is discrimination, and it violates the Army Code," and what have you.  And, and the colonel's responsibility either, either put these apartments off-limits to everybody, or have them open up to everybody.  So they opened them up to everybody.  That was in 1965.  Then, once they found out that I was doing civil rights, then the black women at Fort Sheridan came to me, and said, "Listen, Lieutenant Todd--" They said, "--they--the, the people from these cosmetic companies come to the PX [Post Exchange] and they make up white people's faces, but they won't make up black people's faces."  Well, that's a violation of the rules.  So I went after them, and said, "Either you make up everybody's faces, or you can't come on the Post."  Then black women from the WAC [Women's Army] Corps came, and said, "You know what, Lieutenant Todd--" said, "--we, we get unfair treatment with Article 15 [Article allowing commanders to impose punishment], and Disciplinary Corps because we are black," so I started going after that.  In other words, we established a reputation that we would fight for civil rights.  And then, the colonel called me in there, and asked me would I volunteer to go to Santa Domingo [Dominican Republic].  (chuckle)  And so, I was assigned to Santa Domingo (laughter) for four months, but under the agreement that I would come back to Chicago.  But, but he laughed about it, and then, and no one ever acknowledged the fact that it may have had something to do with the civil rights work.  But it was a, it was getting very hot, so, I was removed.  One incident that happened there, which--and, and I had never had a great deal of experience living in the so-called North.  I went to the--a doctor at Fort Sheridan, and, and told him, you know, that I, I was feeling queasy and uneasy, and my eyes were red, and I wanted a diagnosis.  And he said, "Well, you know, you shouldn't worry about your, your eyes--eighty percent of all black people have red eyes, and flat feet."  I mean he's a captain in the military.  And I said, "I didn't ask you for any of your voodoo diagnosis, I want your medical opinion."  So I wrote him up; I wrote the colonel on him.  And of course, the colonel said, "He didn't mean any harm, he'd apologize."  And so, and he out-ranked me, and so, I went over, he said, "Well, I didn't know that you were going to do that."  I said, "Well, I didn't come here for you to use any of your myths and any of the rumors, and your whatever diagnoses you use, I want your medical opinion."  So he apologized when we got into it.  But anyway, I left and went to Santa Domingo, and stayed for four months TDY [temporary duty], and then, came back to Chicago.  And finished my time at Fifth Army Headquarters at Hyde Park and 51st Street; and then, back out to Fort Sheridan when they moved it.  So, I--by that time, I was promoted to captain, and then I had the experience of being a lawyer in the Department of Labor in Washington [D.C]; having been in Assistant Staff Judge Advocate, in the military--so I had some credentials.
Story_ID: 14349
Speaker 1: When I got out of the military, not a single white law firm would give me an interview.  Not a single one.  My wife [Janis R. Todd]--by the time I had gotten married, and my wife--who had gone to school with a noted white lawyer in Chicago [Illinois], was a civil rights lawyer, who took biographical sketches of mine, of resumes--they would not give me an interview.  I eventually--because I lived on the North Side, and didn't know anything about politics in Chicago--a precinct captain said to my wife, "Well, what is Tom going to do?"  And they were white.  And they took, they, they took me to see George Dunn, the ward committeeman, for the 42nd Ward; I didn't know, I didn't even know what ward I lived in, I had just registered to vote in 1960, and had only voted in one presidential election.  So, I mean, I was not involved in electoral politics.  But, they made arrangements to get me into the United States Attorney's Office.  From the near North Side, none of the black politicians on the South Side knew me, they didn't know anything about me, they didn't where I had come from, and I ended up in the United States Attorney's Office.  And the United States Attorney, during that time was a person by the name of, Edward Vincent Hanrahan.  So, I was hired by Hanrahan, and incidentally, as, as you probably know, in '68 [1968], when Hanrahan ran, he had a lot of black support.  That was prior to the assassination of Mark Clark and Fred Hampton [Black Panther Party leaders], on December 4th [1969].  So, I was in the United States Attorney's Office, because I had experience in the military, they put me into criminal trials immediately.  After six months, I was dissatisfied, because, there was nothing being done in civil rights.  And I was about to leave, but Hanrahan was getting ready to leave, to run, as a matter of fact, for States Attorney, and they were bringing in a new United States Attorney--a guy by the name of Thomas Foran, who was considered more liberal, and that sort of thing, and so I stayed around.  And, I knew that there were some Reconstruction statutes; I knew that the United States Attorney's Office had the power to deal with civil rights, but I knew that it had not been done in Chicago.  So what I did was, I found the statutes, and then I asked the United States Attorney could I establish a Civil Rights Office, in Chicago.  Well that was different, because all of the civil rights matters were handled in Washington [D.C], they were centralized, just like taxes, under the 1957 Civil Rights Act.  But we got permission to establish a Civil Rights Office, in the United States Attorney's Office--the first one in the country.  And I was assigned, and a secretary, so that, they named me the head of the Civil Rights Division.  Well, some of the white lawyers in the United States Attorney's Office objected because they said I had not been there long enough to head a division.  But the guy said, "But there's only one person in the division."  Said, "That's all right," so the press release just said that I was there, and the press indicated that I headed the division, but I was the only person there.
Story_ID: 14350
Speaker 1: Let's put this in perspective: I was in the United States Attorney's Office in 1967.  You had the assassination of Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.] in 1968, in April 4th, 1968.  You had Bobby [Robert F.] Kennedy's assassination [1968].  You had the assassination of Mark Clark and Fred Hampton, December 4th, 1969.  And you had the Days of Rage, during the Democratic National Convention in 1968--those are my years in the United States Attorney's Office.
Speaker 2: And those are hot years.
Speaker 1: Hot years!  And as a federal prosecutor, as a black federal prosecutor, I used the United States Attorney's Office to get entre into the black community.  I met Renault Robinson while I was a federal prosecutor; I met Reverend Jesse Jackson while I was a federal prosecutor; I met Lou Palmer while I was a federal prosecutor.  Because my attitude was that this is a federal prosecutor's office, but it should work for the black people; it should work for the community.  And so, as a result of that, I started to move toward developing cases in civil rights.  Well, as you know, at Balboa and Michigan [Ave, Chicago, Illinois], in 1968, during the Democratic National Convention, young white students, yippies and hippies, they called them, and what have you--were beaten unmercifully.  So they convened a special task force, to come in to see could they get indictments against Chicago police officers.
Story_ID: 14351
Speaker 1: No Chicago [Illinois] police officer had ever been indicted, for a deprivation of civil rights, in the history of Chicago, under an 1866 statute.
Speaker 2: Why do you think that is?
Speaker 1: Oh, because first of all, there was no pressure to do it, the politicians didn't do it, and, and of course, the white politicians wouldn't do it.  The police department actually was under the cover of the mayor, and everything else, so it was kind of sacrosanct.  But I was from out of town, and I knew there was an 1866 statute.  So they brought Ramsey Clark, brought in this task force, to investigate.  And they were getting ready to indict Chicago police officers for beating white students, and I said, "No.  Black people have been beaten in Chicago historically; black people have been beaten in these housing developments historically, if there gone--if there is going to be a black, a police officer indicted for the deprivation of civil rights in Chicago, the first indictment should be of a police officer who deprived a black person of their civil rights.  And I argued on the inside, and I got my way.  We, E. Duke McNeil, who was then at TWO [The Woodlawn Organization], called me and told me about a case involving a black man who was killed outside of Stony Island [Chicago, Illinois], The Queen of the Sea, by two TAC [tactical] officers, who, they said, they hit him, and he hit his head, but he died.  And he brought the case to me.  It was not a good case, but it was a case.  And we developed it, and I developed it with the FBI [Federal Bureau of Investigation], as a matter of fact, and we got the indictment.  I took it to the Grand Jury.  But the decision was made, for me not to try the case, to use two white lawyers, because it was a, it was a very controversial case, at the very beginning.  And we thought that because the jury would be all white, that we would do it that way.  Well, the jury, we got the indictment, the jury, they presented the case, the jury deliberated forty-five minutes, and they acquitted the police officer.  So the next case that came in, Jeff Fort, who was then the head of the Black P-Stone Nation [Chicago gang], called me from Tilden High School [Chicago, Illinois].  And he said, "Attorney Todd, I don't know you."  He said, "But they are beating young black children out here, police officers."  And I said, "Jeff, are you sure?"  He said, "I witnessed it."  So I went to the United States Attorney's Office, and I said, "I just got a complaint from Jeff Fort."  He said, "What Jeff Fort?"  I said, "Who's the head of the Black P-Stone Nation."  He said, "Well I don't understand."  I said, "Well you can't--" I said, "Well Jeff Fort is a citizen.  Now if he is, if he is afoul of the law, you indict him.  But if he is a citizen, he has a right to make a complaint."  And so, he filed a complaint, and I brought Jeff Fort and Mickey Cogwell to the United States's Office--Attorney's Office, took them into the United States Attorney, and they made a complaint against a police officer.  I didn't use the FBI to investigate this one, because I thought the FBI did not serve me well for the first one.  I investigated the case--I took the complaint, investigated the case, and also, set up the trial of the case with a lawyer from Washington [D.C.].  The interesting thing about it, at this point, is that, the administration had changed.  [Richard] Nixon had been elected, and the United States Attorney was a holdover, but the Chief of Civil Rights, in Washington, was Jarris Leonard--a Republican from Milwaukee [Michigan].  Nixon, apparently, still believed that [Mayor Richard J.] Daley may have done some things with that election, when he lost to John [F.] Kennedy in 1960.  So, they, they, they really, really gave me carte blanche, in terms of, what I could do.  And so, they approved the indictment without the local United States Attorney's Office knowing.  So, we got the indictment, and they sent a person from lawyers--from Washington to try the case with me.  And I tried the case myself.  We hung a jury for conviction, and so, once the jury was hung for conviction, you have a right to re-try them.  When I went up to the judge to re-try it, I found out that the United States Attorney's Office had, behind my back, cut a deal to dismiss it.  I went to my office and sat down, and said, "If you were going to dismiss it, you will have to dismiss it.  I will not go."  I did not go to the courtroom.  Well, my high profile at that court caused the press to call me, to say, "Why didn't you go?"  And I said, "Because they threw the case, and as a result of that, if they were going to throw it, they weren't going to have me to do it for them.  They'd have to do it themselves."  But during that period, we got that first indictment against the Chicago police officer.  We got--we hung a jury for the first police--for the first time against a Chicago police officer.
Story_ID: 14352
Speaker 1: We cited the Chicago Board of Education, for discrimination in faculty assignment in hiring, because it was easier for me to do by myself.  We represented the, the--what we call the FTBs, the [full-time basis] substitute teachers, who were mostly black, who were being treated unfairly by the Board of Education.  We filed the first Civil Rights Act, under the 1968 Housing Act, in the country.  So, we established all that with one person and a secretary, as a matter of fact.  But during that whole period, I established a reputation, and a rapport, in the black community, as 'the people's prosecutor.'  And that's what I wanted.  As a matter of fact, the, the Chicago Sun Times--it was an unfortunate date, but on the same day that Fred Hampton [leader of the Black Panthers] was, was killed [December 4, 1969]--ran a story called 'The Black Edge of the Legal Sword.'  And it was a story about my efforts trying to use the federal power to help to protect black people, and to protect them as a matter of fact.  And I stayed there until 1970, and then I went in, from there, to Northwestern University [Evanston, Illinois], as the first full-time black law professor.
Story_ID: 14353
Speaker 1: Now, what--why did you leave?
Speaker 2: Well, the, the, the position [head of the Chicago Civil Rights Division of the United States Attorney's Office] was a political position, and I stayed there three years.  And, I, I didn't want to stay any longer.  I wanted to do something else.  Teaching was not something that I wanted--that I had even thought about.  But somebody asked me to apply, and I applied, and they hired me.  Remember now, that was after 1968, after 125 cities went up after the assassination of Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr. [April 4, 1968], after the disturbances in Watts [Watts Riots, Los Angeles, California, 1965], after the disturbances in Bed-Sty--in Bedford-Stuyvesant [New York, July 18, 1964], after the disturbances in Detroit [Detroit Riots, Detroit, Michigan, 1967], and after Chicago [Illinois] had its own disturbances [ April 1968].  So, as a result of that, white corporations and white universities were seeking black students and black professors, and everything else that you could get.  So, Northwestern [University, Evanston, Illinois] offered me a position, and I took a joint appointment at Northwestern, as Assistant Professor of Law and Assistant Director of the Center for Urban Affairs.  But one of the pre-qualifiers for me, was that I would teach a course called 'Law & Racism' and I developed a course called 'Law & Racism.'  Many white students went through that course.  As a matter of fact, Flint Taylor, who represented the Black Panther family, and, and one other person, Skip--I can't think of Skip's last name--they were in my 'Law & Racism' class.  And as a result of that, I taught the Black Panther case.  I taught, in 'Introduction to the Legal Process,' what was going on in the legal process.  So--and I taught 'Constitutional Law.'  So I stayed at Northwestern four stormy years, and then, I left it.  And after having talked about everybody--the governor, and the mayor, and the president, and, and law professors, and, and, and white persons who were depriving black people--nobody would hire me.  So I went into private law practice with Bob Tucker and with Jerome Butler, in this, in the building at One North LaSalle, called Tucker, Watson, Butler & Todd.  And--
Speaker 1: Now, in what way was it stormy at Northwestern University--?
Speaker 2: Oh, I was the only black law professor.
Speaker 1: What, what, what kind of pressure did they put on you?
Speaker 2: They, they--all sorts of pressure.  First of all, I was put in charge of, of admissions, which was a trap, because, either I was in there with two other people on the Admissions Committee.  But I really had the authority, and took the authority to admit blacks and Hispanics, at that time.  And so, if I made a decision, and if they didn't have the qualifications that Northwestern thought that they had, they said to me, "Well, this person doesn't make it."  I said, "Well, either I'm in charge of admitting them, or I'm not."  So whether they have the LSAT or not, I see something in their background, I think they can make it--incidentally, some of those people that I worked to get into Northwestern graduated--some of them are judges in here, in Chicago, now, and I won't call their names.  And some of them are judges in other areas.  But I took that responsibility, because I wanted to admit some more black students.  And we admitted them, as a matter of fact.  But I, but, but a university is, is, is, is, is based upon camaraderieship [sic.] and you're supposed to, to, to, to, to eat, and, I didn't do any of that.  As a matter of fact, as an Assistant Professor of Law at Northwestern, I took the position as executive--as deputy director of Operation Bread Basket, with Reverend Jesse Jackson, and then, as executive director of Operation PUSH [People United to Serve Humanity].  But I was still an Assistant Professor of Law at Northwestern University.  So that created a lot of controversy, and I didn't associate with the faculty, and I didn't deal with--that's not why I was there.  I was there as an activist who had gone to teach, not a teacher who just happens to dabble in activism.  But I established a rapport, even while I was at Northwestern, with the black community.  Then, not only at Northwestern but nationally.  And then, participated with Drew Days, and some other persons, as they established a segment of the National Bar Association, the black Bar Association for black law professors.
Speaker 1: Did, did, did, did the number of black professors--?
Speaker 2: I was the only black law professor there.  And, what I did was, I was the only black on the staff.  The only other black person at Northwestern's law school, when I went in, was a brother by the name of Pinckney Osborne, who was a janitor.  'Cause I spent more time with him, because he knew more than what the dean knew, about what was going on.  But I was on every committee: I was on the Equal Opportunity Committee; I was on the Affirmative Action Committee; I was all of those committees.  And I said to the dean, "I'm resigning."  I had to meet with the black law students to tell them, "I'm coming off the committees, because, with me serving on all of these committees, they don't need to hire anybody else. What they can do is use me."  And so, I told the, I told the dean of the law school, I said, "I'm resigning."  He said, "Why?"  I said, "Because you don't need a black law professor, you need a Niggerologist."  And I--and he said, "Well what do you mean?"  And I said, "You want somebody who's an expert on dealing with black people."  I said, "And, and you got me on all of these committees, we need to get somebody else on this faculty, in these areas, to deal with it."  So I resigned.  And he said, "Well what's a Niggerologist?"  I said, "Well, you have white toilet paper in the bathrooms now.  I suspect if you--if the law school decided to go to pastel, you would call me in as a consultant on the toilet paper."  And so, he understood what I said.  They later hired a black Dean of Admissions; then they hired another black law professor; and then they hired another black law professor.  But as I sit here and talk to you on June 6, 2002, there's only one black law professor at Northwestern's law school now, and she is a marvelous black woman, by the name of Professor Joyce Hughes, who, who's been there twenty, thirty years.  And Northwestern still has only one black law professor.  But again, that's a part of the problems and the things in which we are dealing with.
Story_ID: 14354
Speaker 1: During the time that I was on the faculty at Northwestern [University, Evanston, Illinois], we filed a lawsuit involving reapportionment.  [Michael] Shakman, who--of the so-called famous Shakman Decision, tried--that was his first case; we tried it and, I helped him to understand what the trial process was.  And so, we tried it, and took it to the Court of Appeals, as a matter of fact, to protect William Cousins, and some other persons.  So then, in 1972, I was in the Ward Reapportionment Case.  In 1982, I was in the Congressional Reapportionment Case, to protect three black congressional seats, here in Chicago [Illinois]--those seats happen to have been Gus Savage, as a matter of fact, a congressman by the name of Harold Washington, and another congressman by the name of Collins, Congressman Cardis Collins, on the West Side.  The interesting thing about that whole political process, is that, in the reapportionment procedures the Democratic reapportionment map, really diluted Congressman Collins' congressional district.  The only safe district was really Congressman Harold Washington's district, 'cause that was the first district in the heart of the black community.  There was a group called PAC [Pan-African Congress] involved with Al Johnson--they used to call him "Cadillac Al," Dr. Bobby Wright, and some other persons, and they drew a map, and that, that protected the three Congressional Districts.  And the Democrats rejected it, but the Republicans accepted it.  So when I went into the reapportionment case in 198-, '81 or '82 [1982], or whenever it was, I actually was a part of the team representing the Republicans, being paid by the Republicans.  My interest though, was to preserve three black congressional districts.  And although the Republicans lost a seat, the three black congressional districts were protected.  And so, that was during that period of time.  So, those are the political aspects opening up processes, trying to get into the political process, and making sure we understood it enough, so that we could participate.
Speaker 2: Let me go back a little bit to Shakman.  Shakman was one of your students?
Speaker 1: No, Shakman was a young lawyer, who had just graduated, who was in the law firm with, at that time, Ab  [Abner] Mikva, who later was a congressman, and who later went to the White House [Washington, D.C.].  He was just a young lawyer; he had just gotten out of law school.  So he was working on the case; we were all working on the case together.  And, I'd had some experience as a lawyer, and this was his first major case, and argument before the 7th Circuit, and that sort of thing.  So, we worked together.  No, he was not one of my students.
Speaker 2: Okay, all right.
Speaker 1: Yeah, so we tried that--those cases.  So, even after I got out of the--of Northwestern and those circumstances, even out of [Operation] PUSH [People United to Serve Humanity], I was still involved in these civil rights matters, in Chicago, and in political campaigns.  And so, in 1971, as I said before, while I was still at Operation PUSH we tried to open up the process, Robert Tucker and I, for independents to run, in terms of, the number of signatures that were needed, to qualify to get on the ballot.  And, in 1972, I guess, or '71 [1971], in that area, I had supported Dick Freedman, who was a Republican, against [Mayor] Richard [J.] Daley--anybody against Richard J. Daley--as a matter of fact.  And in 1975, I was one of the few blacks in Chicago so-called leadership that supported Richard Newhouse.  That laid the foundation to all of the circumstances that we were dealing with, to lead toward the election of Harold Washington, in 1983.
Story_ID: 14355
Speaker 1: I just wanted to go back to your involvement with Operation PUSH [People United to Serve Humanity], before, and then, maybe we'll push on to Harold Washington.  But, yeah, when did you become involved with Operation PUSH?
Speaker 2: Went into Operation PUSH in the latter part of the [19]60s, early part of the [19]70s, with Reverend Jesse Jackson, was appointed as the Deputy Director of Operation Breadbasket, and, and also as the president of the Southern Christian Leadership Conference.  It was a jewel--it was a dual, and it was a jewel, because those who--two positions were act--absolutely terrific for me.  Because it gave me an opportunity to go to the front line of a viable civil rights organization.  That was in 1969, 1970.
Speaker 1: Now, just for clarification, the SCLC, the Southern Christian Leadership Conference--
Speaker 2: (simultaneously).  The Southern Christian Leadership Conference was founded by Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.
Speaker 1: Yeah, and Operation Breadbasket was a program of--
Speaker 2: Operation Breadbasket was the urban arm of the Southern Christian Leadership Conference, established by Dr. King, after his marches in Chicago [Illinois], in 1966.  And, and, and Reverend Jesse Jackson was placed at the head of that, in Chicago, dealing with economic development and that sort of thing.  I, I succeeded the Reverend Calvin Morris, as the Executive Director of--or the Deputy Director of Operation Breadbasket.  I read--I met Reverend Jesse Jackson while I was an Assistant United States Attorney, during the marches under the Philadelphia Plan, with the [Richard Milhous] Nixon administration, and so-called Black Capitalism--they were establishing these plans all over the, the country.  And Art Fletcher was an Undersecretary of Labor, and Republican, was in charge of hearings, here in Chicago, and I was an Assistant to the United States Attorney.  So, I was assigned to him, to help him with the hearings, because white contractors were marching against the hearings.  We first started the hearing in a hotel, and they took over the hotel, so we moved it to the customhouse, which is a federal facility, and the hearings were held there.  I was sent, with United States marshals, to pick up Reverend Jesse Jackson, because he was testifying.  And, I met him for the first time, during those hearings.  And later, met him again when I was invited to speak at Operation Breadbasket, for the Martin Luther King Jr. Celebration.  So, that, that's what--so the United States Attorney's Office was used, really, for me to get, really, a, a solid footing in representing the black community, and to establish a reputation in the black community.  I was--we campaigned.  We had to actually campaign in the early--in [19]70, in [19]71, to get a black president of the School Board.  And the black president, the candidate was a guy by the name of Warren Bacon, who many people thought should have probably been the first black mayor of Chicago--just a marvelous individual, who was at Inland Steel.  And, Dr. Manford Byrd was in that whole system, as a deputy superintendent.  But, we, we, we thought that Warren Bacon, who was on the School Board, should be the president.  So, we went all over the city, speaking, and rallying, and what have you.  And I spoke at rally for Warren Bacon, at Operation Breadbasket one night, and somebody heard me, and suggested to Reverend Jackson that I would speak at his celebration for Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr., the next year.  And I did, and he invited me to join him as a part of the overall movement.
Story_ID: 14356
Speaker 1: When the difficulties came between Reverend [Jesse] Jackson, and SCLC [Southern Christian Leadership Council], and Reverend Jackson was suspended for various reasons, the mantle of leadership of Operation Breadbasket came to me.
Speaker 2: What were the--what was the split about?
Speaker 1: Well, it was really a, a--I think it was a controversy based over a power struggle between the Reverend Jackson, and his segment, and Reverend Dr. [Ralph] Abernathy, and his segment.  Reverend Jackson had been tremendously successful with Operation Breadbasket, with Black Expo, with the black business people in Chicago.  And, I just think that it was just an unfortunate kind of a conflict, in that situation, where the subsidiary, the, the, the part was really outstripping the, the parent, and the whole.  And it just boiled down to that kind of a situation.  So, there were several things, which they cited for suspending Reverend Jackson.  One of them was appointing me, because he didn't get permission from [the SCLC headquarters in] Atlanta [Georgia]; the other was a meeting with U Thant, the then Secretary General of the United Nations, without permission from Atlanta, and, no one from Atlanta was at that meeting.  The other one was the incorporation, by the black business community of Black Expo.  Those were, those were the things that they cited.  But since I was the Deputy Director, when he was suspended from it, then the, the mantle of leadership passed on to me.  I was actually--
Speaker 2: --you're the only one who objected to--(chuckle)
Speaker 1: --but I was the, the Deputy Director, so I was the, I was made the acting leader of Operation Breadbasket.  And of course, that was a--there were a lot of problems with that, because I was really from the outside, and people didn't know.  And they didn't know whether or not my ambitions would cause me to want to overtake Reverend Jackson, and take the organization.  But I never had those ambitions.  I was an Assistant Professor of Law, a lawyer, and I respected Reverend Jackson's leadership.  So, on the first meeting, after the suspension, so, which it was on a Friday, we had our regular Saturday morning meeting.  And I was in charge.  So, at that meeting I decided that I would have a special guest speaker, which is an ordinary circumstance, for the meeting.  And so, I invited Reverend Jackson to be my speaker, as a matter of fact, and he spoke.  Subsequently, after that, the entire board, headed by a Mr. Wesley South, at WVON, resigned.  And that lead to the establishment of Operation PUSH.  And we can talk about that when we come back.
Story_ID: 14357
Speaker 1: Brought Reverend [Jesse] Jackson in to speak for me [at an Operation Breadbasket meeting], and that was on the, the next week, which was the 11th, and then we, we went to a meeting in Wash--in New York [New York].  Reverend Jackson did not go.  Reverend Jackson was on suspension.  I led the delegation, which was comprised of Warner Saunders, of channel 5, who was a board member, and who was comprised of Al Johnson, who was also a board member, which was hosted by Percy Sutton, who was then the Manhattan borough, and by Carl Stokes, who was the--who was the mayor of Cleveland [Ohio], and Richard Gordon Hatcher, the mayor of Gary [Indiana].  And the reason they convened this meeting was to determine what Reverend Jackson wanted to do.  And, let me tell you some of the people that were there: Quincy Jones, Aretha Franklin, Ossie Davis, Percy was not there, Carl Stokes, Richard Gordon Hatcher, Roberta Flack came later, Pete Long--whom you don't know, but he was a producer, and what have you, his wife was on 'Sesame Street,' [children's television show] as a matter of fact.  But these were people that came together and said, "We respect the Reverend, and respect Reverend Dr. [Ralph] Abernathy, and we want to do what the Reverend wants, but we don't want to hurt Dr. Abernathy."  In fact, Ossie Davis said, "Tom we, we will do whatever Reverend Jackson wants to do, but we don't want him to hurt Reverend Abernathy."  Now, this was in December 11th, about, or 12th, I guess.  Now, if the Niagara Movement, the original meeting in Niagara Falls, Canada, in 1905, with W.E.B. DuBois, and all of those persons.  If that was the precursor to the founding of the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People], then this meeting was the precursor to the founding of Operation PUSH [People United to Serve Humanity].  And so, when we came back, my report to Reverend Jackson, and to the board members, was that we have national support for the establishment of a new organization.  The only caveat is that, they do not want to see Dr. Abernathy, SCLC [Southern Christian Leadership Council], Dr. [Martin Luther] King's organization, hurt.  Within a week, or so, we were packing up the headquarters at 79th & Halsted [Chicago, Illinois], to leave, to establish a new organization.  We had a new--had a contest to name the new organization.  Reverend Clay Evans was very active of course; he was the first chairman of the board.  So we submitted names for the new organization.  Reverend Jackson submitted Humane Economic Liberation Plan.  But the acronym was "HELP".  And so, Reverend Clay Evans said, "That sounds like you begging," and whatever, "That's no good."  So I submitted People United to Save Humanity.  Because everywhere I went, there was a sign that said, "PUSH"--whether it was on the door, it was on the trashcan, it was everywhere.  So PUSH was just natural.  And I came up with People United to Save Humanity, which was the original name.  And that name was submitted.  So, I taught my class at Northwestern [University, Evanston, Illinois], and I went out to the Dr. King Workshop, and so, Mrs. Lucille Loman, someone who had been in the meeting, said, "Well, they selected your name."  I said, "Well what are you talking about?"  She said, "No, our new organization will be named Operation PUSH."  And so, I named Operation PUSH, as a matter of fact.  And the next weekend, at the Met [Metropolitan] Theatre, which is torn down now, on Dr. [Martin Luther] King Drive [Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 2: Yeah (unclear)--
Speaker 1: We had our meeting, and I announced to the world, Reverend Jackson's new organization as Operation PUSH--People United to Save Humanity.  And so, from there on we--Reverend Jackson and I together--with him as the president, and me as the executive vice president, originally--National Vice President, originally, then Executive Vice President--traveled the nation, speaking together.  Because everybody knew Reverend Jackson, a few people knew me, so we spoke together initially to establish PUSH, and establish PUSH chapters, and that sort of thing.  And that's the way we started.  We got to a point where if Reverend Jackson couldn't come, since they had become familiar with me, then they would ask me if I would come and substitute for him.  And so, those are the ways that we originally built it--just the two of us.  Basically discussing it back and forth, in terms of the leadership.  And I was still an Assistant Professor of Law at Northwestern.  But the Saturday morning meetings, I was in charge of helping to run, and that sort of thing.  And so, we, we, we developed it from that standpoint.  I consider one of the most significant experiences that I've ever had in the Civil Rights Movement, not only to work with Reverend Jackson, at that time, to work with Dr. King's organization, at that time, and with Dr. Abernathy, and Dr. Joe [Joseph E.] Lowery.  But also, to have a, a contribution--small as it is--of having contributed the name to an organization that later became internationally known.
Story_ID: 14358
Speaker 1: What do you, what do you--what would you consider the most important issues that was raised during your days with Operation PUSH [People United to Serve Humanity]?
Speaker 2: The most important issue for me is still the most important issue, which is education.  The most important issue for the organization was economic development, because, at that time, you remember, because of the work of Reverend [Jesse] Jackson, and many of the black business people, Chicago was considered a black Mecca.  With black banks, and black business people, and they were opening up opportunities.  But underlying all of that, was always education, and, and, and even though I dealt with the economic aspect of it, to some extent, my beat, if you would, was education.  Because I, I always thought education was the key, and I still think education is the key.  And so, one of the--I think the last Black Expo that we had was a Black Expo which was dedicated to honoring Historical Black Colleges, and Historical Black Presidents, and Black College Presidents.  And so, during that period, as it is now, I still consider education the key, and most of the time that I spend now, is spent in dealing with issues involving education.
Speaker 1: One of the, one of the, I guess, the most important aspects of the education issue that, you know, was it the funding of black schools, and what, what, what is it--?
Speaker 2: All of the above.
Speaker 1: -- the curriculum--?
Speaker 2: Getting the education, getting, getting access to education, getting an, an opportunity to, to receive an education, getting opportunity to receive knowledge, and to use that knowledge for, for actually constructive purposes, getting the credentials, getting the degree, getting the degree not for the purpose of making a living, necessarily, but to make a difference.  I still believe in that and, and even though, as we sit here talking today, although seventy-five or eighty percent of our kids, nationally, according to the census, graduate from high school, we only have 16.5 percent of our population now, with baccalaureate degrees.  And when you start talking about law degrees, you're talking about less than three percent, medical degrees, and professional degrees, if you're talking about PhDs, you're in the single digit.  So education still represents the key to it, especially when you're dealing in a society, which uses every mechanism, uses every possible obstacle to deny you access to opportunity.  And they use education, or a lack of education, as an obstacle, although, in many instances, whites are less educated, with fewer qualifications than blacks, because they've got, they've got access to it.  So, I still emphasize education, and I say to kids over and over again that education is still the key.  Even when black people become rich and famous, and some white people, when they become rich and famous, they go back to get the degree, as if it sort of brings closure to their lives.  Reverend Jackson went back after thirty-five years, to get the Theological Seminary Degree from the University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois].  Shaq [Shaquille] O'Neal, who's--I guess--a great basketball player, certainly a wealthy man, took him eight years to get his degree from LSU [Louisiana State University, Baton Rouge, Louisiana], but he went back to get his degree.  Just recently, in 2002, Steven Spielberg--obviously rich, obviously famous--went back after thirty-three years to college, I think California Polytechnic [State University, San Luis Obispo, California], to get his degree. Oprah Winfrey went back to get his degree--get her degree.  So, we, we need to argue to our children, "Yes, you may make money, and you may make these other areas--and what have you--but the thing that, that you get, that they can't take it away from you, and you're always in a position to compete, and that is an education."  Historical Black Colleges have always provided that opportunity.  And even now, with only four percent of the colleges and universities in the country being historically black, they still graduate the majority of black graduates.  So I'm an advocate of Historical Black Colleges, I'm an advocate of public education, and an advocate of education generally, I still think it's the key.  'Cause even if you get the money, and you're, you're, you're a millionaire, if you don't know what to do with it, and somebody can take it away from you, and you don't have no--enough education to know what questions to ask, you still--education enhances whatever you want to do.  I always say, over and over in, public speeches and public, and, and presentations that education and liberation are the Siamese twins of freedom, and that you get education to get the tools to make a down payment on freedom.  Whatever that freedom is.  If that freedom happens to be economic freedom, education enhances it.  If it happens to be religious freedom, it enhances.  If it's personal freedom, it enhances it, because education gives you an opportunity to know what to do for yourself to make it better.  So whatever you want to do, education still makes the difference.  I say over and over again, with education it is difficult, without education it is almost impossible.  And, in education, public education for us, gives us, not the opportunity for a head start, but for an even chance.  And public education, even being assailed as it is now, still represents, for the mass majority of people in this country--especially blacks, but not just blacks--an opportunity to get access to circumstances that can put them into the competitive pool.
Speaker 1: What about cur-curriculum and education?  What are your feelings--?
Speaker 2: Oh, I think curriculum, I think that's essential, I think that's important.  The curriculum must be designed in accordance, now with so-called school reform and what have you.  But the responsibility of the educator is to do what is necessary in the curriculum, but do what is vital for the student.  Because what we must do is teach for life, and students must learn for survival.  So even if you've got a curriculum that must meet state standards that must meet requirements, and what have you.  Those are, those are things that must be met.  In the South, when I was in Alabama, with these segregated schools, we had to take courses and other things that were prescribed by a segregationist government.  But the black educator knew what we needed to survive, and knew what we needed, in terms of education.  So the curriculum, the curriculum was the beginning, not the end.  Gave us the tools so that we could get into the other areas, and then develop the experience ourselves.  And the same thing was true in law school.  I had to pass the Bar [Examinations] in Louisiana to become qualified to practice law.  So that Southern University's Law School [Baton Rouge, Louisiana] had to teach me what was necessary to pass the Bar.  In the meantime, on the other hand, I had to learn other kinds of skills, and other knowledge to survive as a black man, in this country.  The law professors, along with the other people, taught me the survival skills to go with the curriculum.  And that combination is what we need now, and we still need it.
Story_ID: 14359
Speaker 1: Okay.  Let's, let's talk about your political activities.  You left, I think you left off with 1975.
Speaker 2: 1975--yes.
Speaker 1: [Richard] Dick Newhouse campaign.  197-, in 1976, after the Honorable Ralph Metcalfe, congressman from the South Side of Chicago [Illinois], well-known, and had been a part of the Democratic organization.
Speaker 2: Over in Olympia [Fields, Illinois].
Speaker 1: Over in Olympia, and ran behind Jesse Owen, as a matter of fact.  When a black dentist was beaten on the South Side of Chicago.  And, he was a dentist in his [Ralph Metcalfe's] constituency, in his congressional district.
Speaker 2: --Dr. [Herb] Odom.
Speaker 1: Dr. Odom.  Congressman Metcalfe stood up for Dr. Odom.  And he said, "If they can do it to Dr. Odom, a, a professional, although he had been a prize fighter, with a professional, educated, obviously not a threat, not a hoodlum, not anything of that nature, they'll do it to anybody."  So he stood up and went to the [Democratic] organization.  And I really think that he thought that the Democratic organization was going to take a stand for, for, for the black community, against the police, with Dr. Odom.  [Mayor Richard J.] Daley not only turned his back on him, but also, they refused to slate him for re-election.  But he stood up, and a whole movement started to build around Congressman Metcalfe, for standing up to the Daley organization.
Speaker 2: Now, now let me just understand, 'cause previously, was Metcalfe thought of as someone who would stand up to the--?
Speaker 1: No.  The answer is no.  No, as a matter of fact, he was considered a part of the organization.  And, and no resistance from the City Council days to his congressional days.  So, no, he was not.
Speaker 2: And, in terms of Dr. Odom, I think, essentially the story is--could you describe the character of Dr. Odom?
Speaker 1: Dr. Odom is a dentist, well educated, a prize--I mean amateur prizefighter, and, and, and, and what you would call a bedrock member of the community.  As a matter of fact, he and his wife, at that time, both--a solid citizen, as a matter of fact.  With their only sin that night being the fact that he was a black man.  Sort of a--I get the sense that he's sort of a gentleman, and almost--very gentle, a very gentle kind of a person.  I've never heard him raise his voice.  I mean, he was not the kind of person that was bellicose, or that sort of thing.  But, his, his sin that night, he was a black man, on the South Side of Chicago.  And I think that, that, that, Congressman Metcalfe really believed that this was the case.  I mean, this is a, this is a, this is a perfect model citizen that was beaten by police.  The Daley organization said, "No."  And of course, it was an embarrassment to Congressman Metcalfe, and--because he had been with this organization, and of course, he had been under a lot of criticism from some people in the community, as being an Uncle Tom, and handkerchief-head--but he stood up.  And when he stood up, those of us, who had been involved in independent politics, and, and all of that, we rallied to his cause.  Because without the Democratic endorsement, of the Democratic organization, he had no money, had no staff, he had nothing.  We built a movement around Congressman Metcalf, for re-election in 1976.  He was not slated, a hand-picked candidate, black, from the community, who was a friend of mine.  And later on, a friend of mine, and I worked with it--Dr. Ervin France, was picked to run against Ralph Metcalfe.  And of course, we supported him.  I mean, Lou Palmer, and Jim Montgomery, and the whole community, and we built a movement around Ralph Metcalf, similar to the movement that was later built around Harold Washington in 1983, for his election.  The, the, the short of it was, we went all over the country--Jim Montgomery, and I--went to Washington [D.C] to speak at fundraisers, and what have you.  He was re-elected, he defeated--it was a national election.  He defeated Ervin France for Congress, but he did lose the Ward Committeemanship, I think, to Tyrone Kenner, the Third Ward.
Speaker 2: Now, just to put this in perspective for people, how many black congressmen were actually in the United States, at that time?
Speaker 1: At that time, the [Congressional] Black Caucus--I suspect, and I don't want to give any misinformation, though--but it was far smaller than what it is now.  And, and it--there are forty-something odd members now, and I suspect at that time, there may not have been ten.  You know, I could get--if we take time, I could go through--
Speaker 2: The people around the country knew the Black Caucus--
Speaker 1: Well he was in the Black Caucus, and very active in the Black Caucus, and they, and, and, and of course, the Daley Machine was legendary, in terms of how it dealt with black people and selected the leaders, and what have you.  So for, for Ralph Metcalfe to stand up, it was instantly national news, and international news.  And for us to surround him with a movement, because we didn't have the, the money, and the political organization, but we had the people.  And to surround him with a movement, and then, to, to defeat him, was a national story.  And that was in 1976, as a matter of fact.  And, of course, Daley--Richard J. Daley--died later that year.  And so, we--what we found in the black community, is that if, if--even if we don't have the sophistication in politics.  And we don't know all of the terminology.  And our people don't understand the power of the ballot.  If you create the movement, and if you create the interest, and you tell them why it's important, then they will not only come out and vote, but they will come out and vote in large numbers.  Very similar to what Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.] did in the South, getting unarmed black people, church black people, to leave these churches with no kinds of protection--nothing but the belief that they needed to be free--to go and face dogs, and fire hoses, and what have you.  If you articulate the issue in the black community, in Chicago, in a way that it means something to them, and it's important, they will come out and vote for you.  One of the interesting experiences about the Metcalfe campaign, was after the election was over, I had black people from the West Side of Chicago, who would be in the Seventh Congressional District, said, "Attorney Tom, we didn't get a chance to vote for Ralph Metcalfe, he--what did they do to us on the West Side?"  And I had to explain to them, that was a different congressional district.  But the whole city wanted to vote for Ralph Metcalfe.  And we were able to do that, seven years later, with the Harold Washington campaign.  But you must give people--black people especially--a cause, something to believe in, to vote for.  And then, once they are transformed, nothing can stop them.  Nothing could stop black people from voting for Harold Washington, in 1983.  Nothing could stop black people from voting for, for Congressman Metcalf, in 1976--not money, not chickens, not hams, not watermelon, not bottles of wine.  Because they believed in a cause, and that's the way we are.
Story_ID: 14360
Speaker 1: You're referring to the traditional--
Speaker 2: To the traditional way of bartering for votes, where you got an instant benefit from the vote.  So, as a matter of fact, the night before the Harold Washington election, we had a rally, outside of Jerry's Palms Tavern.  And I knew--and I was one of the speakers.  And I knew that a lot of the people in that audience were people that had been given money by some of the other candidates--and I'm not going to call them.  And I know a lot of them were so-called gang members, and a lot of them came from the development.  But it was packed.  And so, I got up to speak, and I said to them in my speech that the right to vote is a precious vote.  "Yeah, right on!"  And I said, "The Supreme Court of the United States of America has said that the right to vote is the most precious vote, it is the most sacred vote in a participatory democracy, because it is the right which protects all other rights."  "Yeah, Attorney Todd, yes!"  "So, don't sell your right to vote."  "Oooh"--I could hear the murmuring undercurrent, because they had already taken the money.  I said, "But don't sell it, because it's too precious, it's too important."  And I said, "Don't sell it, because, whatever they gave you is not enough for you to sell your right to vote."  And so I, I looked square at the audience, and I said, "Don't sell your right to vote, but I want you to take the money, and vote for Harold."  (laughter) So, what they--I said, "Not sell it--you take the money from them, when you go in that ballot box, they won't know who you voted for.  So take the money, and vote for Harold."
Speaker 1: (unclear) --pull that curtain.
Speaker 2: "When you pull that curtain."  So take--I wouldn't tell them not to take the money.  I--many of them had already taken the money.  "Take the money, but vote for Harold."  So, the--you know, that was the kind of anecdotal thing that happened.  But all of those experiences came together for the [19]83 campaign, along with the hard work done by Lou Palmer, and, and Renault Robinson, and, and staff, when all of the volunteers who did it, that ended in the surprise--in some quarters--election of Harold Washington, but not in others.  The black church--all of the political pundits were caught flat-footed, because they didn't think it could happen.  But the one thing they overlooked, was that once the black community, anywhere in this nation, makes up its mind that this is what it's going to do.  And that was the lesson from Selma [Alabama], the lesson from Birmingham [Alabama], the lesson from Montgomery [Alabama], the lesson throughout the South--is that, once the black community makes up its mind, that this is what it's going to do, nothing--not even a threat of death--can turn them around.
Story_ID: 14361
Speaker 1: And that's what was used here, as a matter of fact.  When you think about the Montgomery [Alabama]--
Speaker 2: This is a figure of speech we're talking about here?
Speaker 1: No, no, not necessarily, when we're talking about facing dogs, and, and, and fire hoses.  When we're talking about the killing of Emmett Till [1955].  When we're talking about he killing of James Chaney, and [Michael] Schwerner, and [Andrew] Goodman, in Neshoba County [Mississippi, June 21, 1964].  When we're talking about the killing of Medgar Evers [Jackson, Mississippi, June 12, 1963].  When we're talking about the lynching of Mack Charles Parker [Poplarville, Mississippi, April 24, 1959].  When we're talking about the thousands of lynchings, and the beatings, and the killings just to try to register to vote, that we went through.  It's not a figurative [sic., figure] of speech--it's literal.  Each time the black people came out of those churches that Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.] brought them out to face these sheriffs, and these sheriffs' deputies, and the [Ku Klux] Klansmen, their lives were put on the line.  But they believed in Dr. King, and they believed that what was being done was right.  And so, death was not an issue.  Once we got into Chicago [Illinois], we had problems that were not quite that severe, but not that far removed.  But once we made up our mind--because they didn't really think that black people would rebel against the Democratic organization, or rebel against the Machine [Mayor Richard J. Daley's administration].
Story_ID: 14362
Speaker 1: So they really didn't think it was serious that first time around, but black people turned out, and that was a black victory.  But what happened, of course, is that the interpretation from the political pundits who said that, "Well black--Harold Washington's base was already black, so the thing that really put him over were white liberals on the lake front."  But that--we understood what the issue was.  So, that, that gave us that kind of experience, that we know what it takes to win an election in the black community--not only here, but also in, in, in Cleveland [Ohio].  We went to Cleveland to campaign for Carl Stokes.  We went to Gary [Indiana] to campaign for Hatcher.  Our people will respond, but you've got to give them something to believe in, and to respond to.
Speaker 2: So, did you--what role did--did you play any role in the Washington administration after the election?
Speaker 1: No.  No, I'd, I never wanted anything in the government or in the legis--I ran the Speaker's Bureau, along with, my then Secretary-Executive Assistant, Mrs. Betty Terry.  We, we, we assigned speakers to cover for Harold Washington, in places where he could not go, and in places where he could not show up.  And we assigned them out of my office, and--as a volunteer.  But no, I didn't serve in the administration, and didn't want to serve in the administration.  And--but it was interesting because, people volunteered, people gave their time.  When you get a movement going, that's what you get going for you, because people gave their time, and they spoke.  And I was, I had been at Northwestern [University, Evanston, Illinois] and I had been involved in the United States Attorney's Office, so--in some of the Steering Committee meetings, some of the people said, "Well, we ought to send Tom Todd to speak on the North Shore, or to some of the middle-class whites," and what have you, and whatever.  I said, "No.  I'm not going."  We had Warren Bacon, who was an Inland Steel executive.  He, he could go, and we'll send him, and we had Joyce Hughes, who was then a professor at Northwestern, so they could make tremendous presentations.  I know where I've got to speak.  I will speak on Saturday nights, in taverns, because that's where our people are.  And I will speak on Sunday morning, in black churches, because that's where our people are.  And I spent--the time that I didn't spend covering places that, that, that Mayor Washington--Congressman Washington at that time, could not make, I spent my time speaking at, at, at taverns and on--at rallies, and what have you, at churches, and that sort of thing.  To black people to talk about why it was necessary to vote.  I remember at a, a, a rally of about five hundred potential volunteers at the Roberts 500 Room.  I had the responsibility of speaking to about 500 people, who had no edu--who had no election experience, who had been in the tavern having refreshments for about two hours, and, and, and on a Saturday night, having a good time, and we were trying to organize them into a, a group of volunteers to work for Harold Washington.  Well, you know, you have great challenges when you're speaking, and whatever.  So, I, I, I wanted to know what to do.  First of all, I knew I was not going to be long, because with that kind of group there's no patience.  And secondly, I knew I was going to be at least loud enough so I could command the respect.  But then I had to have something to grab them, you know.  And so, I started talking, why Harold Washington, and they listened, and what have you.  And so, I didn't speak for about seven or eight minutes, and I ended the speech by saying that Harold Washington was number eight.  That was his ballot number.  And I ended the speech by saying, "Damn straight, punch eight, damn straight, punch eight," and by the time I said it the third time, they were saying, "Damn straight, punch eight."  And so, it turned into that kind of a call-and-response thing, and then the buttons came out the next time, with "Damn straight, punch eight"  So, that was a part of those, those kind of things that brought everybody in to the, into the fold.  But you've got to develop, and give people something to vote for.
Story_ID: 14363
Speaker 1: Let me just reflect on, on your speaking style.  You said here your nickname is T.N.T., that's what they still call you in the Southern [University, Baton Rouge, Louisiana] Alumni.
Speaker 2: Yeah, they still call me that all over the country, right, right.
Speaker 1: It symbolizes ignition, and explosiveness, and with your, with your size, and the sound of your voice, and your command of facts and figures, and your ability to cut an issue, you know.  You're in great demand as a public speaker.
Speaker 2: Well, I appreciate that.  Yeah, it's T.N.T., they started calling me T.N.T. in college, as a matter of fact, and, and, and it was, to some extent, based upon the, the chemical formula trinitroglycerine--"That's, that's dynamite," they said.  That--you know, but my friends who've known me a long time, they say, we really started calling him T.N.T., not because of dynamite, but because "T'ain't Nothin' To It," as a matter of fact, that was the way they dealt with it.  But they still call me T.N.T.  My, my, my speaking style comes from the black Baptist Church, where I made my first speech, when I was four years old.  That was--we talk about the black church being a, a church--an institution of opportunity, and, and, and you know, we were in Tom Thumb weddings, and, and, and, and we participated in the black church.  So, I was asked to give an Easter speech, when I was four years old.  And, and my speech was--and I still remember that speech--my first public speech was, "I didn't come to stay.  I just came to say, 'Happy Easter Day.'"  And they just applauded, and what have you.  But that was my first public speech.  So, from the church, to, to school, I was always on the podium, and speaking, and in oratorical contests, and what have you.  So that speaking was very much a part of my life, and bought a part of an influence--in college, and everywhere else.  And so, public speaking became a natural kind of thing for me.  And then in, in, in high school [Central High School], I sang.  As a matter of fact, it was an unfair comparison, but, because of my size, and because of my voice, there were comparisons about Paul Robeson.  Now, you know that's a stretch.  Paul Robeson was a brilliant lawyer, and thespian, and, and, and speaker, and actor, and what have you, but I--just because I was big.  And as a matter of fact, the--my senior year, my graduation, my choir director used a song popularized by Paul Robeson, 'Ballad for Americans,' by [John] LaTouche and [Earl] Robinson, which was forty-two pages long.  And, as a sixteen-year-old baritone, singing with the choir, and also playing with the band, I memorized forty-two pages of manuscript, and sang it from memory.  I wasn't that good, but at least I had a good memory, and I had a big voice.  So, what--so, so, so the, the training, and music, and speaking helps with the rhythm of my speaking.  The voice is, is something which my family had, and, and it's, it's a resonant kind of a voice, it's the voice that I'm fortunate to have, as a matter of fact.  So, I combine the, the ch--the black church, the call-and-response of Africa and the black church, with, with my timing from, from, from the time that I was a singer, with the experience as an educator, and experience as--in law school, and what have you, and then the experience in civil rights.  It is put together as a combination of circumstances, which produces a speaking style.  That has been, fortunately for me, for the last almost thirty years, one where people have been willing to call and ask me to come, and to deliver messages.
Story_ID: 14364
Speaker 1: What would you consider the, the seminal legal cases that you were involved in?
Speaker 2: Starting as a law student, working on the papers in Garner v. Louisiana [1961], helping the sole practitioner [Johnnie Jones], the black lawyer in Baton Rouge [Louisiana] to fight for the city and demonstrators.  While in the military, the defense of a black--of two--of a black soldier, who was accused of kidnapping a white woman, in Indiana--facing a life sentence.  No doubt, he, he restrained the young lady, and what have you, and he was wrong.  But, a life sentence.  Being able to get him off as a lawyer for him, in the military, with six months.
Speaker 1: What was the name of that case?
Speaker 2: It was, the United S--it was Indiana v.--I can't think of the name--Grady somebody--it's been a long time since it's taken place.  But, he was in the military, and I was appointed his lawyer, and it was, it would have been considered a prank, had he been white, and she was white.  But he was black, and the other soldier was black, so they charged him with kidnapping--facing a life imprisonment.  We tried the case at Fort Benjamin Harris [Indianapolis, Indiana].  And, they convicted him, which I expected.  But, my issue was to try to get him a short term, and he got six months.  And that was considered a victory for that standpoint.  I don't like criminal practice.  Then, in the, in the United States Attorney's Office, my, my method of operation--I was able to help more black defendants, because I was fair.  I met R. Eugene Pincham, when he was a--he and Earl Strayhorn were the, were defense lawyers, but I was a prosecutor.  But they knew that I was not going to be unfair to them.  And I would--that I would prosecute, and I would, I would be fair.  So, fairness was an issue that I was concerned about.  In terms of cases, the indictment against the first police officer for deprivation of civil rights in Chicago [Illinois].  That was United States v. Fine--I believe it is, I get them confused sometimes, when you get old.  That was, for me, a, a, a tremendous accomplishment, because it had never been done before.  And then in the United States v. Gorman, that was the second case that I got the indictment in, and I tried that case personally, and it hung the jury.  I thought that we were laying the foundation for the time to come when police officers would be indicted, and subsequently, as you well know, they were, and convicted for deprivation of civil rights.  Being involved in the Ward Reapportionment case, in the--either [19]71 or [19]72, was a, a case that I was tremendously proud of, because it was laying the foundation, or helping to lay the foundation for independent politics, in Chicago.  Before that, in [Jesse] Jackson v. [Richard J.] Oglesby, with Robert Tucker, helping to open independent politics, in Chicago, with Reverend Jesse Jackson as the plaintiff--that's Jackson v. Oglesby, who was the governor, at that time.  That was--now that case is reported, some of those cases were reported.  Then, while in the United States Attorney's Office, I talked about the two indictments.  Those were very important, because they were opening doors for other kinds of things.  And then, the--to get the, the file the first open-housing act, under the 1968 Housing Act, in Chicago.  To do that, in the nation really--but it was filed in Chicago, and the Chicago areas--was a, a landmark kind of case, in the area of civil rights.  The working on the desegregation of the Chicago faculty, student--I mean, teachers, as a matter of fact, which opened the door to get into the Chicago schools, along with helping the FTBs--the Full-time Basic Substitutes.  All of those while I was in the United States Attorney's Office.  Working with, what was called, a contract buyers league--a group of black homeowners, who were made to buy property on contract, in Lawndale [Chicago, Illinois neighborhood].  Because they couldn't get mortgages.  And on contract, meant that they had to pay more money for it, and if they missed one payment, they could lose it.  So, as a federal prosecutor, a private lawsuit was filed.  But I was able to convince the United States government to file an amicus curiae brief, in that case, on the side of the black homeowners, as a matter of fact.  And I was very happy about that, because it was again, using the power of the United States Attorney's Office, on the side of people who ordinarily did not have access to it.  During that period of--that was while I was in the United States Attorney's Office too.  And then the, the Congressional Reapportionment case, which involved the congressional seats of Harold Washington, Cardis Collins, and Gus Savage, in [19]81 or [19]82.  I, I, I, I felt as if that was making a contribution to opening up the political process in Chicago.  During the [19]80s, and latter part, we filed a lot of civil rights cases, under Title VII--employment discrimination.  We sued the American Bar Association; we sued Playboy Enterprises; we sued several entities, because they, they, they didn't have affirmative action programs, or they fired people for the wrong reasons, and that sort of thing.  Probably, the case that I look at as one of, one of the most significant that I've ever handled, involved the, the desegregation of colleges in Louisiana.  It is the Louisiana Higher Education case.  The name of it is United States v. Louisiana, and it dealt with the preservation of Southern University, in Baton Rouge, and the preservation of Grambling State University, in north [Grambling] Louisiana.  And, although I was not a party, I was a, I was a lawyer for both--at one point--the Southern Alumni Association, and the Grambling State Alumni Association--ended up representing Grambling, but also representing Southern's interests.  And it ended up in a 1981 consent decree that, not only preserved Grambling and Southern, but also, established, at Grambling and Southern, schools of nursing, doctorial programs, and oh, somewhere, two, $300 million for buildings and programs.  We subsequently, tried that case in 1989, before a special master, and got another consent decree, in 1994, which is still in existence in Louisiana--helping to preserve Grambling and Southern.  And I've dealt with cases throughout the country, dealing with that, but in terms of higher education, that is the most significant case that I've handled.
Story_ID: 14365
Speaker 1: I think, this, this is good, because I think, a lot of people--it's good to have this on record, because a lot of people know you as a public speaker--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --an exciting public speaker, but they don't know about--
Speaker 2: Well, yeah.  It's some of--especially younger people, and some people who just know me recently.  But a lot of people know about some of the cases, and, of course, the record is there.  But those are the cases that I did--I dealt with, as a civil rights lawyer, in establishing the kind of framework, which, which leads to the, the kind of national public speaking that I got--that I'm doing now.  And, all of that has been done by word of mouth, for the last thirty years.  I speak, people hear me, they ask me to come, and I negotiate all of my own speaking, I have no agency, I have no person who represents.  And I, I literally speak throughout the country, and have spoken in Africa, and, and, and Mexico, and of course, in the Bahamas--most of it on education.  I went through a period where the book publishing company Houghton Mifflin sponsored speeches by me, to their workshops.  I spoke at Notre Dame [University, South Bend, Indiana], for their reading workshop, at MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Mass.] for their math workshop.  Four years ago, or five years ago, the National Education Association, Mid-Atlantic Region asked me if I would come and speak to their group, in Columbus, Ohio, as a matter of fact.  And I spoke to them, and, and since 1997, I have literally spoken all over the country for the National Education Association, and for affiliates of the National Education Association--whether it's Wisconsin, or whether it's Maryland, whether it's Connecticut, Massachusetts, New York--I mean, just all over the country, all by word of mouth.  The interesting thing about that, is that, in many of the audiences where I address education, and educational issues, the audience, it sometimes is as many--as much as ninety-eight percent white, because the public school teachers in these areas outside of the urban areas are basically white.  My next speech is at St. Simons Island, off the coast of, of Jacksonville [Florida], where I will speak to the Georgia Association of Educators.  I just left North Carolina, speaking for the Governor's Task Force for--what they call--the Excellent Teachers.  So, I've spoken literally, all over the country in the last few years, and will continue to speak in the areas of education, dealing with educational organizations, as well, of course, as colleges--Historical Black [Colleges and Universities], and others.
Story_ID: 14366
Speaker 1: That is what, for whatever years I may have left doing, I want to spend them trying to have some impact on education, educators, and the whole education process.  And trying to convince students--black, white, Latino, whatever you happen to be--what--that they equalize it to some extent, that gets you into the game to compete, is education.  Doesn't--it won't, it won't necessarily achieve it for you, but it puts you into the game, so that you can compete, so that you cannot overemphasize the importance of getting an education, and a solid education.  And then, once you get that education, my, my attitude is that you must give some back.  We, we, we are not there yet.  So you don't go to college just to make it, a living, to get a degree to make a living, but to make a difference, as a matter of fact.  And so, we are still preaching to individuals that you get the education, and then you must give some of that back to the community.  You must give some of the talent back, because we still need the talent; we still have not made it.  And that's my message over and over again.  One of the things that bothers me over and over again when I speak to young black students, who go to the so-called prestigious white schools.  They go to schools, now, in the seventies [$70,000] and eighties [$80,000], and they have to take out student loans, to get through undergraduate school, and then they go to law school, and they have to take out student loans again.  I've talked to some of our students, who are graduating from some of the most prestigious law schools in this country, and some of them owe between 75 and $100,000, in student loans.  Well, that's a mortgage.  I tell them that they can't be free, until they satisfy the mortgage.  And I talk about slavery, and how you could go to freedom by dying, or you could go to freedom by running away, or the master could free you in the will, or you could manumit.  Manumission is the process of purchasing your own freedom.  If you've got a $100,000 debt, you've got to get a job, and try to satisfy that debt, so a lot of the talent that we have in our community cannot come back, because they've got to work in big corporations, and big law firms, and other places to try to satisfy these debts.  So we are not getting the benefit from some of the, some of the brightest minds in our community, and some of the best-trained minds.  When I graduated from Southern's Law School [Southern University, Baton Rouge, Louisiana]--an all-black law school, in Louisiana--and, and incidentally passed the written Bar Examination the first time, out of that all-black law school in Louisiana--my debt was $105.  I borrowed a $100 from the Parent-Teachers Union, guy by the name of Dick Tuntley, who's a good friend of mine, and I needed $100 to buy a suit, and some shoes, and, and a shirt, and a tie so I could graduate.  They wanted me to give the invocation, so I needed a suit, I didn't have one.  And then they charged me five dollars, onto the loan, for membership.  So that, when I--by the time I finished, I mean, I was able to satisfy the $100, and I had no lingering debt over into my career.  One of the problems we have now, is these are tremendous obstacles for our students and young professionals, who must satisfy these student loans.  And, we need to look at that situation, and they need to reevaluate what they're doing.  Because, as I've said over and over again, if you learn one plus one equals two at Central State [University, Wilberforce, Ohio], then you know that one plus one equals two at Wright State [University, Dayton, Ohio], or at Wilberforce [University, Wilberforce, Ohio], or at Notre Dame [University, South Bend, Indiana] or at Harvard [University, Cambridge, Mass.], or at Yale [University, New Haven, Conn.].  So, we need to really start looking at that situation, and making sure we get a quality education for our children, but not saddle them for, for life, with these debts, which means that they can't ever be free.
Story_ID: 14367
Speaker 1: I'd like to ask you one other thing.  Your popularity, I know here in Chicago [Illinois], as a public speaker, and as--you, you're much ad--you're so much admired for your ability to cut issues in, in public meetings.  Some of that has caused people to attempt to draft you for political office.  And there are--and yet you have not chosen to run for office.  And you don't seem to be on a level of people ambitious, you know, in that regard.  How do you, how do you respond to that?
Speaker 2: Well, thank you very much.  And I, I--people have come to me about running for mayor, and running for other political positions, but I know my limitations, and I know myself; and I am not a politician.  Now, I can help form the context for politicians, and I can help to find issues, and I can help--in some instances--energize crowds.  But, in terms of, what you have to do to be a politician, that is just inconsistent, to a great extent, with my own personality, and what I, what I deal with.  So, I will not, out of ego, or out of personal ambition, allow myself to be put into a position, where I know that I can't function.  I know where I am most effective, and I know what I can't do, and I know what my shortcomings are, and I like to know what my strengths are.  And I think helping people get elected, and helping, and advising is where I have the strength--not in actually governing, because of the kinds of things that you're asked to do, and the kinds of circumstances that you are put through, some people are better suited for it than others.  And I am not suited for it.  So, as a result of that, I have always been very flattered by persons who have come to me and asked me to run, but I've always declined, but I've always participated in helping to mobilize the community around those candidates that I think are, are worthy of community support.  But I just know what I don't know, and I know what I am not suited for doing, and I won't let anything put me into a context of that nature--I won't compromise, I tell truth, as I know it, and I'm not going to, to bite my tongue about that, or to compromise, and I understand that.  And I understand that that needs to be done, and I understand that there are persons who need to do it, and I understand that there are certain roles.  And so, that's not my role.
Story_ID: 14368
Speaker 1: And so, I won't let anyone miscast me.  I will go into the role where I think I can make the most effective contribution.  And I say that to my children [Traci and Tamara Todd].  I haven't talked about my children, but I do have two children, two daughters, and I'm very proud of them.  And I have a wife [Janis Todd], who's a thirty-year educator, here in, in Chicago [Illinois].  So education has always been around us, as a matter of fact.  But, I also kept my private life separate from my public life.  And, one of the reasons I have not done television interviews, or radio interviews, or even talk shows since 1989 was that because after all of the rancor after the death of Harold Washington, and the problems between Tim Evans and, and Eugene Sawyer.  And the attempt by the white media, and white establishment, and other folks to take back the power in Chicago.  The, the press was ruthless.  And, I don't think that I have a, I have a responsibility to my family and my children--if I take this ride, and if I risk my circumstances, or even my life, that's my business.  I do not have the authority or the right to subject them to the same kind of thing.  So, as a matter of fact, although I represent some on-air personalities--Art Norman, and John Davis, and as a matter--over the years, many more than that.  I don't participate in any interviews anymore.  I just don't do it.  But I--and they tease me, because they say, "Did you see me?"  I said, "Naw, I didn't see you," because I don't watch television.  But they are good people, but I will not represent anybody who does not have some community consciousness.  And, I've done, at least three or four contracts for Art Norman, and at least three for John Davis.  And, as a matter of fact, Dorothy Tucker, you know, just over the years, Lauren Green, who went up to New York, I did contracts for them.  And, that's a part of the practice that I'm involved in now.  But, in terms of the general practice, I don't practice.  Most of my time is spent speaking, and trying to have an impact on people's lives.  And, and, and some of the most flattering moments I've had, is when people have come up to me, and said, "You were my graduation speaker."  I had a young lady, in Baltimore [Maryland], two years ago, and said, she said to me, "You spoke to my eighth grade graduation."  I was at Grambling [ State University, Grambling, Louisiana] at graduation one year, and a young man came up to me, and said, "You spoke at my eighth grade graduation, you spoke at my high school graduation, and now you're speaking at my college graduation."  I don't remember my graduation speaker, I don't know who it was.  But for, for, for some of these people, and some of these individuals, to remember my commencement speech, and to remember that I was the commencement speaker, is a real rewarding kind of circumstance.  Many of them now are lawyers; many of them are doctors; many of them are educators themselves, and professionals, and many of them are doing commencement speeches, now.  But they remembered me, for that.  And that is a very, very rewarding kind of circumstance for me.
Story_ID: 14369
Speaker 1: Now, you're not exactly a household name.
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: But, people spread your name by word-of-mouth about this pu-public speaking--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --speeches, as you've said before.  And as I sit here in this office, these walls are covered with awards--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --honorary degrees, from every corner, certainly the black educational world--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --and beyond--Syracuse University [Syracuse, New York] and other places.  What do you think, I mean, you certainly seem to have a legacy.  What do you think that legacy would be?
Speaker 2: Well, I think it--if you had to summarize it as a legacy, and I appreciate your doing that, it is that, I've always tried to stand where what I thought was right, and I always told truth as I see truth.  You may disagree with it, but it's as I see truth.  And I've always done it with the ability to do it in such a way as to enhance rather than destroy.  I mean, I, I mean, I deal with the legal analyses, I deal with the skills developed as a lawyer, for analysis, and that sort of thing, and, and my attitude is that it--I have got to communicate with you before I can teach you.  If I turn you off in trying to communicate with you, then I can't teach you.
Story_ID: 14370
Speaker 1: So that I've got to find that element--I speak to a lot of white educators, and people say, "Well how do you speak to white educators?"  I said, "Because the common denominator is educator."  And whether they're white, black, or Latino they're facing the same kind of problems, now.  And as a matter of fact, in the last four or five years, many of the organizations that have invited me to speak, have been predominantly white affiliates of the National Education Association, because I am addressing the issue of education.  I do not address it in the context of sugarcoating.  I spoke to the Alabama Educational Association, and I started the speech by telling them that it was difficult in Alabama, growing up in the [19]30s, [19]40s, and [19]50s as a black man, but education made the difference.  As a matter of fact, in Alabama, during that particular time--and I said that in the speech--the white governor banned a book because it had a white rabbit and a black rabbit playing with each other.  That's how segregated it was, and how insidious it was.  But I argued--I said to that--and that's a fact--and, and, and it has to be a fact.  I argued that to say that the thing that was the difference for me was the, the educators took time to make a difference in my life.  And then I challenged them, because many of them are teaching black students and Hispanic students for the first time, that their responsibility is to make a difference in that child's life, and to understand what they, what, what that child needs to succeed.  So that's the challenge for the educators.  I just spoke at Oak Ridge, Tennessee--that was my last speech, which was this week--and I spoke to a black club, but it sponsored a diversity forum with workshop, and I was the diversity luncheon.  So, it was a lot of black people and white people.
Story_ID: 14371
Speaker 1: What I did was--and I do it all the time, is--I use the history of the United States.  I don't just stand up and call names, I use the fact that America wasn't founded on diversity, it was founded by rich white men, who had property.  And only rich white men could vote, and serve on juries, and everything else.  And I remind the white people who are there that if they were not rich and powerful, or their families were not, they couldn't vote either.  There was no universal male suffrage.  And women didn't get the right to vote until the Nineteenth Amendment, in 1920.  So, you put it in the historical context, whether you like it, or dislike it.  I say to them, "Don't get mad at me, get mad at the history.  I didn't write the history."  You know, "I didn't make the founding fathers white and rich and privileged."  And so I deal with that, and I, and, and, and I talk about affirmative action, and how affirmative action is used at the entry level, and at the middle level, but when it's at the top of the game, there's no affirmative action program.  When, when, when they got ready to get rid of Lee Iacocca, at Ford to bring in a member of the Ford family, they didn't run a--the affirmative action search, they just put somebody in, you know.  But, but they've got blacks and whites fighting at the bottom for jobs, fighting at the bottom for admissions to law school and to colleges--when they admit, at the top, whites from families that are powerful, who make large contributions, who are politically connected--that's affirmative action.  But you see, the, the, the, the, the white people at the bottom, who are fighting blacks for the admissions, they can't deal with that.  If the only reason, the only reason George [Walker] Bush could get into Harvard [University, Cambridge, Mass.] and Yale [University, New Haven, Conn.] was because his family, certainly he couldn't get in on his merits.
Speaker 2: He didn't have to go back to the bottom and fight his way--
Speaker 1: No, of course not, and he couldn't have gotten in.  Every, every college that's there, the, the, the college president has, what they called, an exception--to admit anybody they want to, and that based upon the, the college president's perception of that value to the university.  So they use it to admit children of alumni; they use it to admit children of large donors; they use it to--use it to admit people who are--they think can help the university--and nobody says anything about it.  When you go to the other end of the spectrum, it's the same game that white politicians use in the South to have blacks and whites fight each other over the mundane, and over crumbs.  So, that's what is going on.  And I say to people who object to affir--affirmative action, that if you're going to object to it, object to it straight across the line.  Object to the admission of the talented athlete, objest--object to the admission of the son of the congressman, or the senator, or the rich family--rich and powerful.  But that's not where the objections come from.  The objections come from the people who are powerless at the bottom, both black and white.  That keeps the friction going at the bottom and the middle, while the people at the top, continue to keep themselves in power.  And you're going to see more and more of that, because, America is turning non-white majorities, all over the country--California is already non-white majority.  But what you do is you institutionalize laws, and you institutionalize practices, so you can take a minority of whites, and control the majority of blacks.  Sound familiar?  It's called South Africa.  Five million whites controlled thirty million blacks, because they in--they controlled the legal institutions, and wrote the rules and the circumstances to keep the apartheid system going.  The question that's being asked now, is that what America is doing?  With Initiative 200 [Washington State initiative ending "preferential treatment" for minorities], and Proposition 209 [California proposition to end affirmative action], and Hopwood [v. Texas, a case banning affirmative action], and the admission cases, and what have you.  Is the white population in America now, putting itself into a position where it institutionalizes its white privilege, so that when they become a minority, white can still be privileged--institutional and systemic privilege.  So that's the issue and the challenge of the twenty-first century.  I talk about assigned value.  When the Constitution was drafted by white men, who were rich and powerful, they put in Article I, Section 2 of the Constitution that Native Americans and blacks were the poor--for the purpose of apportionment and taxation only, shall be considered three-fifths of a person.  That is an assigned value put into the Constitution of the United States.  And Dred Scott, in 1857--Roger B. Taney said that blacks had no value, they were property.  In 1896, in the Plessy v. Ferguson case, the, the justice said that blacks had less value than whites.  You see?  So that all we are doing now, is trying to get value added to blacks to come up to the value of whites--that's all the struggle is about.  So that you'd have to interpret, my, my point in using that is that I use the United States Constitution, I use the laws, I use the context of history, to teach, and to use to illustrate my point.  So that, people, people may get angry at me, and they may not like what I'm saying, but they've got to say, "Well wait a minute, the, the--he's telling--he's, he's only reciting American history.  It's just my interpretation of American history that is different, and then, it provokes thought.
Speaker 2: These facts challenge the popular culture notion on what America--?
Speaker 1: Yes, yes, and I used it with the, with, with the very history that America has used, and the very law and legal system that America has used, to cultivate the image that it wants.  I just gave it a different interpretation.
Story_ID: 14372
Speaker 1: How would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: As a person, who told the truth, as he knew it.  And as a person, who stood up for what was right, as he knew it.  As a person, who was willing to fight, for what he believed in.
Story_ID: 14373
Speaker 1: And, what do you think your mother [Alberta George Todd] and your father [Cleveland Todd] would think about your career?
Speaker 2: If my mother were living, and she did not live to see me finish college, she didn't live to see me finish law school; my father did, he was at law school graduation.  If they were living today, and I went home, they would say to me, "Junior, are you hungry?  Do you want me to cook for you?  Do you want me to do something for you?"  That's what they saw--they saw a child.  I remember when I was in--with Reverend [Jesse] Jackson, and we'd travel all over the country, and, and speak, and people would have adoration, and that sort of thing.  And I'd call my father, and I'd say, "Daddy, I'm so tired."  And, he would say, "Yes, I know you're tired."  My father now, was a longshoreman, he worked twenty-five years with his hands and muscle, and he was tired.  And so, I said, "Daddy, I'm so tired."  And, he said to me, "Junior, you're tired, but you know what, you have an education, and momma--your momma and I worked so you could work with your head, and not your hands.  So you may be tired, but you are not really tired."  I stopped telling my daddy I was tired.  I never could, I never admitted to him I was tired, because he'd--he did not have any concept of being tired, sitting behind a desk, wearing a suit and tie, speaking to people all over the country.  His idea of being tired was that manual label--labor, muscling those plant--those sacks on the riverfront.  And so, they would say to me, "I would cook for you," if my mother couldn't cook, then she would say "I'm sorry I can't cook," because they never saw anything but a child, and I never saw anything but a mother and father.  No, no education, no anything--it didn't matter, these were the people who molded me, and I loved them.  And I would say to them that "I love you."  As a matter of fact, they would be proud, but it wouldn't be such pride at what I have done as much as at what I am, and that is their child.  They were proud of my being their child, I'm sure, much more than my being a law professor, or a vice president of PUSH [People United to Serve Humanity], or anything else.
Story_ID: 14374
Speaker 1: Describe this photograph for me.
Speaker 2: Well, it's a school photograph, at Caldwell Elementary, in Mobile, Alabama.  And it's, I think, my third grade picture.
Speaker 1: Caldwell--C-A-L-D-W-E-L-L
Speaker 2: C-A-L-D-W-E-L-L, Caldwell.
Speaker 1: All right, and, again, what year was that?
Speaker 2: Well, I was about nine, so I would think it would be somewhere around 1947, approximately.
Speaker 1: [Thomas Todd as a third-grader at Caldwell Elementary, Mobile, Alabama, ca. 1947.  From the collection of Thomas N. Todd.]
Story_ID: 14375
Speaker 1: This is a picture of me, during the maypole days, in Caldwell Elementary [School, Mobile, Alabama].  And I was about five years old, dressed in my king outfit.  And that would have been 1943, about, I guess.
Speaker 2: [Thomas Todd at Caldwell Elementary School, Mobile, Alabama, 1943.  From the collection of Thomas N. Todd.]
Story_ID: 14376
Speaker 1: This photograph is in the front yard of a house that I was raised in, in Mobile, Alabama.  I was in the Boy Scouts, so that would probably be somewhere, again, around 1947 or [19]48.
Speaker 2: [Thomas Todd as a Boy Scout, in front of his house in Mobile, Alabama, ca. 1947.  From the collection of Thomas N. Todd.]
Story_ID: 14377
Speaker 1: This is in my band uniform, in Mobile, Alabama, at Central High School.  It would probably be in 1954, or [19]55, and so, I would think that at that time, I would be fourteen or fifteen years old.  That's not right, is it?  I went to high school at eleven, twelve, thirteen, fourteen--so, it would probably be '5---I finished high school in '55--this would be '53 or '54, 1954, yeah.
Speaker 2: [Thomas Todd in his band uniform at Central High School, Mobile, Alabama, 1954.  From the collection of Thomas N. Todd.]
Story_ID: 14378
Speaker 1: This is the official photograph for graduation from high school, at Central High School, in Mobile, Alabama, in 1955.
Speaker 2: [Thomas Todd at his graduation from Central High School, Mobile, Alabama, 1955.  From the collection of Thomas N. Todd.]
Story_ID: 14379
Speaker 1: This is a photograph from high school, officers and members of the student body, and the, and the student senate, at Central High School, in Mobile, Alabama, it would be in 1954 or [19]55.
Speaker 2: And, where are you located?
Speaker 1: Back in the back, the tall one in the middle, up there.  You see.
Speaker 2: --(unclear) want me to point him out?  You--you're--
Speaker 1: Go up.  Right there.
Speaker 2: Right here?
Speaker 1: Yep, that's me.
Speaker 2: [Thomas Todd (back row, center) with other members of the Central High School student senate, Mobile, Alabama, ca. 1954.  From the collection of Thomas N. Todd.]
Story_ID: 14380
Speaker 1: This photograph was taken at Alabama State University [Montgomery, Alabama], in 1957.  And, the young lady in front, is now Dr. Easter Wright, she was Miss Over--Easter Overton, a member of the Southern University [Baton Rouge, Louisiana] Debate Team, with me, and the young lady I'm talking to is, at that time, was, Betty White, who is a member of the Grambling State University [Grambling, Louisiana] Debating Team.  We were at a forensic conference at Alabama State.  An interesting sidebar on that, one of the people who was coaching that Texas Southern [University, Houston, Texas] team, was Barbara Jordan.  Barbara Jordan came out of that debate, that season--we all came out of that debate culture.  So she had come out of Texas Southern, she was there that time.
Speaker 2: What year was this?
Speaker 1: [19]57.
Speaker 2: [19]57.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: [Thomas Todd with Easter Overton Wright (front) and Betty White (center) at a conference at Alabama State University, Montgomery, Alabama, 1957.  From the collection of Thomas N. Todd.]
Story_ID: 14381
Speaker 1: This is in 1962, outside of the law school at Southern University [Baton Rouge, Louisiana].  The gentleman to the left, with the white shirt on, is the dean of the law school--Dean Aguinaldo Alphonso LeNoir--capital L-E, capital N-O-I-R.
Speaker 2: Was he from the United States?
Speaker 1: Yeah, from, from Missouri.
Speaker 2: Okay, then we'll leave that alone--
Speaker 1: But, Louisiana though, but see in Louisiana you got a lot of French names, and what have you.  It's family, yeah.
Speaker 2: Are you, are you speaking?
Speaker 1: Naw, just standing there looking at the ladies, so don't, don't, don't tell them that, though.
Speaker 2: [Thomas Todd (center) with Dean Aguinaldo Alphonso LeNoir (left), Southern University, Baton Rouge, Louisiana, 1962.  From the collection of Thomas N. Todd.]
Story_ID: 14382
Speaker 1: This is graduation, in June of 1963, and I had just graduated from the Southern University School of Law [Baton Rouge, Louisiana], and these are my classmates.
Speaker 2: Can you remember any of their names?
Speaker 1: I remember all of them.  On the left--
Speaker 2: Could you describe them from left--screen left to the right.
Speaker 1: On the left is Marion O. White, W-H-I-T-E, Marion O., who is still--who lives now in Appaloosas, Louisiana.  Mildred Byrd, B-Y-R-D, who I--the last time I heard from her, was in Birmingham, Alabama.  Me.  Nathan Wilson, he's in Baton Rouge.  And Bertell Winder, "Golden Boy," he's deceased now.  That's what--he was a, he was a disc jockey, and he really went to school over a long period of time, and he just graduated with our class, yeah.
Speaker 2: How you spell his name?
Speaker 1: B-E-R-T-E-L-L, I guess, Bertell Winder, W-I-N-D-E-R.  Yeah, he's deceased, he's the only one of the three--of the five of us who is deceased.  But really, he just graduated with our class, these other persons, we started together, and graduated together.
Speaker 2: [Thomas Todd (center) with (from left) Marion O. White, Mildred Byrd, Nathan Wilson, and Bertell Winder, at their graduation from the Southern University School of Law, Baton Rouge, Louisiana, June 1963.  From the collection of Thomas N. Todd.]
Story_ID: 14383
Speaker 1: That's a photograph of the dean of the--the founding dean, and the, the dean of the law school [Southern University School of Law, Baton Rouge, Louisiana], during my years there.  Dean Aguinaldo Alphonso LeNoir; he is now deceased.
Speaker 2: [Dean Aguinaldo Alphonso LeNoir, Southern University School of Law, Baton Rouge, Louisiana, ca. 1962.  From the collection of Thomas N. Todd].
Story_ID: 14384
Speaker 1: This is from my freshman moot court competition, in the law school moot courtroom, and these are my classmates, and teammates.  The young lady is Mildred Byrd, and the young man is Marion White.
Speaker 2: And then, just for the record, which university is it?
Speaker 1: Southern, it's Southern University, in Baton Rouge, Louisiana.
Speaker 2: [Thomas Todd (left) with his classmates, Mildred Byrd (center) and Marion White (right) at the Southern University School of Law, Baton Rouge, Louisiana, ca. 1963.  From the collection of Thomas N. Todd.]
Story_ID: 14385
Speaker 1: This was taken in my office, at 219 S. Dearborn Street, at the Federal Building, in Chicago, Illinois, when I was an Assistant United States Attorney.  And that picture would have been taken in 1967, or [19]68.
Speaker 2: [Thomas Todd in his office, 219 S. Dearbord St., Chicago, Illinois, ca. 1967.  From the collection of Thomas N. Todd.]
Story_ID: 14386
Speaker 1: This is a picture that was--that is located in a coloring book about Reverend [Jesse] Jackson, which I don't think was ever published.  But the picture itself, was actually taken by the Chicago Sun Times, and it was the day that Reverend Jackson was suspended from the Southern Christian Leadership Conference [SCLC].  That would put that date at about December fourth or fifth, 1971.  See, it was in the wintertime, as you can see.
Speaker 2: [Thomas Todd (right) with Reverend Jesse Jackson, December 4th, 1971.  From a coloring book in the collection of Thomas N. Todd.]
Story_ID: 14387
Speaker 1: Reverend [Jesse] Jackson had just asked me to come back to act as president of Operation PUSH [People United to Serve Humanity], while he ran for President, in 1983.  This was the Saturday morning meeting, where I was introduced again, and this time, as the acting president of Operation PUSH.  It would--it's in Chicago [Illinois], in--I don't know the exact month, but it would be some one toward the latter part of 1983--the summer of 1983, I guess.
Speaker 2: [Thomas Todd with Jesse Jackson at an Operation PUSH meeting, Chicago, Illinois, 1983.  From the collection of Thomas N. Todd.]
Story_ID: 14388
Speaker 1: May, 1989--Commencement Speaker at Southern University, in Baton Rouge, Louisiana, the May Commencement.  I was the speaker.
Speaker 2: [Thomas Todd speaking at Southern University, Baton Rouge, Louisiana, May 1989.  From the collection of Thomas N. Todd.]
Story_ID: 14389
Speaker 1: This is the conferring of an Honorary Degree at Syracuse University, in Syracuse, New York, in May of 1990.  I was one of several honorees and recipients.
Speaker 2: [Thomas Todd receiving an Honorary Degree, Syracuse University, Syracuse, New York, May 1990.  From the collection of Thomas N. Todd.]
Story_ID: 14390
Speaker 1: This is the conferring of an Honorary Doctorate at Southern University, my alma mater, in Baton Rouge, Louisiana, and, I think that's December of 1999.
Speaker 2: Yeah, who are the other people in the photograph?  Do you know?
Speaker 1: The middle person is the Chairman of the Board, Myron--I can't think of his name, now.  He's the Chairman of the Board, and the other person is the President Assistant, Dr. Leon Tolliver.  I'll have to find Myron's number--his name.
Speaker 2: [Thomas Todd receives an Honorary Doctorate from Southern University, Baton Rouge, Louisiana, December 1999.  From the collection of Thomas N. Todd.]
Story_ID: 14391
Speaker 1: This is a photograph of the, then president of Grambling State University, the third president of Grambling State University, Dr. Joseph B. Johnson, and later the president of Talladega [College, Talladega, Alabama], in his office, in July of 1988, during the commencement ceremony, where Whitney Houston was given an Honorary Doctorate, and I was the commencement speaker.  Grambling State University is, of course, in Grambling, Louisiana.
Speaker 2: [Thomas Todd with Whitney Houston and Dr. Joseph B. Johnson at commencement ceremonies at Grambling State University, Grambling, Louisiana, July 1988.  From the collection of Thomas N. Todd.]
Story_ID: 14392
Speaker 1: This is from a layout for the old Chicago American Newspaper, it was taken outside of Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.'s workshop, at 79th & Halsted, in Chicago [Illinois].  And it really was as a result of my having just been named as the Vice President of Operation PUSH [People United to Serve Humanity], as a matter of fact.  And, it was from an interview that ran in the magazine section of the Chicago American.
Speaker 2: [Chicago American newspaper layout of Thomas Todd, Chicago, Illinois, 1995.  From the collection of Thomas N. Todd.]
Story_ID: 14393
Speaker 1: This is a photograph of a Dr. Jewel Prestidge, the first black woman to receive a Political--a PhD in Political Science, in the United States.  She was being honored by the National Political Science Association, and she--I was there because, she taught me at Southern University, at Baton Rouge, Louisiana, and is a long-time mentor of mine.  This was taken at the Palmer House Hilton Hotel, in 1995, in Chicago, Illinois.
Speaker 2: [Thomas Todd with Dr. Jewel Prestidge, at the Palmer House Hilton Hotel, Chicago, Illinois, 1995.  From the collection of Thomas N. Todd.]
Story_ID: 14394
Speaker 1: So this is what they ran on television--
Speaker 2: Describe this one.
Speaker 1: --at Channel Five.
Speaker 2: 198---
Speaker 1: No, 1972.
Speaker 2: [19]72.
Speaker 1: This is a television sketch by Verna Sadoc, I believe--and I'm not sure how to spell her last name--who is a courtroom sketch artist for Channel Five, at the time.  And, she did the sketch of my argument in the Ward Reapportionment case, in Chicago [Illinois], in 1972.  And this appeared on the, on the news, and she sent me a copy of it.
Speaker 2: [Courtroom sketch of Thomas Todd during the Ward Reapportionment case, Chicago, Illinois, 1972.  From the collection of Thomas N. Todd.]
Story_ID: 14395
Speaker 1: This is a picture with a, what I consider my best friend, Dr. Joseph B. Johnson, former president of Grambling State University [Grambling, Louisiana].  During this picture he was the president of Talladega College, and that would be in [19]9-, around 1993 or [19]94, and it's in his office, as a matter of fact.
Speaker 2: At Talladega?
Speaker 1: At Talladega College, in Talladega, Alabama.  That poster in the background is a poster of a Talladega Man or a Talladega Woman, there's a copy of that in there.  And the significance of that is that, they made the poster based upon the gradu--I mean, a speech, which I made defining the Talladega Man and Talladega Woman--and that's in the back.  I have a copy of that, I mean, we do have the poster, if you want to see it.
Speaker 2: [Thomas Todd with Dr. Joseph B. Johnson, Talladega College, Talladega, Alabama, ca. 1993.  From the collection of Thomas N. Todd.]
Story_ID: 14396
Speaker 1: This is at the graduation convocation for my daughter, Traci, on the left-hand side, T-R-A-C-I, at Northwestern University [Evanston, Illinois].  And, with her sister, my younger daughter, Tammi, T-A-M-M-I [Tamara].  And that would have been, I guess, 1995.
Speaker 2: [Thomas Todd with his daughters, Traci (left) and Tamara, Northwestern University, Evanston, Illinois, 1995.  From the collection of Thomas N. Todd.]
Story_ID: 14397
Speaker 1: This photograph was taken in Jefferson City, Missouri, in January of 2002, at the central Missouri celebration of the birthday of Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.
Speaker 2: [Thomas Todd, Jefferson City, Missouri, January 2002.  From the collection of Thomas N. Todd.]
Story_ID: 14398
Speaker 1: This is the poster that was used as the advanced publicity for the Greenwood Voter League's annual banquet that is held in the LeFlore County Civic Center, in Greenwood, Mississippi.  And this was in December of 19--of 2001--I'm sorry--and I was the keynote speaker.  An interesting thing about it is the donation was ten dollars, for a banquet, with--for this is, this is an Historic Voter League.  They did a lot of voter registration--Fannie Lou Hamer, Aaron Henry--during the [19]50s and [19]60s, in Mississippi.
Speaker 2: [Poster of Thomas Todd for the Greenwood Voter League's annual banquet, LeFlore County Civic Center, Greenwood, Mississippi, December 2001.  From the collection of Thomas N. Todd.]
Story_ID: 14399
Speaker 1: This is taken from the Minority Action Council of the Tennessee Education Association, in Nashville, Tennessee, in April of [19]9-, of 2002.  The Johnella Martin Minority Action Council--it's a, actually a black caucus as a part of the Tennessee Education Association.
Speaker 2: [Thomas Todd speaking to the Johnella Martin Minority Action Council of the Tennessee Education Association, Nashville, Tennessee, April 2002.  From the collection of Thomas N. Todd.]
Story_ID: 14400
Speaker 1: This is the poster that was used for the Black History program at NASA Glen, in Cleveland, Ohio, for the Black History program, in February of 2002.
Speaker 2: [Thomas Todd speaks at the Black History program, NASA Glen, Cleveland, Ohio, February 2002.  From the collection of Thomas N. Todd.]
Story_ID: 14401
Speaker 1: About nine years old, in Mobile, Alabama, dressed up for Easter.  (chuckle) Complete with hat, and tie.  We had to dress.
Speaker 2: [Thomas Todd, Mobile, Alabama, ca. Easter 1947.  From the collection of Thomas N. Todd.]
Story_ID: 14402
Speaker 1: Taken at the Pre-Conference of the National Education Association, here in Chicago, at 2000, and this was at the Hyatt, and this is for the National Education Association Retired Persons.
Speaker 2: [Thomas Todd speaks to the National Education Association Retired Persons, Hyatt Hotel, Chicago, Illinois, 2000.  From the collection of Thomas N. Todd.]
Story_ID: 14403
Speaker 1: Yeah, it was in May of 1988, at Southern University, in Baton Rouge, Louisiana.
Speaker 2: [Thomas Todd, Southern University, Baton Rouge, Louisiana, May 1988.  From the collection of Thomas N. Todd.]
Story_ID: 14404
Speaker 1: (laughter) I'm tired.  Well I can't say I'm tired--
Speaker 2: Na, you can't say you're tired.  You can say it to me.
Speaker 1: --if anything, I'm not a long shore man or nothing--
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: My dad has a similar approach to that too, you know--
Speaker 2: They believe it too, and I, I, I stopped saying it.
Speaker 1: --they'd do the real hard work.  Spend all day stomping tobacco worms, or something like that--
Speaker 2: That's what I'm saying, that's what, that's, that's tired.
Speaker 1: --that's tired.
Speaker 2: [Thomas Todd, Southern University, Baton Rouge, Louisiana, May 1988.  From the collection of Thomas N. Todd.]
