Story_ID: 176691
Speaker 1: All right, my name is Larry Crowe.  I'm interviewer today with The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Scott Stearns.  Sir, can you please state your full name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: Charles Homer Thomas, C-H-A-R-L-E-S, middle name, Homer, H-O-M-E-R, last name Thomas, T-H-O-M-A-S.
Speaker 1: And, sir, what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: May 3rd, 1951.  I think they called it the St. Louis Maternity Hospital [St. Louis, Missouri].
Speaker 1: Okay, in St. Louis, Missouri?
Speaker 2: In St. Louis, Missouri, yes, sir, 1951.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what is your occupation and title?
Speaker 2: I'm a journalist.  I currently work as the political reporter at WLS-Television in Chicago, Illinois.  It is an ABC-owned and operated station.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what is today's date?
Speaker 2: Today's date is January 24th, 2014.
Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: We're at 1900 S. Michigan Avenue, Chicago, Illinois.
Story_ID: 176692
Speaker 1: All right, now, before we go into depth, there are five, lightweight questions we ask as a warm up, and they only require a short answer.
Speaker 2: Sure.
Speaker 1: The first one is, do you have a favorite food?
Speaker 2: Sure.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I can be general and say fish.
Speaker 1: All right, that'll work.  Do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: Blue.
Speaker 1: All right, a favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Fall, autumn, love it.
Speaker 1: Okay, a favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: The Caribbean.
Speaker 1: All right, and the last one is, do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: Do I have a favorite phrase or saying?  Nothing that comes to mind as a favorite.  Perhaps as we continue here, it'll pop into my mind and I'll, I'll tell you about that, but--
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Story_ID: 176693
Speaker 1: Well, now, I'm gonna ask you about your family history.  I'm gonna ask you about your mother's side of the family and your father's side, and we'll go all the way back as far as we can go.  Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: My mother's full name is Oneida Marie Thomas--I'm sorry, Franklin, Oneida Marie Franklin.  Oneida is O-N-E-I-D-A, Marie, M-A-R-I-E, Franklin, F-R-A-N-K-L-I-N.
Speaker 1: And what is her date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: August 15th, 1927.
Speaker 1: In--where was she born?
Speaker 2: She was born in St. Louis, Missouri.
Speaker 1: Okay, now what can you tell us about the ancestors on your mother's side?  I mean how far back can you trace them and what were they doing?
Speaker 2: I never met my grandfather on my mother's side.  He actually died in the late 1940s.  He was from Kansas.  And being from Kansas--his name was Tilford Franklin, and T-I-L-F-O-R-D.  And I don't know a lot about him.  I never met him, obviously.  But I've been told that he came from, at least in his father's generation, that he came from free people.  They were not slaves.  Kansas, of course, was a, I guess a battle ground during the last years of slavery, but he--
Speaker 1: That's right.
Speaker 2: --came from free people, I'm told.  He married my grandmother who was Bernice Franklin in the 1920s.  And they were married, I guess for some twenty-five years or so before he died in the late '40s [1940s].  Now, this is all very sketchy 'cause my mother's family history is rather sketchy.  But--
Speaker 1: What did your grandfather, Tilford Franklin, do for a living?
Speaker 2: I don't know.  I really don't know (laughter).  There was some talk that he was a hustler.  You know, what, that's a very general way of saying it, but that he did a lot of things.  I don't think he broke any laws or anything, but I think he may have had a cocktail every now and then.
Speaker 1: Okay, now this is--he comes to St. Louis during the 1920s during Prohibition, right?  And a lot of people, you know--
Speaker 2: I suppose so.  Well, he may have come to St. Louis prior to meeting and marrying my grandmother, but they--my grandmother, I know she worked. She had a job during the, during most of her married life.  She had a very interesting job.  My grandmother worked at a department store called Famous-Barr in St. Louis.  And my grandmother was very fair complexioned.  She passed for white.  She would go to work on the floor at Famous-Barr as a sales person, which you could not do if you were black.  But she would work there--and these are stories that I'm, I've been told.  She would work there and get on the bus--North St. Louis was black.  South St. Louis was white.  She would get on the bus for the first leg of her bus ride home was to go south so she could put, she could confuse the people about her actually living on the North Side.  So then she would go so far south, turn around and then go back north on the bus where nobody at her job could see her go to North St. Louis where her family lived with Tilford who was a brown-skinned man as opposed to her.  She was very light-skinned.  Her mother, my great-grandmother was an Irish woman.  I've been told she was basically off the boat Irish.  I remember seeing her.  When I was a child, my grandmother would be in the bedroom, and she'd be combing this white lady's hair.  This white lady, old white lady with long red hair, combing it.  And I can remember that, even today.  And, and it was explained to me later that was my great-grandmother, and she had, she had basically what we know now as Alzheimer's disease.  But she was just there.  And, but she was off the boat Irish, the way--that's the way she's been described.  And that explained my grandmother's very fair complexion and my, my own mother's very fair complexion.
Story_ID: 176694
Speaker 1: Now, are there any stories about your great-grandfather?  I mean was he--
Speaker 2: Well, I didn't know him.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I didn't know him because he died in the late '40s [1940s].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So I never met him.
Speaker 1: Okay, so were they married or--
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, they were married.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: They definitely were married 'cause I've seen, actually seen the census reports, you know, of who lived in the household.  But the grandmother also lived--my great-grandmother lived there.  And I can remember seeing her.  They say she was Irish.  She was actually born or she lived in Tennessee.  I don't know who her husband was or, but I assume she had my grandmother [Bernice Franklin] with a black man.  That's how she ended up on the North Side of St. Louis [Missouri].  My mother had one sister and two brothers, all of whom I met during my lifetime and knew.  And they, this older brother was a heroin addict.  He had a lot of trouble in his life.  My mother's [Oneida Marie Franklin Thomas] younger--no, my mother was the oldest, I'm sorry.  Her next, her brother next, he was a heroin addict.  She had another brother who was in the service and he had some issues there and he never was quite right.
Speaker 1: That's what they call shell shocked or--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, something like that.  He had something that was related to his service, and he came back, and he just never was right, never could hold a job, was always in different situations.  She had a youngest sister.  Her youngest sister, she had some issues as well that really--she didn't, wasn't in the service.  She was a little bit, you know, she was not--you know, if you look at back today, you know, she just had some mental issues.  My mother never really had any issues like that.  She, I guess it was in the late '40s [1940s], like 1949, she had a child out of wedlock who is my older sister.  And she married my father [Clarence Thomas] in 1951--1950, yes, 1950 and I was--I was born in 1951.  I was the oldest child between my mother and father, my biological mother and father.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: She had a daughter from a previous engagement.
Story_ID: 176695
Speaker 1: All right, now--
Speaker 2: But--
Speaker 1: --what did your mother [Oneida Marie Franklin Thomas] say about growing up in St. Louis [Missouri], and, you know, in terms of what her trajectory was?  Was she--did she have a goal that she was trying to accomplish?  Did she finish school or did she--
Speaker 2: She finished high school.  She went to a Catholic high school.  They were Catholic, my--which I think goes to my great-grandmother's Irish roots.  I think once she met my father [Clarence Thomas] that ended her connection to Catholicism.  She, you know, she grew up, you know, with a, like a, I would think in the 1930s and '40s [1940s], Catholic African, you know, African American, but sort of living a nether world or that between a world, very fair skinned, African Americans, but at the same time, certainly not of any means.
Speaker 1: Okay, was there a name for the neighborhood that she grew up in, in St. Louis?
Speaker 2: Ah, man, I just knew it was in North St. Louis, and they moved to several different houses.  They just didn't live in one place, I mean, because I think my grandfather [Tilford Franklin], her father, again, you know, he was kind of like a hustler.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I mean his wife [Bernice Franklin] was basically taking care of the family with her job at Famous-Barr, which was a pretty good job for a black person back in the day.  And she, you know, my grandmother was basically supporting the family by passing for white at this department store.
Speaker 1: That's an interesting story.  We've heard of other stories like that, and--
Speaker 2: Really?
Speaker 1: --this is one of the more interesting ones, the bus route (laughter).
Speaker 2: Yeah, well, she--that was always sort of her legend.  That's how she pulled it off, and she fooled them, and she actually retired from there.  And they never, they never figured it out.
Speaker 1: Now, how do you spell the "Bar" part of Famous-Barr?
Speaker 2: B-A-R-R.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: And "Famous" is like--
Speaker 1: The regular way of--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But my, my mother's side of the family was very fragile, very fragile.  I don't even know my cousins anymore.  I mean they had some issues.  I don't, my only--my--only my mother's youngest sister had any children.  She had two sons, but I've lost contact with them.  They had some issues.  The family never really stayed together.  That family just basically, you know, dissolved.  It just didn't last.  And when I grew up everything that I did family-wise or 90 percent of what I did family-wise was always centered around my, my father's family, which was very large and very close knit.
Story_ID: 176696
Speaker 1: So, so your mother [Oneida Marie Franklin Thomas] graduated from Catholic school, and they lived in North St. Louis [Missouri], I don't know a lot about the St. Louis neighborhoods, but did she near--live near [Charles H.] Sumner High School [St. Louis, Missouri] or Vashon [High School, St. Louis, Missouri] (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Near Sumner?
Speaker 2: She would have gone to Sumner.  You know, I can, I could, you know, if I saw the--if I could remember those names, I probably could be able to tell you.  But I didn't really visit there that often 'cause we lived in the suburbs.  That's where I lived with my father [Clarence Thomas] and my mother, in the suburbs of St. Louis, which was a--I'm sure we're probably gonna get to that in a minute, but--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --it was outside the city.  So we would go downtown to the city every now and then to visit my maternal grandmother [Bernice Franklin] and that part of the family.  But we didn't spend a lot of time there.
Speaker 1: Okay, just one more question about your mother.  Now, did she work after high school anywhere or did she--
Speaker 2: Work?  After high school?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Not initially, but, you know, she--later, I mean she would work after she was married.  But I don't think, she didn't work initially after high school.  I mean she, again, she had a child not long after graduating from high school.  So I guess she had to be twenty--she was born in '27 [1927].  My sister was born in '49 [1949], so maybe she did.  But she didn't go to college or anything like that.  But she was very, very--my mother was very articulate, had beautiful handwriting.  Oh, my goodness and very intelligent woman, and she, you know, she, she loved to read to us, and she always placed a very high premium on your verbal skills, whether or not you could express yourself to get what you wanted.  She had that down.  My mother could go from, you know, talking in the neighborhood, and she could get on a telephone, and you wouldn't know whether she was white or black.  And that was very--that was rare in those days, particularly growing up in what I call a southern city like St. Louis 'cause St. Louis, to my way of thinking is not Midwestern.  It's southern, and that, my mother had just tremendous communication skills.  And I think I carry a lot of that today with what I do, and my, my own verbal skills.
Story_ID: 176697
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, well, I'm gonna go to your father's side.  Now, can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: His name was Clarence, C-L-A-R-E-N-C-E, Edward, E-D-W-A-R-D, Thomas, T-H-O-M-A-S.
Speaker 1: And his date of birth and his place of birth?
Speaker 2: His date of birth was January 16th, 1915.
Speaker 1: And was he born in St. Louis [Missouri] too?
Speaker 2: He was born in St. Louis, Missouri.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, what can you tell us about his side of the family?  How far back can you trace them and what were they doing?
Speaker 2: Now, I can trace--I have pictures, well-made photographs actually, of my great-grandfather--my great-grandfather who was Andrew--his name was Andrew Thomas.  I'm trying to get his middle, make sure I have his middle name down, Andrew Thomas.  He worked at a candy factory in St. Louis.  And just looking at the pictures of him, I mean I don't know what he did, but he was, he obviously did well enough to be able to get himself a place in the suburbs of St. Louis, in a town which at the--town called Webster Groves [Missouri].  Now, St. Louis was a southern city, and if you have any experience with southern cities, you know that there could be suburbs around the southern city and they will be peopled for the most part by the more affluent.  I can't say wealthy, but certainly more affluent white people.  But down South, where you had your affluent white folks, they always had black folks living not far away.  That's one of the real (laughter) paradoxes about the segregated South.  Black folks were always there 'cause they needed black folks to do a lot of the jobs around their property.  So we lived in Webster Groves, in the black section of Webster Groves.  The communities were--and that's where my grandfather, great-grandfather bought himself a house or built.  I don't know, but the house still stands, and the family still owns it.  But it's in, right now, the community is called Rock Hill [Missouri], but back in those days, there was no Rock Hill in the late, I guess 19th century.  But my grandfather moved there, great-grandfather, I'm sorry, moved there with his family from downtown St. Louis--from the City of St. Louis.  And the house is still there.  It's at 217, I think it's South Thornton [Avenue] or West Thornton [Avenue], whatever.  But, and it's an old brick bungalow, still there and my great-grandfather moved there and he would ride the train to St. Louis to go to work at the candy factory.  And he was like the pillar of the community.  Man, he was, you know, this is a brother who was doing pretty good.
Speaker 1: Do you remember what candy factory it was?
Speaker 2: No, I don't.  I don't, but he--and they had a nice house, man, they--a lot of land.  I remember the house is still there.  It's still owned by the family.  And that's where we would always go for any kind of picnic or anything like that.  Now, of course, my great-grandfather, he died in the early 20th century.  I don't know which year.
Story_ID: 176698
Speaker 1: But my grandfather [Charles Thomas], you know, he grew up--the house he, he grew up in, he maintained the property.  He still had the property, and my grandfather, who, he became an entrepreneur, he was a--in the '20s [1920s].  He was a disciple of Garvey, Marcus Garvey and a free enterpriser, if you will.  And how he expressed that economically, professionally, however you want it, he opened his own store.  He opened a store where you could buy, in the community, in the Webster Groves [Missouri] community, where you could buy, you know, food items.  He had a deli in there.  He had a dry cleaners in there, and I think he sold kerosene for a minute, anything you needed in the community.  And he was the neighborhood grocer in the 1920s, '30s [1930s], really '40s [1940s] and '50s [1950s] 'cause I can remember as a kid going to the store.  But at any--that's how he raised, my grandfather raised his nine children.  He had seven girls and two boys.  And my father [Clarence Thomas] was the oldest boy.  And all of 'em went to college.  My father went to Lincoln University in Jefferson City, Missouri.  Many of his sisters went to Stowe--Harriet Stowe Teachers College [later, Harris-Stowe State University, St. Louis, Missouri] and they all became school teachers in St. Louis [Missouri].  My, the youngest sibling was a boy, William A. Thomas.  He went to St. Louis University [St. Louis, Missouri].  But they all went to college.  In fact, there was an article done by the St. Louis Post Dispatch on the occasion of my grandparents' fiftieth wedding anniversary, suggesting that, you know--it was about, wow, this young, this, these black people living in Webster Groves, sent all nine kids to college.  In 1962 when they wrote this article, that was a big deal.
Speaker 2: Now, what was your grandfather's name?
Speaker 1: I'm sorry, it was, his name was Charles Seals, S-E-A-L-S, Thomas.
Story_ID: 176699
Speaker 1: Is there a story behind the Seals?  That sounds like another last name.  Is that the last name of another relative?
Speaker 2: You know, it does, but I don't know what it is, the origin of it.  No, I don't know, but I do know that the roots of--well, maybe I don't know.  But I mean I've been told that the roots of his family is somewhere in eastern Alabama.  But that's, I have no confirmation.
Speaker 1: Well, that's okay 'cause this is good place to put that out there in case somebody's looking.  At least that's something you heard that they can follow up on.
Speaker 2: Yeah, but that would be my great-grandfather's [Andrew Thomas] roots.  Now, he was married, my great-grandfather was married to--my great-grandmother's name was Miriam Thomas.  And it was--and my, we have pictures of these people from the late 19th century, yeah.  I mean, you know, they were, I mean they were pillars of the--well-made photographs for them, man, certainly well made for that era as any--good as anything of Teddy Roosevelt [President Theodore Roosevelt] in the early 20th century (laughter).  Yeah, nice photographs, man.  They were dressed up, man, everything.  The--so where was I?  Well, at my grandfather [Charles Thomas].  I'll start with my--because that's the person I really knew.  And he was married to my paternal grandmother who was Alby, A-L-B-Y, Thomas.  And Alby Thomas, she traces her roots to Alabama for sure.  She was, she had a Cherokee in her.  And she traces her roots back to the Trail of Tears, folks coming up out of Georgia, you know, going to Alabama first before they went up through Tennessee and on their way to Oklahoma.  And there was a lot of inner-marriage between Cherokees and blacks, and you could almost look at Alby and say, whoa, you know.  She had some serious native, Native American in her.  But her family moved to St. Louis [Missouri], and she grew up in a, I don't know what they called it, a bar or whatever, 'cause my great-grandmother, she was--my grandmother, not my great-grandmother, my grandmother, her brothers, they were--they certainly lived the fast life.  I think one of 'em's name was Homer (ph.).  That's where I got my middle name, from one of her brothers, Homer, who I never really met.  He was alive when I was born, but I was too young before he died.  Who else?  I think Homer was the only one that I really keep hearing about.  But Homer lived the fast life, you know.  I guess he would have a cocktail every now and then, and he would shoot some dice and my grandmother, Alby--it's really interesting.  The family legend is she grew up in like a, what amounted to a bar, whorehouse or whatever, you know, because she was a very religious woman.  And she could sit at that piano--and she played piano, and she could play that piano.  And she could belt out 'Your Blessed Assurance,' [sic, 'Blessed Assurance'] your gospel, classic gospels.  But then--and she used to always tickle the kids with this.  She'd get on that piano, and she'd start playing some boogie woogie.  [making boogie woogie tune].  And we'd go, whoa (laughter).  And I found out in later years (laughter), that's the music she heard when she was growing up in that house of ill repute 'cause she was, as a kid, as a baby, she knew the music.  And she could mimic it 'cause there was always a piano around because they always had a piano in that joint.  And that's how she learned to play.  But she could, she could--every now and then, she'd get the biggest kick out of us getting the biggest kick out of her, suddenly going from 'Blessed Assurance' to boogie woogie (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 176700
Speaker 1: And, you know, the fact, whatever he did or didn't do, I mean led to basically the extinction of--
Speaker 2: Of that part--
Speaker 1: --of that, that part of the family.  And, you know, it's very regretful because, I actually went on one of those Ancestry.com things.  That's where I found out he was from Kansas because he had some [U.S.] Military records and such that--and then, of course, you look at those census reports.  And you see who was living in the house and who they were.  And my great-grandmother--that's how I found you that, you know, she was from Ireland, essentially.  But she had no--but that's where it stopped.  She apparently came here.  I don't know if she was an adult or if she was a child, but she came here.  And she was sort of by herself in Tennessee because everybody else was, I guess, in county whatever in Ireland.  She was a potato famine immigrant.  And, but, she apparently got involved with a black man.  And that's how my grandmother [Bernice Franklin] came to be.  But my grandmother was, you could tell she was a black woman because she had curly hair and what not.  I could tell.  But I guess, back in the day, she told people she was white and they bought it.
Speaker 2: Yeah, there's probably more, I guess, ambiguous--I mean people of ambiguous race and then the idea of who somebody is was a little bit fuzzier in the 19th century than we suppose today.
Speaker 1: And even, you know, even--yeah, because, you know, one thing, one problem was, particularly in that part of the world, you were either white or you were black.  In St. Louis [Missouri], that was it.  There was no such thing as a--I remember my father [Clarence Edward Thomas], he had this terribly racists thing he used to say all the time.  If somebody, if he saw somebody who was Indian, I mean from Mumbai or whatever, he would ah, he's some kind of Puerto Rican.  (Laughter) that was his, that was his, (unclear).  He's some kind of Puerto--oh, they some kind of Puerto Ricans.  I'm like, what?  (laughter) you know, I think about what he used to say.  Then, what are you talking about (laughter)?  This person's from Indonesia, some kind of Puerto Rican, because there was just nothing other than being black or white.  And that defined whether or not you could go there or come here.
Speaker 2: Okay, okay.
Story_ID: 176701
Speaker 1: So, so your father [Clarence Edward Thomas], you know, so did he go to high school out in the suburbs in Webster Groves [Missouri]?
Speaker 2: Yes, he did.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: He went to one of the only black high schools, really--there were two black high schools in the State of Missouri where you could continue your--we're back on the air?
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 2: Okay, in Missouri, there were in the 19--until the 1930s even, maybe even after that, there were only two places in the States of Missouri where you could go to high school after--where you could go to school after eighth grade if you were black.  One was--well, on that I should say in the St. Louis area, only two high school, 'cause I can't be sure of the rest of the state.  The rural areas certainly not, but Kansas City [Missouri] might be another story.  But anyway, two black high schools, [Charles H.] Sumner High School in the City of St. Louis, famous, historic place and Douglass High School in Webster Groves, Missouri, which I'm sure is one of the reasons why my great-grandfather [Andrew Thomas] settled there 'cause Douglass High School was, it was it.  I mean kids came from all over the state who wanted to go to high school (brief interruption) of each other.  So I grew up in that environment.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Now, did your father serve in the War [World War II, WWII]?
Speaker 1: No, he did not.  My father was, my father, he had it figured out, I mean in terms of (laughter), who he was as a black man.  He just, my father (laughter) was the first revolutionary I ever met.  He worked at the post office.  He had a blue post office shirt, (laughter) but, man, my father, he wasn't, he wasn't about gonna go--he was like--he was what Muhammad Ali said about war decades before Muhammad Ali said it.  He said, I ain't gone--they ain't never called me out of my name.  I mean I'm not gone go over there and fight.  For what?  'Cause like I said earlier, he was embittered by what the system did to him.  So he wasn't about to go put life and limb at risk for a system that basically did not allow him to prosper.  He had that figured out.
Speaker 2: Now, you said earlier too that your grandfather [Charles Seals Thomas] was a Garveyite--
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Was a member, a formal member?
Speaker 1: You know, I don't know if he was a formal member, but he certainly was a subscriber--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --to the whole United Negro Improvement Association [sic]--
Speaker 2: Universal Negro, yeah.
Speaker 1: Universal Negro Improvement Association theory about economics and community uplift.  Yeah, he wasn't dependent upon anybody else for that.  And, but my father, back to him, he was, man, like he--the whole baseball thing.  I mean he was embittered by it.  And, you know, I can actually remember having to--when I was an adolescent, just having it out with him, you know, about his anger.  You gotta, you know, you gotta--and I was a little angry too (laughter).  But I said, you know, hey, you can't keep doing this, you know, till you--'cause you're not gonna do it to me.  I'm not gonna leave here.  I'm not gonna be embittered.  I'm gonna give it a shot.  And, you know, but we got along.  I mean it was nothing that was that bad, but I can remember him really being a bitter person.  He wasn't gonna be in no [U.S.] Army, nobody's Army.  I think he said he got out 'cause he had a hernia.
Speaker 2: Okay (laughter) with quotation marks (laughter).
Speaker 1: Yeah, (laughter) but, now, my younger--his younger brother served in and around the time of Korea [Korean War].  But I don't think any of--yeah, but it was only two boys in the family.  Well, my father would have been twenty-six, twenty-seven years old at the time of World War--when this country entered World War II.  But he had no, no interest in that.
Speaker 2: Okay, okay. (Simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Story_ID: 176702
Speaker 1: Is there a story about how your parents [Clarence Edward Thomas and Oneida Marie Franklin Thomas] met?
Speaker 2: They met through, they met through a guy who worked at the post office, who was my father's friend.  And he knew, my father's friend knew my mother.  And he introduced the two, and my mother had, of course, you know, a young child.  And my father had been married previously.  But his first wife died.  I don't know how.  I believe it was illness.  He never really talked about it a lot.  But he was widower, and, of course, he met my mother who was a single parent, and they married around 1950.  I came along in 1951.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, so did they say anything more about their courtship or anything about how they--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: No, now, they--
Speaker 1: --what they liked about each other?
Speaker 2: --they were not, they weren't that--they weren't--they weren't that type (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 176703
Speaker 1: Okay now, well, when you think about their personalities, you know, their dispositions, their sense of humor, how they walk, talk, what they look like, who do you think you take after the most?
Speaker 2: My mother [Oneida Marie Franklin Thomas], without a doubt.  I mean I have the, more of a--I'm more of an A-type personality.  I place a very high premium on communication.  My father [Clarence Edward Thomas] was more of a (unclear) laid-back kind of guy.  You could get him going on the right topic, but he wasn't Mr. Personality.  I mean he wasn't gon' go out and buy a new fancy suit, you know.  He, you know, he was pretty plain, plain guy.  My mother liked to push, push the envelope a little bit.  She liked to experience new things.  I totally take after her.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 176704
Speaker 1: Tell us about your siblings from--now, you're the oldest, right?
Speaker 2: Oh, I'm the oldest, of course, I have a sister.  I claim.  She is my sister.
Speaker 1: An older, yeah.
Speaker 2: My mother's [Oneida Marie Franklin Thomas]--half-sister, I think biologically speaking.
Speaker 1: And what's her name?  What's your sister's--
Speaker 2: Patricia.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: P-A-T-R-I-C-I-A, Renee, R-E-N-E-E Thomas.  And she, she's still living in St. Louis [Missouri].  She went to, what at the time was Texas Southern University [Houston, Texas] for a couple of years, and then she didn't finish, went there for two years.  And she got married and still living in St. Louis.  I have a younger sister, Paula Marie Thomas.  She graduated from Lincoln University in Jefferson City, Missouri, went on to law school at the University of Missouri, at Kansas City [Missouri], graduated, was an attorney in Washington and later in St. Louis.  She passed, died about two years ago.  I have a younger brother, John.  John Marlowe Thomas, M-A-R-L-O-W-E, Thomas.  He is a, still living in St. Louis.  He was born in 1956.  My oldest sister, '49 [1949], younger sister, 1953, my youngest brother, my brother, young brother, 1956.  He still lives in St. Louis, worked in real estate, and his name is John Marlowe.  My mother had an appreciation for poets (laughter).  So I was Homer.  He's Marlowe.  There you go.
Speaker 1: That's something.  I didn't make that connection (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, I didn't either until later in life, I figured it out.  I said, oh, you know, she, she loves poets.  She loved, yeah.
Story_ID: 176705
Speaker 1: Yeah, you know, we grew up in a three-bedroom house in--in fact, our house is here.  The, right behind me was an aunt Lou [ph.].  She was a sister of my grandfather [Charles Seals Thomas] on my paternal side.  Right next to her was a house with one of my aunts in it.  Across the street was the historic family home [in Webster Groves, Missouri].  I mean we all lived like, bam, bam, bam, bam, bam, bam, bam.  We all lived next to each other.  We was like a compound almost.  But I mean it was other houses of other families, but like I could walk next to the uncle's house.  And maybe six of us, six different houses that were all in, basically, in a line that we all lived in, in the same neighborhood.  So I always saw my aunts and uncles, family reunion, everybody was right there, every holiday, Christmas, Memorial Day was a big holiday for us, big barbeque, Thanksgiving, all lived together, right there, same neighborhood.  And it wasn't until later, I guess maybe in the late '60s [1960s], early '70s [1970s] when, you know, other neighborhoods opened up to black folks in the St. Louis [Missouri] area, then people started scattering a little bit more.  But we lived right there together, always.
Speaker 2: Okay, that's interesting to have everybody so close together.
Speaker 1: Yeah, right there, man, and so I grew up with everybody, cousins, everybody, man, you know, walking down the street, the whole bit.
Speaker 2: So you had a lot of support growing up, I guess, with all your relatives?
Speaker 1: Yeah, a lot of support.  In fact, a lot of, a lot of--I had a lot of parents, man.  Me and my broth--with these people sitting around, I couldn't, man, I couldn't get away with anything.
Story_ID: 176706
Speaker 1: So where were we?
Speaker 2: So we were talking about your father [Clarence Edward Thomas] coming out of Douglass High School in Webster Grove[s] [Missouri] (unclear).
Speaker 1: Yeah, he--my father went to Douglass High School in Webster Groves.  He would tell stories about it all the time.  It was only, only one of two high schools in Missouri on at least the eastern half of it for, where a black person could go to school after eighth grade.  Douglass High School and [Charles H.] Sumner High School in the City of St. Louis [Missouri], and Douglass in the suburbs.  And Douglass got a lot of kids from all over the region who didn't necessarily live in the city, but they would come to Douglass if they could get there to attend high school.  And it was quite a destination.  It was a destination, obviously.
Speaker 2: And the names even, I mean, you know, you had Frederick Douglass High School out in Webster Grove, and you got Charles Sumner High School, a great abolitionist order, you know, and senator from Massachusetts.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: So, people, you know, whoever named 'em, you know, and certainly the people that they were meant to educate, you know, the freedom of black people was implied in the names of the schools.
Speaker 1: Yeah, and he left Douglass High School, graduated from there, I assume in 1933 and went on to Lincoln University which is historically black college [HBCU] in Jefferson City, Missouri.  And he graduated from Lincoln University with a degree in economics.  But that didn't do much for you in 1937 or whenever it was he graduated.  But he did graduate and his first job was driving a milk truck, he says because--or he told me, because he basically couldn't, I mean it wasn't like you were gonna get hired by the accounting firm in downtown St. Louis.  He was also a baseball player.  He loved to play baseball.  He tried out for the Kansas City Monarchs [Kansas City, Missouri] in the '30s [1930s].  He got homesick, he said, came home.  He never really said he didn't make the team, but (laughter), but apparently, he was a pretty good baseball player because others in the neighborhood would talk about he played right field.  And apparently, he could hit it a long way.  But he was very slow, couldn't run (laughter).
Speaker 2: The Monarchs, that's the team that employed Satchel Paige.
Speaker 1: Absolutely, Satchel Paige and well, you know, those guys moved around quite a bit.  I think Cool Papa Bell [James Thomas "Cool Papa" Bell] may have played for a minute with the Monarchs.  You know, those guys, they, each season somebody's playing for somebody else, but my dad was a baseball player. And he always held a great deal of bitterness about the fact that he couldn't play in the major leagues.  And, or that couldn't be part of what he could do.  And I think he became even more embittered after Jackie Robinson entered the major leagues because at that point, he realized what had happened to him and how this system had basically kept him, you know, basically, didn't allow him to do what he wanted to do in life.  And I think it went beyond just the baseball thing.  It was also the fact that he was a college educated, had a degree in economics, and he couldn't really do anything with it.  He, by the 19--I guess 1950s, he got a job with the post office and began working as a clerk at the post office, which in the strata of the post office was better than being a letter carrier.  So that's what his college education got him.  But he never turned against education 'cause he always, you know, he always kept the--I shouldn't be doing that 'cause he did not hit me (laughter).  But he always made it very clear that you had to, you had to finish high school, and you had to go to college 'cause that was the culture for his family.  As I said earlier, all nine kids went to college, and my generation, we certainly were not, not going to--we were not gonna go to college.  I mean that was expected of us.
Story_ID: 176707
Speaker 1: Now, did he [Thomas' father, Clarence Edward Thomas] have any stories about Lincoln [University, Jefferson City, Missouri], about any of his professors or mentors or anything?
Speaker 2: Not really.  He really didn't.  My father, for instance, he didn't pledge a fraternity.  Keep in mind he talks about, my father would talk a lot about what it was like growing up, being a teenager and a young adult during the Great Depression.  I mean that defined his personal economics.  My father was a saver.  He didn't, he--it was like they say, he threw nickels around like they were manhole covers--
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: And it all traced back to the depression.  And what his family had to do, nine kids in the depression.  I mean trying to keep people fed, trying to find what work there was, going to college.  You know, a college student can starve to--you know, in an economic boom.  He went to college, an all, historically black college [HBCU] during the depression.  And it defined him to a large extent.  And I think that even to this day, I'm frugal.  I mean I, my wife [Mary Tinajero Thomas] and I, we enjoy a good life, but I, I plan for the future, and I got that from my dad.  But he didn't talk a lot about when he went to school.  He never pledged a fraternity.  He didn't talk about it in any glorious terms.  "I had great fun when I was in college."  Nah, he never talked about--never talks like that.  And he went away to school.  I mean Jefferson City [Missouri] is like 120 miles away from St. Louis [Missouri], so he had to stay there on campus.
Speaker 1: So I imagine he had to work his way through school?
Speaker 2: I'm sure he did, but I mean it would be odd jobs here and there when you can get them 'cause keep in mind, it's the '30s [1930s].  And people didn't have a lot of jobs.  But his dad [Charles Seals Thomas] ran a grocery store or had a grocery store in St. Louis.  And his, and my grandfather, I mean his legend was that he was giving credit all over the neighborhood to folks.  He was feeding families and, "Pay me when you can," kind of thing.  And, of course, a lot of my father's siblings worked around the store and in the community.  They actually--the store and the family lived over the store.  And the store was like one block from the high school [Charles H. Sumner High School, St. Louis, Missouri].  So it was sort of a, you're here, but you go to school, and that's what you do.  You go to school.  And it was never any problem getting there.  It was never any problem monitoring all my father's brothers and sisters as they went to school.  And, of course, as each--my oldest, my father's oldest sister, she went to Harris-Stowe Teachers College [later Harris-Stowe State University] in St. Louis, so she got a job teaching right out of college.  So she helped the family.  And as each would graduate, they would help the youngers in the family to, to get through this, through the, you know, the '30s [1930s] and World War, World War II [WWII].  And by the late '40s [1940s], of course, I mean most of my siblings--well, my father's siblings had graduated because, I mean they had those babies, those nine kids, one boom, boom, after another.
Story_ID: 176708
Speaker 1: Okay, so he had, he had a strong--your father's [Clarence Edward Thomas] family seems like a very strong group of people--
Speaker 2: Yeah, and, you know, the thing about it, after, after everybody graduated from college, nobody moved any more than twenty minutes away.  I mean and, I would say more than half, lived right there in the same neighborhood.  In fact, there was, I can remember when I was an early teen, after my--I mean I could walk to the store from where I grew up, both houses I grew up in.  Where I was born, was maybe seven doors down from the store.  Where we moved in 1956 was maybe a five-minute walk to the store, where my grandfather [Charles Seals Thomas] and grandmother [Alby Thomas] lived.  I would say seven or six of the nine brothers and sisters in my father's generation lived within walking distance.  They were always on me, and then, you know, the question was, "How you doing in school?  What's going on?"  La de dah de dah.  I mean they were constantly on your case.  And you had to basically tell 'em (laughter), and, and so there was--no, I had a, I wouldn't trade my upbringing, man, for anything.  I mean for, no, anything.
Speaker 1: Did any of your aunts or uncles teach at the school--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yeah, they were all teachers.
Speaker 1: --at the local school?  Okay.
Speaker 2: And virtually all of 'em were teachers.  My aunts were all teachers.  My uncle who was the youngest of all that generation's siblings, he was pretty much a business guy.  He ended up developing a, doing, owning the largest black-owned development company in St. Louis [Missouri] called W. A. Thomas & Associates.  And, man, they built a lot of stuff in St. Louis in the 1970s and '80s [1980], and before he passed.  But--
Story_ID: 176709
Speaker 1: Well, what was it like in Webster Groves [Missouri]?  I mean, we always ask the question, what were some of the sights, sounds and smells of growing up?
Speaker 2: Of Webster Groves, for me?
Speaker 1: Uh-huh.
Speaker 2: I, you know, one of the things I remember was walking to school because we had to walk to school, and 'cause we--you know, we grew up in the black section.  And after the schools were integrated in the late '50s [1950s], they closed the black schools, the black high school and the, the--and we had to go to the white schools, which were much farther away from our neighborhood 'cause they weren't built for us.  But I can remember going to school as a young--going to the all-black elementary school.  That was special to me because I had an aunt who was a teacher there.  She knew all the other teachers, and they sort of socialized together.  So going to school was, it was a challenge for me because, you know, I had to look at these people not only at school, but I had to look at 'em out of school 'cause, you know, my family was involved in this whole teaching thing.  So that was part of it.  The other part was walking to school and learning to navigate bullies and kids that always wanted to fight and stuff.  And I think I developed some--I had to fight, but I got tired of fighting, so I learned to talk my way through it.  And, man, I been talking ever since.  I could talk my way through any kind of bully, and I learned that from going to grade school.  And I never had any peer pressure because I was always the independent kid.  I was always one who could talk my way through anything.  I would just--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Oh, I'm sorry.  I didn't wanna to interrupt, but I just wanted to ask you, how would--can you give an example of how you would talk your way out of a conflict?
Speaker 2: Well, if there was a kid who was into trouble, and they wanted to get me involved in the trouble, I'd find a way to get out of it.  I mean I could find a way to find something else to do, you know, to tell them I had something better to do or, or put it on somebody else that, you know, well, nah, well I can't do that now, man, 'cause I'm going out--I've got, you know, if Joe, the bully, if Joey, the bully, wanted me to do something crazy with him, I would find, I'd make something--make up something about Billy, the bully, who's crazier than Joey.  So he ain't gonna, you know what I mean.  And I knew that.  I knew that Billy was crazier than Joey.  So I would make up something that Billy wanted me to do.
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: So in other words, you going against Billy, Joey?  Joey said, nah, I understand.  Go ahead then.  You know, he'd back off.
Speaker 1: 'Cause he knows that Billy is crazier than him?
Speaker 2: 'Cause he know Billy's crazier than he is.  So either you play one against the other, but you had to have information.  You had to have intelligence about Billy, and you had to know, well, okay, play it.  But I didn't know--I didn't have nothing to do with Billy.  But I could get out of it, you know.
Story_ID: 176710
Speaker 1: Then later on, walking to school became--when we had to walk to high school [Webster Groves High School, Webster Groves, Missouri], that was a different story altogether because then it was walking with all the other black kids up to the white high school.  So at that point, we got a chance to talk 'cause we had to walk, and the walk was like over a mile.  But during that mile, we talked, and we got together.  And I don't, if you walked today with Melvin (ph.), you might be walking with Carlos (ph.) the next day or you might be walking with Larry (ph.) the next day.  But you're still talking, and you started getting together, getting yourself together.  And what we didn't realize, well, we did realize it later because I--this is the good part of the--we'll get to this part of the story, but we would be walking, and the buses would be going by, full of white kids.  They didn't have--they wouldn't give us a bus.  We had to walk over a mile, sometimes mile and a half, depending on where you lived in the neighborhood.  But the white kids would go by, and we would wave, "Hey," 'cause we knew 'em from class, but we didn't even--it didn't occur to us, why we were walking and they were riding until later.  But it was a time in the day when you had some real perspective on who you were when you were walking to school 'cause once you got to school, you were--to the white high school, you were sort of in there.  But when you were able to compare notes with the other kids walking to the high school, you got to know who you were and why--where are we going today, and what's happening with you and what's--how are they treating you?  You know, that sort of thing.  So that was a very important part.
Story_ID: 176711
Speaker 1: You were telling us about your father's [Clarence Edward Thomas]--(unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yeah, we, part--one of the sights and sounds was, you had an expectation for that every other Friday.  Everybody knew when pay day was 'cause that was the day that you went shopping to the store.  And if you needed anything, that was when your dad could get it for you.  And we all depended on it because my mother [Oneida Marie Franklin Thomas] wasn't working at that time, that--when we were that age.  But we'd all pile into the car, and we'd go to the grocery store.  And my father always bought himself a new car.  From 1956 through, I could say, the end of the '60s [1960s], every three years, my father would get himself a new car, a new Chevrolet, new Chevrolet Impala.  And I guess that's how he managed it.  And he'd trade one in, get a new one, and so he always had a nice car.  And he would go shopping on payday.  And we knew that.  And so when he got paid, he might bring us home, like some barbeque or bring us home some hamburgers.  He was a good guy.  And, you know, we were--that was an expectation that we had.  Of course, there was always expectations around holidays because my father always made sure that we had a holiday.  And even if it, if it wasn't like Christmas or Easter, it was Memorial Day or Thanksgiving when the whole family and the extended family would get together.  And I would--those were good times growing up.  I mean I have no regrets at all about any of it.
Story_ID: 176712
Speaker 1: In terms of what you're doing now, and what your career has been, what was your access to the news in those days?  Did you--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Oh, man, that's good.  My first job was in the news business.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I was eight or nine years old, third grade, news business.  How?
Speaker 1: Delivering.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah, okay.
Speaker 2: St. Louis Argus.  Man, I, I was a--that was a black newspaper.  One of my uncles, one of my father's [Clarence Edward Thomas] sisters' husbands was Joseph O. Banks [ph.].  He was the circulation for the St. Louis Argus.  And the St. Louis Argus not only distributed its own newspaper, it also distributed for Johnson Publications, Jet and Ebony.  So I was nine years old, third grade, fourth grade, and he got me a route.  Well, he basically said, if you deliver the paper in the black community of Webster Groves [Missouri], you know, I'll pay you, I think it was a nickel for every Argus I delivered.  Six cents for every Jet magazine, and eight centers for every Ebony magazine.  Ebony, of course, only published once a month.  So then my job was to first sign people up for subscriptions and then deliver these publications as they came out.  I delivered the Argus once a week, Jet once a week, and Ebony once a month.  And Uncle Joe would bring me the papers that I needed.  And I was probably delivering maybe ten, twenty, maybe twenty, twenty-five papers, you know, and get the money and go buy candy.  But I can remember that, especially Jet, man, I loved Jet 'cause, man, I would get the Jet, man, and I would just read the Jet over and over again (laughter).  And I actually had some complaints from people saying, "What's this grease on my magazine?"  Or, "Why is my magazine dog-eared," because I was, you know, obviously, reading this stuff.  And I even remember thinking, man, I'd love to be a writer for Jet 'cause I used to love to open Jet and see that pretty girl in there too, you know.  I said, man, look at this, this stuff, and they'd have great stories in Jet.  And they were short, to the point, and I was a voracious reader.  I mean, 'cause I was telling you about my mom [Oneida Marie Franklin Thomas], you know, she really put a high premium on reading.  And I would just read everything.  Man, I couldn't eat a bowl of cereal without reading the box, you know, I mean or reading a can of PET milk or whatever.  I, I'm gonna read, man.  So, but I had this paper route.  I used to read this stuff constantly.  I used to think about, man, I'd love to work for Jet.  I'd love to work for Ebony.  You know, I just liked it.  So, that was my first job.
Story_ID: 176713
Speaker 1: By the time I got to junior high school, I was in eighth grade, yeah, and I was actually--because I had some pretty strong, I had good grades at the all-black elementary school that I went to.  And I had some pretty strong language skills, as I've told you, from my mom [Oneida Marie Franklin Thomas].  And I read a lot.  So they put me in an advanced class.  And so I was in there with these pretty much, well-off, you know, white kids.  It was myself and another black kid who I know today.  He became an attorney later in life, but he was my good buddy in there.  And it was just us, these two black boys and all these other white kids.
Speaker 2: So this is about 1964 or so?
Speaker 1: This would be '63 [1964], '64 [1964], '64 [1964], yeah.  So we would be in this class, and they--we would take French.  And it was an advanced class.  It was an advanced section.  But I can remember starting a newspaper (laughter).  I started typing 'cause we had typing too.  We took typing.  And I can remember typing a little newspaper.  I called it The Hotline.  I mean I'm in eighth grade, man.  And all I would do in The Hotline was I was, you know, this pre-pubescent kid.  And I was basically flirting with the girls, with this Hotline.  And I would have a cartoon in there.  And I would talk about who was cute and who was liking on who and all this.  And I'd write this stuff.  Kids loved it.  And they would pass it around.  Of course, I would get in trouble because I would spend my time at home not necessarily doing all of my homework, but I would be on this typewriter that we had at home.  And I would have mimeograph or these carbon copies (laughter), real carbon copies.  And I would maybe make three copies of a page.  And I would make it, and then I would staple it together, and they'd--kids would pass it around.  They loved The Hotline, man.  But the school made me stop doing it.  But I can remember The Hotline.  It was nice.  I mean I had a nice header on it, Hotline, and then I would have a cartoon that I would draw.  And I'd have a little sports section.
Speaker 2: Now, was there a reason the school made you stop?  That was, I mean--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Yeah, because they found it disruptive.  And I wasn't talking about stuff.  I was talking about who was cute and who was liking on who and, you know.  And I remember I had a little, I had a little--and this came from Jet, I'm sure, I had Fox of the Week (laughter).  Whichever girl I thought was really hot, she was Fox of the Week.  They didn't like that, and, man, this is 1964, man, and you know, they didn't go for all that, man.  So they stopped me from doing it, but that was my first venture into publishing.
Story_ID: 176714
Speaker 1: And that's eighth grade.  Now, fast forward to 1967, '68 [1968], America was in turmoil.  We were going to this white high school [Webster Groves High School, Webster Groves, Missouri] where the whole basketball team was black, but all the cheerleaders were white girls, you know.  We couldn't, we had to, you know, we had to walk to school, and we'd see the white kids ride by in a bus.  All this stuff was going on and, of course, the country was in upheaval.  And I started a newspaper called The Dark Side.  I have copies of The Dark Side today.  And The Dark Side was basically a typewritten newspaper, but I had a nice header on it, The Dark Side, date, volume, edition, just copying from the Post, the St. Louis Post Dispatch, what its header looked like, you know.  I had The Dark Side.  And I had articles in there.  And, about some of the stuff that was going on in the school, the imbalance, how we were being treated.
Speaker 2: Now, did you have a--were you getting your political, I guess, orientation, was it coming basically from the newspaper and from Jet and Ebony or--
Speaker 1: Yeah, from Jet and Ebony, from media, from, from listening to some speech Stokely Carmichael may have given, or something H. Rap Brown may have said or the Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King [Jr.], you know, I mean I was borrowing on all these people, [HM] Dick Gregory, everybody.  I was reading, 'cause I was a, again, a voracious reader.  I wasn't necessarily reading 'Beowulf' (laughter).  But I was reading what I wanted to read which has always been my style.
Story_ID: 176715
Speaker 1: Okay, so I was wondering, too, if there was another, any other--I know you said your father [Clarence Edward Thomas] and your grandfather [Charles Seals Thomas] had a certain political orientation towards black self-determination and that sort of thing.  Was there, was there any other figures around that, teachers or any other people that had an influence?
Speaker 2: I would say my father.
Speaker 1: Your father, okay.
Speaker 2: My father, my father cheered me on (laughter). Remember, I was telling you about him.  And my mother [Oneida Marie Franklin Thomas], at that--by that time, kids were older.  She went and got herself a job 'cause in St. Louis [Missouri] in the six--in the late '60s [1960s], man, they were hiring.  You know why?  'Cause McDonnell Douglas was based in St. Louis.  McDonnell Douglas was making the fast movers for Vietnam 'cause you know that was, we were the world's police force back in those days.  So McDonnell Douglas was building these jet fighters, and they needed clerk typists and all kinds of workers.  So my mother got a job at McDonnell Douglas as a clerk typist.  And, boy, what did she have access to that I needed, a Xerox machine.  Oh, my God.  That was like an iPad today.  Man, like she could run me off, three hundred copies of my newspaper.  And she did it for me, my mom (laughter).  So The Dark Side was going concern, and the high school [Webster Groves High School, Webster Groves, Missouri] went nuts because I could do stuff like, okay, we had a story about, they wanted to stop kids from smoking outside the school.  Or they were getting kids.  So I said, well, today we're gonna protest this crazy rule about we can't smoke, you know, outside the school.  So I said, we're gonna walk out of school today at one PM, we're gonna have a walk out.  And I put it in The Dark Side.  One o'clock, everybody came out.  I said, I was intoxicated by the power of media.  And I haven't lost that to this day, you know, nearly fifty years later.  I still understand the power of the written word.  I mean I was maybe 5'6", 120 pounds dripping wet.  I was the big guy on campus, man, 'cause I ran this news, this rebel newspaper.  Now, they had a newspaper at the school.  It was a joke.  They didn't talk about anything, but I could have a walk-out.  I could do anything I wanted, you know, and they, I got--I was expelled once for it, you know.
Speaker 1: You were expelled once, but they brought you back?
Speaker 2: Oh, they had to.  I mean I wasn't doing anything.
Story_ID: 176716
Speaker 1: Well, we had a student election.  And I used this newspaper, because, you know, in a suburban high school like that [Webster Groves High School, Webster Groves, Missouri], 'cause keep in mind, Webster Groves [St. Louis, Missouri] had millionaires living in it.  They had people living in the same community when my neighborhood who didn't have running water, but there were--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yeah, you were--
Speaker 1: --millionaires living there too.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I think you talked about this off camera before--
Speaker 1: Right, right, but this,--(unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --but this is really--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --keep in mind, Webster Groves was a unique community back in the '60s [1960s].  In fact, Charles Kuralt, the famous, the late CBS news correspondent, came there, I believe, in 1963 and did a documentary called '16 In Webster Groves.'  And it was a document about young people in America.  But Webster Groves was such a melting pot that CBS News chose this place to do its, what they called then a white paper because it was such a unique environment.  You had black, you had white, you had very rich and very poor.  You had all this middle.  And CBS was trying to document what was happening in America with young people, and, boy, were they prescient, is that the word?  Because they, you know, the '60s [1960s] happened right after that, but that's another story.  But Webster Groves had very rich, very poor.  It had very rich white people, very poor white people, not too many rich black people, but a lot in the middle.  What I did with my newspaper, they had a student election.  Now, of course, the very rich white kids controlled the student government and everything else in the school.  We had an election.  I used the newspaper to form a bond between the black kids and the poor and middle-class white kids.  It worked.  I won, I won.  I got a black kid elected student body president in 1968.  They stole the election.  They told me that, because so many kids voted who normally don't vote, they had to write their ballot in hand, and they wouldn't honor those ballots.  Yeah, they stole the election.  Everybody knew they stole the election.  I knew they stole the election.  I didn't really care.  I loved the idea that I had upheaval.  That I had people mad, that I had people (laughter) going crazy.  But I did it, I did it with the newspaper.  That's how I covered my candidate.  My candidate had a paper.  The other candidate, they had that, that student, ah.  But I mobilized, I made--created a bond between the black kids and the poor white kids.  I called them the greasers, the poor white kids, they called them the greasers.  Well, I called them the greasers in the paper.  They loved it, and they joined.  And it was class warfare, all started because I--and I have been intoxicated by this profession ever since because I understand its power.  Now, I understand that you gotta be very careful with the power.  I understand that today.  But back then I was a kid.
Speaker 2: This is a new toy now.
Speaker 1: It was a new toy--
Story_ID: 176717
Speaker 1: And I can also remember like this community, Webster Groves [Missouri], which again, as I mentioned was this higher end, suburban community in St. Louis [Missouri], they would always have, around the 4th of July what they called community days where they would celebrate freedom, 4th of July, Independence Day.  Well, with the--through the auspices of the paper and through the organization I had founded called the Students for Black Awareness and Action, we decided, me and my inner circle, decided to have our own float in the parade.  So what we did, we basically went out and got a truck and we put pictures on the truck, Malcolm X and Stokely Carmichael, of [Reverend Dr.] Martin Luther King [Jr.], Frederick Douglass, all these black heroes, celebrating our freedom.  So we tried to get--and we went out and we registered the float.  We had an adult to drive the float, the truck, and we had a lot of brothers in the bed of the truck, one of them holding a big red, black and green flag, and we're gonna put this in this suburban (laughter), suburban parade, right?  This is 19--summer of '68 [1968].  And, of course, when they saw us coming, the local police got involved.  So they rammed the truck, arrested the driver who was the father of one of my compatriots.  We had white kids on the float too, arrested them, arrested me, told us we couldn't get in the float, even though we had--in the parade, even though we had all the proper permits and everything else.  Well, as it turned out, it became an ACLU [American Civil Liberties Union] case, and eventually all the charges were dropped.  But I can remember having police surveillance on my house, cops sitting outside all the time 'cause I was one of those revolutionaries at that point.
Speaker 2: This is incredible that they would actually stop the float, I mean when I look back--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Oh, yeah.
Speaker 2: --I guess it's really--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Yeah, but it was about freedom, but it was about our freedom.  It wasn't about George Washington.  It was about my freedom, and keep in mind Dr. King had just been killed two months earlier in the summer of--it was before the summer of '68 [1968].  He was killed in April, I believe, yeah.  And so there was a lot of, lot of stuff going on.
Story_ID: 176718
Speaker 1: --But, and then I think--then I went on to my senior year in high school [Webster Groves High School, Webster Groves, Missouri], and I, I, I still did the paper [The Dark Side], but I kind of backed off 'cause I was thinking then about going to college (laughter).  And I had to, I had to, you know, make up some things, you know, make up some work.  I got involved in dramatic arts a lot.  I mean I think one of the ways the school decided to try to cool me out, when I think about it in retrospect, they decided, number one, to do more things that were sensitive to the black student.  And one of the things they did was, they had a play.  They did 'Raisin in the Sun,' and, of course, I did Walter Lee Younger.  I was the lead because they wanted to give me some way to express myself (laughter), I think, other than rabblerousing at the high school.  So they, I played this role, and I--man, I was really good, man, I was really good.  And, 'cause I always had sort of a flare for that anyway.  And the whole idea then was maybe you should go to college and study dramatic arts, you know, and lada, dah, dah.  And I liked the idea of that, you know.  And I did some summer stock stuff and some other stuff.
Speaker 2: Was there an African American theater company in St. Louis [Missouri]?
Speaker 1: There was, but I wasn't in--they have a black repertoire I think.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: I don't know if it was actually formed then, but--
Speaker 2: Right, the St. Louis Black Rep [St. Louis, Missouri].  Yeah, I know about 'em.  I don't, I just don't know if they were formed--
Speaker 1: Yeah, I don't know if they were formed at that point.  But they may have been in their very nescient stages.  But I, I really got into this whole notion of dramatic arts, and that was when I went to college [at University of Missouri, Columbia, Missouri], one of the things that I was very interested in doing, becoming an actor or being around theater, writing plays or whatever, totally dropped by the spring of my senior year in high school I wasn't doing the paper anymore.  Now, the paper was still being published by some younger brothers 'cause they wanted to carry on the legacy of it, but I wasn't doing it anymore.
Story_ID: 176719
Speaker 1: And, of course, I was accepted into the University of Missouri [Columbia, Missouri] and the, we agreed that I would begin by going to summer school.  I would start a summer early, the summer before the actual fall--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Now, is this some sort of a program that--
Speaker 1: No, no, it--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: It was just an--
Speaker 1: The question was, where were you going to high school [sic, college]?  And my father [Clarence Edward Thomas] decided that I would be the first, well, not the first, but his son was going to go to the University of Missouri, which at that time, late '60s [1960s] even, was still barely integrated.  And my father decided that for the same money that I would spend to go to Lincoln University [Jefferson City, Missouri], I could go to University of Missouri.  And since I had the grades to do it, hey, why am I gone send you to Lincoln, when I can send you to the University of Missouri for virtually the same amount of money, and you could handle it.  So why don't you go there?  So I said, I don't know, dad.  Well, go for the summer.  Okay, went for the summer, got straight A's, 4.0.
Speaker 2: So what did you take in the summer?
Speaker 1: What did I take that summer?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: I took a mathematics class, I think, and an--it wasn't eco--it couldn't have been economics 'cause economics is five credits when you're a freshman.  It was another three-hour course.  But they were hard, hardcore academic courses.  I wasn't taking any lightweight stuff.
Story_ID: 176720
Speaker 1: Well, let me just ask you this before, we got you out of high school so fast, I didn't ask you if you--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --about you're--were there any special teachers or mentors in high school [at Webster Groves High School, Webster Groves, Missouri] then?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, well, my mentor, my mentor was actually in elementary school.  I can't remember--I remember some good teachers I had in high school.  One was an English teacher who I thought was really good.  Her name was Mrs. Albright (ph.).  I don't remember her first name, but she was good.  But my mentor educationally was a guy named Henry Givens.  Now, Henry Givens was my fifth and sixth grade teacher at Douglass, Frederick Douglass Elementary School, which was an all-black school.  Henry Givens, man, would come to work, my brother would be clean.  He'd have a suit on, man.  He was a young cat.  He was in his twenties, right out of college.  And I don't know where he went to college to this day, but Henry Givens, man, was always clean.  And, man, he was strict, and he'd hit you with ruler if you messed up in his class.  And I remember, it's--boy, he would, he'd say, "Boy, what?" you know, he would--Henry Givens was always about it.  And it's an interesting story about Henry Givens because he would later, after his initial teaching experience at sixth grade, he would, he went on to get a master's degree, I believe, from St. Louis University [St. Louis, Missouri], and a doctorate someplace else and became president of Harriet Stowe Teachers College [later Harris-Stowe State University] in St. Louis [Missouri].  The guy was a phenomenal person, and I picked up on it when he was my fifth grade teacher because he was a guy that I wanted to emulate in life because this cat was sharp, and I always knew that about him.  But, and he went on, I mean--and I've talked to him, you know, since then.  He barely remembered who I was, but I, I told him, I said, man, (laughter) I remember you from fifth grade.  I don't care what you're doing now, all this Ph.D. stuff.  In fifth grade, you made a tremendous impact on me.  But he was a mentor, I think, the guy that really impressed me the most, of all the teachers that I had, and he was fifth, sixth grade, but high school, again, I was, man, I was an agitator.  I mean, and that's where I really did journalism, and I did it--I mean I did it--well, it was advocacy journalism, certainly.  But I found out what this profession is all about.  It's about change.  It's about influencing people.  It's about giving them information that they need, putting things in perspective so that they can take action.
Story_ID: 176721
Speaker 1: You know, 1968 when most of the--this was the crest of your activities, I guess, as an agitator, that was the year that Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] was assassinated, April, '68 [1968], and then [Robert] Bobby Kennedy--
Speaker 2: But my paper [The Dark Side] actually started before the assassination.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Yeah, but this is a, that assassination seemed to mark a time when a lot of institutions in the United States, work places and institutions started thinking about how they were really gonna try to deal with diversity on some level, either real or unreal.  They made a stab at it.  So I was just wondering like, what did your high school [Webster Groves High School, Webster Groves, Missouri] do--you said they opened up some things for black students in '69 [1969].  But did they have any special event or observation of King's assassination at the school or--
Speaker 2: No, they did nothing like that.  It was a time of great fear.  You know, people--you know, I looked at some of this stuff, you know, this Dr. King stuff, like the mayor did a breakfast last week, Dr. King and they had all the corporate heads here in the room.  And, you know, that was a time of extraordinary fear and loathing.  I can remember my daddy [Clarence Edward Thomas], the night Dr. King got killed, getting his shotgun and sitting by the front door.  My daddy sat by the front door with a shotgun.  And we were in the house, man.  We were scared.  We're terrified.  And the people talk about this time that, you know, and they grow up--you know, these people that--I mean Dr. King would be out marching in front of the mayor's breakfast 'cause he knew who would be in there.  And that was not, you know, and everybody, you know, of course, supported the movement.  Now, you ask 'em, ah, I was right there with him, you know.  Dr. King was a pariah in America.  And there was probably as many people out there applauding his assassination as there were lamenting it.  I mean, I'm being real here.  I remember what was going on.  I remember the fear.  I mean there was, man, there was a fear that it was over when that happened, you know, that this was it.
Story_ID: 176722
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So, yeah, tell, tell this story about--
Speaker 2: I can remember right after the assassination of [Reverend] Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.], there was a march organized in St. Louis [Missouri] through North St. Louis basically commemorating or people rededicating themselves to the struggle.  And my father [Clarence Edward Thomas], keep in mind, I mean the tension at the time, people were taking sides to be in this march.  And you were taking a chance.  I mean my father worked at the post office.  He didn't work for black folks.  He worked, you know, with white people and essentially for white people at the post office.  But he made a decision that he was gonna be part of this march, and we went there not knowing what was gonna happen, I mean whether or not there'd be violence, whether or not there'd be protesters around the march 'cause keep in mind, America was not down with Dr. King.  They talk about him today, and he's got a holiday, and that's all very good, but at the time, as you know, Dr. King was a very controversial figure.  So we went to the march, and there were thousands of people there, thousands.  And we did the march, and I'm sure my father was--after he did the march, and he did so, satisfied himself personally, the next day, the St. Louis Post Dispatch did a story, front-page story on the march.  Guess who's on the front page (laughter) story?  I mean they focused on my dad, myself and my brother, right there.  I mean (laughter) my dad (laughter), I'm sure he had to go to work the next day, "We saw you in the paper," 'cause you know, if you were in the newspaper in 1968, that was a big deal, man, you know.  That was a big, that was it, man.  That was not light, that was better--that was bigger than being on TV or anything like that.  But anyway, I thought it was interesting that he would end up the symbol (laughter).
Speaker 1: Did he suffer any repercussions for it?
Speaker 2: I don't know if he did or not.  I mean he continued to work for the post office for another six, seven years, but, but yeah, he--but the fact that he would end up on the front page is amazing.
Story_ID: 176723
Speaker 1: So all those issues were dramatized in that era, and I just wanted to go back to that.  But, but okay, so University of Missouri [Columbia, Missouri] (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, I went there--
Speaker 1: --in 1969, right?
Speaker 2: --in large part because my dad [Clarence Edward Thomas] said, you ought to go there and get the best you could possibly get.  And I went there, and I went around the dramatic arts.  Keep in mind, it was only like two hundred blacks on the campus, undergrad and graduate at the University of Missouri, which at the time had thirty-five to forty thousand students.  It was a huge state university.  And I'm there, and I'm looking for the dramatic arts department, and what I might be able to do.  And believe me, wasn't anything there for me to do in the dramatic arts department.  They weren't doing 'Raisin in the Sun' or any kind of plays that I could possibly act in.  And they certainly weren't--that was in the day, you know, that you weren't gonna do Shakespeare either.  I mean they probably wouldn't even do 'Othello' in the University of Missouri (laughter).  So it's like, wow, why am I here?  Well, by the time the fall semester began--now, keep in mind, during the summer, I was a 4.0.  Time the fall semester began, you know, fall of '69 [1969], man, I was, I was doing everything but going to school.  I was having a good time.  And while I had a 4.0 (laughter) that summer semester, by the end of that first semester, I mean I had a point something (laughter).  It was bad (laughter).  They put me on probation, and I, you know, struggled through the second semester.  And they told me that, well, you're gonna have to go home unless you fix this in a summer session.  So I went to the summer session, and I thought I did well.  But the grades didn't come back well.  And, plus, I was involved in a lot.  I mean the girls.  It's 1969.  I discovered some new substances (laughter).  And, man, my father came and just got me.  He said, "Nah, this is not gonna continue.  You go, man, you're coming home."  And this is the summer of '69 [sic, 1970].  And he says to me, "You're going to junior college in St. Louis [Missouri] to fix this."
Story_ID: 176724
Speaker 1: So, you know, I was like, man, I was, I was totally--I was, I was in the times, man, in the moment, had hair, man, out here.  I think I wore a fatigue jacket with an American flag upside down.  I was like completely out to lunch (laughter).  And he [his father, Clarence Edward Thomas] brought me home.  And I can remember being with some high school friends the night before I was supposed to go register for this junior college, Forest Park Community College [later, St. Louis Community College-Forest Park] in St. Louis [Missouri].  And, you know, I wasn't necessarily in the, in the frame of mind to go register.  I can remember my dad grabbing me by the scruff of my neck, getting me out of bed, getting me dressed, basically carrying me through the registration process at the Forest Park Community College to get me back in school in the fall semester of 1970, yeah, yeah, it would be '70 [1970].  And, of course, after he got me registered, I went to school there, and I took a full load, and I think I had a, it was easy.  It was almost like high school.  And I was, you know, I'll get it, I think I can get another 4.0.  But in those days, those grades were easily transferrable to another state school.  So I went back to the University of Missouri [Columbia, Missouri] in the January of--or the second semester of my sophomore year.  And by then, I had figured that much out that this was not about the party and continued that year.  And basically, by the following summer 'cause I had to go back to summer school, I caught up.
Story_ID: 176725
Speaker 1: I was gonna be a third year student that quickly, including that semester with, in the community college [Forest Park Community College, later, St. Louis Community College-Forest Park, St. Louis, Missouri].  But in those days, you had to declare a major at that point when you're into your sophomore year.  You had to declare a major.  There was no such thing, really, as a general studies degree.  At that school [University of Missouri, Columbia, Missouri], they wanted to know, what you gone do?  I looked around, I said, "Man, what can I do?"  This is the best journalism school in the world.  You know, I'm a Christian now.  I got saved late in life.   And I realized that God had me covered.  I'm, I'm on the campus of the first journalism school ever created on this planet, renowned around the world, still considered "the best" or certainly one of the best journalism schools in the world.  And I'm there.  I'll give that a try 'cause I like that.  I went there, and I became immersed again, in this profession and was being taught the principles of what I'm doing, the responsibilities.  This wasn't The Dark Side anymore, The Hotline.  What do you have to be as a journalist?  Why is this important in a democracy that you have a free press?  I'm taught the history and principles of it, the ethics of it.  What I did, a lot of it, I shouldn't have been doing, and I learned that, became--University of Missouri has a, probably the strongest vocational component to its program inasmuch as they own a television station, a commercial television station that has commercials on it and a news program every day.  They have a newspaper that prints every day, publishes to a community, radio, advertising, the whole bit.  So I got involved in the program specializing in the broadcast section.  Loved it, became immersed in it.
Story_ID: 176726
Speaker 1: What was your awareness of other African Americans in broadcast journalism (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: It was strong enough.  In St. Louis [Missouri] when I was growing up, they had a guy on the air.  His name was Fred Porterfield, Harry's [HM Harry Porterfield] brother.
Speaker 1: Really.
Speaker 2: And Fred was the first black anchorman in St. Louis, and this was in the mid-'60s [1960s].  And, man, he was curious, man.  Everybody, you know, Fred, man, Fred Porterfield's on.  He didn't last very long, but he was there for a minute, and they had another woman named Dianne White.  She was a weather woman.  She was on Channel 5 in St. Louis, and, you know, she was a black woman.  And everybody checked her out.  You know, I mean, wow.  So there was some, some awareness.  Now, newspapers had virtually nobody that you knew of who was black in St. Louis.  There were two major newspapers there, the [St. Louis] Globe-Democrat and the [St. Louis] Post-Dispatch, but you didn't know of anybody there who was black.  But these television stations, they had a couple of black folks on the air.
Speaker 1: So all the black journalists were basically working for the [St. Louis] Argus or the [St. Louis] American?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes, now, I was familiar with some of those.  But, yeah, I saw them, but I, you know, I can't really necessarily say that Fred Porterfield was an inspiration.  I just knew he was there.  By the time, though, I got in college [at University of Missouri, Columbia, Missouri], I was--and I became immersed in the profession, I knew of black anchor people in Cleveland [Ohio] or Los Angeles [California] or New York [City], I mean because I was starting to study the field.  And certainly they became mentors--I didn't know, but I knew there was a possibility.
Speaker 1: Yeah, like Carl Stokes was an anchor in, up in Cleveland--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Cleveland, right.
Speaker 1: --before he became the mayor, yeah.
Speaker 2: Exactly, Carl Stokes, definitely.  And there were a few others around the country that you knew of.  And I had some very encouraging professors at Mizzou [University of Missouri, Columbia, Missouri] because the professors at Mizzou came from all over the country, and they would come from New York, L.A. [Los Angeles, California] or--and they really weren't as hung up on stuff.  And they were, they were journalists, and they were more, they had more of a world view, and they were less inhibitive of my success.  In fact, they knew that in the late--early '70s [1970s] that somebody like me, who would come out of there, with a piece of paper, could write a ticket.  They knew that, so they did what they could to encourage me to be good.
Story_ID: 176727
Speaker 1: I had this thing from my mom [Oneida Marie Franklin Thomas], the whole speaking part.  I was part actor (laughter).  And I could write, oh, my gosh.  And here I am at the great journalism school [University of Missouri, Columbia, Missouri].
Speaker 2: But you hadn't realized it until then, huh, that you--
Speaker 1: No, I really didn't.  I did not go there to go study journalism.  I didn't.  And, and it worked out that way, and so by the, by now, I'm growing up, you know.  I'm not, I'm partying like I used to.  I mean I'm telling the frat brothers, you know, hey, man, you know, I'm going to school, you know.  And they understood.  I would get teased a lot because I would be on the radio 'cause I actually got a job at the community radio station.  And it was a Top 40 radio station that played Top 40 music, and they had Top 40 disc jockeys.  You couldn't go on Top 40 radio station like you were on KXLW which was the black radio station in St. Louis [Missouri].  You had to go on there, "Hey, I'm Chuck Thomas, Top 40 radio."  You know, I had to do it like that (laughter).  And I could because as I said earlier, my mom taught me the language, and I'd been going to high school [at Webster Groves High School, Webster Groves, Missouri] with all these white kids, and I had to communicate with them too.  So I was good at it, and I would get teased unmercifully because the other black kids at the campus would say, "Man, you're a white boy.  You talk like a white boy."  "Hey, man, I'm getting, you know, I'm making a little money, and I could do this."  That's what I do.  I never had a problem with that.  They would tease me unmercifully because I talk, talk like a white boy.  Well, that's what I do.  Now, I don't talk like that at home.  But I mean I'm on the air, I'm a professional.
Story_ID: 176728
Speaker 1: I can remember when I got word that I was gonna graduate [from University of Missouri, Columbia, Missouri].  I tell you, man, I couldn't believe it.  Number one, I was, I was so immersed in the journalism program, that I loved it so much and when I was doing it, and when they said, "You're graduating, which means, you gotta leave." "What?"  I mean I couldn't come to grips with it.  So I immediately enrolled in grad school and had it set up where I would be a teaching assistant and such, get a master's degree because I don't just think I had the nerve to leave until I was told, and I can't remember who told me, that there was a radio station in Kansas City, Missouri that wanted to interview me for a job.  I, "Really?"  And I immediately got in my 1964 Mustang--I think it was, '67 [1967] Mustang, something like that, and drove immediately to Kansas City to do an interview for this job at KCMO radio.  This is, this was after I had actually been a few weeks into the graduate program in June of 1973, right after I had graduated.  And I went to Kansas City, and I had this interview, and they wanted--this was a country western radio station, KCMO, fifty thousand watt day timer.  And they, looking for, they were looking for a black person (laughter).  Come on, I know what time it is.  I mean they needed it 'cause, you know, the FCC [Federal Communications Commission] licenses were being challenged if you had--if you were all white.  And I did the interview, and I can remember during the interview, I had the big 'fro, man, and the whole bit, you know.  I can remember during the interview the news director and the general manager of the station talking about me as though I wasn't in the room.  I'm sitting there, and they're deciding, said, "Well, what do you think?  Well--and the news director said, well, what do you think?  And the general manager said, "Well, at least he doesn't sound like Rochester [Eddie "Rochester" Anderson]."  I remember it clear as a bell.  Now, I know who Rochester here.  I think you know who Rochester is, and you know who Rochester is.  And (laughter) I wanted this job so badly that all that stuff that I had built up inside, just said, I ain't gone say anything.  I'm gonna see if I get this--the general manager said, "At least he doesn't sound like Rochester," as though he might hire me.  I knew that.  So I didn't say anything.  I just sat there.  I didn't even say, "No, sir, boss" imitating Rochester.  I didn't say that either (laughter).
Speaker 2: Which was the way Rochester would have said it.
Speaker 1: Right, the way Rochester (laughter) would say it.  So they hired me.  And the job paid, I think it was eight thousand [dollars] a year, plus overtime.  And the overtime was guaranteed because you had to work six days 'cause that's the way it was in radio, six-day week, you had to work.  So that was more money at the time than my dad [Clarence Edward Thomas] was making, when I counted the overtime.  I was gonna make probably in the range of twelve thousand [dollars], thirteen thousand a year with the overtime.  That was a lot of money in 1973, man.  So I got the job, and I worked midnight to eight [o'clock], reading the news.  And if I had time to go out and cover a story here and there, I would.  By six [o'clock] in the morning, all the heavyweights had come to work.  So at that point, I'd go out on the street and cover whatever I had to cover for the balance in the morning.
Story_ID: 176729
Speaker 1: But that was my job, and that was the first job I had professionally, I'd say, you know, full-time, and that's where it all started.  And KCMO Radio [Kansas City, Missouri] was the sister radio--was the radio station companion to KCMO-TV.  Well, after I'd been there about a year and a half, two years, I started doing voiceover work for the television station.  It worked out all right.  They said, "Well, why don't you come over here and be reporter?"  "Sure."  So two or three years in--two years in, maybe, I became a reporter at the television station.  And it was a CBS affiliate television station, covered some big stories, had some stories picked up by the network.
Speaker 2: What were some of the stories that were coming to you in those days?  What was going on?
Speaker 1: What do you mean, big stories?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: I remember covering the flood in Kansas City [Missouri, 1977].  It was awful, like thirty people got killed because of--and the network wanted that story, so I did it, and they put it on national television.  I remember covering the 1976 Republican National Convention [Kansas City, Missouri].  That was interesting because that was the convention that, where the Republicans nominated Gerald Ford, who had been sitting in for Richard Nixon.  But Ronald Reagan challenged him in the primary, and Ronald Reagan lost.  He didn't win the nomination.  But Reagan gave a speech to the convention the night before, sort of like the second place guy's traditional speech.  Reagan gave this speech, man, and I can remember being on the floor of the Kemper Arena in Kansas City listening to this guy give this speech.  Man, I never considered myself a conservative Republican, certainly, but, man, I heard this speech--and I heard later, it was a stump speech.  He'd given it a hundred times.  But in those days, you didn't hear that a hundred times 'cause there wasn't as much media.  But I heard this speech for the first time, and I said, man, not only is this guy a good speaker, he got me going with this stuff, "The bold, the colors, red, the white, and the blue are fading" or whatever he said, and we--"And we want bold colors.  We don't want pastels."  Man, whoa.  And I could see the delegates sitting there with their funny hats on.  You would see it in their faces, and I remember it clear as a bell from forty years ago, thirty-eight years ago, whatever it is.  They were saying to themselves, you could see it in their eyes, we nominated the wrong guy. You could see it.  They fell in love with Ronald Reagan right then.  And you knew that if Ford didn't get reelected--didn't get elected in '76 [1976], which he did not, Ronald Reagan was gonna be this party's standard bearer in 1980, and he was gonna change the course of this country.  And I, that just stands out in my mind as a story that I covered then.  I did a lot of other stories.  I mean I did a lot of stories in Kansas City that sort of focused on the African American community there and its history because it's a rich history.  And it's a beautiful city.  I mean Kansas City's a wonderful place.
Story_ID: 176730
Speaker 1: But I went, you know, I worked there [KCMO TV, Kansas City, Missouri], and I was having a great time.  But then my wife at the time, she had a sister who had moved to San Francisco [California].
Speaker 2: Now, did you meet your wife in college [University of Missouri, Columbia, Missouri]?
Speaker 1: College, yes, I did.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: I met her in college.  We just met.  And she was going to school there, and I was going to school there.  And she came from a very prominent family in Columbia, Missouri.  Her mother and father were educators there.  In fact, they've named a high school after her mother, the [Muriel Williams] Battle High School in Columbia High--in Columbia, Missouri is named after my ex-wife's mother.  And she had a very prominent family there, the most prominent black family certainly, in Columbia, Missouri.  And that's who I married.  And we were married a long time, actually had two beautiful children together.  And she lives here in Chicago [Illinois] now.  She's an attorney.  Her name is Carolyn--I'll give her maiden name, Battle-Thomas.  That's the name she uses professionally.  She was born Carolyn, C-A-R-O-L-Y-N, Lya, L-Y-A, Battle.  But she--that's who I married, and we lived in Kansas City [Missouri] together.  But as we were living in Kansas City, we--she said, "Let's go visit my sister in San Francisco."  Well, we did.
Story_ID: 176731
Speaker 1: And I--and I was watching San Francisco [California] television [KGO-TV], and I was twenty-eight years old or whatever it was, and, hey, I'm gonna see if I can get me a job here, you know.  So I sent 'em a tape.  I went back, sent 'em a tape, and they called me back immediately and said, hey, why don't you come out and do an interview with us?  (Laughter) sure.  So I went back out, did an interview with 'em, and they hired me.  And that was it for Kansas City [Missouri].
Speaker 2: So San Francisco, this is 1978, right?
Speaker 1: Seventy-eight [1978], yeah--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --'78 [1978], went to San Francisco.  And, man, what a place.  Beautiful.  I remember once we got the family out.  We lived in Oakland [California] because I was put in charge of the Oakland Bureau.  That was my first job there, first responsibility in San Francisco.  And I, San Francisco was kind of a loose environment (laughter).  It wasn't necessarily good for me.  They wanted--the story, the station I worked at was called, it was KGO.  It's an ABC-owned and operated station.  And I think in the industry, KGO was jokingly referred to as "kickers, guts and orgasms" (laugher) because we would do the craziest stuff.  We were number one.  We were number one with a bullet, but man, we would just do anything on television.  And we would get the most sensational stories we could find and put 'em on television.
Story_ID: 176732
Speaker 1: For ex- for an example?
Speaker 2: Well, I'll tell you the reason I got fired.  I started doing this story.  There was some guy who was taking, he was shooting at interracial couples on the freeway, racists Aryan brother kind of extremist, man, you know, well, which we found out eventually.  But interracial couples were being shot and shot at on the expressway by this person, right.  Now, you know, I mean I've always had like, you know, justice has always been something that I, you know, injustice to my people, I mean I, I'm interested.  I mean I'm curious about that.  So I started doing a story, doing an investigative piece.  And, well, I had a producer there, an executive producer who was also interested.  And we started working the story together, a white guy and myself.  Well, we come to find out that the guy who was doing the shooting, we pretty much nailed it down because we found literature that he was putting out other places, claiming responsibility.  Now, the cops were trying to write it off as not connected.  But this guy--his name was Coy Ray Phelps.  If you Google him, he probably would come 'cause he's probably in prison somewhere now or, but he, but he was shooting at people.  Well, we pretty much found out who he was.  And we were doing a story, and we didn't have very many, I mean we basically put what we knew about the investigation on television.  Well, Coy Ray--well, I get called into the office one day, and they say, "Charles, we got a call from San Francisco police, and we think that we should assign you a bodyguard."  I said, "Why?"  "Well, you might be--there's, some threats have been made in relation to the story that you've been doing."  I said, "Really?"  So, the station, ABC, sends twenty-four hours bodyguards to my house, and I got these guys with guns sitting around my house with my family, my two very small children and my wife there.  And they were, what's going on?  "Well, baby, I mean I--I mean there's this thing," you know, and I--well, two weeks go on with this bodyguard business.  And I'm continuing to do my stories.  And I get called into the news director's office one day, and they say, well, Charles, we're gonna pull the bodyguards.  Okay, so that you know.  I said, "Okay, I guess everything's cool?"  "Yeah, everything's fine."  The very next morning, my wife, who worked in what they called the [San Francisco] Peninsula in San Francisco [California], which is just south of the city, and we lived in Oakland [California].  She has to go over the [San Francisco-Oakland] Bay Bridge to get to--she's driving from our home in the Oakland Hills to the Bay Bridge.  Bam, bam, gun shots or something breaks the windshield of her car.  She calls me or whatever.  I find out about it.  I drive there, and the Oakland Police Department says to me, not knowing anything else, a rock or a bullet hit the windshield.  This is the day after they pulled the guard.  I'm going, holy crap, whoa.  I go to the station immediately and say, "Hey, I gotta have the protection back.  Here's a police report from OPD, a rock or a bullet has hit my car."  The guy says to me, "Well, actually, Charles, we got word from New York [City] that we were spending too much money on the bodyguards.  We can't do that anymore."  What?
Story_ID: 176733
Speaker 1: So they [KGO TV, San Francisco, California] tell you they can't provide--it costs too much.  It's too expensive to provide--
Speaker 2: Yeah, well, I mean I was, I was--I mean I was--I just, rage built up.  And, you know, and I basically had a (laughter), I had a physical altercation with the news director, the guy who basically said this to me.  And I basically disappeared.  I disappeared for, I left after the physical altercation, I left.  And I went back to Oakland [California] and I knew some people in Oakland who were basically, prison gang people.  And (laughter) they basically protected me for a period of several weeks.  And I found out later that their--(laughter) they really weren't protecting me as much as they were using me as bait.  Yeah, because they figured that (laughter) if this guy and his Aryan brother, Church of the Holy Brotherhood as he called it, were coming for me, they'd have 'em where they wanted 'em.  Madness, total madness.  Keep in mind, this is Oakland, late '70s [1970s], you know.  You know, Oakland, Huey's [Huey Newton] still around.
Speaker 1: Yeah, Huey Newton had just been released from prison a--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yeah, you know--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --a year or so before, right?
Speaker 2: The, I think the SLA [Symbionese Liberation Army] had been, you know, around Oakland and Berkeley [California], I mean, you know, they had some seriously radical--
Speaker 1: Jim Jones had just--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Jim Jones [Jonestown, Guyana massacre, 1978] had just done his thing.
Speaker 1: And that happened in '78 [1978], right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, he had just done his thing.  I mean this was a, I don't know, called the Hotel California days.  At any rate, I disappeared.  So several weeks later, the station [KGO TV] came to me and said, "Hey, look, let's work this out."  You know, what happened, in the interim, they arrested the guy who was doing the shooting.  The San Francisco [California] police arrested the guy.
Speaker 1: This was Coy [Ray] Phelps.
Speaker 2: Coy Phelps.  So at that point, the station came back to me, and they said, "Look, let's work this out, you know, this is not good."  And they said, "Look, I'll tell you what.  You did such a good job.  We'll give you a raise, and we're gonna give you a raise retroactively."  In other words, piece of cash if you just forget this (laughter).  I mean I wasn't interested--I knew then that if you sue one of these major companies, you'll never work again.  And I loved what I do.  So, and I still do.  So I didn't, I said, sure, I'll take the cash (laughter).  So I'll take the cash or the retroactive, and continued to work there until an option came up on my contract at which time they told me that I had to leave.
Story_ID: 176734
Speaker 1: Keep in mind that I told you there was another guy who was working with me.  Well, he got fired before I got fired (laughter), and he went to Philadelphia [Pennsylvania].  And he became a news director there.  So as soon as I got fired, I called him up in Philly.  "Hey, man, guess what they [KGO TV] just did to me, same thing they did to you."  He said, "Don't worry about it.  You got a job."  And this is like right after I got--I walked out of the office after I got fired, and I picked up the phone, called my guy to tell him I got fired.  He says, no, you--but you're hired now.  So come to Philly.  So that's how I ended up going from San Francisco [California] to Philly 'cause the guy who was involved with me in this situation went to Philly.  And he took me to Philly.
Story_ID: 176735
Speaker 1: And--
Speaker 2: Okay. (Simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: I mean that's the CliffNotes section, part of my life in San Francisco [California], but I just, I just did some very weird, strange stories that I don't think had a lot of--San Francisco's sort of a provincial place.  I mean I did a lot of other stories that were very strange.
Speaker 2: Well, just give us--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: I mean I can remember a story I did one time about, I was working in the Oakland [California] Bureau, and I had this lady call me, and she said, my daughter has been kidnapped, and she's kidnapped, and I can't--and I need help in getting her back.  And I said, well, "Yeah, have you filed a police report?"  She said, "No, but I know where she is."  And I said, "Well, why don't you file a police report?"  "Well, they aren't gonna do anything."  I said, 'cause--I said, "Well, what's up?"  And she said, "Well, she's with this guy in Ukiah [California]," which is a small community north of San Francisco in the Mendocino County.  And she says, "I know where she is, and I know the address."  And I said, what is going on?  So she said, "She's being held as a slave."  So I tell my people at San Francisco, "Yeah, it sounds great.  That sounds great, great story, great story."  Well, I get up there, and the guy tells me--I called the person with the phone number she gave me.  And the person answers the phone and says, "Yeah, I got her.  She's mine.  She belongs to me."  I said, come on, slavery's not legal.  He says, "Well, she's a willing person."  And he put her on the phone.  "Yeah, I'm his slave."  And I remember--so I tell my office about it.  They say, "Oh, that sounds like a great story, great story."  This is San Francisco, right.  I couldn't pull that off in Chicago [Illinois] (laughter).  At any rate, I go up there.  We drive to Ukiah, and a guy tells me to meet him at a supermarket.  I get to the supermarket.  This guy is standing there.  He's this little short guy with a beard, looks a little nerdy and he's got this six foot tall woman with him.  And he's got a leash around her neck, and she is in mini-skirt and fish nets and high heels.  Whoa, and, "You George?"  He says, yeah, this is, yeah, I'm George and this Ananka (ph.) or whatever her name was.  I said, "Okay, well.  What--can we talk?"  He says, "Yeah, well, I'd rather talk up at the castle."  I said, okay. "But first I gotta go pick some stuff up here at the store.  We'll be back."  I said, "Do you mind if we take some pictures while you shop?"  "No problem."  So we take pictures of this guy and his six-foot tall woman in fish nets and heels, and they're shopping and everything.  And we're shooting it, right, telling this guy's story.  He takes me back up to the castle.  It's this dilapidated shack up in the woods.  And, you know, this is some bondage and discipline stuff, right, or whatever.  And we shoot it, man, and shoot pictures of the woman, man, you know, hung out--we put that on TV.  Great ratings.  That's San Francisco.  Now, that's the kind of story they wanted.  The, what would happen, we wouldn't do the news of the day, what happened at city hall.  We would do stories about somebody would call to the station and say, "We had a plumber come in and the plumber messed up the house, and I got three feet of water in the basement."  "Really?  Well, let's come out."  So we'd go out, shoot the water in the basement, talk to the homeowner, go track down the plumber.  Why did you screw up this guy's house?  Well, I [stammering]--and that would be the story.  That ain't news, but that's what we did in San Francisco in the late '70s [1970s], early '80s [1980s].  That was what we did.
Speaker 2: That gives me an idea, (laughter) what you're talking about.
Speaker 1: No.
Speaker 2: (Laughter) that gives me a good idea what you're talking about.
Speaker 1: Yeah, and plus, but the thing about it, we got these humongous ratings.  The station [KGO-TV] made money hand over fist.
Story_ID: 176736
Speaker 1: Were, were there any particular stories centered around the black community out of all these strange stories (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Not really.  I mean, you know, stuff like Jim Jones [Jonestown, Guyana massacre, 1978], sensational.  I mean that was a black community story.  Most of those people were black folks that got killed in that.  I mean we, you know, we would do stories about, you know, the Black Panthers getting, you know, harassed by the Oakland [California] police and that whole back and forth.  Huey Newton going to court and coming back.  We didn't do anything about the black community.  But when I went to Philly [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], there I had set piece journalism.  I mean it was classic stuff.  I had to learn (laughter) the profession.  And I kind of think of Philly as my professional home because I learned very--we covered [Philadelphia] City Hall.  We covered economics.  We covered government.  Philly is a straight-ahead news town.  San Francisco [California] was not.  It was a lot of fun living there.  It was a lot of--beautiful place, but not, not necessarily--I mean I didn't have a lot of transferrable skills that I developed in San Francisco.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But Philly, just the opposite.
Speaker 1: This is WCAU [TV]--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: WCAU was a CBS-owned and operated station at the time.  It's now, I think, owned by NBC, but at the time, it was owned by CBS.  We had, I think one of--we had a tremendous reporting staff.  People you see on the network, on network news worked with me at [W]CAU.
Speaker 1: Who were some of the ones?
Speaker 2: Brian Williams, the guy that is the NBC anchor, he was a snot-nosed reporter at WCAU (laughter).  A guy named Bob Orr who I saw this morning on CBS news.  He's a Pentagon--homeland security correspondent for CBS News and has worked alongside me.  Anthony Mason who is a correspondent at CBS worked at CAU.  They just have a tradition of having--a lot of people went through there.  But I think of Philly as being a place where I really learned set-piece news.  I mean Wilson Goode [HM Reverend Dr. W. Wilson Goode, Sr.] was elected the first black mayor of Philadelphia during the time I was there.
Story_ID: 176737
Speaker 1: The MOVE confrontation happened.  I was on the ground, man, when the bullets started.  And before the fire and the bombing and the fire of the MOVE Compound in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania].  I covered that, start to finish, beginning, I mean the pre-MOVE, the MOVE, and then the aftermath for years after that.
Speaker 2: So what do you make of that story, I mean as someone who covered it?  You know, we've heard the story from people whose relatives were in MOVE, people who were in the administration--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Oh, I'm--(unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --even general, the general who was the public safety director that authorized the--
Speaker 1: Police riot, police riot.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Plain and simple, no other way to explain it.  Police out of control.  It became very apparent that the mayor at the time, Wilson Goode [HM Reverend Dr. W. Wilson Goode, Sr.], of the power he inherited, one power he did not inherit was control of the police department.  That remained with quote, unquote "somebody else."  I mean the cops controlled the cops in Philly.  Now, Frank Rizzo [Francis Lazarro "Frank" Rizzo, Sr.] controlled the cops.  He used to be one of 'em.  But Wilson Goode, well, yeah, you can be mayor, but you're not gonna control the police department 'cause they did what they wanted to do, when they wanted to do it, how they wanted to do it.  And it became very apparent--that became apparent, well, that was--to me, I knew that when it happened.  But the investigations certainly bore that fact out, that that's what happened.
Story_ID: 176738
Speaker 1: It [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] was just a fascinating place to, to work.  And I enjoyed Philadelphia.  I mean Philadelphia was the opposite place from San Francisco [California].  I used to call Philadelphia--I mean if San Francisco is the Land of Fruits and Nuts, then Philadelphia was affectionately called the--I called it the "Dough Belt" because everybody around there sat around chewing on a piece of dough, whether it was a slice of pizza, a pretzel or a hoagie, they were into dough in a big way, man.  And, and, but the people were--that was the only place I knew where they could--in Philly, a salutation was, excuse my language, but "fuck you."  These people had more ways to say, fuck you--I mean and Philly was the first place I ever heard anybody do a two-octave fuck-up, "fuck [high note], you [low note]," you know, (laughter), all over town, North Philly, South Philly, Philly suburbs, that's what they say.  But it's an earthy place.  The people are real.  I love Philly.  I mean I could live in Philly any time.  And I think of it as my professional home.  It's where my skills were finished 'cause I left there and I went to ABC News to work as a correspondent.  That was really interesting too 'cause I knew that, I said, man--'cause ABC saw me working in Philly, the people in New York [City, New York] 'cause I used to do pieces for the New Jersey Network which also airs in New York.
Story_ID: 176739
Speaker 1: The step in between, I worked at CAU [WCAU TV, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], but we got into a little salary thing.  And I left, and I went to work for what's called WTAF [TV, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], which was a independent station which usual--which traditionally did only sports and reruns.  But they wanted to open a new department.  So they recruited me to be part of their reporting, to be the weekend anchor person, and to be part of their reporting staff.
Speaker 2: This is the first time that you moved from being a reporter to an anchor, right?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Which I (laughter) wasn't that crazy about, but they, I went there, but I cut a deal with them.  And I said, "Well, look, I'll do that, but I also wanna be an independent producer and do my own stuff."  And they said, no problem, as long as you're here on the weekends and do a little reporting for us during the week.  So the deal worked out for me because BET, Black Entertainment Television, was just coming online.  And they needed contributors, and it was a lot of interests in that MOVE story because the investigation was still continuing.  And I could file a report on developments in the MOVE story every week, and BET would pay me a nice little chunk of change to send them a story every week.  And I also developed a relationship with the New Jersey Network where I could send them stories.  And I had some other clients who I could send news about Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], and what was happening in Philly, in the Philadelphia area, other places and I would be paid.  So I had a company called Thomas Productions. And Thomas Productions stayed up and running for about two years.
Story_ID: 176740
Speaker 1: Well, one of the stories they saw me do, I did a story in New Jersey for New Jersey Network, and it was about the Nicaraguan opposition hiring--I'm sorry, training contras.  Remember the contras, who were against the Nicaraguan government?
Speaker 2: Right, right.
Speaker 1: They were training them in New Jersey, outside Union, New Jersey, which is where they have a lot of Cubans lived there, they were training these people to go to fight in Nicaragua.  And we, they allowed us--they let us come with them, and we had it exclusively, as they did their training.  So you got this military group training inside the United States.  It was weird.  So they saw the piece in New York [City].  They loved it, so ABC came calling and said, wow, this reporter, you know, man, you got some pretty good stuff.  And we like it, you know.  But when ABC called, and I said, yeah, right.  Yeah, ABC's gonna hire me after what happened in San Francisco [California] (laughter).  I said, yeah, I told my lawyer or agent at the time, I said, yeah, good luck for this one.  Well, as it turned out, "What have you done for me lately?"  That's the way it is in the corporate world, and I don't even--they never brought up what happened in San Francisco.  I never brought it up.  ABC News hired me.  They hired me on, they hired myself.  They hired a guy named Ron Claiborne who's still there, the brother who works on the weekend, and they hired Bill O'Reilly who does the thing on FOX.  And Bill O'Reilly quit shortly thereafter because he realized he wasn't gonna get Peter Jennings at--Peter Jennings' job.  What an ego.  But--
Speaker 2: So that's what he was (laughter), he thought he was gonna get?
Speaker 1: He thought he was being hired to replace Peter Jennings.  And when he found out he wasn't, he quit.
Story_ID: 176741
Speaker 1: Can I go back just a little bit (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Sure.
Speaker 1: --to the, one thing you said was intriguing.  You said that Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] completed your professional training, basically, and solidified you, you know--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --as a journalist.  Now, were there any particular mentors there or--(unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: [HM] Acel Moore.
Speaker 1: Okay, Acel--
Speaker 2: You know him?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I mean Acel was, he was an editor at the time, one of the senior writers at the [Philadelphia] Inquirer, and I, you know, I knew where Acel came from and what Acel represented, how Acel played--he was a black man, through and through, but he could be a mass media journalist effectively.  And I said, this is what I have to be.  I have to be true to myself, and I have to bring my experience to the game.  I mean I can't let the mass media define me.  I have to help define the mass media.  And I learned that from him.  There were some other people there that I admired.  I admired a guy named Vernon Odom.  Vernon Odom was a reporter at WPVI in Philadelphia, Channel 6, which is the number one station there.  He's been a reporter there forty years.  I don't know if Vernon still works there or not.  But I used to admire Vernon because Vernon showed, he showed to me what a career is supposed to me because Vernon wasn't out there trying to get the next job, the next job, the next job like I was doing.  Vernon, he did what Booker T. [Washington], "Cast down your bucket, and work this field."  And, man, he became, Vernon, a tremendous success in Philadelphia, always working at the same station, very well respected.  Maybe not the, technically, the best writer-journalist in the world, but he just showed, he showed me what commitment is.  And I think I carried a lot of what Vernon did to Channel 7 when I came here.  I said to myself, I want to do at WLS--this is after I left network, I know I'm getting ahead, but after I left network, when I came to Channel 7, Vernon was a guy that I said, if I can do at Channel 7 what Vernon did in Philly at Channel 6, I'll be fine.  And it's worked out that way.  But let's go back.  Any other mentors in--I think, in her own way, Mary Mason.  I don't know if you're familiar with Mary Mason in Philly.  She was a radio host back in the '80s [1980s].  She was very well connected to the community.  I'm sure she's not on the air anymore.  There was a guy named Harvey Clark who was--are you familiar with Michele Clark?
Speaker 1: Um-hum.
Speaker 2: He is Michele Clark's brother.  And he worked as a reporter at WCAU [TV] in Philly.  He eventually ran for [U.S.] Congress.  I don't think he won, but Harvey was, he was a mentor because Harvey was a strong, black man.  Harvey didn't take no mess from folks in the office, man (laughter).  And I looked at, you know, I said, wow.  But Harvey's still here.  But Harvey would not take anybody's mess.  He was a big guy, and Harvey was--and, again, technically, Harvey wasn't the greatest writer or journalist.  But in terms of how he survived the corporate side of this, he wasn't around here bowing and shucking and jiving and all.  Harvey was Harvey.  Harvey was a strong black man.  And I, and I learned a lot from Harvey.  Man, and Philly was a great place, man.  I had business people there that I knew, a guy named Jimmy Carter.  [Jim] Jimmy Carter was the, he's a guy you could really talk to 'cause Jimmy--here's what Jimmy Carter did.  Jimmy Carter worked at IBM [International Business Machines Corporation] back in the '70s [1970s], late '60s [1960s] and '70s [1970s], brilliant guy, grew up in Caruthersville, Missouri.  I should have put him on a list somewhere, but this guy, in the '70s [1970s], he started, one of the founders of a company called SMS, Shared Medical Systems, a black man.  This company was the first to put medical records on computer files.  This Negro made so much money.  He was living Philadelphia, and my wife's family knew him.  So I got to meet this guy, fascinating guy.  He invented--all this stuff about medical records on computer files, he did it, black man.  Nobody knows it.
Speaker 1: That's interesting.  I've heard another story about somebody that I actually know that's developing a program for medical records too--(unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Shared Medical Systems.  And the company's been, you know, devoured and devoured again and again, but Jimmy Carter is still out there living in Phoenix [Arizona] in Scottsdale [Arizona].  I talked to him not long ago, at least, maybe in the last year certainly.  But kind of sick now, but he's still with us.
Speaker 1: We need to get his information, yeah.
Speaker 2: It's an incredible story.
Story_ID: 176742
Speaker 1: But, yeah, there's a lot of people, man, mentors in Philly [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] that I remember.  What's that brother's--sister's name, worked for the--you know, you had the [Philadelphia] Daily News there, and you had the [Philadelphia] Inquirer, a lot of folks.
Speaker 2: Yeah, it sounds like a real strong community of journalists there.
Speaker 1: They do.
Speaker 2: I know you haven't mentioned people like [HM] Chuck Stone--
Speaker 1: Oh, oh, come on, oh, come on, Chuck Stone, there you go Daily News.  Absolutely, I mean Chuck, again, giving you, telling you how you can do this and be wildly successful, not sacrifice any principles and still do mass media journalism.  I mean Philly, it didn't get any better than that.  I mean they were actually than Chicago [Illinois] because those people in Philly hung around.  I mean, you know, [HM] Clarence Page really doesn't work here.  He works in Washington [D.C.].  Chuck Stone worked in Philly.  [HM] Acel Moore worked in Philly.  Vernon [Odom] worked in Philly.  And the only person here that I've met that could be comparable was [HM] Vernon Jarrett.  That's an interesting story, man, woo.
Story_ID: 176743
Speaker 1: Now, you were, more than likely a member of NABJ [National Association of Black Journalists], right?
Speaker 2: You know, I haven't been as active as I should be, because I've been so busy.  I mean I just--you know, I, sometimes I joke, and, yeah, I'm down with NABJ.  I mean I think it, philosophically, it is what it--what it strives to be, there should be a group like that.  But I jokingly say, you know, I do more black journalism in a week than everybody in this group has done in a year (laughter).  I'm serious, man.  I do a lot.  I mean I work very hard.  And I get up at six [o'clock] in the morning working, man, and I'm working till six, seven [o'clock] at night every day.  And I ain't gonna go to some place to eat chicken wings, you know, at seven o'clock at night and drink scotch.  I ain't gonna do it.  I just don't have the time.  And I'm not, I'm not putting myself above that, but--and I'm there if anybody needs me, and they know that.  But I just can't do the party thing.  I don't party.  I just don't--and a lot of it is social.  And I'm not doing social stuff.  I got a family.  I got grandchildren.  I got a wife.  I just don't do social stuff, and I'm an older guy now, you know.  I go to NABJ.  The last time I went to NABJ, many years ago, man, that was like, somebody's grandpapa walking around there.  Man, the college kids with their resumes, man.  I ain't looking for a job.  And, yeah, I can help, and I mentor quite a few kids.  Oh, man, I got a roster, former interns and young people all over the country that write me constantly.  You know, we talk, and most of 'em are African American, but I, I--going to a cocktail party, Halloween party, Christmas party, I just don't, I can't--
Story_ID: 176744
Speaker 1: Okay, well, what's the Vernon Jordan-Jarrett [HM Vernon Jarrett] story, rather?
Speaker 2: Oh, man, you know, obviously, I'm--I mean I've known Vernon--I knew Vernon.  He worked at, not only--everywhere else, but he worked at Channel 7.  That's where I met him.  And I mean even the brothers in Philly [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] that I talked about with such re--I revere, they revere Vernon (laughter).  Vernon in Chicago [Illinois], but they revere Vernon.  Vernon "the" man.  He is the godfather.  There's no black journalist in this country worth his or her salt who doesn't know the name Vernon Jarrett it, what he did because you gotta understand that Vernon moved from the black press, from the [Chicago] Defender, I think even the Kansas City [The] Call to the [Chicago] Defender on up through the Sun-Times [Chicago Sun-Times] through Channel 7, I mean what a journey?  To go from the black press to the mainstream media.  I mean that's chronicling everything that's happened to me is--in one body, in one mind, in one experience.  So Vernon could say stuff to you, I mean, like you go up to Vernon, "Hey, Vernon, how you doing?"  Vernon look up from what he's doing.  He'd say, "White folks still in charge."  (Laughter) you ever heard that?  Vernon does, "White folks still in charge."  You know, and he'd go right back to what he's doing.  He might be working for white folks, but I don't, you know, but that's Vernon.  But knowing what I knew about Vernon, and I'm a good friend of Vernon's son, Tommy [Thomas Jarrett], who works at Channel 7.  So I had a different kind of access to Vernon.  But when Vernon passed a few years ago, Tommy was very alone, his son was very alone.  And he was at the hospital, and Vernon was not doing well.  And he wanted me to come to be there with him.  And I'm in the room, the hospital room and Vernon Jarrett is there.  And Tommy is there, and the [HM] Reverend Jesse L. Jackson is there.  And Vernon is not conscious anymore.  He's breathing, but he's not conscious.  And we're there for hours, and Vernon is there, and I'm thinking about where he's been, where this life has been in my profession and what he means to me.  And Vernon took his last breath.  And I was there.  And, man, I know what was happening 'cause you know I told you before during this interview that, you know, I'm not deserving of it, but God has covered me.  He has, he has taken me through this experience, you know, the journalism school thing, the--and here I am, black journalist, and I'm the only black journalist in the country, and I'm there.  I mean, you know, that a baton is being passed, and why did he send me there?  Why was I there?
Story_ID: 176745
Speaker 1: All right.  My name is Larry Crowe.  I'm interviewer today with The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Matthew Hickey.  Sir, can you please state your full name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: My name is Charles Homer Thomas, Charles, C-H-A-R-L-E-S, Homer, H-O-M-E-R, Thomas, T-H-O-M-A-S.
Speaker 1: And what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: My date of birth is May 3rd, 1951.
Speaker 1: Where?
Speaker 2: Oh, in St. Louis, Missouri.
Speaker 1: And what is your title and occupation?
Speaker 2: I am a journalist, and currently, my title is political reporter at WLS Television in Chicago, Illinois.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 176746
Speaker 1: Well, we're finishing up an interview we started a couple of days ago.  And we had you at the verge of taking a job as a national reporter with ABC News.  This is 1988, I believe, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, 1988.  I had been working at WTAF-Television [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], and for my own company, Thomas Productions, at the time.  And one of the freelance pieces that I had done was seen in New York City apparently by some of the executives at ABC, at ABC News.  At the time, at ABC News, Roone Arledge was the president.  And I was invited to New York City to sit down with the executives at ABC News, some of the people who would run the news operation as well as Roone Arledge, who was the president at the time.  And things worked out, and I was surprised because I had had some issues at ABC when I worked for the network-owned television station in San Francisco [California].  But apparently, all was forgotten because they liked my work, they liked my worth ethic.  They liked, apparently, they liked my background educationally, and I was hired.  And I think I was thirty-seven years old.  And to me, that was the zenith of my every ambition as a journalist, to work for a network news operation.  That's what you wanna do.  And even though I was doing quite well in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], I was making more money than I had ever made in my life.  I think I made $137,000 in 1988.  And I never thought I'd make that much money working in local television, but the combination of things I was doing afforded me that much.  So ABC, when I was negotiating with them, I told 'em how much I made.  So they basically said, okay, well, we'll pay that, but you're gonna have to drop all that freelance stuff 'cause you work for us now.  Fine.  And I was hired, and I was excited.  And they told me that my assignment would be the Midwest Bureau.  And I assumed that would mean Chicago [Illinois].  But they said, well, we're having some issues in Chicago right now.  And we've moved a lot of our operation to St. Louis, Missouri.
Story_ID: 176747
Speaker 1: How about that?
Speaker 2: That is something.  So your folks--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Isn't that something?  I mean and that was, that was, again God in my life because the previous October, my father [Clarence Edward Thomas] was diagnosed with ALS, Lou Gehrig's Disease as they call it, just three months ahead of this happening.  And this would give me a chance to go back to St. Louis [Missouri] to be with him and my mother [Oneida Marie Franklin Thomas] and my other siblings as they dealt with this horrific disease.  My father, I believe, was seventy-two at the time of his diagnosis.  So he's an older ALS victim.  And he wouldn't have a lot of time.  He deteriorated quickly.  I got back to St. Louis, and, of course, began working in the bureau for ABC.  And I was in and out of town a lot, but I could come back.  And I could see the digression of him.  And I can remember--my father, after he retired, he went fishing every day.  He retired from the post office in the '70s [1970s], late '70s [1970s], but he would go fishing every day.  And one of the things he asked myself and my younger brother to do one day was to go fishing with him.  And he was not really walking very well because of the ALS.  And my daddy would fish for catfish, channel catfish in these lakes around St. Louis.  And so then I didn't really like to fish.  I was always too much of a nervous case to fish.  I couldn't sit still.  But we went 'cause we wanted to be with him.  And he wanted us to be with him.  But I remember my daddy, he--my daddy was about six, 6'2".  I mean in his prime, he was probably about 240 [pounds].  He was a big man.  And a strong man.  And I remember us sitting there fishing and my dad had to go to the washroom, which was up on a hill in a little building.  But he had ALS, and he wasn't moving very well.  So he had to climb up this hill to use the washroom, so I can remember him going up there.  And he didn't make it.  So he, you know, he urinated on himself.  And when he turned around, I could see it in his face, you know, he was embarrassed.  He was, he demoralized, you know.  He knew that in front of his sons, he was not the man that he had always been.  And I used--that just stuck with me for the rest of my life because, you know, because it--I knew at that point, he wasn't gonna be with us that much longer.  And he wasn't.  I mean he was gone--that happened in the spring, April or so.  He was gone by July.
Speaker 2: So just a couple of months after you were--
Speaker 1: Two or three months after that incident.  But he, he just deteriorated so quickly.  I mean he lost all of his muscular function, and all he was doing at the end was just basically there breathing.  He was trapped in his own body as they, as a lot of the ALS patients say.  But it--you know, I was just blessed to be there though, to see him at the end 'cause it does nothing to your mind, this disease.  It just affects your muscles, control, your ability to move, breath.  I mean in the end, everyone is asphyxiated because their lungs no longer function.  And he had let us know he did not want a respirator.  And he didn't, and he died at home which was, really consumed to a large extent the first six months of my being at ABC. I was--I was focusing on this new job, but at the same time I had this other thing going on.  So--
Story_ID: 176748
Speaker 1: So by July, you know, there was really the work in St. Louis [Missouri].  I mean I moved my family there from Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], and we bought a huge house in St. Louis because housing prices are very inexpensive.  So when I got to St. Louis, I was able to move to, I mean I had eight bedrooms, six bathrooms, eight fire places, huge, federal mansion in what they called the Central West End of St. Louis, huge house.  And there were no black folks living (laughter) in this neighborhood.  And it was a gated community.  I mean this is where the corporate giants of the early 20th century lived in St. Louis.  And, but I had a house there.  And people would, from St. Louis, would come by and say, man, you really, you really hit it big.  I mean I wasn't, I didn't think so 'cause I had seen other parts of the world at that point.  But it was, it was just a huge place.
Story_ID: 176749
Speaker 1: He [Thomas' father, Clarence Edward Thomas] passed away shortly after you got there [ABC News, St. Louis, Missouri], but he, he was such a strong personality, did, did he remark about your career at all before he passed?
Speaker 2: Oh, he was very proud of me.  I mean he used to brag about me, as I would find out subsequently (laughter) from talking to some of the other people that he would, he would talk to.  I was, I was his, you know, I was his work of art, man, as were all of his children.  I mean he was proud of all of his children.  And he did one heck of a job raising us.  We had no situations with the law or anything like that, and our--within our family, we all knew the value of work.  We knew we had to pay our own way, and that was just ingrained in us as well as saving and preparing for the future.  He made sure that was, those were values that all of us had, as well as family.  You know, real responsibility to your children.  I mean we learned that from him, first and foremost because that's what he always had for us.  And I've told you, you know, how the, you know, the social values that he instilled in me, that it just wasn't about me.  It was about a people, about the struggle, and he did it in a very different way.  He wasn't preachy.  He wasn't directing me to a lot of books.  He was just trying to--he took more of a micro approach to being a black man in America.  I mean remember my father saying to me, he said, "Take the white man's job, but don't take his bullshit."  That was his, that was his language.  That's how he said it to me.  He said, "Don't get caught up in his bullshit."  That was what he said.  Now, I remember that.  "But take his job and take his money, but don't get caught up in his values and his bullshit, and the stuff that happens in the world."  And I don't think he meant it as a racist comment.  He just meant it as, don't get caught up in--don't lose your, don't lose your way.  Don't lose your values for some corporate value.  Don't lose your personal value.  You know what I taught you about right and wrong.  So don't go out there because somebody on your job tells you to do something wrong, you just automatically do it.  You know what's right and what's wrong, and you always draw the line with people in your corporate office.   And I followed that, I followed that edict to the letter.  And you know what?  It has benefited me because to this day, I don't think anybody can say anything about my ethics.  I've never taken anything from anybody.  I've never had anybody influence a story that I do.  I think any politician in Chicago [Illinois] will tell you that, that they can't--they don't, (laughter) they don't have a way in with me.  I don't care if it's the mayor, the governor, any politician that I've ever covered here can ever tell you that I've played any kind of game like that with them.  And it comes from my dad.
Story_ID: 176750
Speaker 1: Now, the lay of the land at ABC when you got there.  I'm--my memory is not that good, but I'm trying to think about what was going on.  I know that Max Robinson had left ABC by the time you got there, right?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And he was the first black anchor--anchor on network television--
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: --basically.  He had internal struggles, I know with ABC News in terms of how to present certain stories and that sort of thing.  There's a, but when you got there, I think 'Nightline' was about eight years old at this point, Ted Koppel was--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Sure.
Speaker 1: --this was a hot show in those days, news show.  Everybody was watching 'Nightline' at night.  They were covering South Africa real tough, I think, when you were there.  The student protests, you know, led by Steve Biko and all that was going on, and Bishop [Desmond] Tutu was on a lot, and other, you know, other figures, key figures in South Africa, you know, De Klerk [F.W. de Klerk] even was on.  And, you know, the national issues were being played out on 'Nightline.'  The, also ABC News had Peter--I think Peter Jennings was the only anchor at that point.
Speaker 2: He was the principal anchor, yes.
Speaker 1: (Unclear) (simultaneous) yeah, yeah.  So, at any rate, so, just, you know, what was it like?
Speaker 2: ABC News was--it had this real Ivy League tent, tilt there.  You would see them hire people from Ivy League schools, not just on the air, but producers.  And they would sort of look for that pedigree when they would hire people.  I came from Missouri, the University of Missouri [Columbia, Missouri], which is a prestigious journalism school.  It's the first journalism school in the world.  And there was always this kind of competitive thing between those of us who went to Missouri, a state school out in the Midwest competing with these Ivy Leaguers.  And I would put my credential up against anybody's, and they respect what a Missouri degree is, believe me.  So it sort of put me on a par, but then on a par educationally, but socially, no, 'cause you went to the state school out in the Midwest.  I mean you weren't a Princeton [University, Princeton, New Jersey] guy, 'cause you look at all the guys who were--at ABC News, they have what they call the rim.  And that's where the big-time producers sat.  And these guys all had these Princeton, Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts], Yale [University, New Haven, Connecticut] degrees.  And that's where they would sit, and they would basically lord over the correspondents in the field.  And they would basically rewrite your stories.  When you submitted your story, one of these guys on the rim would basically rewrite.  I'm not, I'm not mad at 'em.  I'll tell you why, because I would write a story.  And it would be a minute and forty-five seconds long.  I'd shoot it up to the rim, 'cause we had those old trash eighty, Radio Shack computers back in those days.  I don't know if you remember that.  But I'd shoot it up there, and the guy would call me back.  And we'd walk through the story.  And he would get my story down to a minute fifteen, minute twenty.  He'd cut it.  But it said the same thing I said in a minute forty-five.  I said, oh, go on with your Princeton, bad self, you know.  You just, you took twenty-five seconds out of my piece, twenty-five seconds of air out of my story, and it still says the same thing.  I'm learning to write.  I'm learning to be a better writer by dealing with these guys.  And it paid off in the, it has paid off in the long term.  I can write today in a minute thirty, what it takes somebody else a minute forty-five, two minutes to write.  But that--and I learned it there.  But going back to the other thing about who got promoted, you'd sit around and go, whoa, that guy, that guy's not that good.  What's he--ah, but he's a Yaley [ph.], you know, or he went to Princeton.  Like, I don't care.  This is about what we're producing, but you, you ran into that every day.
Story_ID: 176751
Speaker 1: I remember--but I never had--they always respected my work at ABC.  I never had, see what would happen at ABC is, is if you made a mistake in a story or a story didn't come off or you missed a deadline, you disappeared.  As a correspondent in those days, you disappeared for three, four, six months.  You just didn't, you didn't get on any show, any show.  '[ABC] World News [Tonight],' if you're blacklisted like that or behind the eight ball, if you will, you just didn't show up again.  That didn't happen to me very much.  I mean I got on the air fairly regularly.  They respected my work, and I was very cooperative, again, with those guys on the rim in terms of learning how to do it.  But I could see, in the long term, I could see in the long term that they were not, they were giving the good stuff to these Ivy League pets, not only on-the-air people, but producers.  And I also saw--I didn't see any black folks ahead of me, upfront, who were getting the good stuff.  I didn't see that.  And I saw that the higher up you went in this hierarchy, the whiter the people were.  I saw that.
Speaker 2: Who were some of the other black people at ABC?
Speaker 1: Good ones, man.  [HM] Carole Simpson was there at the time.  George Strait was there at the time.  I can't name you too many more because they weren't there.  Ron Claiborne who is still working there.  He was hired basically the same day I was hired.  And Ron's still there, and he's a weekend, a morning anchor at ABC News.  There were some good producers there though too, Callie--oh, man, I bet you all have put--have [HM] Callie [Crossley] here at The HistoryMakers.  Oh, man, Callie--she worked out of Boston [Massachusetts].
Speaker 2: I think I know who you're talking about, but I can't--
Speaker 1: You think you know who I'm talking about.
Speaker 2: I--we interviewed Carole Simpson, we did interview her.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And we interviewed another (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Callie, what's Callie Crosby [sic, HM Callie Crossley], Callie, Callie--what is Callie's last name?  I can't remember--
Speaker 2: I think I know who you're talking about.
Speaker 1: --her last name.  The other producer there, executive producer, a guy who went about as far--at that time, at ABC News, as you could go, Ray Nunn.  Now, I don't know where Ray is now, but Ray had gone about as far as you could go in the ABC hierarchy at the time.  He was an executive producer.  Ray went to Yale [University, New Haven, Connecticut] (laughter).
Speaker 2: Well, what's ironic though, what you're saying is that the anchor himself, Peter Jennings, was a high school dropout from Canada.
Speaker 1: I--(unclear) thank you--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --thank you. So--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: No (unclear) the man.  I'm not saying that he didn't know what he was doing.  But he--
Speaker 1: Yeah, but for them to--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --he didn't have the credentials--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --to start latching on to all that.  You know, and then Peter, Peter was a, Peter was an operator.  I'm not gonna, you know, get in--I mean there were all kind of things said around the newsroom.  Peter, Peter was, if you had, if you were in Peter's good graces, then you were gonna be fine, even without your degree.  But a lot of the people who ended up in Peter's good graces happened to be very attractive young women.  (Laughter).
Speaker 2: It's a coincidence--
Speaker 1: In fact, in fact, one of the inside jokes, and I, talk about Peter Jennings after he's gone.  I mean that's--Charles, you should be ashamed of yourself.  But, one of the reasons that a lot of young, white, male wannabe's would go to ABC as opposed to CBS or NBC is because they thought that maybe Peter would get caught up in some kind of scandal or maybe some jealous husband would gun Peter down.  And they would have a shot at the job.  That, I--this is (laughter).  Anybody who was at ABC at the time Peter was there will tell you this.  Now, I think Peter was saved late in his career.  And, of course, he became ill, and he had to deal with some stuff.  But at that point, in the '80s [1980s], man, Peter was--Peter had quite a--it's quite a reputation about Peter Jennings.  But anyway, I was there, and I tell you, man, I always had, I always had discernment in terms of where prof--where I was professionally and what was going on.  And I was, and I could see stuff, stuff that always wasn't gonna benefit me, but I could see it.  I wouldn't get mad about it.  I was just seeing it, and I saw that there weren't any black folks doing that much at ABC.  I mean George Strait was a White House correspondent.  He was a medical--George Strait, I think his beat became the medical beat.  And Carole Simpson was a weekend anchor.  And that was pretty much--and then there was me.  And I was a Midwest correspondent out of Chicago [Illinois] and St. Louis [Missouri], 'cause that's interesting.  Even though I was based in St. Louis, I was taking Southwest Airlines and TWA [Trans World Airlines, later acquired by American Airlines] to Chicago like a taxi, 'cause I mean you had to.  Chicago's the center of the Midwest.
Story_ID: 176752
Speaker 1: The reason they [ABC News] set up a bureau in St. Louis [Missouri] is because they could use nonunion technical crews in St. Louis where they couldn't use 'em in Chicago [Illinois].
Speaker 2: That's right.  (Unclear)--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: So they moved the operation, enough of the operation to St. Louis so that they could use these cheaper technical people.  But that's another story all unto itself.  You need to do a HistoryMaker about ABC News to do that, but that's why I was in St. Louis.  And that's why they moved so much of the operation down there. But they did, in 1989, I think they were under some question about, "How come y'all don't have more black people working here?"  I think people were asking ABC News that because they really didn't.  So what they did, they decided they were gonna do a revolutionary program called 'Black in White America.'  And this program would take a look at the status of black people in America in 1989.  And the principal correspondents on the piece would be [HM] Carole Simpson, George Strait and Charles Thomas.  And I remember my role, my part of the piece was to live in a Chicago housing project and basically tell the story, having lived there.  And I lived in a CHA [Chicago Housing Authority] development at, around 61st [Street] and Wabash [Avenue], with a family, and basically, day-to-day.  And I interviewed members of the family and we talked, and I told the story--told their story.  And it was a great program.  It, the executive producer on the program was Ray Nunn.  Callie, I can't--why don't I remember her name?  Is it Crosby maybe.  I think it's Crosby [sic, HM Callie Crossley].  She was one of the producers, field producers.  I think she worked with Carol.  A brother named Anthony Mason, not Anthony Mason.  Was it--yeah, it was, Mason is his last name.  He produced for George, and you know the sister that did mine, she actually grew up in St. Louis.  I can't remember her name, but anyway, the document is out there, 'Black in White America.'  You probably can get a tape of it somewhere if you ever wanted to watch it.  But we did this show, and it, and I think we did the broadcast, an hour-long documentary from nine [o'clock] to ten [o'clock], at least in the Midwest, ten [o'clock] to eleven [o'clock] on the East Coast.  And we did 'Nightline,' after it.  All of us were in the studio talking to Ted [Koppel] about our experiences, and what this program meant.  It was, it had to be the highlight of what I did at ABC News.  But, you know, I never watched the program.  I still--till this day, twenty-four years later, I never watched-twenty-five years later now, I never watched the show.
Speaker 2: Okay,--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: 'Cause it's just something I never did.  I, to do it was so exhausting, I didn't even--I might watch it at one point in the future.  And I heard it was good.  I won awards, but I'm not that kind of guy.  I'm not into awards and I'm not into, you know, seeing what a great job I did.  I've never done that.
Speaker 2: So that means too that you didn't--now, you didn't see the other segments, right, 'cause you weren't in those.  But you know the one that you were in, but all the footage you shot, didn't necessarily make the show.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I wrote it.  I wrote it--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --so I knew what was in my segment.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And I kind of knew what was in Carole's segments and in George's segment because we talked a lot about what we were doing.  I think George's segment had to do with the Tuskegee Airmen.  He told that story, and I think that Carole did a story about self-image, with dolls and such and who chose the black doll and who chose the white doll.
Speaker 2: The Kenneth Clark--
Speaker 1: Yeah, the Kenneth [and Mamie] Clark experiment.  That actually had been done by CBS in a White Paper [sic, 'NBC White Paper'] some time, decades earlier.  I was always a little shaky about that 'cause I said, hey, I've seen this before.  Charles Kuralt or somebody did this--
Speaker 2: That's right--
Speaker 1: --a long time ago.  But, you know, she did it.  And she did it well.  And the story needed to be told again 'cause I think CBS did it in the '60s [1960s].  She did it in the '80s [1980s], and you know what?  There wasn't that much difference in terms of what she found, which I thought was something that needed to be documented.
Story_ID: 176753
Speaker 1: And I was always a great admirer of Carole [HM Carole Simpson] because Carole would always--I mean I can, I like to think of myself as being bilingual as far as being--I can speak to a brother in the projects at 61st [Street] and Wabash [Avenue, Chicago, Illinois].  I can speak the same way.  I mean I can communicate.  But I can also, I can speak to the masses in the Midwest on Channel 7 or ABC News.  But I remember I was living in those projects, and I was (laughter), and I was, "Hey, what up?" you know, "hey, what's happening?"  "You know, man," that whole bit.  I was doing that every day.  So we were having a production meeting in New York [City], (laughter) and I kind of lapsed into what I was doing every day.  And Carole Simpson looked at--'cause I said something like, "Yeah, you gotta give him his props, man, you know."  And she looked at me, she said, "What did you just say?"  And I said, I said, I tried to clean it up, "I had to give him his props."  You meant propers (laughter).  But that's how Carole was, is, you know, she was, you know, she was just a person that always wanted you to play it straight.  There's no use in going back to that.  If you've gotten to this point, Charles, don't go back there because you don't need to.
Story_ID: 176754
Speaker 1: [HM] Carole Simpson, and--yeah, we interviewed her at Emory--not Emory [University, Atlanta, Georgia], but Emerson [College, Boston, Massachusetts], I guess, in Boston [Massachusetts].  She was there teaching, I think.  But, yeah, she went through a number of struggles, you know, to get to the place that she, you know, to reach the height that she did with ABC News.  She had to endure a lot of harassment and, you know, once her desk was set on fire.  And, you know, so she's, you know, interesting.  So this is--I'm sure I saw this when it came out 'cause I would see everything like that, if it came--(unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: No, we, it was a landmark program ['Black in White America'].  It was landmark for the network too because they were--you know, I don't know if they've done anything like that since.  But at the time, I mean, it was like, okay, we see what you mean.  Let's do this.  Let's try this.  Let's see what these people can do.  And, you know, we did it.  And I--ABC, I think, still lags behind the other networks.  I mean I think CBS is still the--they're still the gold standard in terms of diversity.  Do you look at their show at all?  You ever watch them in the morning?
Speaker 1: Yes, right.
Speaker 2: Beautiful program.
Speaker 1: Charlie Rose and Gayle [King] and--
Speaker 2: Oh, I mean, you know, man, that's what should be.  Unfortunately, their ratings are not happening.  But, man, I look at that program, and I look at, you know, the correspondents they have, the depth of their experience, the diversity, and the fact that they're not doing this pop nonsense.  I mean when they do an entertainer, they do an entertainer who is, you know, a proven commodity.  They're not doing Justin Bieber, you know, or when they have somebody come in.
Speaker 1: And they're not interviewing people that are on shows that they're, you know, on their network--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --just for the sake of interviewing 'em, to promote the show.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Not as much as the others.
Speaker 2: No, well, they'll promote '60 Minutes'--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --but they're not promoting 'Dancing with the Stars.'  Man, I can't stand--I find ABC's program unwatchable, that bubble gum stuff, circus, man, you know.
Speaker 1: So in those days though, ABC seemed to have a bit more integrity.  I mean people liked, you know, Ted Koppel's 'Nightline' and--
Speaker 2: Well, Ted Koppel is no longer there.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I know.  But when you were there, you know, in those days--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yeah, we, yeah, we were--and I thought that when I was there, it was sort of the end of an era, so to speak.  I mean there wasn't much longer after that, that things really began to go in a different direction, at least for ABC.  CBS has been very consistent.  I don't know how they afford it, but they seem to be consistent.  I mean what they were doing at ABC with people like myself, at that--and I don't think I--I'll tell you why I left or how I left.  But what was happening, they would hire correspondents like myself from the local stations.  And they would pay 'em, you know, and they didn't, they weren't making as much as me 'cause I had a little bit more, some other stuff happening when I got hired.  And, plus, I think they wanted me for other reasons.  But they'll hire somebody, give 'em a hundred thousand dollars.  Man, whoa, wow, a lot of money.  This is in the late '80s [1980s], '90s [1990s].  Wow, I make a hundred thousand dollars.  But then by the time they got that second contract, they might give it to 'em, but that third contract, where they were gonna start making multiples of a hundred grand a year, they would dispose of you and get them somebody (laughter), get them somebody who worked like crazy for, you know, the hundred thousand again.  And they kept doing that.  And they've driven down the quality of correspondents at ABC.  CBS, man, those guys, John Blackstone (laughter), those guys have been there forever, I mean, so they gotta be making--Bill Whitaker, you know.  Those guys, they've been there forever.  Man, they, so they gotta be making good money, and they've got the experience and the depth.
Speaker 1: Yeah, they do have the oldest people--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: I mean at one time '60 Minutes,' it was with Mike Wallace and Morley Safer and those.  I can't think of an older crew of people still working.
Speaker 2: Yeah, they had Harold Dow, man.  What a loss that was, what a loss, man.  What a wonderful--what a wonderful, wonderful, wonderful journalist, man.
Speaker 1: Yeah, Harold Dow, yeah.  I remember him. Yeah.
Story_ID: 176755
Speaker 1: So, what were some of the, the stories that you covered for ABC News as Midwest correspondent?
Speaker 2: Oh, man, I covered, well, I mean I covered the Midwest, but the big stories that would be memorable, I think that the plane--it was a plane crash in Sioux City, Iowa, I think a United 232, I think that was the number of the flight, you know.  And they had video when the first plane crashed.  They had video of the plane actually hitting the ground.  And I was in St. Louis [Missouri] at the time, and they told me to get a Learjet and go there immediately.  And I remember giving my credit card to people in St. Louis to get a Learjet to go to Iowa immediately to be one of the first correspondents on the ground when, after this horrific plane crash.  So we, you know, we covered that for, you know, two weeks and the aftermath and were there.  And that was a big story.  Another big story was the, I was sent to London [England] for bureau duty, I guess in 1990 maybe.  And I was sent from London.  That was just basically a staging area, went to--went from there to Frankfurt [Germany] to be sent to what was then Czechoslovakia, Prague [Czech Republic] and Bratislava [Slovakia] to cover the, what they call the springtime revolution [sic, Velvet Revolution] or whatever it was with Vaclav Havel--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --when the Soviet Union was breaking apart.  And Czechoslovakia was one of the focal points because they were doing their revolution nonviolently, and that country, Czechoslovakia was splitting apart from the Czech side where the Bohemians and the Slovak side where the Slovakians lived.  And, you know, I got, I ended up spending several weeks in Bratislava which was in Slovakia.  And this was a place where they were really pretty cool with Communism (laughter).  They weren't so keen about separating from the Soviet sphere.  But, of course, the Soviets at that point wanted no part anymore of these little satellite countries.  So I was there and got some serious lessons in life while I was there because, number one, I saw how destitute and poor and spiritless these people who had been living in this Soviet system had become.  I mean thoroughly dispirited.  I mean you go in a restaurant at night, and they had nothing to eat.  Or they would say, every table is reserved and the place would be empty.  And, I go, well, what's up?  So, you know, the person who was sort of our guide pulled us, said, "Well, you know.  What happens is, the government sends the food to the restaurant and then the people who work in the restaurant steal the food.  And they don't wanna work anyway to serve anybody.  So they basically say every table's reserved, and nothing happens.  "Oh, so what are we supposed to eat?"  The guy says, "Well, I'll take you somewhere where I know they aren't into that game."  "Okay."  So, you know, we would see stuff like that.  We would also see, like I remember seeing a factory 'cause I--well, I would walk around Bratislava, the capital of Slovakia, and people would see my Nike's.  And they would, man, they'd wanna get my Nike's off my feet.  They were offering all kinds of things to get my Nike's.  Whoa, man, so okay, "But no, I'm not selling my Nike's."  And then we went by a factory, and, man, behind this factory, there was a pile of gym shoes that was twice as tall as the building.  I said, well, they got a lot of gym shoes here.  Well, nobody wanted 'em 'cause they were poorly made and, but what would happen is that this was a government gym-shoe factory.  And every day, people would come to the factory, the workers, paid for by the government.  And they would make gym shoes.  And they would just make gym shoes, wasn't, didn't have to be a market for the gym shoes, didn't nobody have to want the gym shoes.  They made gym shoes.  So what happened, because nobody wanted to buy them, they would just pile up in the back of the factory (laughter).  And sure enough, that same day, there was this little smoke coming out the factory, and they were making gym shoes that nobody wanted.  But you really got a sense of the worthlessness of how this system had failed.  And I'm not saying free enterprise and capitalism is the greatest thing since sliced bread 'cause we have our problems too.  But that system, purest Communist system, didn't work, didn't work.  It needed some tweaking (laughter).  And you see--you saw things like that.  And you just got a lesson in what, how governments cannot be pure, so to speak, true to one system or another.  You learn that there's gotta be a blend, just like what you see anywhere.  Like in this country, we have a blend.  I mean social security is a socialist concept, but at the same time, MasterCard is a capitalist concept.  I, whatever, I'm getting out of my area of--I'm getting out of my lane now. But, but you saw stuff like that--
Story_ID: 176756
Speaker 1: The other thing that I saw, Bratislava [Slovakia] or Slovakia borders Austria.  And we would work all week in Bratislava, and at the end of the work day, Friday, we would get in a car.  And we would travel thirty miles to the Austrian border and a few more miles and be in Vienna [Austria].  Man, every weekend, it was like going from Kansas to Oz (laughter) 'cause you--it's like everything was in color once we got to Vienna.  Man, you'd go, you'd go there.  Man, they'd have all this fine chocolate and pastries and food and we're coming out of this, having been in Bratislava, Slovakia for a week, man, we couldn't wait to get out of there.  And we go there, man, and we spend the weekend in Vienna.  But I, but it was something very ugly about this.  One of my producers was Jewish, and he had a very obvious, Jewish name, can't remember--Schneider (ph.) or something like that.  And, man, every weekend, something would happen where these Austrians, who were extraordinarily anti-Semitic, would just do something so insulting to this guy, you know.  Like, we--one time we get to the hotel in Vienna.  They had everybody else's room, but they don't have his.  Come on, made the reservation, same time, same day, you know, we--in fact, you know, ABC made the reservations.  How come you don't have his room?  Well, obviously, they were messing with him.  So once the rest of us would say, well, we ain't staying here either until you get him a room.  You know, and they'd get the manager to come down and then suddenly, you know, something would be--everything would be all right.  Stuff like that would happen to him consistently.  And he had a--and any time his credit card would be shown, and it's obvious, Jewish, this was at the time, around the same time that Kurt Waldheim had become the president of Austria pr- prime minister or whatever they called him.  And Kurt Waldheim, there was a revelation that he had been an SS [Schutzstaffel] guy.  And, man, they elected this cat in Austria, to be their leader, despite his SS ties.  And you just learned a lot about anti-Semitism and what it really was--is, in the world, and it gave me a whole new appreciation for the struggles of people around the world.  You know, we have our struggle, we have our holocaust, black people do in this country.  And it was one of the worst this planet--that's ever visited this planet.  Don't get me wrong.  But other people have theirs.  And when we go out to the world stage, globally, and we start talking about our issues, man, somebody in Rwanda, who was in that genocide, they're gonna look at us and say, hey, man, you know, yeah, you had yours, but I got mine that's happening right now.  Or you can go to a Palestinian who's living in a camp in the Gaza, and we could talk about our struggle till we turned another color.  And they're not gonna listen.  They're not gonna hear us because they're dealing too much with what's happening right now.  And you have to figure that out if you're an African American, if you have a black person, if we have our history.  We have to understand our history.  We have to appreciate our history, and we have to understand it's where we are.  But when we go out on that world stage, the rest of the world isn't always gonna be listening to us.  They aren't gonna be hearing us.  So we gotta check the baggage when we go out there in the world because there're other people who are, who have had and are living and are enduring their holocaust today or their middle passage.
Speaker 2: Yeah, well, this had to be strange for you in a sense to be in a place where black folks were actually treated better than Jews--
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, exactly.
Speaker 2: --in a paradoxes of racism.  I know we often talk here about how Caribbean black people and Africans are treated better than African Americans, you know, by--and they'll even say that.  They don't encounter the same kind of hate that our native African Americans (laughter) encounter from (unclear) white people.  But, so, this man, by just virtue of his Jewish name, they had already identified him, pre-identified him to discriminate against before he even arrived?
Speaker 1: Yeah, absolutely.  They--and the thing about it is that they would do it without any sense of social consequence.  I mean they, I mean, whoa, I mean I couldn't go into--there could be a racist clerk in a Hyatt Hotel in Detroit [Michigan] or whatever, and that person could be a virulent racist.  I could call that person out.  And I could say, "Hey, man, you got--just hold on a second.  Is there a supervisor here?"  You know, what's going on?  In that situation, it was like everybody was anti-Semitic, and it was an accepted way to do business.  You know, this was 1990 or thereabouts, and I don't know what's going on in Vienna today.  I can't say that.  But I know then, it was quite a lesson for me, and I've always appreciated since then the, the Elie Wiesels of the world--did I say his name right?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) okay, who say never again, never again, and because it is a very ugly thing that's out there in the world.  And it, and it as racism in this country needs to be stamped out, in Europe, in particularly, it needs to be stamped out in certain countries.  And--
Speaker 2: Yeah, Vienna is where [Adolf] Hitler spent his youth, you know, his young manhood.
Speaker 1: Well, I understand it's still around in Poland, in Russia, in France, my goodness, you still hear, read, read a lot of stories about things that are happening even now, desecrations and such.
Speaker 2: That's interesting.
Story_ID: 176757
Speaker 1: So, you were there--so you spent like two weeks in Slovakia?
Speaker 2: Oh, I spent more than that.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I mean we were there several weeks.  You know, it began--it was bureau duty.  I can remember being sent there and not, really just, really dispatched out of St. Louis [Missouri], not with a lot of luggage or anything, going to London [England] to do bureau duty, then ending up in Frankfurt [Germany], then ending up in Prague [Czech Republic] and then in Bratislava [Slovakia].  You're there for several weeks.  You've told your wife and kids when you left home that you were gonna be gone for maybe a week, and you end up going for a couple of months.  But that's the life of a network correspondent which, you know, which for me, I think it wasn't for me because at the time, I think my children were--they were born in '75 [1975] and '77 [1977].  So they were, and then by 1990, they were teenagers.  And they were thinking about--they were in high school.  And I was out chasing my dream or living the dream, if you will.  And I had these two high school kids.  And I know I had signed a three-year contract with ABC, which expired in, I guess 1991, in January of 1991 or, yeah, thereabouts.  And they offered me a new deal to continue as the Midwest correspondent, and I felt, sure.  I mean they liked my work 'cause they wouldn't have extended me a new contract.  And they would tell me they liked my work.  And I was growing, I was learning.  I was seeing the world.  Keep in mind, I had traveled as a--even though I was a Midwest correspondent, man, I was in California.  I was in--I was all, every state, every state, doing something, some kind of story because just because you were based in the Midwest, didn't really confine you.  If your story took you to Florida, then you went to Florida.  If your story took you to Mississippi, you went to Mississippi, Texas, you name it, all over the country, New York City [New York].  I would spend a lot of time there because that's where the national headquarters were, and, you know, you would end up going there.
Story_ID: 176758
Speaker 1: But they liked my work, and I resigned my contract in that January, signed on for another three years at ABC News in 1991. But the following month, right after I signed the contract, word came down that the St. Louis [Missouri] Bureau, where you are, where you are based is gonna close which meant--I said, oh, that means I'm gonna have to work all the time in Chicago [Illinois].  "No, Charles, we're going to reposition you in Los Angeles [California]."  "Oh, really?"  "Yeah, we want you to be a West Coast correspondent."  "Hum, wow."  "You know, go out there and look around, and we'll help you make the transition.  You know, we have a housing department and all that.  And we'll help you," well, they were gonna help you to a certain extent.  (Laughter) they're gonna move you, move me and my family.  I had two kids in high school or one in high school and one about to go to high school.  I'm like, wow, that's gonna be difficult on them.  And my wife was a little leery, but I went out or we went out to look at houses.  And, man, this stuff out here is expensive.  We're living like royalty in St. Louis with eight-bedroom, federal mansion in the wealthiest part of the city [Central West End, St. Louis, Missouri].  In L.A. [Los Angeles, California], man, we're looking at these little houses in Studio City [Los Angeles, California] and the different parts of Los Angeles that were like, whoa, we gotta live here?  And, (unclear).  So eventually, we saw a house in Pasadena [California], and it was an old English Tudor that looked a lot like the first house my wife and I had ever bought in Kansas City [Missouri], many years earlier.  And it was cute, old English Tudor, nice, well-manicured neighborhood.  It was $625,000.  Oh, my gosh.  How am I gonna afford that?  Well, she says, well my wife says, "Well, I have to go back to work," and a lot of other stuff.  And the network promised, and they were gonna make good on an offer to "help."  They weren't gonna pay, but they're gonna help.  Pasadena public schools suck.  I mean they're horrible, at the time.  I don't know about today (laughter).  But they were horrible.  We gonna have to go to private school.  [Growl].  Man, it wouldn't be the first time.  Our kids went to private school in St. Louis, so, you know, we were used to making, paying that nut every month.  So we were just about ready to buy this house in Pasadena when the old guy--it was an old guy who lived next door.  And he said, "Oh, you're wanna be my neighbor, huh?"  And he starts talking to me, and I said, "Yeah, well, you know, this is a nice place, nice neighborhood."  "Sure is, one of the best."  And he says, "Let me, what are your taxes gonna be?"  I said, "Man, the taxes on this place are gonna be $1,400 a month."  They're like $15,000 a year.  Yeah, for the taxes, $15,000 a year, $1,400 a month.  He says, yeah, "Well, I pay $800."  I said, "Really, you pay 800 a month?"  I said, "Yeah, that's a lot."  He says, "No, I pay $800 a year."  I said, "Wait a minute.  Your house, which is virtually identical to mine, you're gonna pay $800 a year in taxes, and I'm gonna pay $15,000 a year in taxes?"  He says, "Yeah, that's that Jarvis-Gann [Amendment, California Proposition 13]."  That was this thing they passed in California back in the '70s [1970s] that--what was it?  They called it the tax, where they froze the taxes for those who were there, and those who moved in would have to pay the higher tax rate.  Yeah, so I said, come on.  Nah, no, no, this is really, you know, we talked.  I said, come on.  We're not gonna go get, jump into this.  And we didn't.
Story_ID: 176759
Speaker 1: We didn't do it.  We said, we can't do this.  And I called the network [ABC Network] and said, "Hey, look, this isn't working out in L.A. [Los Angeles, California]," and they said, "well, but that's where we need you."  Well, at that point, I--when I had worked in the Chicago [Illinois] Bureau, whenever I was there, the guy--this goes back to San Francisco [California], when I had my issue.  The guy who was working on the story with the gunman [Coy Ray Phelps] had become, had left Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], and had become the news director at WLS Television [Chicago, Illinois].  His career had taken him to that point.  And anytime I would see him, when I was in the Chicago Bureau, he would say, "Hey, man, whenever you get tired of this traveling, just let me know.  You can come work for me."  And I said, ah, okay.  You know, but I was a network correspondent.  Why I wanna work for you?  Man, but I was desperate now because I knew that this Los Angeles thing wasn't gonna work.  I went to Tom, I say, "Tom, man, is that offer still standing?"  He says, "Of course."  I said, you know I'm a network correspondent, man.  I make a little more money than your local guys.  "Man, that ain't nothin', man we pay a lot of money here.  We pay more money than the network does.  You--this is Chicago.  This is the largest television station between New York [City] and Los Angeles and the most successful television station between New York and Los Angeles.  This is it, this is hot stuff here.  This is Chicago."  Okay, man, so, you know, I--my agent at that time, started telling the network, look, my guy has got two teenaged kids.  He can't do this.  Is there something else?  "No, we need him in Los Angeles."  "Well, look, LS [WLS-TV] has offered him something.  Can he pursue it?"  "Okay, he'll be in the family," the ABC family.  And they worked it out.  So by October of 1991, I began my career as a general assignment reporter at WLS-Television in Chicago.  And they made good--they actually gave me a raise from what I was making at the network under my new contract.  (Laughter) so how can I, how can I refuse?  I mean I basically landed on my feet.  And that was the last real intersection in my career because I've been at WLS every day since then.  And it also kind of completed my work experience as never having been without a job since I left college [University of Missouri, Columbia, Missouri], never.  I've always been blessed in that way, never to have been unemployed.  I've always been in this industry, always been doing what I wanted to do, and uninterrupted, really.  But I never, never went without a paycheck from somebody in this business.
Story_ID: 176760
Speaker 1: But I, I started then at, at LS [WLS-TV, Chicago, Illinois], and I was working at the beginning as--I worked Tuesday through Saturday, and I was off Sunday and Monday.  And I had to keep the kids, and the wife and kids in St. Louis [Missouri] because they were in high school.  And I didn't wanna disrupt that, at least not for my son, who at the time was a junior in high school.  And he was playing on the basketball team, and, you know, everything else.  And I just didn't see any point in moving him at that point.  My daughter was a little more resilient, and we spent two years sort of prepping her to come to Chicago [Illinois].  And she was, and is, continues to be very interested in the arts.  She's a musician.  She was a painter.  She just loved the arts.  And so we kind of took two years to maneuver her into Chicago Academy for the Arts [Chicago, Illinois], which is a private school here in Chicago where she could do her junior and senior years, which she was really excited about doing that.  So it wasn't a problem.  Plus, her brother had gone off to college by then.  And my kids are very interesting because they had moved in their lifetimes from Kansas City [Missouri] to San Francisco [California] to Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], back to St. Louis.  Every time they moved, my children, my son who is two years older than my daughter, they would have to bond.  They would have to become best friends again because (laughter) they had to meet all these new kids and so they are very close.  So when my son went to college, he went away to Morehouse [College, Atlanta, Georgia] in '91 [1991], I think.  Was it '91 [1991]?  Ninety-three [1993] from--no, yeah, '93 [1993].  She was, she lost her best friend.  He went to college.  So it wasn't a problem for her to go to a new school 'cause as far as she's concerned, everything's happening new anyway, 'cause my guy, my older brother, my best friend, he's gone.  So she came to Chicago and she prospered.  You know, she got used to riding the "L" [elevated train] to school and meeting her other, what is that, right-brained buddies or left-brained buddies, whatever they, whichever one is the artistic side.  And, you know, she's fine, living in an apartment downtown Chicago is cool with her.  And at the time, you know, I basically would do all the--being the new reporter, even though I was a former network correspondent, I had to do the dirty work at LS.  I worked at nights, and I, I had to stand on the bridge during the snowstorm, had to go out and do the dirty murder, and all that.  But I, you know, I didn't mind.  It was, it was covering news.
Story_ID: 176761
Speaker 1: Now, when did you come, become the political reporter?
Speaker 2: Not until--my first day as political reporter, and, first full day as political reporter at WLS[-TV, Chicago, Illinois] was the first, [HM] Barack Obama's first full day as president of the United States [January 21, 2009].
Speaker 1: Okay, so we're not even talking about that yet.  We will--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Oh, that's a long time--
Speaker 1: In 1991, as we were saying off camera, this is the beginning of Richard M. Daley's administration.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: So what were the issues, and--well, what did you--you covered general assignment stuff.  So you were doing a lot of things in the early days.
Speaker 2: A lot of stuff.  I mean I would do the, do stories that certainly were related to the mayor all the time.  But I wasn't the political reporter.  If anything, I was always kind of considered the guy who would be the political reporter if the political reporter wasn't there for whatever reason.  If he was out of town or he was--and the political reporter, actually, when I got there, there were two other guys who covered politics when I got there.  There was a guy named Hugh Hill who was sort of the dean of broadcast political reporters in Chicago [Illinois], and then there was Andy Shaw who was sort of his understudy.  Hugh didn't quit until the late 1990s and then Andy sort of took over full time.
Speaker 1: I remember Andy Shaw as being sort of a nemesis of Harold Washington back in the day, but--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yeah, Andy was a nemesis to a lot of people.  He, he--you know, these guys, you know, they look for constituencies, the reporters, 'cause I ain't gone lie to you.  I got one.  I got a constituency.  My constituency, but they happen to look more like me, you know.  I mean that's where I get my stories from, get my ideas from, get my ideas at church.  People come up to me, hey, you hear about this, hear about that.  I get 'em from the barbershop, get 'em from, you know, where I hang out.  And that's part of, you know, makes me the reporter I am.  And I don't expect to be Andy Shaw.  Now, I--it's really interesting right now to watch Rahm Emanuel because the dynamic has shifted from--or the guys who are getting the stories now are the Jewish guys.  Jay Levine is connected.  It's tribal.  I, I ain't mad at Jay because if that mayor looked like me, I probably would be getting something.  But what's really different about it, and what really is such a major shift is that the Mike Flannery, the Mary Ann Ahern's, the Hugh Hill's of the world dried up.  It dried up for them.  They're not getting much at all.  You gotta watch, and go, oh, okay.
Speaker 1: And coincidentally, Irish in a (unclear) administration--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --they seemed to get--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: All, they getting it all.  They were getting everything.  Back in the days of [Richard] Phelan and [Richard M. Daley], man, they got it all.
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: Phelan, Daley, and who was the governor?  I guess Edgar [Governor Jim Edgar] was the governor, back in those days.  But I don't know what Edgar was giving 'em, but, yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah, Channel 9 had Fahey Flynn, you know.
Speaker 2: Yeah, Fahey, all the Irish--Joel Daly, man, and all those guys, getting everything, man.  Not anymore.
Story_ID: 176762
Speaker 1: Were there any memorable stories in terms of the black community in the early days that you were--I mean there's always something going on.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: But, but--
Speaker 2: Yeah, that's very interesting because the stories that really, I think, developed my brand had really nothing to do with Chicago [Illinois].  In 1992, I had been here maybe a year.  I think the summer of '92 [1992].  Is that when they beat up Rodney King?
Speaker 1: Yeah, I think so, yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah, the summer of '92 [1992].  And because I was so experienced at travel from my days as a correspondent and the subject matter was such, Rodney King getting beat up by some white cops, ABC-7 dispatched me to Los Angeles [California] to cover the Rodney King situation.  Channel 7 dispatched me.  So there being this very large and well-informed African American community here, they were very interested in what I was reporting from Los Angeles.  So a lot of people began to watch and pay attention to what I was doing when I was there.  The, of course, when the trial happened, and the police officers were acquitted, oh, my goodness.  I went to Los Angeles, and I covered the riot, the Rodney King riot.  So again, folks here in Chicago were very interested in what's happening.  "Hey, that's--they got that guy, Charles Thomas, out there."  I don't know who the other stations sent, but they sent me.  So I got a connection with the African American community here, but it also--and keep in mind, I had been around Chicago for six, seven years watching local news because I was working for the network.  But now, I was speaking directly to the Chicago audience, not necessarily to the national audience, but to the Chicago audience, and they knew who I was.  And they knew that I could handle the story as well as of these other reporters that had been foisted upon them from, you know, by the local stations here.  In fact, the comment that I would get is, "Hey, man, you good.  You represent, you represent, you know, you represent good."  You know, that's, that's what people would say to me in their words because they knew I could handle it.  And I could handle it because I had been around this industry for thirty years.  And I was as good a reporter as any other reporter they could put up against me.  And that was one compelling story, the Rodney King verdict and the fact that people tried to burn down Los Angeles in their outrage that these officers could walk.  Not only did I cover the first trial, I covered the second federal trial in Los Angeles. So I went to Los Angeles, basically set up camp there--
Story_ID: 176763
Speaker 1: Now, it's very interesting, what was going on at home.  Well, my daughter, of course, was going to the Chicago [Illinois]--she wasn't at that point.  She was still in St. Louis [Missouri] during the Rodney King situation.  That's another story that we'll get to in a minute.  But my, but my--so I was kind of working between--family's in St. Louis, I'm working in Chicago, but I'm in Los Angeles [California] doing the story.  And I had a lot of relationships with people in Los Angeles from my days at the network.  I mean I knew a lot of the network crews and producers, and, of course, they could support my effort working at Channel 7 because I left ABC News with a great reputation.  I didn't have any bad feelings about anything.  It was a purely personal reason that I left.  So it worked for me.  And that was the most compelling story I did during my first year or two in Chicago.  Now, of course, I would do the murders and the fires and everything else that came up, but the second and most compelling story that I did in Chicago was, again, not a Chicago story.  It was a little bit of a Chicago story, but it was mostly a Los Angeles story.  And that was the O.J. Simpson trial.  The managers at ABC-7 had the foresight, and they saw that that story was going to basically grip this nation.  And that's to the credit of my bosses at Channel 7 'cause I didn't realize at the time that I was sent there, what a story it was gonna be.  But I went to Los Angeles to cover the O.J. Simpson case, not only the murder and the events surrounding just, right after the Nicole [Brown Simpson] was killed, but remember that O.J. flew to Chicago the morning after.  So we had an angle.  So they said, go out there and see what's going on.  So I got on the airplane and went to Los Angeles.
Speaker 2: Said he cut his hand (unclear)--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Yeah, he said he cut his hand on a piece of glass in the hotel at [Chicago] O'Hare [International Airport] or something like that.  So, we had an angle, something to connect our city to the case.  But they said, go out there and just be on it, be on the air all the time saying something about the O.J. Simpson case.  So that was my job.  I went here, came to Los Angeles, and Chicago loved it because you--people just could not get enough of the O.J. Simpson story.  In fact, keep in mind that ABC-7 at the time was the only station that would be on the air at four o'clock in the afternoon.  The others didn't come on, I think, until five [o'clock].  We were on at four [o'clock].  So by the time the trial started or the preliminary hearings and such, we were on the air first with it.  And there wasn't as much at the time, CNN, FOX News--I don't think FOX News was even around then.  MSNBC and all that.  People were thirsting for the first information they could get about the O.J. Simpson case.  And Chicago was one of the thirstiest places.  And I was the only guy there from Chicago.  The other stations, they either didn't have the money or the foresight.  They sent me out there and just kept me out there.  They said, get yourself a--in fact, I even rented an apartment (laughter).  I gave up on hotels and had rented an apartment.  I even moved a piece of exercise equipment to Los Angeles so that when I wasn't working, I could be, you know, working out on a treadmill or whatever because it became my home away from home.  This is '94 [1994] when the O.J. Simpson case broke.  And I covered not only the investigations, but the trial, Johnnie Cochran, Robert Shapiro, F. Lee Bailey, all these--you know, interviews every day with these people.  And people ate this stuff up.
Story_ID: 176764
Speaker 1: [Mark] Fuhrman, the "N" word.  Remember that Judge [Lance] Ito--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: All this stuff.  People loved it.  What a story?  We got to the point where--of course, they had cameras in the courtroom.  So I didn't sit in the courtroom, didn't sit in the courtroom ever.  I sat in a trailer outside the courtroom where the signal from the courtroom was being beamed.  So I knew what kind of video I had every day to tell the story.  Now, we would shoot [Johnnie] Cochran and O.J. [Simpson] and everybody going into the courthouse.  But after that, I would sit in that trailer, and I would file a report--I would file four reports during the course of the news from 4:00 [o'clock] until our news went off at 6:30 that night.  Our reporting was better than what the networks had because we were on the air more than them with it, and I had everything they had because what would happen, ABC would shoot stuff, and they would send it all to this trailer where you could process and get all the video.  So our stories on the O.J. case were better than anybody's.  I mean--and I was basically told that over and over again, and--during the course of that case, and because, quite frankly, you know, racism was the backdrop of that case.  I mean it was--here you got a black man, accused of killing a white woman, and you know all this stuff about that, that goes on there.  And so many of the reports were dripping with racism.  You remember it.  But mine were not because I took the view of the case--I was aware of that pitfall.  And because I was one of the few African American reporters that was covering the case day-to-day, hour-to-hour, or hour-to-hour, day-to-day, maybe one of the only ones really, you know, I, I brought my own life experience there.  I mean I was aware of this whole black man, white woman thing, going on with this case.  So I was, you know, I didn't try to inflame my reports.  And I also didn't try to make Johnnie Cochran into some kind of clown, some kind of Algonquin J. Calhoun.  This guy, what a reputation.  This was the best defense lawyer in Los Angeles [California].  And I made it a point to say that every time and talk about cases that he had already won in his career.  No, this isn't, you didn't hire Al John (ph.)--and the reason that he is the lead attorney on this case is because he's the guy most likely to win it.  And I think people got that by the end of it, but I was very--I was from the beginning telling people, hey, this Johnnie Cochran.  And what he did during those weeks, months in defending that case, what he did for black lawyers, historic, historic.  But that, to me, I think cemented me in the conscious of Chicago [Illinois] television more than any story that I did during the first years I was here.
Speaker 2: So you were out there in the years '94 [1994] through '95 [1995]--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: I was there for the whole thing.  And I even went back and covered the civil trial--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --which, of course, the damages were awarded to the Goldman family [family of Ronald Goldman].  So, yeah, I covered both trials.
Speaker 2: Well, being so close to, do you have an opinion about whether he was guilty or not--I thought I'd ask.
Speaker 1: I--and I'm glad you did because I talk about that a lot (laughter) with people in private.  I think he did it.  I think that, but I don't think--I think the Los Angeles Police Department and in the name of justice had--they screwed the case up.  Yeah, I don't see, yeah, yeah.  I think, I think he did it.
Speaker 2: I think, yeah, I think that's an opinion that's--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: And I think, but I don't think they had--I think they had so adulterated the evidence, and Johnnie Cochran was able to pick it apart, that he walked.  And I think, and this is--it's not the first time that's happened in the United States of America.  But I think that's what happened.  And I think that--and on whether or not the evidence was planted, no.  I don't think all that evidence that they found was planted.  But was some of it planted?  Yes.  And that's why he walked.  You can't--and I think police departments all over the country learned from that.  They learned from that.  I mean they went out there and they did stuff that was clearly out of line.  And was all that evidence planted?  No.  Some of it, yes.  That's what I believe because you asked me what I believe.  And I think that's the reason he got off because I think the jury looked at it and said, hey, you know, garbage in, garbage out.  You can't, this, this evidence is, is adulterated.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I think a lot of people feel that way, that the--he might have done it, but he--they framed him anyway.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Yeah, they framed him anyway, and they didn't have to.
Story_ID: 176765
Speaker 1: But it, it was, it was a moment [O.J. Simpson trial], and I covered many other stories.  You know, this is Chicago [Illinois], big market city with so many things going on.  You know, I can't--you know, people often ask me, "What's the biggest story you ever covered in your career?" And I can't answer.  The best stories that I've covered are those that I have grown from not much and developed into, you know, a story, a good story.  I remember, if I can digress, when I was in Kansas City [Missouri], and I'll keep it short.  But when I was in Kansas City, I remember I'm driving--it was March.  And the snow was melting, and it was really nasty out, you know, and slushy.  And we're riding through skid row in Kansas City.  And the cameraman sees a guy, and he's crawling across the street in this mess.  And he says, look, look, the cameraman.  And I say, "What?"  He says, "Look at that, look at that."  I said, "Well, I see it."  Yeah.  He says, "I gotta get that."  So he gets out and he starts shooting it.  And then by the time I'm out of the car, and I'm looking at it, I see that the guy who's crawling across the street has no legs.  He has no leg beneath his knee and two pants legs are dripping wet, and this guy is crawling, skid row, Kansas City, 1977 or something like that.  And so he's taking a picture and he follows the guy crawling, not helping, but taking pictures.  And the guy is crawling to a door.  And the door is to a bar.  And he follows the guy all the way until he gets in the bar.  The last thing you see are those two wet pants legs dragging into the bar.  The door shuts [sound of closing].  And I go, whoa.  What was that about?  "Hey, man, we gotta go in there."  I said, this is skid row, 1977, Kansas City, Missouri.  Ain't nobody like me going in a skid row bar in a suit and tie, and black man.  This is a white guy who was doing this, by the way.  And so I said, I worked up my nerve, and I went in there.  And, man, everybody went crazy 'cause the cameraman was with me, and he was rolling, cinema verities [sic, cinema verite], you know.  And, man, they're going nuts in there, diving under, get out of here.  Get the (unclear).  And, man, it was chaos.  I said, "Whoa, whoa, whoa.  We just wanted to talk to this guy."  And by then, the guy was sitting on a bar stool, pants legs swinging in the wind below him.  And my guy is shooting, right.  He's one of the best photographers I ever worked with, but that's another question--another story.  But anyway, bam.  So the bartender, so the guy is over there, and he's got a drink and a shot of, and a glass of beer.  And he said--and everybody's telling us to get out.  We're saying, please, can we stay, talk to the guy?  So the guy at the bar, the guy, says, "Why don't you flip for it?" (Laughter) and so the bartender says, "Okay, we'll flip for it (laughter)."  So he gets a quarter out, and he throws it in the air, and it comes up, and he says, call it.  And I said, heads, and it came up heads.  "Okay, I'll talk to him."  So I end up talking to this guy, and to make a very long story short, this guy's an alcoholic, legs froze off in a boxcar in Omaha [Nebraska], ten years ago.  And he tells us a story about being a drunk and a hobo.  And, man, did I write a story.  Okay.
Speaker 2: So is that your--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: That's a story.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: That's how you get a story, not a fire, not a plane crash, not an inauguration, not even O.J. [Simpson].  That's a story, that human story.
Speaker 2: And these are the stories that are around us all the time, that--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --we may not even notice.
Speaker 1: We don't know it.  But when you get one like that, and you take it from that moment to a story about an alcoholic, and what this disease does to people, then you touch somebody.  And I did, and I'm very proud of it.  And I don't need some jury for the Emmy's to tell me that's a great story.  I don't need that.  That's something I never needed in my career.  But I know when I've told a story that, that's going to affect people.
Story_ID: 176766
Speaker 1: Now in the mid-'90s [1990s] for a period of time, Chicago [Illinois] was like it is at the present time, a shooting gallery, '94 [1994], '95 [1995], I think the crime stats [statistics], I mean the shooting stats were off the charts, especially on the South Side and the West Side.
Speaker 2: '92 [1992], '93 [1993].
Speaker 1: Um-hum.
Speaker 2: Yep.  In fact, I was there at the, I think the [Gangster] Disciples, and the Black Disciples were warring in Englewood [Chicago, Illinois] in the early '90s [1990s].  And, man, what we talk about is 'Chi-Raq' today, man, (laughter) that was Chi-World War something, you know.  Man, it was terrible.  That was, it was much worse then, than it is today.  And I covered that, but I covered it in a very, not unholistic way.  I mean murder tonight, murder tomorrow night, you know, I just covered it murder by murder by murder, standing in front of somebody's house, talking to somebody's mama or brother or sister who had just been, just been killed.  But I did so much of that, hundreds of stories I've done like that.  It's the worst thing in the world to have to go up to a family and get the picture of the victim and talk to the mama and--'cause you think about your own children.  Well, you know, I used to not, I used to just do it.  But after I reached a certain point, man, I started thinking about, "Man, what would I do if this happened to me?"  And it became more and more difficult to do, to walk up to people and have that conversation.  And I got to the point where I would say to the cameraman, you sit in the car.  I'm a take care of this on my own, and if they wanna talk to us, then we will.  But it's none of this going up to somebody's house with a camera and the first thing out of my mouth when I--which I learned to do, "I'm sorry about your loss.  Yeah, I really am.  I'm so sorry what happened.  I'm Charles Thomas.  I'm a reporter.  Do you think you could talk to me just a little bit?"  That's how you do it, and if they say, no, "Ma'am, God bless you.  I hope--if there's anything I can do to help, let me know."  I give 'em a card, and I split.  And I don't go back.  Now, back at the office, "Did you get 'em, did you get 'em?"  (Laughter) Come on, you know.
Story_ID: 176767
Speaker 1: We, we were talking off-camera about the political trajectory of the [Richard M.] Daley administration that you witnessed, you know, the entire time you've been a reporter here for WLS [WLS-TV, Chicago, Illinois], vis-a-vis the black community.  Do you have an analysis of what the Daley administration was like for the black community?
Speaker 2: You know, I was here during the, I mean the first Chicago [Illinois] politician I ever interviewed was [HM] Eugene Sawyer, who, of course, was the, sort of the interim mayor between Washington [Harold Washington] and Daley.  And, you know, I immediately sensed the disorganization, as an outsider, of what was going on.  I realized that there wasn't a lot of confidence in Mayor Sawyer, and obviously, in retrospect today, a lot of people are saying, "Well, why not?  Why wasn't there?  He was as capable as any of these other guys."  But there wasn't.  And there was a lot of resentment toward him, and, you know, as an outsider I could sense the disorganization, even then, immediately, particularly, what happened during the election in which Daley and Timothy Evans and Sawyer all ran.  And, of course, Daley won.  And once Daley was mayor, you could sense in the newsrooms, certainly, in the city, the sense of relief.  The mayor is-"We took back [Chicago] City Hall," "we," meaning white folks took back city hall.  You could see it.  It was everywhere, and it was almost as though they were gonna give this guy every chance in the world to consolidate power, the media.  And they did.  There was, I think, you know.  There wasn't--it wasn't all a diabolical scheme.  Part of it, the city's gotta heal.  It's gotta heal.  I think black folks knew that--and a lot of white folks knew that.  The city had to heal.  So that was one motivation for sort of toning down the "mess," if you will.  I mean, was to tone down the mess.  So Daley was getting a pass in that regard.  But there was also this whole idea of, "Whew, the mayor's white again.  Let's give him a chance," and, boy, did I think the newspapers, in particular, because they, I think, were the power center, the editorial, the editorial wherewithal of both newspapers.  I think they gave Richard M. Daley a break between 1989, certainly on through that first election.  I think he ran against [Joseph] Joe Gardner--no, that was Timothy Evans--no, it was Joe Gardner in '91 [1991], right, wasn't it?
Speaker 1: Ninety-four [1994] I think was Gardner.  I think he was in--
Speaker 2: Well, the elections are '91 [1991], '95 [1995]--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Ninety-one [1991], '95 [1995].
Speaker 2: Eight-nine [1989], '91 [1991], '95 [1995].
Speaker 1: Then maybe it was '95 [1995] then--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: It was Gardner in '95 [1995]?
Speaker 1: Yeah, I'm pretty sure--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Who was it in '91 [1991] [sic, Timothy Evans]?
Speaker 1: Gardner was in the mid-'90s [1990s], I know.
Speaker 2: Who was it in '91 [1991]?
Speaker 1: Ninety-one [1991], I know one time Judge Pincham [HM R. Eugene Pincham] ran against Daley, but he didn't have a big--
Speaker 2: I thought it was Gardner, maybe in '91 [1991].  Maybe it wasn't--no, it wasn't Gardner--
Speaker 1: And I know I was--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --it wasn't Gardner in '91 [1991].
Speaker 1: Yeah, I was working for Chicago Alliance.
Speaker 2: Right.  And I was still at the network in '91 [1991].  No, I wasn't 'cause I remember covering Gardner.  It was '95 [1995], but I can't remember who was '91 [1991].  But he got a pass.  He caught a pass.  I mean they--editorially, people were not very hard on him.  Then in '95 [1995], they consolidated control of the Chicago Public Schools [CPS] under the mayor's office.  And the bipartisan or the partisan election was done away with.  And it became nonpartisan.  So there would be no more Democratic primary 'cause keep in mind, that's how Harold won in '83 [1983].  He won the Democratic primary, and then the Democrats had nowhere to go but back to Harold in the general.  That's how he won in '83 [1983], and, of course, he won the same way in '87 [1987].  So not winning--so, but by getting rid of that primary election, that sort of ensured that the incumbent would get at least two shots at it.  And if that incumbent happened to be white that would give him a better chance to be reelected.  I would say '95 [1995] to '99 [1999], there was--the economy was booming, if you remember under the second [President William Jefferson "Bill"] Clinton term in particular.  A lot of people bought houses, a lot of people were working in Chicago.  And I mean people weren't thinking about, you know, hey, if it works, it works.  And black folks felt the same way, and there was certainly no great ground swell of political activity to change things at city hall.  "Hey, I'm trying to buy a house. I gotta go to work in the morning.  I'm not," you know.  It wasn't until I think the ninety--that, I think it was a 2003 election.  I think Mayor Daley by that time won, I think it was 70-some percent of the African American vote.  And he was unquestioned at that point.  I think right after he won the first--he won reelection on the first round, I believe it was 2003, like two weeks later, he tore up Meigs Fields, didn't ask anybody, just bulldozed it.  And I--that was a signal. "Hey, I'm king now.  I don't need to ask you.  I think we would have that land over there--I think Maggie [Daley] thinks that ought to be a nature preserve.  And we have made a decision.  Live with it."  And I think people said, oh, my goodness.  What have we created here?
Story_ID: 176768
Speaker 1: Yeah, we're talking about the political trajectory of the Daley [Richard M. Daley] administration and vis-a-vis the black community.  And I know one, one of the issues that arose was the, who's gonna be police superintendent.  And it seemed obvious to a lot of people that Charles Ramsey was the right candidate.  He was the interim superintendent or a guy who was chosen to replace Matt Rodriguez on a segment of 'Nightline,' that was dealing with violence, youth violence.  He spoke nationally, and people said, wow, this is the man.  But he was not chosen and soon became the police chief of Washington, D.C.
Speaker 2: Because I think at that point, Mayor Daley, because he had been given this pass, and he was allowed to make those kinds of decisions, bad decisions, without any review for his first six to ten years in office, by the time--the press really lost its ability to really make some editorial calls.  They didn't question the mayor. Because they didn't begin his terms in office questioning him, a pattern developed that persisted during his, let's say seventh through or sixth through tenth year in office, that by the time he got to the tenth to thirteen year--or fourteenth year, he was totally in control of everything.  And he would make those kinds of decisions that people didn't really--he wasn't criticized enough for those.  That's one.  The police superintendent situation where he overlooked Charles Ramsey who clearly was the most qualified to go for somebody he could control.  He did the same thing when it came to the Chicago Public Schools [CPS].  He never appointed a professional educator.  He appointed hacks, guys he could control for political reasons.  And this became--this became his style.  The press didn't call him out.  The public didn't know that he was making these kinds of bad decisions.  It's only after he's left office that we realized what horrible decisions these were.  And all the time, his administration kept up this drumbeat, this PR [public relations] drumbeat, where they told us everything was looking good, everything was going well, when, in fact, it was not.
Story_ID: 176769
Speaker 1: Do you remember the Duff scandal?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I mean you get, he--you know, they, he kept--the mayor, Mayor [Richard. M] Daley--and I've talked to him about it many times personally.  He told me one time that, you know, "I never realized until after I was elected mayor that there was, there were rich black people in Chicago [Illinois]."  He said this to me.  He said, "I didn't realize there was such a thriving black middle class."  And, man, this is like, this is the seat of the black middle class in America, not New York [City], Chicago.  This is where our political economic wherewithal has always been.  He'd never heard of the Supreme Life Insurance Company.  He's never heard of the businesses that started here.  He didn't realize the significance of it.  He didn't, and he'll tell you that.  He says he discovered the black middle class.  So he, that's who he began to manipulate or try to manipulate in terms of trying to, well, to basically consolidate his power.  And that wasn't necessarily a bad idea on his part, but that just shows you his naivete when it comes to dealing with the African American community.
Speaker 1: I always heard a rumor that Cecil Partee had something to do with tutoring Mayor Daley to--
Speaker 2: That's a rumor.  I don't think there's any--Cecil Partee certainly never confirmed it before he left us.  But I think it goes back to some of the--some of his naivete about who we are, I mean he could make a deal with certain key components of the black community, and they would look the other way when some of these other deals went down, like the Duff's.  Now, he could have, he should have been called out on that.  But he should have been called out on that by the black business people who didn't get the deal.  Where were they?
Speaker 1: Now--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: They knew who got the deal.
Speaker 1: Minorities deals supposedly given to--(simultaneous) (unclear)--
Speaker 2: Yeah, it was a minority deal.  So how are you letting the Duff's get away with a minority deal when you have a company that could do the same business or you certainly could form a company that could do the same business.  And this guy's doing the business?  You've gotta know that those contracts are out there and who's getting them.  And if you're a black business person, never convince me in a thousand years or in a lifetime (laughter) that African American business people do not know where the minority contracts are in this town.  They had to know who this Duff guy was dealing with or who he was using as a front 'cause black folks hang out, particularly, middle-class black folks hang out together.  So they looked the other way because they were probably getting their little piece of the pie on the end and that's one thing Daley did.  He worked those circles.  Now, Rahm Emanuel, if I fast forward, he ain't doing that.  And I think that's one of his problems that he's not dealing with the black middle class enough.  He's sort of picking and choosing who he wants to be the power in the African American community, and that's not working 'cause the people that Rahm's choosing don't have any wherewithal, don't have anything behind 'em.
Story_ID: 176770
Speaker 1: With all the progress that was made during the Harold Washington years in terms of minority contracts and just opening up the City [of Chicago, Illinois] and making it fair, a lot of people say that, that if Harold Washington didn't do anything, he did make the city fair for a couple of years, I mean or set some policies in place that opened up the playing field.
Speaker 2: You know what happened, man, I--you know, and I've written essays about this or an essay about this, that the Harold Washington years were seminal to not only what happened in black Chicago [Illinois], but what happened to black people all over this country.  If you look at the 19--Harold's first term, 1983 to 1987, of course, he couldn't even begin his second term really, but those four years, look at what happened in this city culturally and businesswise for black folks.  Oprah [Winfrey] came to this city.  Michael Jordan became the first international, global team sports star in this city during that first Washington term.  Even guys like Tom Joyner began his act, which basically redefined radio, the whole industry, mid-'80s [1980s], right in the pocket, Harold.  There was this other guy who came to Chicago from New York [City], gonna be a community organizer.  He was inspired by Harold to come here, and we all know what happened in that story [HM President Barack Obama].  I mean when you talk about what happened to black folks during that period, and there are any number of other examples, smaller ones, lesser known, but nonetheless, who sewed their seed during that period.  So you have to learn to appreciate what happened then.  But it wasn't--yeah, the political piece put him in place, but the cultural, economic piece, spiritual piece was even greater than that because it has defined who we are as a people in this country.  I like to think of it as, I like to compare it to the Harlem Renaissance, what it meant to us from a literary standpoint, artistic standpoint, what that meant for us from a cultural, economic standpoint, what we could do, what we could do, how we could transcend racism and go global, did it out of Chicago.  And that can happen again.
Story_ID: 176771
Speaker 1: Okay, in that vein, where do we stand today, I mean with, you know, the--well, you covered the election of [HM] Barack Obama, I guess, from, you know, the WLS[-TV, Chicago, Illinois].  And now we're in the second, midway through the second term.  Where do you think we are now?
Speaker 2: I think we're looking for that magic, that magic that happened between 1983 and 1987 in Chicago [Illinois].  And we're trying to find out what, what did we do then that we're not doing now?  And I, I don't know the answer.  I mean I can't give you the answer, sitting here, but I think that if we look to that period, I think we all too often over--what's the word, romanticize what happened.  And we definitely over simplify it.  But we have to recapture that.  I mean--and one component part of it was certainly political organization, that we have to restore that.  We know that, but there were some other things that happened.  I mean why did Oprah [Winfrey] come here?  What happened?  Why did Oprah say, well, I'm, go to Chicago and start this show?  What inspired Barack to come here?  What was it about Chicago?  What was going on here?  I think we have to look for that stuff again.  We, we have to recreate some way to communicate with each other too, certainly, and we--and in Chicago, we have lost that.  And in most big, American cities where African American people are concentrated, we've lost the ability to communicate among each other.  We haven't adapted to the digital age.  I don't, I didn't know you before our meeting for this interview.  Man, I should have known you ten years ago.  I should have known of you ten years ago.  I should have read something by you ten years ago, and you've written, I'm sure.  You've done stuff.  But where is, where is our ability to do that?  Where is the medium that I'm gonna meet you as another black man?  We don't have that right now.  And that's a critical component that we must redevelop.  We had ways.  You mentioned to me the other day about Lu Palmer's [HM Lutrelle "Lu" F. Palmer, II] five minutes that he would do on the radio, and the impact of it.  Where is that five minutes today?  Where can I find that five minutes done by Johnny Johnson, I don't know, whoever it is?  Where is it?  We don't have it.  We don't have the media anymore.  We don't have a newspaper anymore that goes to the entire area.  We don't have a radio station that everybody can hear at once.  So there are components that we have to find, but I think we have to recreate that energy again, not just for people in Chicago, but for all over this country.
Story_ID: 176772
Speaker 1: What's next for you?  Are you writing a book?  Are you--
Speaker 2: No, I'm not.  And maybe you've inspired me maybe to try that 'cause I've been--I'm sitting and talking to you saying, whoa, it's a lot of stuff here.  But, you know, I think what has to be for me next, I understand the news business.  I'm not gonna say I understand media 'cause--but I understand the news business.  I understand what people wanna hear.  I know what a good news story is and what one is that people are gonna just skim over.  And how do I know that?  'Cause I've been doing it for forty years.  I'm a classically trained journalist.  I went to the University of Missouri [Columbia, Missouri].  If any--who's gonna do this?  Who's gonna create that next media in the--who's gonna put us on a digital platform?  Who is gonna be the next or the twenty-first century version of Robert Abbott?  Who is?  And to my way of thinking, it has to be someone who knows what they're doing (laughter).  And over and over, I've told myself that my next, my next episode will involve trying to fill that void.
Story_ID: 176773
Speaker 1: You won an Emmy in 1992, right, for a story (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: You know, I've won, you know, that's interesting because you guys asked me about that, and I--I've won several Emmy's, but I don't go get the statute.  I mean I--many of them that I've won, I've won in concert with other people because we've worked on the project together, and they submitted the entry 'cause I don't do that.  I'm just not a, I'm not a guy who really cares about that kind of thing, winning an award.  Whenever I apply for a job, I don't put down how many Emmy's I won or I don't describe myself as an Emmy-award winning journalist.  I just never have done that.  I have, on my case at home, I've got over the years, man, all these awards and citations for my work that aren't necessarily Emmy's, but they're from the African American Contractors Association for this, whatever you did or they're from the University of Missouri [Columbia, Missouri] for this or from Chicago [Illinois]--I don't know.  I'm just trying to remember some of the names on some of these plaques that I have.  But I'm not interested in that.  I, anybody who knows me will tell you that I have no ego that I just don't care.  I have an ego--everybody has one, but I just don't carry it around with me.  It's just not that important a part of who I am, ego and self promotion.
Speaker 1: Well, let me ask you this.  A lot of people, especially news reporters that win Emmy's, say the same thing.  They say, I didn't win it myself anyway.  It was for a story I worked on.  But did you, I mean, in your opinion, did you win--did the Emmy's that your crew won, were they for the right stories (laughter)?  Or was it something--
Speaker 2: Not always.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: In my opinion, not always.  Yeah, but some of them, but I've won, I mean I won one in 1983 in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] that I was particularly proud of because all they gave me was--they didn't give me anything.  They just told me some people were lined up, looking for jobs in Delaware County [Pennsylvania], which is just outside Philadelphia, sort of a blue-collar, working-class community, just outside Philadelphia and that my job was to go out there and do a story about the people lined up for work.  Well, I was doing it--we were gonna do what we call a close-up.  We had a segment every day in the news.  But that's all they gave me, so I went out to this place, and sure enough, there was hundreds of people lined up in line trying to get a job 'cause this was '83 [1983], that first [President Ronald] Reagan recession.  And it was tough.  This was Philadelphia where the steel mills were closing and everything.  So I went out there, and we shot the line and interviewed a couple of people; interviewed this one guy, and he was in line.  And we talked to him, and he said that he would actually--he didn't live far from where the line was, and he'd take us back to his house, and we could sit in his house and interview him and do a little more texture for the piece.  Fine.  So we go out to his house, and we're talking to him and his wife, sitting there at the kitchen table.  And I have a mic on, and I think we had moved the mic to his wife for some reason, and we're talking.  And then this guy, he was a white guy about, maybe in his mid-forties.  He had two or three kids.  They were at school at the time.  And he was talking about what was, what had happened to him, how this mill had closed, and they had just totally flipped the script on him.  He'd done everything right.  Man, this big hulking construction guy, man, he broke down.  He just broke down.  And he, tears, crocodile tears start coming out.  I took my mic off and switched it over to him and just let it play.  Got it back in three or four hours.  The material was so compelling, I could just [slap sound].  It wrote itself. They sent--okay, so the story wasn't phenomenal, but the person who was the special projects producer submitted the entry, submitted this entry.  I mean it won that category, going away.  "So the winners are," whoever, whatever her name was, "and Charles Thomas from WCAU Television."  Well, I go up to the platform with her, and she starts giving a speech (laughter).  This woman had been nowhere, anywhere near the project.
Story_ID: 176774
Speaker 1: She received the information from you, basically, that was her account?
Speaker 2: Well, she didn't do anything.  She didn't edit the piece.  She didn't write it.  She didn't do anything.  She just, she conceived that this is the place we needed to go that day.  She didn't do it.  But she got an award as the executive producer for the piece.  And I got an award for the piece, and I kind of remembered it because I knew--and this goes back to, I was telling you what great stories are, that it was a story that I kind of worked really, turned around really quickly on my own in one day, and we won an Emmy for it.  But that's what Emmy's are.  I mean you--you don't always, people that are up there getting them--and a lot of times, you know, and the reverse.  A lot of times you see these anchor people that win these Emmy's, they didn't do anything.  They didn't even show up for work that day.  They got a script and said, go in a booth and read it, and why don't you come out here and do a stand-up with me.  And here's what you're gonna say.  And they sit up there acting like they're some great reporter.  These people don't report.  They just read the teleprompter.  And that's a talent, by the way.  They should be, and they should be paid for it, and maybe they should make a lot of money for it, if they get good ratings.  But they aren't journalists, most of them.  But, yeah, well, who wins an Emmy?  I mean I don't, man, I never, I never got into that.
Story_ID: 176775
Speaker 1: I know you served as an anchor--
Speaker 2: Yeah, in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], I anchored.
Speaker 1: --in Philadelphia.  But I take it you like being a reporter better?
Speaker 2: I like being a reporter better.  My temperament is not, does not work for the anchor thing, I don't think.  I mean I'm a grown up now.  And I know that I could say something that maybe they don't want me to say.  I could do, I could see myself doing that, not often.  But, man, one slip up, and in the age of YouTube, (laughter), you know, you live in infamy, forever.  I don't have the temperament for it.  I don't like the idea of going to an office and sitting there.  I don't like the things they--like they want you to do.  You start losing a few strands of hair, they're gonna want you to get some plugs put up there.  And, man, I'm just not--and it's their right.  They have a right to do that.  I mean you signed on for this, you know, hey.  You know, I'm just not.  I don't have the temperament for it.  And I like--and I'm a journalist, not a, not a news reader.
Story_ID: 176776
Speaker 1: Now, when you look back at everything you've done to this point in your career, and you're still working, is there anything major that you would do differently if you could go back and change something?
Speaker 2: If I could go back and change things?  (Laughter) in my career or personal life?
Speaker 1: Oh, I--
Speaker 2: And I think the two are intertwined.
Speaker 1: Sure.
Speaker 2: I wish--and I know that God does everything in his own time.  But I wish I had found Jesus Christ much earlier in my life because I would have been much better off professionally, certainly financially, and as well, obviously, as spiritually.  But if I had found that higher power earlier, I would have been, I think more guided.  And I don't think I would be like out there proselytizing or anything.  I just think that it would have created this stability in my life that would have, that would have kept me on course.  I mean I've done a lot of--I went through, I mean all kinds of periods in my life.  I think I got married way too young, for one.  That was--and I don't think I got married necessarily for the reasons, for the right reasons that I married my second wife, which I think I did for the right reason.  I didn't, I wasn't in touch with what that should have been, that first marriage should have been.  So maybe I shouldn't have done it.  I have two beautiful children from it, and I was blessed with them, and they're still as wonderful as ever.  And that--and I always wonder about that.  Well, if you didn't married, you wouldn't have had them, you know.  But that's a, that's a, sort of a personal situation.  But I would have been much more guided.  I mean I went through periods in my life--I went through, in my forties, I went through what I affectionately refer to now as my Jimmy Buffett period (laughter).  You know, I spent a lot of time in Margaritaville, you know, and wasted a lot of time, which I probably wouldn't have done had I known about myself then, what I know about myself now.  But I think finding a spiritual underpinning--I wish I had done that earlier.  I think I would be better professionally, even now than, than I am had I done that and certainly better personally.
Story_ID: 176777
Speaker 1: What are some of your concerns and hopes for the next generation of African American news reporters?
Speaker 2: I think they have a tremendous opportunity.  I think the industry is in flux right now because of the technology shift and people are trying to find out their place.  I think there is much less racism today in the industry than there was when I started.  And, you know, we can grip, and we can point to where, yeah, that's racist, that's racist, that's racist.  Yeah, you can do that, but there's a lot less today than there was, and I think a lot of it has to do with the fact that other people are more receptive of what you can bring to the table.  I think that every young, African American person who enters this field or white person or Asian person or Latino person, must understand that they must develop a brand, their own brand when they come into journalism.  You have to have a passion for something.  I don't know what it is, what it's gonna be, what our passion is going to be, but you can't go out there acting as though you're gonna be the generalist everything.  I mean they told us to be objective and be able to do any kind of story, any day.  But, no, today, you're gonna have to have a brand.  You're gonna have to have a reason for somebody's--who is going to go to a dot.com to find you, you, not--you telling the story because you know more about this story than the other dot.com does.  And that's the new challenge because there's just so much out there now.  You can go to Charles Thomas.com as easily on a computer as you can go to disney.com or abc.com or nbc.com.  It's just a .com.  Now, of course, they have the means to promote and put their signs up on the highway and all that that you might not have.  But bottom line, the story is gonna tell the story that you're telling and how you tell it and how passionately you tell it is going to take people to you.  I often tell young journalists that you are asking me how you can get in the business or the profession.  I'm telling you, you come up with a good story.  You come up with a good story, and the profession, the industry will find you 'cause you're the only one with that story.  And sometimes, it's not the fact that you were the only one there when the plane crashed.  Sometimes your passion is reflected in how you tell the story of what happened after the plane crashed.  It's your passion.  It's what takes the, what takes the viewer, the listener, the reader to that other place, and you gotta have a passion.  And sometimes your passion can't be about everything.  Maybe you're passionate about education.  Maybe you're passionate about food.  Maybe you're passionate about sports or football, one sport, I don't know.  But you've gotta have a passion.
Story_ID: 176778
Speaker 1: All right, similar to the question I asked about what would you do if you could change something, when you look back on your career now, what today would you consider to be your legacy?
Speaker 2: My legacy would be as the first African American political reporter at a major television station--certainly in Chicago [Illinois].  But I go places, and I don't see anybody who looks like me doing this job anywhere else.  But, you know, and WLS [TV] is a big place.  And sometimes I think about it, man, this is the largest television station, certainly, between New York [City] and Los Angeles [California] and perhaps the most successful television station from an economic standpoint in the country because we even lead within our group in terms of ratings, how many people watch.  And I'm the political reporter/editor at this place that is a television station in the home of the president of the United States [HM Barack Obama], the home city of the president of the United States.  Wow.  And I think of that as a legacy.  What have I brought to this situation?  A view, I think a point of view.  I don't, I don't ever deny or ever say that I don't bring a point of view to the situation because of who I am, where I grew up, how I grew up, who my daddy [Clarence Edward Thomas] was, who I go to church with, who I sleep with at night, I bring a certain point of view to the situation.  I know there's one thing political reporters often do, we cover the story, and we try to get some perspective on the story.  And we usually go out and get an expert.  Well, I've gotten experts that have tended to be a lot more colorful.  They tend to be a lot more female.  They tend to be a lot more people that I know that come from my life experience, I bring to the table.  I'm not saying my expert is any more expert than Joe O'Halloran's expert.  But they're different, and I think I can bring something different to the discussion of politics, not only in Chicago, but also nationally because I've noticed that a lot of the experts that I've brought to the table since I've been the political reporter here, now, others are using, same people.  They didn't know they existed, I guess, maybe.  But who cares?  They're using them now, and I think I have brought that to the table here.  I also believe that my legacy is that, I mean African American reporters have had a tough time since we've been part of broadcast television being more than African American reporters.  The anchors, they have to put on the air because they've gotta show that they got a black face they can put out there.  But when you get down to the reporters and the actual coverage of the news, there's been a tendency in broadcast journalism to get a black reporter because you need a black reporter, not because you got one who is good at it and can do the most important job that you have at the television station, for reporters, which is to cover government and democracy.
Speaker 1: Right, not the fluff stuff.
Speaker 2: Not the fluff stuff or even the murders or even the car crashes and what not.  You gotta cover government first of all to make sure this democracy continues or prospers or even survives.  And they've entrusted me with that.  And I think I've done a credible job of it.  I think I've shown them that somebody that looks like me can do it, given the fact, given that person has the proper experience, education and everything.  And that's what I brought to the table.  You know, one thing I've said to myself about having attended the University of Missouri [Columbia, Missouri].  Maybe I've said this before in our sessions, is that no one can contest my professional wherewithal.  I mean I can sit in any room with any news executive in this country, and they'll have to look me in the eye and say, "Hey, well, you know, he's got the qualifications.  He's been there.  He's done that, and he's educated."  And that's helped me.  And I think that's part of the legacy, that somebody who looks like me can do this.  And I think it's only something that's really happening recently.  I mean we've evolved to the point where Charles Thomas could get a shot.
Speaker 1: Okay, in a highly political city.
Speaker 2: Yeah (laughter), the most political city in America.
Story_ID: 176779
Speaker 1: Yeah, do you have a favorite African American or a favorite, I guess political reporter?
Speaker 2: Political reporter?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: There are some guys locally that I really respect.  I know there's a guy that works at Crain's Chicago Business.  He doesn't know that I think as highly of him--I've, I--his name is Greg Hinz. This guy is good.  He, he gets people to talk to him that, not talking to me (laughter).  And I'm calling the same people.  And, you know, you have to give him his propers (laughter).  You know, he's good.  There are some people here that I really respect.  There's a lady who covers [Chicago] City Hall for the [Chicago] Sun-Times, Fran Spielman, gets a lot of stories.  She gets a lot of stories.  There are people that I respect, that I think do a good job.  Nationally, covering politics, I mean I like that old guy, Bob Schieffer, works at CBS.  I think he's good.  I mean he's fair.  I mean, when you think about it, who's still out there (laughter)?  I'm sixty-three years, almost sixty-three years old now, and, you know, I'm the old guy.  In fact, I go to these stories, and I'm one of the oldest guys there.
Story_ID: 176780
Speaker 1: Now, I was thinking of this--this question occurred to me during the little bre- break we had, but I'm just wondering like, when you come to a city like Chicago [Illinois]--and you've been in and out of Chicago, you know, even before you started at WLS [TV], who in the African American community did you consider essential to talk to in terms of getting a political orientation as to what was important for us?  Or did you even approach it like that?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, oh, I--there are so many that I talked to that--let me think about that one.  I--there are.  I mean they're--I'm just trying to be careful.
Speaker 1: It doesn't have to be comprehensive list or anything.  I'm just--I was just wondering, like you, you know, just off the top, like who around here would you consider like, you know, important to sit down and have lunch with or something, you know, to get your bearings?  If you, if a young reporter came--(unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: One of them is in office right now, who I think is fascinating, [HM] Toni Preckwinkle.  She knows a lot of stuff.  And she keeps her head, she keeps her cards very close to the vest.  If you ask Toni Preckwinkle a question, I don't care what the venue is or whether it's a group of reporters or one reporter talking to her, you ask her something and she stops.  And she thinks.  Then she answers.  Well, the other re--the other politicians like Mayor [Rahm] Emanuel, they try to impress you with how smart they are.  And they try to--they immediately start talking.  And usually, it's just nonsense, talking points as we call it or as they call it.  Come on.  Said, you said that about that question, the other question.  Get out of here, but she will stop and think and say stuff that people don't say, like you ask her about the jail or criminal justice, she'll tell you.  It's people in jail that don't belong there, and we have to pay for it.  That's a revolutionary statement.  And she's been saying that for as long as she's been in this office that she currently holds.  I have a lot of respect for her and the fact that she tells the truth, that she never--I can't say never, but--okay, here's a guy.  Okay, here's a guy that when I got my job, when I started doing this, who was I paying the most attention to?  [HM] John Stroger [Jr.].  I mean, not only that, not only tell you about politics, but he'd tell you about life.  John Stroger, he wasn't the most revolutionary guy in the world.  He wasn't the most innovative guy in the world, but as far as what was happening, politically, in Chicago, I don't care what level, he knew.  And he had a perspective on it that was consistent, that was consistent.  And a lot of the guys that John Stroger did business with every day, he didn't necessarily have to like 'em.  But he always knew how to maintain a relationship with them.  You know, he could talk to the Irish politicians in Chicago.  They liked him.  And they didn't like him because he, he was some, you know, Uncle Tom.  They liked him because he could deliver.  He had something behind him which was that eighth ward democratic organization [8th Ward Regular Democratic Organization].  That's why they respected him and liked him.  Another reason they liked him too is because they trusted him, because he--not only because he delivered on his political promises, but this was explained to me, not by him, but by somebody else.  He's Catholic, and the whole Catholic thing kicked in.  They had sort of the (laughter), same thing going.  And they said, well, at least he isn't one of those Baptist guys.  I think Harold Washington, if I recall, was the first non-Catholic mayor of this city in a long time, since the Irish, certainly since the Irish took over.  I mean a hundred years maybe.
Speaker 1: I think you're right.
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Think about that.  But John Stroger, he was the black politician that they dealt with, and that was one of the reasons.  But--
Story_ID: 176781
Speaker 1: Yeah, I talk to him [HM John Stroger], [HM Toni] Preckwinkle and both happened to be [Cook] County Board Presidents.  I never met Harold [Washington].  I never met Harold Washington.  I met [HM] Eugene Sawyer, but, yeah.  I'm not necessarily impressed with the current congressional delegation.  I'll say it.  I think that Bobby [HM Bobby Rush] and Danny [HM Danny K. Davis] have basically gotten too old.  And Robin [Kelly], I think was elected by--under false pretense with this [Michael] Bloomberg money.  Maybe she'll come around, but this Bloomberg thing, making guns the issue in her election.  It's economic development, duh.  You know, I mean I--but he came in and sort of made her the gun candidate.  I wanna know, what's that about?  Maybe she'll change and she'll get better at it, but I'm--and Jesse, Jr. [HM Jesse Jackson, Jr.] never impressed me, never, never.
Speaker 2: What a sad story that turned out to be.
Speaker 1: What a sad story, but, you know, there--now, there's a guy that I didn't--when I talk about his dad, that's a guy that I did not mention here.  I couldn't ask him about politics here, I mean, you know, I'm not.  I, I'm just being honest (laughter), man.  I'm not thinking that he's really a player anymore when it comes to Chicago [Illinois] politics.  Now, I appreciate his history 'cause I mean Barack [HM President Barack Obama] couldn't be Barack if it hadn't been for [HM] Jesse [L. Jackson] in the '80s [1980s].  I know that, but today, in terms of who I would look for, for counsel on this, un-un, no, wouldn't be.  And there's some younger brothers out there who I think know the landscape of this city very well, John Rogers [HM John Rogers, Jr.], who we happened to mention earlier, yesterday, Jim Reynolds.  These guys, man, you know, they're connected.  They know where a lot of things are.  You know, I have to, have to give it up.  I mean they do.  They're not politicians.  They're business people, but they know the political landscape of Chicago.  Ironically, Barack really, I don't think he necessarily does.  I think he more, he's a product, but I don't think if you take him into the inner workings of it, he could really help you that much with it.  David Axelrod could (laughter).
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: But maybe not so much Barack.
Story_ID: 176782
Speaker 1: And I'm also wondering about this whole notion of Barack [HM President Barack Obama] as carpetbagger.  I mean did he just come here to use us and then go away, bigger and better things?  I'm glad he got that sister [Michelle Robinson Obama], found that fine sister here and took her with him.  But, I--you know, people are beginning to wonder about that right now, but that's not a name on my list.  Had an interesting story.  I went to Washington [D.C.] right after Rahm Emanuel was, decided he wanted to leave the administration and come back here [Chicago, Illinois].  And Barack gave him this big send-off in Washington.  And I went to Washington to cover it.  So I get there, and they tell me that Barack is going to make the announcement at 11:00 AM in the East Room [White House] and we'll open the East Room at 10:30 so that the reporters and everybody can go in.  Well, I, not being a Washington correspondent, I said, I'm going in the East Room as soon as they open so I make sure I know where I'm going.  And I can get myself a position.  So I was one of the first people there.  So I got right up to the rope.  I was gonna be fifteen feet from where the president would be speaking.  So he comes out, room fills, packed to the gills.  And the president starts speaking, and he kind of looks over, and we make eye contact.  And then he just goes back to what he's doing.  Well, you know, he--the event's over.  It lasted about a half an hour.  I'm leaving.  I'm one of the last people to get out since, because I was one of the first people in, so as I'm leaving, I get it on the arm.  "The president would like to see you in the Oval Office."  Whoa, man (laughter).  I knew Barack.  I had been to Africa with Barack and some other things.  So I get to go to the Oval.  And I sit there and chat up the president.  Now, I'm sworn to secrecy.  The--he says, what we talk about has to be off the record.  But, you know, so we went in, and we talked.  We talked a little politics, and I realized then that he wasn't necessarily the expert on Chicago [Illinois] or Illinois politics.  He used it to get where he needed to be because of the demographic nature of Illinois.  That's why we've had so many black senators, you know.  But, you know, we talked baseball, and we talked, you know, other stuff.  But that was quite an experience, I mean, to be in the Oval with the president.  Now, he got, got myself a little picture, a little photograph, you know, of, in the Oval with the president.  But that's why I didn't include him on the list because I think--and he's gone off to bigger and better things, you know.  In fact, while I was sitting there talking with him, his press secretary was in the back, looking at his watch, saying, "Ah, Mr. President, Mr. President, you--(laughter)."  But, yeah--
Speaker 2: Do you think he pulled you in just to kind of reconnect with what's going on here?
Speaker 1: Who, Barack?
Speaker 2: The president, yeah, right.
Speaker 1: I mean, I get the sense that he, I don't know if he thought about the presidency when he came here.  That's not clear at all or that he wanted to do bigger and better things, but certainly, this is the place to be because of the fact that if you win a primary, you can win--a black man can win a primary in Illinois, based on the black vote in Chicago, which he, basically, he did.  Yeah, I think he won 38 percent of the vote in that first primary.  Then he was the Democratic nominee, who--and all the, and the Republicans imploded, and a Democrat imploded in the primary.  But I think he only won 38 percent of the vote in his first primary.  I have to check beyond that.  But I mean that's how you can win, and certainly anybody who has ambitions would come resettle in Chicago and try to use that dynamic to become a United States Senator 'cause you can do it here.  You can become a governor here.  [HM] Roland Burris proved it in the '70s [1970s] that you can win statewide in Illinois, if you're an African American, when he won as comptroller, I think.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah, comptroller, right.
Story_ID: 176783
Speaker 1: Let me go to this, this next question and it's just about family.  I know you mentioned your family.  We always kind of ask about it at the end.  You married a second time, and you have two children from a previous marriage--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Tell us something about your family today?
Speaker 2: My family today?  I have--as, you know, I was--let's go back quickly.  I mean I got married in college or right out of college to a young lady, a young woman who lived in Columbia, Missouri where I went to school.  She also attended the University of Missouri [Columbia, Missouri].  We were married for a long time, really, twenty-some odd years.  And the thing really started to fall apart after the kids left and went to college because we kind of looked at each other.  And we were all--we were mom and dad, and kind of went, well, who are you?  And I don't know, who are you?  Well, you know, I don't really like you, you know (laughter).  That's what, I mean I'm just (laughter) being real here.  And, you know, certainly it was just as much my fault that the marriage didn't work as--and I can't speak for her.  Maybe she knows it was her fault as well.  But it didn't, you know, after a long time, we decided to split up.  And my wife, after she moved here to Chicago [Illinois], from St. Louis [Missouri], she went to law school.  And she earned her juris doctorate and was admitted to the bar, three years after moving here.  And so she's, you know, she's a professional woman, and I, you know, very smart, very bright, but marriage between us just didn't work.  I married my second wife, a young lady who grew up here in Chicago.  She's a sales person, and I love her very much.  She has an adult son.  As I mentioned, I have two adult children.  We're still very close.  We have--my son has two sons.  My daughter has two daughters.  My wife's son is married and at this point, they're expecting their first child.  So that'll give us five grandchildren.  They all live right now within twenty, twenty-five minutes driving distance of us.  So we are blessed in that regard.  We can see our grandchildren frequently.  And for that we are very, very blessed.  That's my family, and generally, speaking, I don't have any brothers and sisters that live in Chicago.  I have two--a brother and sister who are still alive.  And my wife has ten brothers and sisters.  Yeah, all of whom are still living and she is the youngest.  And they're all still on this earth, and she's very blessed in that regard.  So that's our family, but none--maybe four, maybe three or four of her brothers and sisters still live here in the Chicago area.  The others are in Arizona and in Florida.  So, that's my family, love 'em very much.
Story_ID: 176784
Speaker 1: Before I ask my last question, is there anything we haven't talked about that we need to mention, and I know there's probably a million things--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: It's probably a million things, and I--
Speaker 1: --that you probably didn't tell me, but I, you know, this last story about [HM] Barack Obama and the Oval Office, we wouldn't have gotten it--
Speaker 2: Right, you, also, you know, I had the occasion, the experience to go back to Africa with Barack Obama when he visited his grandmother in the village where his father grew up.  This was in 2007, I think--no, 2006.
Speaker 1: Now, this is before--is this before he wrote his book ['Dreams from My Father: A Story of Race and Inheritance']?
Speaker 2: This is when he was a United States Senator.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: After his election, yeah, it was 2006, August.  And I was not the political reporter at the time.  I was like that next guy in (laughter).  And I was like the first guy on the bench.  And, but the station decided that I should be the guy that goes to Africa with Barack Obama.  And I did.  It was a fascinating trip.  Not only did it afford me an opportunity to meet him and Michelle [First Lady Michelle Obama] and the children who were much younger at the time.  And just experienced that moment when he, you know--see, he had met his grandmother before, but when he saw his grandmother where the village where he came from, to see the reaction of the Kenyan people to him was amazing.  I remember blogging and writing blogs at the time, how he arrived and there didn't seem to be that much excitement about him getting there.  But, man, once word got out that he was there, you wouldn't believe it.  I mean it's people hanging out of trees, I mean tens of thousands of people would show up, just in the street to see, to try to see and try to touch one of their favorite sons.  And they were convinced at that time that he would become the president of the United States because it was only, at that point, it was only a rumor that he might run.  And his trip to Africa was to give him some, give him a foreign policy credential if he would need it, if he should run.  Now, five months later, he actually declared or six months later, he declared for the presidency on that very cold day in Springfield, Illinois.  But at that point, it was just speculation that he might do it.  But it was fascinating.  It's always fascinating to be, for me, to be in Africa.  And I know during that trip, I kind of figured out what my deal was with Africa 'cause whenever I went to Africa, and I'd been to western Africa, northern Africa, Egypt. This was a trip to Kenya, always, there was always a sadness that I felt whenever I went to Africa.  It was like I was depressed.  What's going on?  Well, I can remember being in the [Maasai] Mara, which is the wildlife area in Kenya.  And it was in a hut, man, by yourself at night, complete black.  And I finally figured out what it was about Africa that always tended to depress me.  And it's because in--and I don't care whether you're in western Africa, eastern Africa and black Africa, the emphasis is always on your family.  Your--and it, not only your tribe, but your family, our clan because within the tribe are different clans, and that's how you identify yourself.  And you, something in your name, something about something you're wearing says what clan you're in.  So that family is very important, and then the whole question about family dovetails into their faith, which is ancestor based.  [phone buzzing].  That's me, but that's my wife.  Don't worry about that (laughter).  But it's always ancestor based. You come from the United States of America.  You're an African American.  You ain't got no ancestors.  You don't know what your clan is.  Everybody's talking about clan, I mean on the street, having lunch.  Somehow, their clan comes.  You don't have it.  And that's what was depressing me.  Why am I so sad when I come here?  And that's what it was.  But once I figured that out, I figured out where the sadness was coming from.  The sadness is the sadness of whoever that ancestor was, who made it through the Middle Passage, who came to this place.  That person spent a lifetime of sadness, didn't they?  Didn't they?  And that's the reconnection.  That's how I met her.  [phone buzzing].  Sorry about this, man.  That's how I met--I reconnect with her, and I believe it was a female.  Why that, I don't know, but I reconnect with her through that sadness.  After I figured that out, I'm fine with Africa.  (Laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay, that's quite a story, that's quite a reflection.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I wanted to mention it because that was an historic trip.  I think only myself, [HM] Ellis Cose, who else went on that trip?  There were some, there was a couple of local reporters from Chicago [Illinois] that went.  But I know Ellis wrote a lot about it in Newsweek.
Story_ID: 176785
Speaker 1: Last question is similar to legacy but a little different.  Sir, how would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: This is gonna sound so cliche.  I'd like to be remembered as a good father, grandfather, husband, man of faith and I know we're sitting here at The HistoryMakers and we're talking now.  God's not done with me, and I'm not done with this profession.  And I would hope that twenty years from now, this interview will be redone.
Speaker 1: Okay, we'll make it a promise.  We'll do it.  If we're both around (laughter), we can both participate together.
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Good, good.
Speaker 1: Thank you very much.
Speaker 2: Thank you.
Speaker 1: All right.
