Story_ID: 14206
Speaker 1: What you see is a photograph of the Chi-Lites, our very, very, very beginning of our career when we first went on 'The Flip Wilson Show,' which was the number one television show in the world at that time.  And we had the pleasure to leave that show and have a number one record, didn't even up the charts, came on at number one, 'Oh Girl.'
Speaker 2: [Photo - Marshall Thompson appears on 'The Flip Wilson Show' with the other members of the Chi-Lites.  MPEG-1 digital video copy of Beta SP videotape of color photo; from the collection of Marshall Thompson]
Story_ID: 14207
Speaker 1: This photograph was taken from the 'A Letter to Myself' album [1973].  And, of course, you see, from left to right, you see brother Robert 'Squirrel' Lester, all the way to the left.  And you have me, of course, Marshall Thompson, in the middle.  And Eugene Record, all the way on the end there.
Speaker 2: [Photo - Marshall Thompson and the other members of the Chi-Lites pose for the 'A Letter to Myself' album, ca. 1973. MPEG-1 digital video copy of Beta SP videotape of color photo; from the collection of Marshall Thompson]
Story_ID: 14208
Speaker 1: Okay, this photo, as you see, is our--one of our performances in Las Vegas [Nevada] at the Aladdin [casino and resort].  And we took this in the lobby of the Aladdin Hotel in Las Vegas, Nevada.
Speaker 2: About what year was that?  That year was 1983.
Speaker 1: And excuse me, name each person in every photo--.
Speaker 2: Again, you have all the way to the end there, Robert 'Squirrel' Lester, Marshall Thompson, myself, in the middle, and Eugene Record on the end.
Speaker 1: [Photo - Marshall Thompson poses with the other Chi-Lites group members in Las Vegas, Nevada, 1983.  MPEG-1 digital video copy of Beta SP videotape of color photo; from the collection of Marshall Thompson]
Story_ID: 14209
Speaker 1: This is one of the biggest songs we [musical group, the Chi-Lites] had.  This was our second gold record which this was number one in the R & B [rhythm and blues music] field, number three pop--on the pop charts.  It was our second gold record.
Speaker 2: What's the name of it?
Speaker 1: 'Have You Seen Her' (laughs).
Speaker 2: [Photo - Marshall Thompson presents the Chi-Lites gold record for their song 'Have You Seen Her.'  MPEG-1 digital video copy of Beta SP videotape of plaque; from the collection of Marshall Thompson]
Story_ID: 14210
Speaker 1: What you're looking at now is the biggest record that the Chi-Lites ever performed in life.  This is the platinum record 'Oh Girl,' went number one--straight to number one on the charts, number one pop and number one R & B [rhythm and blues music].
Speaker 2: Now do you know how many records it sold?
Speaker 1: A million.
Speaker 2: It's platinum
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: [Photo - Marshall Thompson presents the Chi-Lites platinum record plaque for 'Oh Girl.' MPEG-1 digital video copy of Beta SP videotape of plaque; from the collection of Marshall Thompson]
Story_ID: 14211
Speaker 1: State your name, and I want you to spell it.
Speaker 2: Yeah, Marshall Thompson, M-A-R-S-H-A-L-L, T-H-O-M-P-S-O-N.
Story_ID: 14212
Speaker 1: What's the date today, to slate it.
Speaker 2: The date is the 6th of July--
Speaker 1: Today is Thursday, July--
Speaker 2: Sixth.
Speaker 1: What year?
Speaker 2: The year 2000.
Story_ID: 14213
Speaker 1: What is your favorite dessert?
Speaker 2: My favorite dessert is chocolate ice cream (laughs).
Speaker 1: And what's your favorite meat?
Speaker 2: Favorite meat is fish.
Speaker 1: Really?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: How about--when you sit down to breakfast, what would be a good breakfast for you?
Speaker 2: Well, for me, I like grits.  I like turkey bacon and wheat toast.
Speaker 1: Are you a chitterlings, hog maw man?
Speaker 2: No (laughs).
Speaker 1: All right, what's your favorite color?
Speaker 2: Favorite color is brown.
Speaker 1: Brown.
Speaker 2: Brown and beige.
Speaker 1: Okay, what's your favorite radio station?
Speaker 2: V-103 [radio station, 102.7 FM, Chicago, Illinois] (laughs).
Speaker 1: I knew that he was gonna say that.  All right, what--what's your favorite type of female?
Speaker 2: Favorite types--well, not too--about five-six--.
Speaker 1: You gonna say stacked?
Speaker 2: Well yeah, stacked and you know, beautiful.
Speaker 1: All right, what's your favorite sport?
Speaker 2: Sport is swimming.
Speaker 1: I didn't know that.  Do you swim?
Speaker 2: Yes, I do.
Speaker 1: Oh, that's your favorite sport.  What do you like to watch--what's your favorite TV show?
Speaker 2: TV show, right now, looking at MTV [music entertainment television station] half of the day, and looking at shows--I'm from the old school.  I like the cop movies, you know, like back in the--back in the day--the real gangster movies.
Speaker 1: Who inspired you when you wanted to be a singer?  Who did you look up to?
Speaker 2: Well, from the beginning, it came from my dad [William Thompson], which played with [Henry] 'Red' Allen's [Jr.] band.  He was a keyboard player there. And my drummer, who played with Duke Ellington [jazz composer/musician]. They inspired me from being a baby.  And everybody in our family had to play drums at the age of three.
Story_ID: 14214
Speaker 1: What's your favorite time of year?
Speaker 2: Favorite time of the year?  I would say summertime for me, because that's tour time.  We get a chance to go across the world, especially in San Diego, California when we're singing on the stage and the palm trees are hanging over our head onstage.  And behind the stage, it's nothing but the ocean.
Speaker 1: What's your favorite phrase?
Speaker 2: My--"V-103 [radio station, 102.7 FM, Chicago, Illinois], it's my radio station" (laughs)--
Speaker 1: No, I mean something like a school slang phrase, what do you like?
Speaker 2: My phrase would be "The Chi-Lites" (laughs), that's it.
Speaker 1: Or "Marshall and the Chi-Lites."
Speaker 2: "Marshall and the Chi-Lites."
Speaker 1: That's cool.
Story_ID: 14215
Speaker 1: I've done a lot of interviews, Marshall, and the thing that I come up with is that most everybody I interview, most singers, they have a bit of genius in that--insomuch as they started off four, five, six years old.  Most everybody, everybody I talked to--.
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: Everybody, the guys with Lakeside [rhythm & blues music group] and he was a child prodigy.  They brought him into Chicago [Illinois] at ten.  What age did you start?
Speaker 2: Well, at the age of three, as I told you, everybody in the family had to be drummers.  We started playing drums.  Then as the years went on, after coming out of the cadet drill corps, I went into the drill teams of Chicago and training all the youngsters in the parades and things like that.  Then I got into Giles Post [Lt. George L. Giles Post #87 of the American Legion, veterans organization] drum and  bugle corps, played trumpet over there for a minute.  Then from there, I went on to play drums with Gladys Knight and the Pips [soul music singing group] at the Regal Theatre [Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 1: And did you travel with Gladys or did you just--
Speaker 2: No, I played with her, yeah, at the Regal.  I was her drummer there.
Speaker 1: Would she come into town by herself, then with her rhythm section, when she got in?
Speaker 2: Right, when she got in, the drummer--I had rehearsed the drums--had rehearsed her songs on 47th Street [Chicago, Illinois] for about three weeks. And the drummer that Red Saunders [jazz drummer] had, he was a more, older fellow than I was.  I was a youngster then.  And he wasn't prepared actually to play it like she wanted it.  So she--I got a chance to go up there and play.  And after I left there, then I had a chance to go with Major Lance [soul singer] on the road.
Story_ID: 14216
Speaker 1: Were both your parents born here in Chicago [Illinois]?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Were they musically inclined?
Speaker 2: The whole family of the Thompson family was musically inclined.
Speaker 1: And tell us about that.
Speaker 2: Well, my father [William Thompson] was a piano player with [Henry] 'Red' Allen [Jr., trumpeter].  My uncle, he played with Count Basie [jazz pianist], Duke Ellington [jazz composer/pianist], Richard Marshall Thompson, which everybody knew him in Illinois, as one of the top drummers of Illinois.  He played at the London House [jazz venue, Chicago, Illinois] for about fifteen years.  My mother [Mary Thompson], she was a keyboard player, working in the churches.  And my uncle, he played with a circus.  He was a trumpet player for the circus.  So just about everybody in the family was musically inclined.  Also, before the drumming of Marshall Thompson, he was with a dance team called Peck and Peck.  He used to dance at the Regal Theatre [Chicago, Illinois] and the Apollo Theater [Harlem, New York], across the country.  I had a chance at three years old to go to the Regal to see him dance.  And they used to dance on a thing [song] called 'Open the Door Richard,' you know.  That was his dance theme.  So I was always into the musical side, you know, ever since I was raised and born in, on the South Side of Chicago at 47th Street.
Speaker 1: Were your parents--were they first generation Chicagoans or did they come up here from down South?
Speaker 2: They, yeah, they came up from down South, Mississippi.
Speaker 1: Was it--where is the place all those blues singers come from, the flatland of down South.
Speaker 2: Yeah, well, my mother's Hattiesburg [Mississippi]--.
Speaker 1: The Delta.
Speaker 2: Right, the Delta, yeah.  She's from Hattiesburg.  And my father was from Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania], originally.
Speaker 1: Did they talk a lot about their growing--I mean, this, you should direct this to Herb [Kent, interviewer], but did they talk a lot about their growing up?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Yes they did.
Speaker 2: How did they grow up?
Speaker 1: Well they, well, from, from my understanding, my father, his father was a keyboard player as well.  So we basically went step by step--.
Speaker 2: Did they have keyboards back then?
Speaker 1: Right, yeah, he was a keyboard player.
Speaker 2: Go ahead. Let him talk.
Speaker 1: I keep thinking I'm on the radio--go ahead.
Speaker 2: So basically, but when I got in the world, that's all I know is music, me and Terry Thompson [drummer].
Speaker 1: All right, and you just naturally fell into a musical life.
Speaker 2: Right.
Story_ID: 14217
Speaker 1: I was wondering--you said your father [William Thompson] was from Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania].
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And so I was wondering if there was a, you know, that he told you about growing up in Pittsburgh?
Speaker 2: No, he have never did it.  Basically, with my father, I just knowin' him as being a musician with [Henry] 'Red' Allen's [Jr.] band, you know, we had pictures and everything across--all over the house.  Then my uncle, I knowing him from playing as a--as a drummer and being with Peck and Peck dance team.  That's what I know basically about them.
Speaker 1: And did, what was your father's name?
Speaker 2: My father's name is William Thompson.
Speaker 1: How would you describe your father?  What kind of man was he?
Speaker 2: He was a very talented keyboard player and musician.  He loved playing his keyboard.  I had the pleasure to--before he passed away, I had the pleasure of seeing him in Calumet City [Indiana] at one of the bars there.  They had a one-man band bar there.  And I had the pleasure to come out there to see, on his job, and see him play the piano--keyboard.
Speaker 1: And Peck and Peck dancers, were they significant?  Were they well known, I mean--.
Speaker 2: Well, Peck and Peck dance team, they was along with the--the Nicholas Brothers [tap dance duo] and dance teams like that.  They did the splits and, you know, jump off of buildings doing the splits, a perfect dance team, and they came all up together. They had--they switched up going to the Apollo Theater [Harlem, New York], the Uptown Theater [Chicago, Illinois], the Howard Theater in Washington [D.C.] and different places like that.
Story_ID: 14218
Speaker 1: And your mother, what was her name?
Speaker 2: Mary Thompson.
Speaker 1: Okay, and you said, she was from--?
Speaker 2: Hattiesburg.
Speaker 1: Hattiesburg, Mississippi?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what about--do you know--?
Speaker 2: Strike that.  Vicksburg, I'm sorry.
Speaker 1: Vicksburg.  Yes.
Speaker 2: Vicksburg, Mississippi.
Speaker 1: Do you know about her growing up or, you know, about her?  Did she ever talk about her parents or were you around--?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Well, all I know from my mother's standpoint, she went to Wendell Phillips [High School, Chicago, Illinois].  She was with Nat Cole, Nat King Cole [singer/jazz musician] at DuSable High School [Chicago, Illinois], and they was all musicians together, playing around town, along with Redd Foxx [comedian].
Speaker 1: Dempsey Travis [real estate entrepreneur/historian] talks about going to school, you know, with Redd Foxx along that time.  What--and you said she was musically inclined, too, right?
Speaker 2: Right, she's a keyboard player as well.  That's how my father [William Thompson] met her.
Speaker 1: That's what--and so do you know how they met or?
Speaker 2: No, but they met playing keyboards.  You know, switching jobs together and Dorothy Donegan [pianist] and my mother and, you know, just working around town, like that.
Story_ID: 14219
Speaker 1: How many brothers or sisters do you have?
Speaker 2: I had one brother.
Speaker 1: One brother.
Speaker 2: Yeah, he's deceased now, and two sisters.
Speaker 1: And what were their names?
Speaker 2: William Thompson, he was named after my father.  Elena and Sabrina Thompson.
Speaker 1: I've got a sister named Sabrina too.  That's an unusual name.  So where did you fit in the family's--.
Speaker 2: Well, I was the baby, number one, until Sabrina came along, about fourteen, fifteen years later (laughs).
Story_ID: 14220
Speaker 1: What was the young Marshall Thompson like?  I mean, you know, as a child?  What was he like?  I mean you had music all around you, but were you mischievous?  Were you, you know, fun loving?  Were you--.
Speaker 2: Well, I, you know, been a lot of fun, always smiling.  In school, in DuSable [High School, Chicago, Illinois], I always sung at the Hi-Jinks [DuSable High School talent showcase] with different singing groups there.  I just always, you know, have been "hyper-getic" (ph.), what you would say, you know, fun.  I always liked a lot of fun, and liked to be a part of things, had the leadership, you know, I'm still the leader of the group [the Chi-Lites] today.  And that's--that's just my character.
Story_ID: 14221
Speaker 1: Can you describe some of your, you know, some memories of growing up with your family and, you know, just, I mean just some-- I'm not looking for anything specific, but just some memories of growing up when you were young?
Speaker 2: Well, I remember on 47th [Street] and St. Lawrence [Avenue, Chicago, Illinois], shooting marbles, with my friends, riding bikes and playing with my brother [William Thompson] and selling Mother's Day flowers on the block for Ronnie Salters family, just having a fun time, you know, and couldn't wait to--to get in, get my career started and move on up in the world.  And going up there on the corner, looking at this guy with this chicken.  This guy used to have a chicken, a dancing chicken on 47th Street.  He was the highlight of the show, you know.  And he used to, he used to use the old slang, "No dime, no show; that's anywhere you go; no dime, no show."  And this chicken would be doing the dance for you.  He'd say, "Dance for me," and that chicken would be dancing, (dances and laughs).  And people would throw pennies and nickels and dimes at him.
Speaker 1: So 47th Street, a lot of activity you've mentioned was on 47th Street.  Can you just sort of describe that?
Speaker 2: Well, actually, on the weekends at 47th Street--47th and St. Lawrence, right on the corner, there was always some type of show going on there.  If it wasn't a band, setting up, playing, it was the guy with the chicken, like I told you or the guy with the--the scissors, going around with his scissor maker.  He had a scissor maker that made music.  And we enjoyed it, you know.  It was, it was, it was very pleasant coming up around 47th and to be able to get out and move on with your life.
Story_ID: 14222
Speaker 1: You had said that you--you know, that you were eager to get on with your career.  And what was that?  I mean--.
Speaker 2: Well, I wanted to be like my uncle, Marshall Thompson, the big Marshall Thompson.  I wanted to be able to sing at the Regal Theatre [Chicago, Illinois], which I never dreamed that I'd have a chance to play and to do--I wanted to be a musician and be an entertainer, you know.  And it happened.
Speaker 1: But why did you want, what was fascinating about that?
Speaker 2: Well, making people happy.  You know, I watched the crowd, you know, just being--it, it seemed--it brought the importance of love to your audience, you know.  And it seemed it just made people happy, even when, in worrying times, the cheerful things made people happy, you know.
Speaker 1: And were you involved in high school or anything, you know, in performing or, you know, do you remember?  I remember you said you first--.
Speaker 2: At the Hi-Jinks.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I sang at the Hi-Jinks at DuSable High School [Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 1: And what's that, what was the Hi-Jinks?
Speaker 2: (Pause).
Speaker 1: The Hi-Jinks was a show that 'Captain' [Walter E.] Dyett had had when they have like assembly, special shows.  We had assembly shows, and everybody went through the Hi-Jinks.  You could go from Ella Fitzgerald [jazz singer] to Nat King Cole [singer/jazz musician], all of them went to the Hi-Jinks, okay.  And that was a start.  If you can get over and make people clap for you and laugh and have a good time at the Hi-Jinks--.
Speaker 2: Okay, so this Hi-Jinks, this was a tradition then?
Speaker 1: Right, at DuSable High School.  That's where a lot of the music really started in the city of Chicago.
Speaker 2: Why do you think that was?
Speaker 1: Because Captain Dyett was one of the best musicians to ever live.
Speaker 2: And he was, was he head of the music--.
Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) Captain Walter Dyett.
Speaker 2: Was he head of the music department there?
Speaker 1: Right, he was the head of the music at DuSable High School.
Speaker 2: And what encouragement did you get from your, you know, your family?  I know you came musicians.  Sometimes parents, you know, are the people you admire, to be critical of you, but was it a supportive environment?  Were they--.
Speaker 1: Well, I would say, yes, especially from my uncle because I remember going to the Cotton Club [music venue] right there on Cottage Grove [Avenue, Chicago, Illinois].  And performing there was my uncle and Redd Foxx [comedian], was playing at the Cotton Club at that time.  And we had a chance to go in, we was way underage, but he brought us in under his, you know, leadership.  He brought us in there, and he gave us chance to put a mic up to our mouth.  And we went in there and sung, and people liked it.  And it really inspired us more to go at it.
Story_ID: 14223
Speaker 1: Actually, I had been rehearsing Gladys Knight's [soul singer] new hit at home.  And I had a chance to play.  So what happened is, I went down to the Regal Theatre [Chicago, Illinois], and they threw me out a couple of times, the first policeman in there say, "Hey, you don't belong in here."  And so he made me get out.  I had my snare drum with me, so what I did, on lunchtime when they had their break, when they took their break--lunchtime, on lunchtime, I went down to 'Jew Town' [Maxwell Street, Chicago, Illinois] and bought me some patent leather shoes, white shirt and a cross tie, went over to Walgreen's [pharmacy and convenience store] across the street on 47th Street [Chicago], sit in there with the rest of the band.  And all musicians think they know everybody, you know, and they'll never say, "No, I don't know you."  All you have to do is say, "Hey, yeah, I remember you in New York."  I had never left 47th Street (laughs).  He said, "I know your name.  What's your name?"  "Marshall."  "Yeah, that's right.  Your name's Marshall."  I said, "What's your name.  I remember you at the Apollo Theater [Harlem, New York]."  "Oh, my name is Hickembottom or somebody like that."  "Oh, okay. Now I know you" (laughs).  So after, after they had their lunch, we went backstage again, through the alley, right there on 47th Street, and they had a new security guard then.  But I was dressed just like the house band.  So I just walked on in there with everybody else, sit in the audience.  And Red Saunders's [drummer] band was playing at the time up there, playing--trying to play Gladys's music.  And the drummer, of course, he--he didn't have the feel.  So I raised my hand in the audience--I said, I say--"I know--could I try it," you know?  It was about four hours before showtime, so she had to have that music right.  So I went up there, got on the drums, played rehearsal perfect, no problems, no flaws, no nothing. Went up there and played a great set of drums and got the show.  She said, "You be back here at six o'clock [pm] to get ready for--for the concert."  Got back there at six o'clock, went up there, told all my friends around the house, "I'm-a be at the Regal.  I'm-a be at the Regal playing drums."  The curtains opened up.  I couldn't move (laughs).  I froze.  I couldn't play nothing. My foot froze, hand froze, everything.  And Gladys was looking back there, said, "Play, play."  And I was--(pantomimes playing drums).  I was scared to death.  I was doing just like that.  And then as we got going, a little further, you know, I, I got into it.  Then I started playing a little more and more and more and more.  And I got into it.  The second show (claps hands), all the fear went away.  I came out there smoking.  But that was my first stage appearance in a big house like that in my life.
Speaker 2: Now, that's a really wonderful story.
Story_ID: 14224
Speaker 1: When did you get interested in doo-wop tunes?
Speaker 2: Back in high--no grammar school, back at Shakespeare [Elementary School, Chicago, Illinois], when the Spaniels [rhythm and blues music group] came out, that was one of my favorite groups.  [James] 'Dimples' [Cochran] was my idol.  I loved Dimples.  That was my favorite voice.  He had the same voice, I had baritone.  And we used to sing all the Spaniels's records, even in talent shows when we battled against Eugene Record and Robert 'Squirrel' Lester, which is one of the Chi-Lites [Thompson's R & B group] today, we used to sing against each other at Shakespeare.  And we was really into the doo-wops then.  [Eugene] 'Gene' Record and Robert 'Squirrel' Lester was into the Flamingos [R & B group].  I was into the Spaniels and the Dells [R & B group] at that time.
Speaker 1: And did you tell us what favorite singer you liked to emulate?
Speaker 2: Well, Gene Chandler [soul singer] is my favorite.
Story_ID: 14225
Speaker 1: First singing group.  How did it get started?
Speaker 2: Well, my first singing group was at DuSable High School [Chicago, Illinois] in the Hi-Jinks [talent showcase].  We used to sing the song 'Since I Don't Have You' by the Skyliners [rhythm and blues music group].  That was the first record that--no, no, and I can take it back a little further than that.  I was with the John Keith Singers, Magnificent Montague [radio personality].  I had a chance to go into the studio.  All of us went in there at one time.  At that time, you had one tape.  We had a song called Tucumscari, (sic, Tucumcari) 'Down in Tucumscari' (sic).  Magnificent Montague's picked us up at Shakespeare grammar school [The Shakespeare School, Chicago, Illinois] and asked us do we want to go in there and sing something with him in the studio.  And we went in there and sung a record called 'Down in Tuckham Scary'.  That was the beginning of everything.
Speaker 1: (Pause).
Speaker 2: Did that record come out on Vee-Jay [Records] or any label?
Speaker 1: It came out on a label.  I'm not quite sure what label it was on at this time.  But Magnificent Montague, he had it out.
Speaker 2: I hear you talk about in your interviews, the Desideros, where did you get that name?  What about that group?
Speaker 1: Well, the Desideros was a group that we created in grammar school.  That was the group I was in.  And, and Robert 'Squirrel' Lester and Eugene Record [future members of the Chi-Lites], they was in a group called the 'Chanteurs'.  That group, we was famous, famous dancers.  You know, we could do the splits, somersaults, turn flips and everything.  And Eugene Record and Robert Lester, they was more for the singing group.  They had two left feet (laughs).
Speaker 2: How did you meld this together and come up with this record, 'The Grizzly Bear'?
Speaker 1: Well, the Grizzly, I'll tell you about the 'Grizzly Bear.'  I think we got the idea from 'The Gorilla.'  'The Gorilla' was out there, by the Ideals [music group] and Eugene Record wanted to come with something--at that time, everybody would try to copy off of another group one way or the other.  And we had to come up with something in that same category.  And so Eugene Record came up with that, 'The Grizzly Bear' (laughs).
Speaker 2: Can you sing a little bit of how that went?
Speaker 1: (Singing) "Do the Grizzly Bear. Hold your hands in the air. Do the Grizzly Bear" (laughs).
Speaker 2: That record didn't sell.
Speaker 1: That was a Chicago record, you know, with 'The Gorilla' out there.  It did great around here, doing a ballad against 'The Gorilla.'
Speaker 2: And you dressed someone up in a gorilla suit?
Speaker 1: Yes, we did (laughs).  Gorilla suit and the bear suit.
Story_ID: 14226
Speaker 1: You didn't tell us how you came to be in the Chanteurs.  You were saying that they were Eugene Record and [Robert] 'Squirrel' [Lester] [future members of the Chi-Lites musical group] were in the Chanteurs and where was [Creadel] 'Red' [Jones] the bass singer.  How did you all come together?
Speaker 2: Well, when I first graduated from [The] Shakespeare [School, Chicago, Illinois], I went straight to Hyde Park High School [Chicago, Illinois] at that time, before I transferred to DuSable [High School, Chicago, Illinois].  Getting into Hyde Park High School--Robert 'Squirrel' Lester, which is one of the Chi-Lites, he was going to school there.  He was singing with Clarence Johnson [baritone, member of the Chanteurs] and, and Eugene Record at the time. And a guy named [Eddie] Reed [member of the Chanteurs], which was the bass singer.  They would, they had their group over on 63rd Street [Chicago, Illinois].  And me, Eddie Sullivan [tenor, member of the Desideros]--it was me, Eddie Sullivan, Wardell [Del] Brown [tenor, member of the Desideros], and myself, we were singing on 47th Street.  And I used to take the bus out to, you know, school every day at Hyde Park.  And, and we'd get over there in the park over there and, and start battling against each other.  It's almost the same story.  It was just like the Temptation [sic, 'The Temptations'] movie there.
Speaker 1: One gentleman wrote that the doo-wop groups were sometimes kind of like little juvenile delinquents, had little gangs and they used to represent by singing.  Is that true?
Speaker 2: Yes, it was (laughs).  That's correct.
Speaker 1: Next question, you know it's coming.  Were you a juvenile delinquent?
Speaker 2: Ah, no, no.
Speaker 1: It was them, not you.
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: All right, the Chanteurs, you're now all one group.  When did you pick up--.
Speaker 2: Creadel 'Red' Jones, he was in the Desideros as well.  And Creadel left, me and Creadel left the group that we had because they wasn't really serious about--they, they--let me see, Clarence, no, not Clarence.  Eddie Sullivan got drafted.
Speaker 1: Just start again.
Speaker 2: Okay, other guys were not serious.
Speaker 1: Right, from Desideros, me and Red went over to Clarence Johnson and Eugene Record and Robert 'Squirrel' Lester, we went over together.  And, and we merged cause they had problems in their group too.  Two members of they group fell out.  So they was looking for two, and we was looking for two people actually.  We ended up with three.  Clarence Johnson, at the time, and then Clarence Johnson fell out.  He wanted to be a producer.  So he, he started producing records.  So we came out as the--Marshall and the Hi-Lites at that time.
Speaker 2: Okay, now, so what year?
Speaker 1: That was 1961.  Oh, '69, no, no, it was 1959 into '60 [1960], at that time.
Story_ID: 14227
Speaker 1: Define everybody's role in the Chi-Lites [Thompson's rhythm and blues group]--it was Marshall and the Hi-Lites.  Did you right away take charge because you are, had been the person in charge or the driving force behind the Chi-Lites down through the years.
Speaker 2: Yeah, well, what happened is I think that playing drums with Gladys Knight [soul singer], playing drums with Major Lance [soul singer], playing drums with Lee Dorsey [rock n' roll singer], playing drums with the Staple Singers [folk, soul music group], I had a lot of experience in, in the musical side of taking the group where I wanted to them, so I think that's the reason why they made me the leader.  Then I went to James Shelton [record label owner], right here on 42nd [Street] and [Dr. Martin Luther] King [Jr.] Drive [Chicago, Illinois] in the basement there and asked him to back us financial-wise.  He was wealthy.  And he said, "Okay, what I'll do, you and my nephew, what I want you to do is--I would, I would put my, invest my money in the group, but it has to be Marshall and the Chi-Lites at the time.
Speaker 1: Marshall and the Chi-Lites or Hi-Lites?
Speaker 2: I mean Marshall and the Hi-Lites at the time.
Speaker 1: And what songs did you do?
Speaker 2: We did, oh, boy, 'Pretty Girl'.  We did 'Love Bandit' with him.  Way back, I've got to remember those songs.  We did 'I'm So Jealous', which we got the break to, at Mercury Records, but we had to change our name.
Speaker 1: Tell me about the name change.  You went from--your uncle who was down the street from here--.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And you went to Mercury Records.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: A legal thing occurred or something like that and you ended up changing the name?
Speaker 2: Right, they had two groups called the Hi-Lites.  There was two groups there.  It was a pop group called the Hi-Lites.  So we didn't want to just make up a total new name, and by us being from Chicago, we decided to put the 'C' in front of that 'H,' and that's, that's why we, that's how we became the Chi-Lites.
Speaker 1: Spell Chi-Lites.
Speaker 2: C-H-I-hyphen-L-I-T-E-S.
Speaker 1: Would you say that was the real start of everything, Mercury Records [record label] or--.
Speaker 2: That's, that's where it started at.
Speaker 1: Name some good songs you did.
Speaker 2: We did 'I'm So Jealous'.  We brought in Andre ['Mr. Rhythm'] Williams [R & B, rock n' roll singer].  He brought in the Motown [soul music genre of the 1960s] band, came to Chicago [Illinois] and played with James and them, played with us on 'Ain't You Glad,' 'Stormy Weather.'  We had a--we, we recorded one album for Mercury at that time.
Speaker 1: How many--and I don't want to get ahead of myself.  This is a double-edged question.  How many records do you think you've made from start to finish, and how much money is owed you?
Speaker 2: (laughs) Oh man, I would say, and it's millions owed to us right now.  I think we have recorded at least, anywhere from forty-five to sixty songs in itself.
Speaker 1: And if somebody had a perfect copy of every one of those records, a record collector would give a pretty penny to have that.  They're selling them real--for real big money in New York City [New York].  You know, and one of our--.
Speaker 2: The original vinyls?
Speaker 1: One of our records is a hundred dollars for the record in New York City.
Story_ID: 14228
Speaker 1: Let's get back to the group.  When did you really start to feel that this was going to be a lifetime thing?
Speaker 2: Well, the first time I hit the stage with Gladys Knight [soul singer] and got the fear out of me from the audience, I knew that it's time for me to, you know, to go out in the world and make a career out of it for myself.  And that gave me the strength, and the, you know, and the talent for me to do it.
Speaker 1: What has driven, I mean what drove you.  You're a person that I've seen--you would be on the West Side and the South Side [Chicago, Illinois] promoting records, on the radio, on two different radio stations at the same time.  And you're still today just driving, driving, driving.  What is it, Marshall?
Speaker 2: Well, this is what I know how to do, number one.  And like I told the lady earlier [Julieanna Richardson, interviewer], that I enjoy entertaining people and making people happy.  I have seen people on the downside, downside of their life, come to our concerts, and seem like they forget about the downside until they leave.  And when they go back home, of course, I know it's back there, but when they come out to see us, it's like, you know, it's--they're in another world.
Speaker 1: Even today, every time you come out with a record, it's like your first record.  You wake people up.  You wake my program director up, out of the bed in the middle of the night talking about you've got a hit record.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: What drives you, man?  Do you ever stop to think about--did something happen to you as a child that gives you this drive?
Speaker 2: No, I think this-- it's leadership.  I always look at it--you have to believe in yourself and God give you a gift to go out there to deliver.  And I don't have time for anything else.  I've never been a drug addict.  I've never dealt with just thinking of things that's not real.  I look at real things, things that I can move on with my life with and make people happy and enjoy it.
Speaker 1: Let's talk about that number one record.  And you tell me that a person, to get a number one pop record, they would work for the rest of their life.  Tell me about that.
Speaker 2: Well, we [music group, The Chi-Lites] was very blessed to have that.  With a number one pop song, you'll be able to work, I mean until you're ninety-five years old.  You could roll out on the stage, as long as the people are still living, who was here in the time that you had that number one pop record, you still have those fans there.  And now, an R & B [rhythm and blues music] record, just a R & B record, you might be here today and gone tomorrow.
Story_ID: 14229
Speaker 1: What is the difference between pop and R & B [rhythm and blues music]?
Speaker 2: A pop record is a crossover record.  It's--it takes care of the whole world.  An R & B record is basically in--on the black side, okay.  So it's R & B music.  It's rhythm and blues.  Rhythm and blues against pop.  It's two different--now, pop covers rhythm and blues and the pop side.  That means that you're known all over the world.  When we get to England, I mean it's just like we're still singing today like we have a number one record today.  And London [England], when we get to London, we have a regular layout there.  People are glad to see you, especially countries that don't even speak English.  They know pop's hits.  We can go to Japan, like Japan--Japanese, they can understand, 'Have You Seen Her.'  They can understand 'Oh Girl.'  Those are huge records.  Australia, I mean anywhere you go and they might have it in their language.  They might, somebody might have covered the same record, singing--singing it in their language.  But when you have a R & B record, it's--you can--it's only a level--it's leveled off.  Here's your R & B record and here's your pop.  Pop, pop records covers pop and R & B, you know. It can go both ways, but a R & B record will go here; a pop record will go there.
Speaker 1: What are your top pop records, your first number one?
Speaker 2: (Pause).
Speaker 1: Well, we had about six, we--'Give More Power to People,' which was our first million seller.  It went pop, I think it went up to like number eighteen.  'Stoned Out of My Mind,' it was pop, it went to like twenty, twenty-one, things like that.  'Oh Girl' came on at number one, 'Have You Seen Her,' it went number three pop. 'The Coldest Day of My Life' went number seventy-two pop, and 'Lonely Man,' it went to like sixty-something--don't quote me, but it was in the pop field, about sixty-three or something like that.
Story_ID: 14230
Speaker 1: What are the pressures within a group that cause it--so many groups break up.  What are some of the pressures that cause some groups to dissolve?
Speaker 2: Well, you have internal problems.  You have people who'll be on drugs.  You have people's family problems or a wife don't want him to be out there doing the music.  They want him at home.  They want them to have a regular job or--we've been through it all.  But the driving force of it is that if you can keep busy and keep everybody excited in what they are doing, it overshadows that.  I tried to--when I got married, you know, I kept my wife [Constance Strong Thompson] on the road with me.  She was the manager--I ended up making her the manager.  So we managed that very well--being on the road.
Speaker 1: I'd like to talk about her if you don't mind, can I?
Speaker 2: Herb [Kent, interviewer], you cannot--you've gotta let him finish.
Speaker 1: I can't do what?
Speaker 2: You've gotta let him finish.
Speaker 1: Oh, did I interrupt you?  Okay, go ahead, I'm sorry.
Speaker 2: Okay, yes, my wife she was like the manager of the group, traveling with us.  So that made it easier for me to travel.  Some of the fellows in the group [the Chi-Lites], their wives was at home so there was a difference there.  And so we--one day we had a meeting, sat down and decided to let--I decided to let their wives comes on the road, as long as they wasn't working a regular job here in Chicago [Illinois].  I told them that'd be okay.  So we started letting them travel with us.
Speaker 1: One of the great things that ever happened to you in this world is meeting her, isn't it? Can you speak about that?
Speaker 2: (Shakes head for no, begins to cry).
Speaker 1: It's hard.
Story_ID: 14231
Speaker 1: Interesting story about your bass singer.  Tell us about that.
Speaker 2: (Laughs) Well, Chuck Barksdale [R & B vocalist], he was always saying about [Creadel] 'Red' [Jones].  Red is one of the greatest bass singers he ever heard.  And Chuck used to tell me all the time. I said, "Chuck, not, you're kidding."  He said "I'm telling you, Marshall, he said, you got to listen to Red."  So we [Thompson's musical group, the Chi-Lites] had the pleasure to go in and record 'Give More Power to the People,' and that's when Red really came out, you know in his bass.  And the record went gold (laughs). So Chuck Barksdale called me up and said, "See there, you'd better listen to me."  So we were--we were very happy to see Red coming in and really, with his bass, and bring the group--. Now, Red was at Hyde Park High School [Chicago, Illinois].  He was a genius in music.  He come up with some bass notes that the average bass singer don't even know how to start to sing, you know.  And as a matter of fact, he made up a lot of our background notes with Eugene Record  [Chi-Lites group member], like on 'Have You Seen Her' and 'Coldest Day of My Life,' all of those huge records.  Red was the driving force behind that background.
Speaker 1: He became ill--.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And had to leave the group.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And no one heard from him for years, and his money was in escrow.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Can you finish that story?
Speaker 2: Well, his wife today, she's receiving his funds.  He passed away about four years ago [2000 interview].  We put a APP [sic, APB, all points bulletin] out on him to try to find him.  And we found him California.  And then we found out--we got his death certificate out in California.  And we found out he was deceased.  But we looked for him for a long time.
Story_ID: 14232
Speaker 1: Marshall, is it not true that when you're a member of a group, you grow closer together than family?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.
Speaker 1: An incredible closeness.  Can you explain that?
Speaker 2: Well, it's like a family.  You know, you--you go on the road, you--you know, I mean back in the time we [Thompson's musical group, the Chi-Lites] went on the road, you couldn't hardly get a hotel room.  You'd go in there and, and it wasn't no rooms for you.  We had to sleep in the cars and to get to the gigs, we went to--I remember the first time out in California, when the Chi-Lites first went out there, we was out there searching for work from door to door on Sunset Boulevard [Los Angeles, California].  We went all up and down Sunset Boulevard, and the O'Jays [rhythm and blues musical group] was there.  The Valentinos [R & B music group] were singing, that was back in the time of Sam Cooke [R & B singer] 'cause he was a Valentino back in those days.  And everybody, we just went in and, and sung for free.  We just went in and tried to get a gig.  I had my [hair] dryer.  I used to do everybody's processes [black hairstyle].  And I took my dryer out there in California.  About two blocks up the street from Sam Cooke's death, we were staying in--on Santa Barbara [California] up there, in the hotel there, two blocks from him, where he passed away.  We couldn't hardly keep a room.  Reggie Thomas ran out of money.  We had to go pawn my dryer.  We pawned my dryer and got the money off the dryer and paid for another night's room. Went to--Etta James [R & B singer] was singing with us, Ritchie Valens [rock 'n roll singer] was there, Etta James, Valentinos, O'Jays and the Chi-Lites.  They gave us about fifteen dollars a night for singing.  And we had to--we went over to Cooper's.  That was our favorite donut shop 'cause that's all we had to eat (laughs), and ate, and went back home just hoping that somebody'd really take this group under their wing.  So Eugene Record [Chi-Lites's vocalist] sent back--one time, we put--the dryer was already in the pawn shop.  So we didn't have no place to go, we didn't have--we couldn't pawn the--'cause the dryer was already there.  So Eugene Record said--called his father, and he sent us, Western Union-ed [money transfer/message service] us money, and got some money out there to us to take care of our rooms while we was there.  But it was something else.  I couldn't wait to get back to Chicago [Illinois]. Broke down in Lynchville, Illinois [downstate Illinois] (laughs), never forget that.  We slept in the car two nights, freezing outside, snow. Our toes was frozen on top of each other in the car, didn't have no, no money to go anywhere.  We were stuck right there.  We had threw a rod in the, in the wagon.  Aw well, the Chi-Lites been through it.
Story_ID: 14233
Speaker 1: Tell us about Eugene Record [Chi-Lites vocalist] who is so well-known for his [song]writing?
Speaker 2: 'Gene' Record was, was the backbone of the Chi-Lites' career in the music industry. He was a very talented producer, songwriter, and he had a very close young lady with him, Ms. Barbara Acklin, which is his team.  She helped write 'Toby' and 'Oh Girl' and 'Have You Seen Her' with him.  He was very instrumental with our career of--of our sound.  He was the sound of the Chi-Lites and with Robert 'Squirrel' Lester and myself and Creadel 'Red' Jones, but he, he wrote all the hits.  And every--just about every song that he wrote for us was very successful in our career.
Speaker 1: Can I ask you why he's no longer there?
Speaker 2: Well, he's in the spiritual.  He decided to--(pause)--Eugene Record decided to give his talent to the God.  You know, he, he wanted to go over to the spiritual side of the music.  And he's--and I was just at his house two days ago.  I sit there and talked with him because we, he's gonna sing with us for the first time in about fifteen years at the hall of fame awards [Rhythm & Blues Foundation Pioneer Awards Program] that we're receiving September the 6th in New York City.  So we--I went over there to sit down with him and let him know what two songs we'll be performing there, which will be 'Oh Girl' and 'Have You Seen Her' and he's very excited about that.
Speaker 1: But there were some irreconcilable differences, just like, as in any group--were there?
Speaker 2: We're the same as any other group.  You know, you have your difference.  You--at the time, when you're younger, when we had the differences, we was still like in our twenties to, you know, twenty-eight, thirties, like that.  And we had our differences.  And, but as time went on, and we learned to respect each other a little more.  So now, we're back as close as ever right now.
Story_ID: 14234
Speaker 1: Let's get to [Robert] 'Squirrel' [Lester].  Was he the heartthrob of the group?  The ladies liked him.  He had light skin, wavy hair like Smokey Robinson [soul singer/songwriter]--.
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Well, Squirrel, yeah, Squirrel was the, what I would say the Jackie Wilson [pop singer] of the group.  You know, he had the long curly hair and the light skin and that, that look that really draws the women.  I remember in Waterloo, Iowa, you would think he was the Pied Piper [folk tale character].  After the concert, he had a line--a string of women running right behind him, walking over to that hotel room there.
Speaker 1: He's still with the group.
Speaker 2: Yes, he is.
Story_ID: 14235
Speaker 1: Where do you want to take the group now--the Chi-Lites.
Speaker 2: Well, I would say I want to go--well, we started off with one movie, 'Original Gangster.'  We had a--the pleasure to perform in that movie.  I'd like to go into some acting if, if possible, with the group.  You know, just little parts, cameo parts.  I'd like to see each one of us get into that. As well as--I'm into the production side now with Avirex (ph.)--doing young talent, the hip-hop talent.  I'm working with that now.  But I'd like to see the Chi-Lites as a whole go--branch out into parts, doing movie parts, whatever, you know.
Story_ID: 14236
Speaker 1: The hall of fame [Rhythm & Blues Foundation Pioneer Awards Program] is finally coming your way.  What's up with that?
Speaker 2: Well, it's gonna be very, very emotional cause my wife [Constance Strong Thompson] sent them letters for about fifteen years to get us in there.  And she passed away.  Now, we are in there, going in there, and it's gonna be very, very emotional.  When we step up there to receive that certificate with Smokey Robinson [soul singer/songwriter], Stevie Wonder [singer/songwriter/musician]--and Betty Wright [R&B, pop singer] will be getting an award as well, and with the super, super Impressions [soul music] group.
Speaker 1: Do you get any money with it?
Speaker 2: Yes (laughs).  I can't tell you how much (laughs), but it is wonderful (laughs).
Story_ID: 14237
Speaker 1: Lay that hall of fame out in detail for us, please.
Speaker 2: Well, this hall of fame [Rhythm & Blues Foundation Pioneer Awards Program] is the number one rhythm & blues hall of fame in the world.  Everybody looks forward to be--to collect the award that we will be receiving September the 6th [2000], you know, by Mr. Smokey Robinson [soul singer/songwriter], okay, and achievement award to Mr. Stevie Wonder [singer/songwriter/musician].  This award here covers every act since the beginning of your time in the rhythm & blues field.  The Dells [R & B music group] went in about four or five years ago, I think.  And I was very happy for them.  After Chuck Barksdale  [R & B singer, member of the Dells] told me about it, that's when, when we really jumped, really jumped on it.  We heard--I mean we heard about it, but we didn't really know how important it was to get in there.  And as the years went on, and I watched it over and over and over and over, and we got a chance to get in there, it's--it's the most exciting thing that we ever had.
Story_ID: 14238
Speaker 1: We used to battle against each other, the Chanteurs and the Desideros [local Chicago, Illinois musical groups] were in these little talent shows around Chicago.  So we had two groups.  We [the Desideros] had myself, Creadel ['Red'] Jones and Eddie Sullivan and Wardell [Del] Brown.  The Chanteurs, they had Reed, Dave Reed [sic Eddie Reed], Robert 'Squirrel' Lester, which is with me now and Eugene Record was one of the Chi-Lites and Clarence Johnson.
Speaker 2: Why is that phone not off? Okay, go on.
Speaker 1: So two members of the Chanteurs had a problem.  Two members of the Desideros had a problem.  So we decided to come together--we was a dance group, they was a good singing group.  So we decided to merge those two together and make up one good group dancing and singing, okay.  So I went [cousin, James] Shelton [record label owner], which is my family.  I went to him and asked him to back us.  He was--he was a person in real estate, you know, pretty wealthy.  And I asked him to back us into recording.  And he said he would.  He said he would spend his money, but it would have to be Marshall--because I'm in the family--it would have to be Marshall and the Hi-Lites for him to invest, okay.  So we ended up being Marshall and the Hi-Lites.  And he took us in the studio, and we recorded our first songs.
Story_ID: 14239
Speaker 1: So tell me how was it when you went into the studio for the first time?
Speaker 2: Well, actually, that was my second time.  I was with [Magnificent] Montague [radio personality].  I did that early--we just--everybody [members of Marshall and the Hi-Lites singing group] went in there and got around the microphone and just started singing.  Actually, I don't even know if they heard me or not (laughs).  But as time went on, when I went with James Shelton [cousin, record label owner], we had to really express ourself.  By that time, they had different tracks, had different microphones at that time.  I was able to really get in there and sing and play drums on the records with my singing.  I mean, I was really to--I was really ready to express myself in the music and had a chance to--to get on wax, okay.  And we recorded the song.  And we put it out, of course.  And they tried to play it. It was just like anything else.  Nothing happened big.  But it--it got play around Chicago [Illinois], and that was it.
Story_ID: 14240
Speaker 1: I designed some of the uniforms [for musical group, Marshall and the Hi-Lites] in the early days.  I've, you know, and I just tried to take different looks from different people that I have seen in the music, you know, business by watching what they had on and going to their shows and different things like that.  We couldn't afford what they had on--we felt we couldn't afford what they had on, but we was trying to get as close to that look that we could.
Speaker 2: And so what did you want your thing to be sort of, or what did you--you know, if people said, "Here are the Hi-Lites."  What did you want, you know, them to say about the group?
Speaker 1: Well, I wanted them to enjoy theirself with us.  I wanted them to be happy and watch us dance, you know.  I would, at that time, I was about this big, and I could do somersaults and flips and splits and all that.  It was just exciting for me to see my--well, first of all see myself up there really getting into it, and to watch the people's faces--(pause)--as I performed.  You know, see.  And like I said, yeah, and it's a pleasure to be able to go down to the Cotton Club [music venue, Chicago, Illinois] where my uncle was playing drums at the time--Big Marshall Thompson, the same name as me.  I, I was his namesake.  Then he let us in there to get around the microphone and sing for all those beautiful people out there.  And we really got over.
Story_ID: 14241
Speaker 1: You had talked about--I forget his name, but the person who wrote a lot of your songs.  Was he with the original group?
Speaker 2: Eugene, Eugene Record [Chi-Lites vocalist].
Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) Yes?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Right, right.
Speaker 1: So what is that relationship between the writer and--you know, and the--would he, like say, "Oh, look, I've got this song for you?"  I mean is it or did it work that?  A lot of people--.
Speaker 2: At that time, everybody had their own job to do.  I had [Robert] 'Squirrel' [Lester, Chi-Lites singer] in charge of transportation and hotels.  I had him doing that.  And I, you know, I had--well Eugene Record was doing all the writing and producing.  I was the person to go out and make it happen.  You know, I'd take what Squirrel--(pause)--okay.  I looked at what Squirrel was doing, looked at what Eugene was doing.  You had [Creadel] 'Red' [Jones] there, the bass singer, dealing with the background harmonies.  So we had a team together here.
Story_ID: 14242
Speaker 1: You know, I was asking you--can you just start that again cause I can't--you were gonna talk about the--.
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Well, we went down to--well, I was on the bus.  And I'd seen Mr. Otis Leavill [soul musician/bandleader].  Otis told me to bring the group [the Chi-Lites] down, okay.  And so I called the guys down.  I said, "This is the perfect time to bring the guys down and get an audition down there for Mr. Carl Davis [record producer]."  And we went down there on 12th [Street] and Roosevelt Road [Chicago, Illinois] and went up there with a song called 'Price of Love' and auditioned it with Mr. Gerald Sims [songwriter/producer].  He called Carl Davis in to hear it, and Carl Davis really liked the song at the time, and he said, "Hey, let's, let's give them a recording deal."  At that point, I knew that it was time for us to quit them jobs that we had, the extra little jobs, and concentrate on our career.  And we had a backing.  We had a full backing.  At that time, Carl I think was with OKeh Records. And he was just building the Jalynne label.  And so you knew that it was, that things was about to happen for us.  And we had confidence--we had confidence and enough confidence in Carl Davis to take us to the level that he took us to. And it worked.
Speaker 1: And what year was this?
Speaker 2: This was 1969, about '69.
Speaker 1: '69.  And this is like ten years after your, your time with Gladys [Knight, soul singer].
Speaker 2: Right.  That's right.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So it wasn't that long a period, really.
Speaker 2: Right, it seemed like a long time otherwise (laughs).
Story_ID: 14243
Speaker 1: What happened?  Let's describe that period, cause 1969, you [musical group, the Chi-Lites] really start to take off.  What was the song?  What was that song?
Speaker 2: 'Give It Away.'
Speaker 1: 'Give It Away.'  And can you sing a few bars of that?
Speaker 2: (Singing) "What's the sense in giving you love, when you're gonna give it away, oh, yeah."
Speaker 1: And--so that--did you start going on tour?  Was there a plan?  I mean what was the--.
Speaker 2: Well, that song took us to the Apollo Theater [Harlem, New York]--that song took us to the Apollo Theater where we would, we was making about, I think about eight hundred dollars for the whole week.  And we had to pay hotel bill.  And we only had enough for hotels, no food.  So we just had to make friends with people, which we did--we made a lot of friends with people around the shows and their friends, and they bought our food for us.
Speaker 1: Now, that was a big thing.  Apollo Theater was a big thing.
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, if you could make it at the Apollo Theater, you could make it anywhere in the world, you know.  That was the number one theater--that one and the Regal Theatre [Chicago, Illinois] was number, the two top theaters in the country.  Along came the Howard Theater in Washington [D.C.], Uptown [Theater] in Philly [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], the Royal Theater in Baltimore [Maryland], let me see.  That was it.  That was the circuit.  And those shows went into the theaters for a week.  So if you did a week at each one of those theaters, you had a good six or seven weeks of work all the time.  After you finished one for, for--you'd just go back around the circuit and start all over again.
Story_ID: 14244
Speaker 1: And did you like life on the circuit?  Did you find--you know, I mean you liked playing your music, but did you like the life on the circuit?
Speaker 2: Yes, I got a chance to meet a lot of people across the world, you know.  And the funny thing about it, every time I'd come back to Chicago [Illinois], come home, I'd see the same person, sitting at the same spot (laughs), in the same place, same spot.  And I had been gone for three weeks.  And I done seen about a million people.  It was just funny, and I often wondered when I came back--I asked a guy one time, I said, "Do you know it's a world out there," you know.  I mean, "Have you ever seen a mountain--(pause)--you ever seen the beautiful mountains that God has made.  I mean it's a beautiful world out there, and you're really missing it, you know."  Oh, I would--and one time I took one of the, one of the guys as a valet.  I felt sorry for him 'cause he had never been to Gary, Indiana before. So I took him out to be our valet.  And he just had a wonderful time.  He just--he didn't, he didn't believe it was--I mean he'd see it on TV, mountain lions and different things, but he never experienced the big mountains, going through the Rocky Mountains and things like Arizona mountains and things like that.  I mean it just--he thought he was in Heaven.
Speaker 1: But at the same time, you always wanted to come back home (unclear).
Speaker 2: Home is home.  There's nothing like home.  You know, we could have moved to California.  And we could have moved a number of places, but this is where we started in Chicago.  That's why we're still here.
Story_ID: 14245
Speaker 1: Now, there was--you know, I read in the material, you know, the whole thing, that you were, this--Chicago [Illinois] had a sound and, you know--and Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] had a sound. And then you had the Motown [Records] sound [Detroit, Michigan]--.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And Memphis [Tennessee].  So what was special about the Chicago sound?
Speaker 2: Well, the Chicago sound started basically from the Impressions [soul music group] and Curtis Mayfield [soul singer/songwriter], Jerry Butler [rhythm and blues producer/musician].  They had the sound here.  And then we added onto the sound as time went on.  And we called ours the Jalynne [record company] sound, which was--came under Major Lance [soul singer], Gene Chandler [soul singer], Barbara Acklin [pop, soul vocalist], the Young-Holt Trio [jazz trio], the Artistics [R & B, soul music group] and Wells Wallers and we had many more.  But we created our own sound right here, and we had two--two great musicians that had that sound.  They helped us with the sound--that was Quinton Joseph [drummer].  He later on went with Harold Melvin's [and the] Blue Notes [soul music group] in Philadelphia for the Philadelphia sound.  But we had a great sound right here in Chicago just with our musicians.  And we created our sound.  Motown created their sound.  Kenny Gamble [singer/songwriter/producer] and Philadelphia created their sound.  But everybody had their own sound.  When we'd do concerts and shows together, you know, although we were singing the same type of music, all those sounds was different, you know.  The Delfonics [soul music group] had that Philadelphia, Thom Bell [producer] sound, you know.  And then you had the Chess sound.  You had Chess Records [Chicago, Illinois] over there with the Dells.  They had their sound, you know.  But basically, we used the same musicians so we tried to--Brunswick Records tried to do what Chess did, and Chess tried to do what Brunswick did.
Speaker 1: 'Cause all of us in the audience, we just think it all sounds good.
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.
Story_ID: 14246
Speaker 1: I remember the time when the Jacksons [the Jackson Five, pop music group] was playing at the Regal Theatre [Chicago, Illinois] on the talent shows.  They used to open up all the talent shows there.  And later on we had a show at the 'Met' Theater [Metropolitan Theater, Chicago, Illinois] when the Regal closed down.  We took the Jacksons to open up the show for us at the Met Theater, across the street from the Regal.  They used to use our arrangements, 'Does Your Mama Know About Me.' Jermaine [Jackson, pop singer] used to love to sing that song all the time.  So he came over and used our arrangements on that show.  And they had their sound.  They had a little young song out of Gary, Indiana.  And so they created their own sound.  And I remember them playing in all the clubs around Chicago [Illinois].  You know, they was, like little kids getting in and so their father [Joe Jackson] took them in and made sure, after they did they show, they had to go straight back on out to the alley and get back in their transportation and go home.  But we had quite a bit of sounds here.  I remember taking the Jackson Five--they didn't show it in the movie ['The Jacksons: An American Dream'].  I'm the first one to give 'em they out-of-town performance.  And that was in Houston, Texas at the Ray Barnett's Cinder Club--which they left out in the Jackson movie, of course.  But it's, all is well.  We're still friends.  I'll be with them on the [July] 22nd [2000].  I just left they house about a month ago in L.A. [Los Angeles, California] and Encino [California].  So I'm going out for the big party with Joe on the 22nd.  But those guys, they had their own sound.  I never thought that that young brother [Michael Jackson, pop singer] would be as big as he is today.  But he had the talent.  So, but he believed in himself and he went on.  And his father believed in the group.
Story_ID: 14247
Speaker 1: Can you just answer that question again about why, you know, your favorite record and why it is your favorite?
Speaker 2: Well, 'That's How Long' is my favorite all-time Chi-Lite [Thompson's rhythm and blues group] record because the meaning of it, the sound of the record.  All three Chi-Lites [Marshall Thompson, Eugene Record, and Robert 'Squirrel' Lester] had a performance part in the record and the range that Eugene Record used in his voice, and the full sound.  The lady--what's Bobby Brown's [R & B singer] wife [Whitney Houston, pop singer], she had a record out similar to it, with the same string line.  We had a--Tom-Tom [Washington, music arranger] had a very, very big arrangement on that song.  And I mean it's just my favorite.  If I play it on stage today, I know we're gonna--somebody might cry while we're singing it, you know.  It's just a beautiful song.  But it was never a single record.
Story_ID: 14248
Speaker 1: Was there a song that you did that took off, that you were surprised that it took off?
Speaker 2: Yes, it was.  'Have You Seen Her' was the big record was the B-side.  Have you--we [the Chi-Lites] used to have--we went on the road singing 'It Would Take More Than This to Change Our Love.'  That was the B-side, and we was in St. Louis, Missouri at Kiel Auditorium with Jackie Wilson  [R & B vocalist], singing at the stage.  So we went out on stage--no, we went--first of all we went to, to KATZ radio [St. Louis, Missouri radio station] with Jim Gates, who was the disc jockey there.  And we went into--to do an interview at the station.  And we went in there, and we was talking and different things like that.  And, and so Jim Gates said, "I'm gonna play your--your hit record."  So he played 'Have You Seen Her.'  And we said, "Oh, you're playing the wrong side.  You're playing the wrong side."  And he said, "Look at the phone."  The phone was lit up, straight.  We said, "Well (laughs), I guess you know what you're playing." And we was down there telling him he was playing the wrong side of the record.  So we--that night at Kiel Auditorium, we didn't even know--we didn't rehearse it with the band, so we didn't have that together.  We was rehearsing the other side.  We had the other side ready for the show.  So we got on stage and sung, (singing) "take more than this to change our love."  We're just singing.  So we went offstage.  People say--they got up out their seats and started, "What's happening here?  You all got to sing 'Have You Seen Her.'"  We said, "What?"  The band didn't know it.  They didn't know it.  So the promoter came in the back, he said, "You all better get back on that stage and sing 'Have You Seen Her.'  There people are gonna tear our place up here."  So we went back out there and sung it 'a cappella' and got a standing ovation.
Speaker 1: That's a nice story.  I'm glad I asked that question.
Speaker 2: And that was before 'The Flip Wilson Show' and everything then.
Speaker 1: And is there a song that you're requested to sing that you're sort of, you know, you don't particularly care for?
Speaker 2: No, I couldn't say that.
Story_ID: 14249
Speaker 1: What do you think has made you successful?  Why so--I mean even though the group broke up, you know, your songs are still in demand, and why do you think that's the case?
Speaker 2: Well, the songs are bigger than the group.  I mean millions and millions of people know those songs.  In some places, it's amazing.  We get on stage, say if I'm hoarse or Eugene Record [the Chi-Lites vocalist] was hoarse or Anthony Watson, which is our new singer, says he's hoarse or something, we really--when we get to those two songs, we don't have to worry about it because all I have to do is put the mic[rophone] out there, "You sing," and they--as long as we're doing the background, they'll carry that lead singing all the way through for you.
Speaker 1: But don't you think that's a certain genius, really, that you have?
Speaker 2: It's entertainment, yes, knowing how to perform, which the youngsters, they're really getting into now.  Youngsters are really getting into knowing how to perform.  I've noticed they're coming to our concerts more and more.  Some of these top younger groups, that really feel--what's the magic.  How's the magic on stage and develop it.  And it is a magic--and, like I say, we learned from the pros, the Ella Fitzgeralds [jazz singer] and the Dinah Washington [blues, jazz singer] arias and like that. Even the Temptations [doo-wop, soul music group] was a little ahead of us.  When they came out with all they fancy footwork, you know. And--and in Motown [Detroit, Michigan soul music capital], you had to learn how to sit and learn how to talk.  You had to learn how to perform, I mean everything, eat.  And they made you eat well at the table, everything.  And we watched some of the things that they'd do.  We didn't know all of it, but we, we picked up as we went along, how they're doing.  And if you do anything long enough, you're gonna fall into it.
Story_ID: 14250
Speaker 1: And do you think that the music that you created will ever see another day?  I mean, you know, a lot of times people think those days will never come again, and they were--it was a lot of genius and originality that came out of that.
Speaker 2: Well, for the new talent, they're sampling all of our music.  Our music has never left.  As long as radio is playing 'em and as long as we have people here like a Herb Kent [disc jockey/radio personality] that really loves our music and staying into our music, it will last forever.  It will last as long as Herb Kent is here, and then when Herb Kent leaves here, somebody is still living, will pick it up and still go on with it.  I hear 'Oh Girl' just--and I'm all, I'm all over the country, just about every week.  And I call Mr. Kent from--I mean I might call him from England, Germany, anywhere, wherever we've at, and that record could be--(pause)--I call Mr. Kent all over the country sometimes on the telephone.  He'll be on the air.  And I just be--I might call him in New York [New York] or just on the highway in my car or something, and say, "Hey, how you doing?"  And I know he's there taking care of business, playing all of the dusties [old records] and keeping people informed.  And he's a legend as well as the Chi-Lites.  And these that grew up with this music, wants to hear this music.  And the youngsters now is really picking up to that type of music because after you record much product, and you go as far as you can, you've got to have another avenue.  So that's why the M.C. Hammer [rapper], when he recorded my song ['Have You Seen Her'] over again, and sold platinum. Paul Young [British pop singer] when he recorded 'Oh, Girl' over again, went platinum.  When Con Hunley, the country-western singer, did 'Oh Girl' again, he went platinum.  So we had one tune, went triple platinum about four or five times.
Story_ID: 14251
Speaker 1: Now, is there an artist that you admire?  I mean I know that your uncle [Marshall Thompson] was a great influence on you, but is there, you know, an artist or artists that you really admire, and if you do, why?
Speaker 2: Well, as far as singing, well, new artists or--.
Speaker 1: Anyone.  I don't care.
Speaker 2: Any artist.
Speaker 1: Someone who influenced you or someone--.
Speaker 2: Well, we'll go to the new artists--I mean the old artists.  Old school.  I came up with the Dells [rhythm and blues group].  I came up with the Flamingos [R & B music group] and the Spaniels [R & B music group].  Spaniels was the ones that I really got into because of [James] 'Dimples' [Cochran].  I just liked the way Dimples looked at the time on album.  He was real sharp looking.  He had my note [baritone], and we used to sing 'Stormy Weather.' (Singing) "Stormy weather, hum, since my girl and me together."  So we used to sing that in school, and then they came out with--let me see, 'Painted Picture,' (singing) "You painted picture."  I mean I just love Pookie's voice.  Pookie Hudson [lead vocalist, the Spaniels R & B group] had a very distinctive voice, and when you'd hear him sing, you knew that was Pookie Hudson.  You see what I'm saying.  And, Flamingos, and at that time, they had Johnny Carter from the Dells.  He was in the Flamingos with 'Golden Teardrops.'  That was one of my favorite records of all time, 'Golden Teardrops.'  'Golden Teardrops' was this tune that I was about--I must have been ten, eleven.  And I heard it--I was in the washroom, when I heard their tenor go off in the echo chamber, I thought I was just sailing when I went out there.  I said, "That's the prettiest record I ever seen."  And it had Solly--Solly McElroy was the lead singer [the Flamingos].  He had a very unique voice, singing lead.  And I tell you, those groups really inspired me in the, in the background harmony and in the group field to really want to go out there and have me a very strong singing group, you see.  And then when I--as time went on, I seen Little Anthony and Imperials [R & B music group] do the dancing, you know, doing the splits and all this.  So I wanted to put that with it, you know.  And it was amazing to see how some acts like that can just get on and make a lot of people happy.
Story_ID: 14252
Speaker 1: Constance [Strong Thompson] came in, she was my wife.  We'd gotten married and everything.  And, and I was thinking of a way for a position for her.  Of course, she was very talented in, in--not in the musical side, but in doing the bookkeeping and different things like that.  She had degrees--college degrees, and she was very intelligent in talking and, you know, playing the parts.  So I decided to let her come out on the road and handle the management end of the Chi-Lites [Thompson's music group]. So she went out there and met some very important people that's--that runs the music side.  And she got in with them.  And she was the type of person that would go in and get numbers, names.  She insisted on about seven hundred Christmas cards--which I didn't have, really have time for that.  She sent about seven----I didn't know how she did it--sent seven hundred Christmas cards out every year, to--everybody got a Christmas card.  They'd be calling me from Japan, Australia, Italy (laughs).  I mean we got all these cards back.  And she was just talented into what she was doing.  And she made sure that I got the wardrobes for the guys.  Anything that I'd forget, she never forgot.  Like time schedule.  If it was three o'clock, I would have been here at two (laughs).  I mean she would control that part of it. She, you know--and I let her in.  I, of course, I have people in my life now that I'm working on to get to that point. But she was the sole backbone of the group as--and the later years when the downfall came.  She took it from, from being successful to the stopping point when disco came out, she took from that--she came right from that disco era and took it to another level.  She'd sit down, I remember the first time she sat down and typed up letters to people in London--people in England--I mean, I mean Japan, different venues.  She'd say--(pause)--she'd say, "Listen. You guys had the number one record in just about the world.  When you have the number one pop record in the United States, everybody follows.  Every, every country in, in the world follows the United States pop charts."  So you don't have to have--in England, just like a Elton John [pop singer], one hundred thousand records is a million seller in London--in England, okay.  In the United States, at that time, five hundred thousand was a million seller.  So you have double the exposure of the crowd.  So what I'm saying is, when we got to England, and we already done sold five hundred thousand in America, that made us double huge in that country, you see.  So a lot of people thought when, when the Elton Johns and all them come over here, they had the same type of sales.  So you know, all they know is Elton John twenty-five million records sold--I mean gold records.  Right, but how many records were sold over there to get that gold record?  But now, using that, when they came over here, they got the five hundred thousand records here because the, the news media and the build-up and all that, coming here, built them up, like the Beatles [rock n' roll group] and all that.  The Beatles started right here on 'Record Row,' right here on [South] Michigan Avenue [Chicago, Illinois] at Chess Records and Vee-Jay, Vee-Jay Records.  And they left here--a lot people didn't know it, they recorded here and sent their records back over there, and really got huge over there, and then came back here and drew all the people, you see.  But my wife, at the time, back to her--I had got away from her, but my wife at the time was, she made sure when the disco era came in, she went and sent letters to everybody to, to show that we were still alive, okay.  Then when computers came out, she really started searching in the computer.  She got me into the computers before she passed away.  And she would start searching things, and a lot of things came up.  And she found a lot of money for the group.  She signed a--found a lot of people was product all over the world that we didn't know nothing about.  The keyword was "the Chi-Lites" came up.  Everything that we ever did, you could find on that computer, you see.  So she was the one behind all that to give me the talent.  Now, we're getting our royalties because of her.
Speaker 2: That's fabulous. So you, she was in many ways your soulmate.
Speaker 1: She was, yeah.
Speaker 2: How did you meet?
Speaker 1: Well, I'll tell you.  I had an office in downtown Chicago with Truman Gibson, my lawyer.  And, and we had a guy that had a--his daughter is in the movies now.  He had the hotels on 95th Street, on Stony Island [Avenue, Chicago, Illinois], all those hotels, Ray McCoy, Ray McCoy.  We shared office together.  And I was coming down the elevator, and my wife was standing right in the hallway.  And we met.  So we went out to lunch, and I said, "Come on up to the office."  And she came up to the office.  And we got to be friends from there.
Speaker 2: And it's not easy--a lot of times, it's not easy for people to live and work together.
Speaker 1: Oh, yeah, it's hard.
Speaker 2: But you were able to do that.  Why do you think that's the case?
Speaker 1: Well, it was in her to deal with the music.  Going on the road and meeting everybody, you know, meeting the Dells [rhythm and blues music group], on the same show.  We was all on the same show together.  The Manhattans [R & B music group] and Ray, Goodman & Brown [soul music group]--we all worked together.  And she got involved.  And she ended up helping them (laughs), you know, working for them, with they problems, and going in and collecting their money.  And sometimes Al Goodman and them would say, "Hey, Connie, go get the money."  And she'd go pick up the money, or one of the other, [the] Delfonics [soul music group] they might send her in there, "Hey, go in there and get that money."  So she'd go in there and pick up all the salaries, bring it back to them, straight count, not a penny missing, the breakdowns, sheets, worksheets.  She typed up, she made out our own guest list, which we still do.  You know you don't--like if Mr. [Herb] Kent [disc jockey, radio personality] wants to come to our concert, it wasn't no--write your name on a piece of paper, send it up there and say "Mr. Kent will be here." She had her own guest list sheet, Chi-Lite guest list.  The groups didn't have hotel sheets.  We got our own personal hotel sheets.  When we'd get to the hotels, she'd always fax the hotels.  When we'd get there, all we do is pick up a key.  You know, everything was paid for, the credit cards was up.  It was just all, she was strictly a business person with the group.  She is very much missed.
Speaker 2: So she really is what made you--a lot of what made you successful.
Speaker 1: Yes, yes, she, she kept us successful.  We was already successful when I met her.  You know, we had the hits had--.
Speaker 2: But I'm talking about from a business perspective.
Speaker 1: Oh, yes, yes.
Story_ID: 14253
Speaker 1: I'm just wondering what, you know, how the experience, being a black artist--and that has happened a lot of times, did you find that, you know, were there times that you know that you were cheated or, you know, things that--.
Speaker 2: Well, back until actually I met my wife [Constance Strong Thompson] and we really got to digging into thing about this money, it was a lot of fun.  We didn't have time to find out where the money was--thing--we was just having a lot of fun.  It was just fun to be traveling and enjoying, getting anything you want.  You can buy just about anything you want.  I mean whatever you needed it was there.  We can, you know, just go get it.  We need a fur coat.  Go get it, you know.  And the average person have to work two or three months or maybe a year to get one fur coat.  And we'd buy it for about forty thousand dollars or thirty thousand dollars.  We had--I remember--I remember and being with Aretha Franklin [soul singer] in Cleveland, Ohio. We had a--we had a show with Aretha in Cleveland.  So we went in this furniture store and I had got a, a condominium.  It wasn't--at that time, it was just an apartment on the, on the lake [Lake Michigan] at 69th [Street], 6930, that's what it was, South Shore Drive [Chicago, Illinois].  And I'd moved in here and all this, my first carpet on the floor, had all my carpet.  And I said, "Oh."  So me--me and Connie, we slept on the floor for a minute, and, oh, we had a good time.  We said, "Oh, when we go out and do this show, we're gonna come back in and buy some furniture."  So it was very funny.  We went--we went to Cleveland (laughs).  And we was going down, we was downtown.  So we see this furniture store.  Aretha Franklin seen us, when we looked at this furniture store.  So we went in there and started picking out furniture.  "I want this and I want that, and give me this grandfather clock. Give me (laughs)--give me this table, give me this bedroom set. Give me this great picture."  So, so [Creadel] 'Red' [Jones], my bass singer, he came in.  He seen this white piano, baby grand, just like, something like that.  He seen this white piano.  He says, "I want that piano.  I want this bedroom set here.  I want that picture.  I want that, this, you know, like one of those trunks."  So the guy say, "okay."  He called his boss.  Said, "Hey, we got a sale in here."  We said--so the guy said, "Okay, let's write up."  He said, "We've got check your credit."  We said, "Hold it.  We don't need no credit.  How much is it?"  He say, "You got cash?"  I said, "How much is it?"  So we went in here.  We say, now--he said, "When you need this delivered?"  We said, "Now."  The show was over at eleven o'clock.  He said, "Holy cracker. Now? Today, you need it?"  He said, "Let me call my"--he called his boss and said, "I got some guys up here playing at the Palace Theatre [Cleveland, Ohio].  They've got, they want to get this furniture.  They want to get the furniture."  He said, "When do they--when do they want it?"  "Today, they want it--today."  He said, "Did you check they credit?"  "Nah, they paying cash, cash money for this stuff."  Man, the guy went in there--we paid them, we paid, we got the promoters, and said, "Listen, take care of all of this here, you understand on our pickup."  He took care of all that furniture.  At the end of the day, we had our cars, we drove right back to Chicago.  The truck was behind us (laughs).  He closed up.  He closed the furniture store for the whole day.  And then came to see the show at the Palace Theatre.  That was the funniest thing that I--and drove all the way to Chicago from Cleveland, you know, and got out and delivered our furniture to 6730 South Shore Drive.  I'll never forget that.
Speaker 1: That's a nice story.  I know you made him happy.
Story_ID: 14254
Speaker 1: You know, it's amazing this, this [music industry] business when it's bad, it could be bad.  But when it's good, it can be very, very good.  You have to believe in what you believe in.  If you believe in this music, it's hard, but everything is hard.  Believe in what you're doing and have faith in what you're doing, and put God first in what you're doing, and then you can move on.  The mountains--and a lot of people have--I know when I used to go down to the radio stations years ago, everything I brought in there, I thought it was a hit, but I believed it was a hit.  So the other person, Mr. [Herb] Kent [disc jockey/radio personality] might say--Herb might have thirty records, but I felt that this is mine.  So if I don't take my--if I don't believe in myself to get it played or somebody'd like it, who else is gonna believe in it?  Okay.  So I took my own records down there, and I stayed on they case.  All them disc jockeys will tell you, "Marshall is there.  Marshall is there.  He's gonna promote."  They used to hide the tape from me at Brunswick [Records] 'cause what happened is, the thing was, "You can't get this played.  There's no records in the shop."  I didn't think like that.  When--the moment I'd get out that studio--they used to throw me out and lock the door.  "Don't give him no tape.  Don't give him no tape." 'Cause if I get a cassette (laughs), I'm gonna be at the radio station, excited about that song, if I like it.  I'm gonna be excited about that song, and they might spin it while I'm there, you see.  So Carl [Davis, record producer] called me, "Marshall, you got it playing on the air."  I said, "Let me tell you something, it's best to get it played on there, than not to get played on there at all, okay."  "Well, we ain't got no records tomorrow."  "Well, build it up.  They'll come back if they really like it, you know."  So I got it played.  We [music group, the Chi-Lites] did that with, 'Give More Power to the People.'  They played the beginning of that record and cut it off.  They had WVON [radio station, Chicago, Illinois] then--he played the beginning of it (makes zooming sound).  And nobody knew what that was (makes zooming sound).  "Cut it off, coming soon, coming"--didn't tell who it was or nothing.  I had took the tape down there and gave it to E. Rodney Jones [disc jockey].  And (makes zooming sound), "Cut it off."  Did that for about four weeks. And when the finally played the record, first million seller. That was it.
Story_ID: 14255
Speaker 1: The contribution that black people made to the music industry.
Speaker 2: Well, I made quite a few (laughs), quite a few.  But I did a contribution for, actually for the president's Library of Congress.  We just finished that with *NSYNC [pop music group], the group called *NSYNC.  We just did the show there with them and which I have pictures of that with me.  So if you--might want to take a shot of it.  That's one among--doing shows for Probation Challenge [Academy of Education, Chicago, Illinois] here.  I did a--fundraisers for Governor [Jim] Edgar here, John Stroger, I did his benefit when he was alderman and before he got to be the commissioner [president of the Cook County Board of Commissioners].  I mean just--we can go on and on and on.  In Detroit, Michigan, we did that for the mayor.  It was--he was there--he had a fundraiser to get to be the mayor of Detroit.  California, we did the beauty pageant.  I mean we just--we can go on and on and on in that for thirty years.
Speaker 1: But I was more asking the question about, you know, black people have had a time in this country in some respects, but they've made, we've made a lot of contributions in a lot of areas.  But in music they've been really in many ways American music.  So I'm just wondering your thoughts about that, creative.
Speaker 2: On the creative side?  Well, I think when it come to that side, Eugene Record [Chi-Lites vocalist] was actually the creative person when it comes to the type of music that he made.  Now, 'Give More Power to the People' was very creative and instrumental to what was going on at that time.  'There Will Never Be Any Peace,' we was trying to give out a message, "There will never be any peace until God is seated at the conference table."  That was one of our songs.  We was trying to deliver a message to stop all the violence in the streets and try to get some of these guys off the street, and--so they can get back into really, what it's gonna take to really make their careers and get some knowledge and schooling, get some--and there's so many things to do now to learn how to learn how to do, to really be successful.  It's--it's right there.  And jobs, like they say, it's no jobs.  Well, they're not looking very far because all you have to do now for jobs, you can go on the computer and it could tell you where the jobs are.  You know, it's--it's so many ways now to be successful in what you're doing.  And it's no excuse.  I think it's just a easy way out of not really wanting to do what you really should do.
Story_ID: 14256
Speaker 1: In terms of the younger generation coming along, do you see, do you think that there are any lessons they need to learn, I mean that they could learn from, you know, your generation?  Do you think that--do you see any--you know, do you sort of--do you think they're on the right path?  I mean do you have any comments about what's happening now?
Speaker 2: Well, I hate to--I think that would be pretty deep for me.  I never liked the different laws that they have today.  Just like they say, you can't scold a kid.  Well, I think back in our day, you could.  Back in our day, even the person next door--we was scared to do something because we knew that the person next door would tell the one next door to you.  Or that person over there will tell my mother [Mary Thompson], and this person over there--today, the people, they don't even know who live next door just about now.  They're scared to ask who that is.  So everybody is to theirself, and I think the law came in where you can't spoil--scold a child or a child--they came up with this child abuse.  And I think the--the kids are living the easier way now.  And--and when you live the easy way, I mean that spoils the child to me.  That, they feel that they can do anything they want to do.  So we live in different times now.  Back in our day, if you do something, that belt is gonna get you.  I mean we didn't--wasn't nobody getting hurt or killing nobody like that.  They were just spanking the person.  But now, if you spank the person now, you can just about go to jail for spanking the kid now.  So a kid feel that he can do whatever he want to do now, you see.  And they know if you hurt 'em, they're gonna call the cops on you.  They know these things.  So they got the advantage, and we didn't have that advantage coming up. And that's a law that came in, and I can't put my finger on it, but I--I got my own finger (laughs), I got my own comments about that, but I'm gonna keep that to myself, and just have to live with the way they have it set up with the laws.
Story_ID: 14257
Speaker 1: Do you have concerns or hopes for the black community going forward?
Speaker 2: Well, I got a lot of hope for us, but I can't save the world, but--(pause)--well, I can't save the world, but if I could save just one, you know, I'm satisfied, you see.  If I can show one person that it's a way out there that you can do without getting into drugs, without selling drugs or being on the corner, then I would do my best to try to deliver that person and show them a better way of life, because it is, it's--it's a lot of doors opened these days.  It's more opportunities these days than it was in our day.  But they're not taking advantage of it.  They're at a whole stand-still, they are right now at a stand-still.  And they can't see no further than selling drugs, getting twenty, thirty dollars in five minutes.  They can't see that.  And I've talked to some brothers in New York [New York], when they was backstage.  They came back, and they was wondering how come won't anybody give them a break and all that.  You know, and then I told them that "You got your break when you first walked back here with us [music group, the Chi-Lites], and you don't know it.  Just talking to us is your break, okay.  Now, we can exchange numbers.  That could be your--if you have something, and you have talent, this could be your break right now, see."  So they didn't know that.  They thought that, the best thing they can do is just stand on some corners and make fast money and put on long chains and that's their way of living.  And that's the way they think it is.  And they need protection.  Somebody got to protect them.  If you're not out, you don't need no protection.  Be in, stay in or, you know.  And go out with your family.  That's what your mother and father is for, go out with them.  And get you some friends.  By the time you get grown, then you can go out, you know, and be to yourself.  But the fast way of living, now--everybody wants to be like the next person.  You know, and "That's my friend.  Oh, he's got a Jaguar [luxury automobile].  He's got"--but he bought his in drugs.  So I mean what about getting a good education?  What about learning how to be an entertainer?  It's a lot of ways--athlete, you know, they got big cars.  Entertainers have big cars, doctors and lawyers, they have big cars.  It's a lot of ways to get it.  And--but they feel that this is the fastest way that they can get it.
Story_ID: 14258
Speaker 1: Now, what do you want to be remembered for and what do you want the Chi-Lites [Thompson's music group] to be remembered for?
Speaker 2: Well, I want to be remembered for our music, for our happiness on stage, for our wonderful performances, which we'll be performing--I think, it might about 150,000 people next Saturday at the festival up here on 47th Street [Chicago, Illinois].  I just want to be loved by them and hope they accept me for the years that I've been in the music, for thirty-nine years.  And I hope they enjoyed what I had to offer as Marshall Thompson.
Story_ID: 14259
Speaker 1: Is there anything else that you would like to say?
Speaker 2: Well, I'd like to say one thing, if, remember one thing, show business--ninety percent business, ten percent show.  That's what show business is all about.
Story_ID: 14260
Speaker 1: The photo that you see right now is, her name is Constance Strong Thompson.  She's Marshall Thompson's wife and manager of the Chi-Lites [Thompson's music group].
Speaker 2: [Marshall Thompson's wife, Constance Strong Thompson. MPEG-1 digital video copy of Beta SP videotape of color photo; from the collection of Marshall Thompson]
