Story_ID: 395624
Speaker 1: I'm Denise Gines, the interviewer for The HistoryMakers.  St- Scott Stearns is the videographer and Denise Cooper [Denise M. Cooper] is observing.  Would you please state your name and spell it for me, please?
Speaker 2: Benjamin M. Tucker [HistoryMaker Benjamin Tucker].  B-E-N-J-A-M-I-N, M, T-U-C-K-E-R.
Speaker 1: And the M stands for?
Speaker 2: Mayor, M-A-Y-O-R.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what is your date of birth?
Speaker 2: December 13, 1930.
Speaker 1: And your place of birth?
Speaker 2: Brentwood, Tennessee.
Speaker 1: Tell me your occupation, please?
Speaker 2: Self-employed musician.
Speaker 1: And the location of this interview?
Speaker 2: Savannah, Georgia, in my home.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And today's date?
Speaker 2: Today's date is January the 23rd, '07 [2007].
Story_ID: 395625
Speaker 1: Now, we're gonna start by me asking you some People magazine-ish type questions.  Tell me, do you have a, a favorite color?
Speaker 2: Lavender and purple.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what do you like to eat?  What's your favorite food?
Speaker 2: Oh, I like oxtail ragu, I like beautiful filet mignon, aged, something like ten, ten years old.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Where do you like to vacation, your favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: I like Barbados, I like Grenada, and I like Antigua.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you have a favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: I guess spring is the most beautiful time of the year for me.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And do you have a favorite saying or phrase?
Speaker 2: I often say I love you, and often say it when I shouldn't.
Story_ID: 395626
Speaker 1: We're gonna start by talking about your family, your mother [Carrie Clayborne Tucker] and father and their parents 'cause you can go back to your grandparents on both sides, is that right?
Speaker 2: I can go back--yes, on both sides, but not much on my father's side except I know who they are, what they are--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --and, and what went--what went down, what, what happened.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But, on my mother's side, I can deal with that in more--
Speaker 1: More detail.
Speaker 2: --more detail.
Speaker 1: All right.  Well, let's start with your father.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: What was your father's name?
Speaker 2: My father's name was Joseph Sullivan Tucker [Joseph Tucker, Sr.].
Speaker 1: And when was he born?
Speaker 2: Oh, I don't know.  He was born--I had it down, written down someplace.
Speaker 1: Okay, that's fine if you--
Speaker 2: I think it's 1898 was when he was born.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And tell me about--we're gonna go and talk about his parents first before (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay.
Speaker 1: --we get to your--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --your dad.  I just wanted his name.  Tell me your grandfather's name.
Speaker 2: My grandfather's name was Joe Tucker.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what can you tell me about Joe Tucker?
Speaker 2: Not too much about him other than he was a farmer.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: My father was 6', probably six--6'1", 6'2", but his--but Joe Tucker, his father, he was about 5'11", 5'8", something like that, but he was sort of stocky, heavy.  And he didn't have too much to say.  He was nice, gentle little old man that I loved, like very much.  He, he was a great farmer because back then, they didn't use chemicals when they--when they were farming.  They didn't have chemicals when they was farming, so I was raised primarily--I was eating the food from the--from the farm.  Mother used to can the goods from the farm.  I used to go to the farm, which is about fifteen miles away and harvest the, the corn, beans, the potatoes, the beets, and just kind of be the--and, and my grandfather was a fantastic farmer.  He was something else.
Speaker 1: Where did they live?
Speaker 2: Oh, well--well, they really lived about fifteen miles from us, ten or fifteen miles from us, still Williamson County, Tennessee.  And I, I, I lived in Brentwood [Tennessee] and they lived between Brentwood and Franklin, Tennessee, which is about fifteen miles, ten or fifteen miles in, in, in distance.  But back then, there was a lot of rural, rural areas that had different names, but, but no township other than the, (laughter) the hills and valleys, you know.  It was--it was--but, I'm sure it has a name by now because everything has, has, has come together in terms of--
Speaker 1: Did your grandfather own the land that he farmed on (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) He did.  He did.  He did.  He owned about, oh, I guess about eighty to ninety acres of land.
Speaker 1: Did he talk about any of his, his father or grandfather being in slavery?
Speaker 2: Not that I remember, no.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: He never talked about that.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And do you know how much education if any did he have?
Speaker 2: My grandfather had no education.  My father had third grade education, so that tells you that they didn't have the time to go to school.  They had time to survive, farm, harvest, and this kind of business.
Speaker 1: Any other stories about your grandfather?
Speaker 2: No, not really.  He, he, he was a good, gentle, gentle person.  I remember going to church with him a lot.  There was a church say about two blocks away on the hill in, in the country.  We used to go there and worship with him.  He didn't sing, he didn't pray, he didn't--he, he just went (laughter).  That's all I remember about him.  You know, Joe Tucker, he's--
Speaker 1: Okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) gentle person.  I liked him.
Story_ID: 395627
Speaker 1: All right.  What about your grandmother?  What was her name?
Speaker 2: Her--on, on my father's [Joseph Tucker, Sr.] side?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Yeah, her name was Eliza [Eliza Tucker].
Speaker 1: Can you spell that?
Speaker 2: E-L-I-Z-A.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And she was a housewife.  She did all the cooking.  She, she cooked three beautiful meals every day (laughter).  You know, you get up early in the morning, you go to the field, and you, you worked--you worked the land, dah, dah, dah, and she'd break for, for lunch.  And lunch was a--was a huge meal: cornbread, cabbage, beans, potatoes, chicken for, for meat or ham 'cause--because they killed all their--all the animals, you know, like the pig, the hog rather, and, and they put it in salt for, for curation.  But there was a meat--there was always a meat and four or five, maybe six different vegetables.  They had plenty of food, you know.  Hominy grits.  I don't know if you--if you heard of ho- they used to make their own grits.  The grits that came in whole corn, like--remember the whole--well, I've-- anyway, that's what went down there.  And, and Grandma used to have three beautiful meals.  Now, for breakfast, she would have sausage, bacon, eggs, and, and they make fresh biscuits every day, you know, just, just--and, it was good, something else.  And for dinner, which would roll around say about five o'clock every day is--dinner--lunch and dinner--breakfast, lunch, and dinner was on time every single day including Sundays, you know.  You go to church on Sunday and, and come back from church, there's a big huge table loaded down with big roasted chicken stuffed with stuffings and dressing all around the chicken outside the chicken.  Oh, it was something else.  I looked forward to those days (laughter), you know.  I loved to eat when I was kid and I loved to play and loved to hang out.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: My grandma, she was a--she, she was--she was in, into home--she was a homebody, a home--stayed home, kept the house, kept, kept the--kept the kitchen rolling.  That was her job (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Grandma Eliza.
Story_ID: 395628
Speaker 1: Now, let's talk about your, your mother.  What was your mother's name?
Speaker 2: Her name was Carrie Tucker [Carrie Clayborne Tucker]. Ca- (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Spell it for me.
Speaker 2: C-A-R-R-I-E, T-U-C-K-E-R, Tucker.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And her mother?
Speaker 2: Her mother was Lucy Clayborne, C-L-A-Y-B-O-R-N-E, Lucy, L-U-C-Y, Lucy.  She was another housewife, a, a homemaker, homebody, stayed home, cooked and that kind of business.  Grandma Lucy, she, she was very quiet, very quiet, another quiet, gentle person who focused primarily on her husband, which was Grandpa, but he was a minister incidentally.  And so she worked with him in his ministry.  And she loves to sing in the--in the church and sing in the choir and that kind of business.  Grandpa created churches on his own.  He created two churches and those churches are still going on this very day in his name.
Speaker 1: What, what is his name?
Speaker 2: His name is Scott Clayborne.  And he had--he created two churches and they're called Clayborne Tabernacle Church [Clayborne Tabernacle Missionary Baptist Church, Franklin, Tennessee] and--(laughter) I, I think it's--I think it's (unclear)--well, but my grandma, she was about 5' tall, 5'1", 5'2" tall and heavyset like, you know, stocky lady.  And I have pictures of her I will share with you later on about my grandmother, Grandma Lucy.  And Grandma Lucy was always afraid of caterpillars, you know, the caterpillars that would crawl in in the springtime, yeah.  And she was definitely scared of that.  She'd just run, "Ah," you know, get grandma, and we'd, we'd go and step on the caterpillar.  "He's dead, he's out of the way."  And then she, she would continue to walk on, that kind of business.  If a roach would--that, that grows in trees, particularly oak trees, sh- she'll have a--she'll have a baby behind that oak, behind that roach coming around.  She was always afraid of something rolling around like even a mouse, even a rat or a mouse, something like that, Grandma would just go bananas behind something like this.  So, I would make sure that she was--she was all clear of anything to frighten her.  We didn't want her to get frightened at all.  We always tried, tried to protect Grandma.  She was something.
Speaker 1: Where did they live?
Speaker 2: They lived about ten blocks from, from where we lived in, in a little town called Brentwood [Tennessee].  Again, Grandma would, would cook a special, special meal at Christmastime, and, and I'll never forget this.  She'll load the table up as if it was suppertime at eight o'clock in the morning, seven o'clock in the morning, you know, all kinds of fruitcakes, all kinds of bread, all kinds of cakes and pies, and then she'll cook the bacon and the sausage and the ham and, and, and just go on.  And the--I forget what you call it when you mix, souse, souse meat (makes sounds) you know, and she'd have that on the table.  And a big bowl of eggs and, and fresh biscuits and butter and jam.  They, they made--they made their own jam, they made their own syrup, they made--they made--they made--even made their own wine, you know.  They had blackberry wine that was incredible.  And, and my brother [Reuben Tucker] and I, we used to sneak in there and get some of this wine, you know to (laughter), to check it out and we walk out half loose and every--, "C'mon, what's wrong with you man?"  You know, but those were the days.  Those were the days, you know.  And my grandfather, Scott Clayborne, Reverend Scott Clayborne, he, he used to put new soles onto our shoes for Christmas and that was--that was extraordinary.  At Christmastime, I knew that I was gonna have some soles on my shoes and I could--and I didn't have to walk on gravel and rocks and sticks and tacks and nails.  And, you know, what he would do, he would take, take an old tire from, from a car that's been thrown away and he would cut the sole out of that tire and put it on his shoe last, and he would tack it back--tack it on and trim it out to, to fit the shoe that he's working with.  And I felt so--I, I was so appreciative of, of having a--really, a new pair of shoes for Christmas, that's where I came from.  I, I learned to appreciate--I--even to this very day, I learned to appreciate.  I, I threw out a pair of shoes or sandals this morning, early this morning I threw them out, but I set them aside so that somebody that needed something to wear--'cause yesterday, well yesterday or last night, rather, I--this guy walking in the street with his feet completely out of the shoe.  He got, got something on top and, and the sole on the bottom of his feet just sticking out.  I said, man, he, he need shoes, man.  If I had them, I would've given it to him, so I laid them aside just in case, that particular guy, I hope he will, come by and pick them up 'cause they're good, good thick-soled, thick sandals.  But those were the days.
Story_ID: 395629
Speaker 1: What lessons were learned--well, I see that there was a lesson learned by your [maternal] grandfather [Scott Clayborne] putting new soles on your shoes.  Were there other lessons that you learned from your grandparents?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.  I, I, I learned of a lesson of saving money, understanding what economics was all about back then.  My grandfather had, had, had a hidden chest under, under the bed cut into the floor, down into the floor, and he, he was a great carpenter and he had it so smoothed out that you couldn't tell where the door began (laughter) (unclear) it was--but in, in this hole, he would have jars and cigar boxes full of silver dollars and half dollars, and I have those silver dollars and half dollars to this very day at the--in, in the vault at the Bank of America, and every now and then I go in and go into the vault and pull it out, just look at these beautiful half dollars and silver dollars that--I guess I got about six hundred dollars' worth of--worth, worth of silver dollars and half dollars in this bank.  So I learned that, that it's important to, to, to save money.  It's important to spend money but know how--but know what you're spending and know what--and, and know how to deal with it, yet be generous and yet be kind and yet be compassionate about this whole, you know, with the whole ordeal of money.  And this is what my, my father--my grandfather did to me and to my brother [Reuben Tucker], you know.  We--I understand it very well, you know.  Money?  Shh, money can destroy you, but not him.  He said, "Save it because there's always a rainy day, son, always a rainy day."  "Yes, Grandpa," (laughter).  My grandpa used to take me and my brother on to jobs to--on his job and, and we--give us--we used to whitewash fences for, for the people we worked for, that he was working for.  And, and the, the, the white--the, the white stuff is made out of lime, put lime in the water and the paintbrush, and you just whitewash these fences where they have horses and places like that, farms, you know, turned out beautiful.  But I learned to work.  I learned to, to be appreciative of the whole deal.  Even though he got money every other Sunday from the church [Clayborne Tabernacle Missionary Baptist Church, Franklin, Tennessee], you know, he, he was working, and then take up commission for the pastor.  He'd come home, he got all this money that he's dealing with.  I guess he put it in the bank for the church.  Now, I don't know.  He may have put it in--put it under the bed for himself.  I don't know what, what Grandpa did with that money (laughter), but it's, it was great.
Story_ID: 395630
Speaker 1: Now, tell me about your father [Joseph Tucker, Sr.].  Talk more about your father.  What type of father was he?
Speaker 2: My father was a loving, kind, gentle man with a third grade education.  He, he--naturally, he came off the farm with, with his father [Joe Tucker] and he married my, my mother [Carrie Clayborne Tucker] and moved from the farm into another town, which is Brentwood [Tennessee], and that was a small neighborhood ten miles south of Nashville, Tennessee.  And, so it's like moving from country to a small city for all intents and purposes.  You got a grocery store, you got a--got a filling station, you got a drugstore, and you got post office, and that's about it.  And so he began to get into gardening.  He became one of the best in the State of Tennessee, landscape gardeners that man could ever dream of.  He was fantastic.  He could take any leaf, you could bring him a leaf from anywhere and he'll tell you what it is, what kind of a weed, what kind of a plant, what kind of a whatever.  He just--he was something else with that.  He was the landscape gardener for--for the president of the National Life Insurance Company [National Life and Accident Insurance Company] in, in Nashville, Tennessee, and who was later--that property was later bought by the governor of Tennessee.  It's now the governor of Tennessee's estate to where my father used to keep this whole, whole business pristine.  Oh, it was gorgeous.  He, he was something else with grass, with flowers.  He used to--I would see him sit down at, at the table at home even during the winter months and take a rose, a bunch of roses, different kinds of roses, he had them all labeled, he'd sit there and he'll cut it with a knife, cut this rose, then cut this, this rose stem, and he'll insert it into this--jam it in and then he'd wrap it around real tight, and then he'd plant this thing come spring and it'll come up.  And if it was a red rose with a yellow rose, when, when, when it blossom, it'd be a red rose with a yellow trim or a yellow rose with a red trim or whatever the case may be.  It just--it just--it just married right there in two.  I said, man, you something.  He would do it with flags.  I mean, the color flags--I forgot what they--what's the real name of the lilies that--they look like lilies.  I, I see them a lot during the--during the funeral services or during the funerals, people have--they, they make big wreaths out of them, big bouquets out of them.  He used to cross them up and get them all into different colors and colors running together.  He was--he was phenomenal.  Tulips, he would do tulips the same way.  He was--he was great.
Story_ID: 395631
Speaker 1: But he was--he was an understanding individual to, to the point to where he understood what love was all about.  He, he--family, what family love was all about.  I guess I've--I, I, I got about three spankings from him during the whole, whole time that I lived with my father [Joseph Tucker, Sr.].  And my father--I was--I was my father's favorite son in, in, you know, and, and I knew that, you know, but--and, we, we didn't misuse our relationship.  In fact--or I didn't you know because my brother [Reuben Tucker], he figured that I had it made with Daddy, you know, but I figured he had it made with Mom [Carrie Clayborne Tucker], too, incidentally 'cause Mom would always spank my brother and, for me, and he'd just--oh, I had--I had a problem with that, you know, but I'll talk about that later on.  But my father was a good man and he was the deacon of the church.  He, he, he would--he, he loved to pray.  He loved to pray, get on his knees and pray in a heartbeat.  And when he got sick in California--they left Tennessee and went to--went to Pasa- went to San Bernardino [California] to--California, to follow me.  I left San Bernardino to go to Pasadena [California] to get into the music scene and my mother and father followed me to Pasadena.  And I left Pasadena to go to, to New York [New York], and from New York to, to Savannah [Georgia] (laughter).  I, I left them in--I left them in--I left them in Pasadena, California, with my--with my nephew and one, one night, I had a premonition that something was happening to my father right, right in this house--no, was it in this house?  No, it was--it was on Jones Street [Savannah, Georgia] while I lived at, at the other house.  And I told Gloria [Gloria Daly Tucker], I says, "Gloria, something's going on with dad.  I, I just feel that something has happened."  She said, "Well, call out and see."  I said, "Well, I been calling, but no one is answering the telephone," and Dad usually answered the phone, you know, if he's home.  So I said, "Something's going on."  And I tried to call my nephew and I couldn't get him.  He was in San Francisco [California].  He, he went to San Francisco because he claimed that he couldn't handle the deal, you know, he couldn't, couldn't--too much stress for him.  Daddy's sick, momma's--you know, aw, c'mon, man.  So, I got on the plane the next morning, went out to California, and went to his apartment, went to his, his house, and sure enough, dad was sitting on the side of the bed, couldn't move.  He, he had a bad case of, of arthritis, rheumatism, arthritis, and he just--he, he just couldn't get--of course, he had no knees, knees were all weak, weak and broken down.  So I immediately cleared the house, cleared the apartment and called a friend of Mom and Dad's out there and, and she took all the furniture and everything, put it in her garage, and I cleared the apartment and brought dad back to Savannah with me.  Oh, he was happy, you know, that he was gonna be hanging out with, with his son.  And I was happy to have him, too, honestly.  Of course my, my wife loved my, my father very, very much.  They struck it very close to each other.  So, he was here for about six months and then I had to put him in a home because he had gotten, gotten sick--sicker.  And the next thing I knew, dad had died in Memorial Medical Hospital [Memorial University Medical Center, Savannah, Georgia], and that was the end of my father.  Then, we had--took care of the body and got the body together, we flew it back out to California.  Meantime, my mom was in the hospital at the same time, and he didn't know that she was in the hospital.  He didn't know that she was there.  He didn't know where, where she was.  He knew something was going on, but mom was in the hospital, too.  Mom had problems with the kidneys and she had a bad case of asthma.  We'll talk about mom when it's time to talk about mom.
Speaker 2: No, I mean, that's fine.  But as, as a child, you said you had a special relationship with your father.
Speaker 1: Oh, yeah, yeah he (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, tell me about that relationship.
Speaker 1: Well, we could talk to one another.  We could talk about anything.  We could talk about sex.  We could talk about God.  We could talk about gardening.  We could talk about anything and everything that came to his mind, you know.  He, he could see something funny going on with, with two people out in the street and he says, "What do you make of that, son?"  I said, "Well, dad, you know, they're in love, you know.  Obviously, they're in love, I think they're in love, you know, they look like they're in love."  That kind of a conversation we would have going down, we would have going on.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Dad, he understood what I was talking about.  He was happy to have somebody to talk to, that he could open up to, and so was I.
Speaker 2: What lessons did you learn from your dad?
Speaker 1: The lesson I really learned from him was be yourself, be you.  Don't try to be somebody else, just be you.  Don't wor- don't worry about what you don't have, worry about what you can get.  I said, okay, all right, I'll do that.
Story_ID: 395632
Speaker 1: So now, your mother [Carrie Clayborne Tucker], what type of relationship did you have with your mother?  What--
Speaker 2: I had a good relationship with my mom, but Mom always--she--I have a twin brother, identical twin brother, and for some reason, he was always on Mom's side and he--Mom, Mom could--my twin brother could go out and do something bad, really bad, and come and tell Mom that, "Ben [HistoryMaker Benjamin Tucker] did it, Mom."  "Mom, Ben did that."  I'd walk up and Mom just start wailing on me.  Mom loved to just spank the fool out of me.  She'd just wham, wham, wham with the straps and with all kinds of stuff, you know, belts and whatever she, she could put her hands on.  And I said to Reuben [Reuben Tucker], "Now why'd you do that, man?"  You know, he said, "Heh, heh, heh, heh, heh, well I didn't wanna get the spanking, so you did."  I said, "You dirty son of a gun, man," you know.  And, and these went on for the longest.  I mean, I'd--we would--I was a grown man and Mom was still--you know, she, she would call Reuben up, "What do you think of this?"  "I don't know, Mom, why don't you ask Ben?"  "No, I don't wanna ask Ben, I'm asking you."  Oh, boy.  C'mon, Mom.  But she loved him.  They had a good--they had a good thing going on.  But Mom was a--was a fantastic cook.  I remember that.  Mom could cook her heart out.  Mom was a gourmet cook, from her heart.  She could do it.  Every meal I had was a gourmet meal all my life, in particular on Sundays.  You know, I could look for a, a big beef roast, I could look for a big chicken roast, I could look for anything that--for dinner 'cause you go to church, you spend all day in church incidentally, you know.  Church starts at nine o'clock in the morning and then you come--you break at t- one o'clock or two o'clock, you come home and you have, have dinner, and then you go back to the church again and come out about six o'clock or seven and, boy, they wore me out with churches, you know.  I just got fed up with churches--
Story_ID: 395633
Speaker 1: What church was this?
Speaker 2: This little--this was a little church in Brentwood [Tennessee] called Brentwood Baptist Church in Brentwood, sits on the hill.  Now, we had--we had a fantastic small house that we lived in, two--or three bedroom house that we lived in with a garage, you know, the shed and all that kind of business and, and with a well in, in back of the house and you pump your water and just kind of--we didn't have running water, city running water, cesspool for your bath and, and outhouses and this kind of business.  And comes wintertime, you got to make a beeline to the outhouse and then back, you know, because it's cold, freezing.  Nashville, Tennessee, or Brentwood, Tennessee, it gets so cold that the high tension wires would break and it's just, just devastating to live in that kind of stuff.
Story_ID: 395634
Speaker 1: How much education did your mother [Carrie Clayborne Tucker] have?
Speaker 2: She didn't have much education.  I, I think she, I think, I think she went through high school and I know she didn't go to college at, at all.
Speaker 1: Did she work outside the home?
Speaker 2: No.  Mother stayed at home every day and she was more or less like a home- homemaker.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Stayed home and kept the house, cooked two meals a day.  Dad [Joseph Tucker, Sr.] cooked breakfast.  (Laughter) My mom cooked lunch and dinner.  But it wasn't much for lunch during the weekdays because daddy was at work, so he would make his own lunch and take it with him to lu- take it to work.  But mother would have a dynamite dinner at home every night.  She was like a gourmet cook, mom was (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Right.
Speaker 2: She's something else.
Speaker 1: This was--you were born in, in 1930 and the Depression [Great Depression] was on at that time.  Did you feel that--or did you lack for anything because of the Depression do you think?
Speaker 2: No, because I didn't have any exposure to anything else other than--other than the, the immediate life that was before me.  You know, that, that is, we didn't go without food, we didn't go without heat, we didn't go without clothes.  What did happen, as I said before, my [maternal] grandfather [Scott Clayborne] would fix my, my existing worn out shoes and put, put that back together.  We had--well, well you see--you see, I would--I would go to the farm [in Williamson County, Tennessee] and bring the vegetables in and Mom would can these beautiful vegetables, potatoes, beans, corn, beets, and stuff like that in the big mason jars, screw it on and boil them in hot water and tighten it up.  And comes wintertime when it was cold, we had fresh vegetables right out of the garden with no, no additives, no, no chemicals to them.  And (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What about your clothes?  I'm sorry.
Speaker 2: Clothes?
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: Well, we bought clothes.  We had clothes and, and when we wore those out, Mom used to patch those up and made those same clothes look--like jeans, you know, you got worn at the knees and she'll put another patch on them and, boom, we'll keep on trucking, from another pair of jeans, cut it out and you'd never know that (laughter) the jeans had a patch on them, but it was.  We made do with what--everything that we had.
Speaker 1: Did your mother (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Everything.
Speaker 1: Did your mother sew?  Was she a seamstress?
Speaker 2: Oh, my mom was a fantastic seamstress.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: My mother used, used to make my, my brother [Reuben Tucker] and I jackets to wear to church every Sunday and we'd all dress up in white pants and little blue jackets and stuff.  Mom could make all of her dresses.  Mom had a very bad case of asthma, very bad case.  When I was a kid, I used to--used to help my mom to get over the, the asthma attack that she would have, and I used to give her shots in her legs and in, in the stomach and, and even in her arms and give her--to, to, to get her breathing back together.  And then finally the technology got a little better and they came out with the inhalers and put the shots down and she start inhaling on her own so she's able to breathe.  I think Mom died some time ago, back in 1974, '75 [1975], 1975 it was, 1975 is when my mother died.  I think she died of kidney failure and, and asthma, sort of--sort of worked against each other.  But Mom, you know, she, she kept the house rolling, baby.  She was good, good mother.  I had--I had good mother and good father.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Love 'em (laughter).
Story_ID: 395635
Speaker 1: Tell me about your siblings.
Speaker 2: Well, my siblings.  My s-, my, my son [Wayne Tucker]?
Speaker 1: No your (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) My, my, my--
Speaker 1: --your brothers.
Speaker 2: --brother.  I have a twin brother.
Speaker 1: What is his name?
Speaker 2: His name is Reuben, R-E-U-B-E-N, D, Tucker [Reuben Tucker].  The D stands for Dobson, D-O-B-S-O-N.  And I think he was born a little before I did (laughter).  I think he was born--because on my birth certificate, it says I was born at zero point zero, zero hours on the 12th of December, but I've always celebrated my birthday on the 13th of December, so somehow or another I, I went over and I crossed over.  If that's the case, I don't know.  Maybe--doctors didn't know what they were doing when, when they were documenting my birth certificate back in those days.  You know, they used a lot of--a lot of house, house calls. Midwives and things like this, but I don't know if I had the midwife or not.  But, I think my--I think I--I think my mother [Carrie Clayborne Tucker] had a doctor to, to, to work on me, to bring me around.  But my twin brother, yeah, he's a--he's an interior decorator.  He's--he was artistic inclined, very, very early age and he later down, he was a trumpet player.  He wanted to play trumpet, he bought a trumpet, laid it down, I picked the trumpet up, start playing it, and then I later on took the trumpet and trade it in on a bass violin.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you have another brother?
Speaker 2: I have an older brother.  His name is Joseph Sullivan Tucker, Jr. [Joseph Tucker, Jr.].  He's eighty--he's eighty year- eighty-one years old as, as a matter of fact.  He, he lives in Bucyrus, Ohio, B-U-C-K-Y [sic.]--Buckery [ph.], Bucyrus.  I don't know how you pronounce it, Ohio.  And he, he, he--I didn't--I didn't have a chance to, to spend a lot of time with him and--when I was growing up because he, he lived the fast life.  He loved to--he loved to gamble a lot and that kind of business.  The, the people he was hanging out with were these, as Mom or Dad [Joseph Tucker, Sr.] would say, the, the, the trifling kind of individual that would lead my son out there astray, but he was weak enough to, to deal with it.  And finally, my, my oldest brother, Joseph Sullivan Tucker, he began to train horses, race horses.  That was his--that was his love.  He could take a horse and, and make him award winning horse, running horse.  He had a lot of stuff dealing with the Kentucky Derby and the Tennessee, Tennessee derbies they used to have around and from state to state.  But he finished high school and that's, that's about it.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So now, he's in a nursing home--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --sad to say.
Story_ID: 395636
Speaker 1: Well, you had started to talk about where you lived and you gave us a description of the house that you grew up in.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: So, tell me about--what was the name of the street that you lived on?  Do you remember?
Speaker 2: The name of the street was called Wilson Pike, P-I-K-E [Brentwood, Tennessee].
Speaker 1: Tell me about Wilson Pike, the neighborhood and the people that lived near you.
Speaker 2: Well, the people that lived near me was, I had a, a cousin that lived next door, at least they said that she was my cousin.  I, I, I think she was my cousin, somehow.  I don't know how that--how that came about.  But anyway, she was next door.  And next door on, on the left of me--that was on the right--on the left of me was, was a white family.  And I, I, I did not know what racism was all about until after I had left my home to go into the service, to the United States Air Force.  I had no idea that there, there was a difference because they didn't treat me any different than I treated them and, and that was--this is in the '30s [1930s] we're talking about, you know.  There was--there wasn't much of segregation and prejudice, this kind of business wasn't going on in Tennessee where I lived 'cause I was totally unaware of that.  You know, we'd--my twin brother [Reuben Tucker] and I would run into their--in, into their houses and play, they'll come into my house and play.  We--I'd go to their house and sit at the table and eat and they'd come over our house and eat, and we just had kind of--that kind of a thing.  And my, my relatives on, on, on the other side would do the same thing.  You know, it just--it was sort of an open--we never locked our houses up.  They would stay, stay totally unlocked, the whole business.  Until when I left to go to--actually, when I left and went to college to Tennessee State [Tennessee Agricultural and Industrial State College; Tennessee State University, Nashville, Tennessee] was when I really found out what was going on.
Story_ID: 395637
Speaker 1: Well, let me ask you about school.  Where'd (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well--
Speaker 1: What about elementary school?  What was the name of it?
Speaker 2: Elementary school, well, that was--it, it--I went to a two-room school, which was about a block and a half from where we live up the hill.  It was really--
Speaker 1: What was the name of it?
Speaker 2: Called Brentwood Elementary [Brentwood Elementary School, Brentwood, Tennessee].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I remember having two different principals there in, in school--in this--you know, you got four grades in one room, in, in each room, four grades, you know, first, second, third, fourth, and fifth, sixth, seventh, and eighth (laughter).  You, you--that kind of a thing.  That's--that, that whole area now has changed totally and it's become a, a multimillionaire piece of property as we--as we speak, even where I lived and the whole business.  But, education, we got our--we got our spankings, we got our--we got our attention getter to, to understand what reading, writing, and arithmetic was all about.  We had to--we, we had to do it.
Speaker 1: Who were your teachers?  Do you remember your teachers?
Speaker 2: My teacher--one, one teacher was named Dr. Wardert [ph.] who was very tough with a wood- with a big wooden paddle that I, I do remember.  And he had a great deal of conversation with my mother [Carrie Clayborne Tucker] all the time to, to keep me and my brother [Reuben Tucker] in line, you know, how--what, what my son is doing, dah, dah, dah.  And if he said something negative, then I'd get another whipping when I got home.  My mom didn't mind spanking us at all.  She didn't--she lived on that.  She, she believed in that piece of leather belt that she used to put on, but--
Speaker 1: Were the teachers black or white?
Speaker 2: They were black.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Right, right.  It was all a black neighborhood, black school, black, black kids, black teachers.
Speaker 1: Well, what did you think--you said that you weren't aware of, of segregation so much, but you went to, to separate schools.  The white kids didn't go to school with you.
Speaker 2: We didn't (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What did you think--
Speaker 2: We--
Speaker 1: --about that?
Speaker 2: We didn't even think about that.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: We didn't even think about the white kids are going to another school and black kids going to this school.  It, it just--it's, it's the fact of life.  I--we didn't seem to worry about things that we had no control over, something that didn't, didn't have any control over that.  But when I got kicked off a bus for smoking a cigarette, that's when I knew that something was going on.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Okay.
Speaker 2: (Laughter) You know, that brought everything around.
Story_ID: 395638
Speaker 1: What is your earliest childhood memory?
Speaker 2: My earliest childhood memory, I, I remember that I used to work in the grocery store a lot.  I used to be a butcher, I used to deliver food, I used to do a--I used to dress chickens and things of this nature for the--for the supermarket that I used to work for, small supermarket, small grocery store.  I remember that, again, my [maternal] grandfather [Scott Clayborne], back to him, you know, he would tell me about saving money, working 'cause I'd been working since I was twelve years old on my own.  I haven't had a, a dime from my mother [Carrie Clayborne Tucker] or father [Joseph Tucker, Sr.] since I was twelve.  They--even when I was twelve, they didn't give me the money to spend 'cause they didn't have it to spend, you know.  So, I've been accustomed of, of being independent.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And one of the things that I have going back, back when is to--is being on your own and dependent on yourself.  Don't depend on anything else but you.  I have the determination to do it.  It's me, not someone else that can do it for me.  I have to do it for myself, and that's what I did.  So my, my twin brother [Reuben Tucker] and I went to a drugstore to work at the drugstore, hopping cars is what they'd--what they'd call it, hanging milkshakes and sandwiches on the side of a car as they drive up and this kind of business, called the cup service, made, made some good money doing that, you know, quarter tips here, fifty cents tip.  Back in those days, that was a tremendous amount of money.  And my brother and I used to go home and give mother twenty, thirty dollars every week, and that just--that--that's--that made her day.  She was so happy, she says, "My son is making money, my son, my son."
Story_ID: 395639
Speaker 1: What other things did you do during your elementary school years [at Brentwood Elementary School, Brentwood, Tennessee]?  Did you like to read?  Was music a, a factor in your life then?
Speaker 2: Music t- took over--(laughter) music was taking over then 'cause I used to listen to the radio a lot.
Speaker 1: Okay.  What did you listen to the radio?
Speaker 2: On the radio, we'd listen to 'Amos 'n' Andy' (laughter) and for the longest, you know, I thought 'Amos 'n' Andy' was a--was a black comedy show, but it, it was performed by white guys, and I didn't know that 'til I got to college and I said, you got to be kidding me, man.  But that's what was going on.  I used to listen to Duke Ellington, Louis Armstrong, Fletcher Henderson, people like that play music.  I became tremendously inspired over this--over, over this music.  Even though in Nashville, Tennessee, there was a lot of country music going on and I didn't even hear country music, didn't know what it was until I left Nashville.  And I said, you're, you're kidding me.  That was going on.  See, a lot of things was going on.  Being deprived of, of, of--being fused into, into the mainstream of, of life in a major, major city like Nashville, Tennessee, as opposed to a little small town outside of Nashville where you had no exposure at all, that's, that's--that was--that was a major difference.  Something major was going down and I wanted to know ba- even back then, how can I participate in the free enterprises?  How is it that this guy can have a supermarket?  How is it that this guy can have a drugstore?  How, how can I get involved?  How?  How is it they can do it and I can't do it?  What's going on?  And that--and that bothered me until I left Tennessee State University [Tennessee Agricultural and Industrial State College; Tennessee State University, Nashville, Tennessee].
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  What other activities as a child--did you all play baseball?
Speaker 2: We played a lot of softball.
Speaker 1: Softball, okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And we played a lot of marbles and a lot of mumbly pegs and this kind of stuff, and the kids would get into--you know, there was a lot--there was a tremendous amount of rock throwing in, in--when I was growing up, was coming up.  They used to like--kids like to throw rocks at each other, see, see if they can hit you with, and there was a couple of guys that were--that were pretty, pretty sharpshooters.  They should've been with the Major League Baseball because they could stand on the hill and throw a rock so fast, and seemed like every time you make a move out of the way, you run into the rock that it's coming at you.  Seemed like the rock had, had eyes or had, had radar or something.  That, that was one of the, the fears that I had of getting hit with a rock.  People just--kids loved to throw rocks for some strange reason.  I don't know why they or where they get that.  I guess they had nothing else to do.
Speaker 1: Right (laughter).
Speaker 2: Had nothing else to do.
Story_ID: 395640
Speaker 1: When you think about the--that time, what are some of the sounds, the sights and the smells that you can remember?
Speaker 2: Well, the sights would, would be pastures where, where cows, where they would, would gather to eat grass in, in, in fields.  I used to have and my, my, my father [Joseph Tucker, Sr.] had a cow that I had to take care of and I gave the cow a name, I forgot what--what's the name--what was the name of the cow, but I used to walk the cow home on the side of the street into, into back of the--into our back lot and then walk the cow again the next morning to the open field for the cow to spend, spend the day eating grass in the big open field.  Then, I walked the cow home and then I would milk the cow, sit--and get a bucket underneath (gesture), with both hands (gesture), just milk the cow and pat the cow on the head.  I used to call the cow by name and we used to walk side by side without even--without, without a rope around her neck or anything, we just walk side by side.  It was the most unbelievable relationship we had.  You know, I thought it was great.
Speaker 1: What about the sounds?
Speaker 2: The sounds, well, well, well, the only sounds that I liked back then was the sounds that I was hearing off the radio with, with Duke Ellington and, and, and Satchmo [Louis Armstrong], and Fletcher Henderson, and, and people like that I would listen off the ra- I, I just enjoyed the, the old jazz that I--that, that was, was coming over the radio.  And particularly on Saturday nights, they have music all night long on some of those stations and it would be clear channel from east to west and north and south.  It was--it was unbelievable.  So, I always get in the radio and put my ears right next to the speakers and just--and just listen.  And then finally, I, I decided that I wanted to really get into music and I wanted to play.  I was listening to the sounds of, of the bass and I figured that this sound is something I wanna deal with, and I start playing the bass.  I ordered a bass violin, found out that I could order one, and so I ordered it, cost me $198 to get--for this bass, came in a big crate, brand new bass, Kay bass, K-A-Y bass, was the name of the bass, put it together.  The, the rich people where my father used to work for gave him a huge beautiful piano that was--it's like a, a grand, but it was--it was rectangular shape, long and rectangular shape, big (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) How old were you when this happened?
Speaker 2: What--I was--I was about thirteen years old when that happened.
Speaker 1: Okay, thirteen.
Speaker 2: About thirteen, and so I got all that together and I read the instruction book, and it, it says, well, this is how you put the bridge and the strings, the G, D, A strings on the bass, and this is the peg and the pin, and I--and I understood that, you know, put it all together.  And you tuned this to the piano.  So, I just G, D, A, E.  Mother [Carrie Clayborne Tucker] had the piano there and I knew where G, D, A, E was and I played it and I tuned the bass up (unclear).  And I began to teach myself this instrument.
Speaker 1: How--did you know how to play the piano?  Did someone teach you?
Speaker 2: No, no, no, no, but I knew--I knew the scale, C, E, A, G, A, B, C (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) How did you learn that?
Speaker 2: Well, I don't know how I learned that to tell--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --you the truth.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I really don't, but I knew that's what it was.  I knew what middle C on the piano was.  It's amazing, but I did.  And then after I start playing the bass over, over long periods of time, I, I realized--I did not realize that my [maternal] grandfather [Scott Clayborne] who was a minister played the bass violin 'cause I was playing it one day and I was showing him what, what, what I had going on with this instrument and he says, "Let me--let me--let me have this, this bass.  Let me show you how to play this thing."  I said, "Okay."  And he took the bass out of my hands and, and, and smoked on it.  Oh, he played--he played his heart out.  I said, "You got to be kidding, Grandpa.  You never told me you played this."  He said, "I know, but that's how you play it."  It was--it was quite inspirational to me, you know.
Speaker 1: So (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So from that day on--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --I, I, I, I taught myself that instrument even when I went to Tennessee State [Tennessee Agricultural and Industrial State College; Tennessee State University, Nashville, Tennessee].  I had to teach myself still more about the bass 'cause they didn't have a--they did not have an instructor.
Story_ID: 395641
Speaker 1: So you go to high school.  Is there--what's the name of the high school you go to (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Pearl High School [Pearl-Cohn Entertainment Magnet High School, Nashville, Tennessee].
Speaker 1: Pearl?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And this is still in Brentwood [Tennessee].
Speaker 2: No, this is in Nashville [Tennessee] now.
Speaker 1: Did you live in Nashville?
Speaker 2: No.  I went (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay.  Did you--
Speaker 2: --back and forth, took--ride the bus back and forth.
Speaker 1: Oh, so you, you took the bus.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Tell me about your high school years, you know, besides the music.  We know that you teach yourself the bass.  But also, don't you teach yourself the tuba?
Speaker 2: I did play the tuba.  I taught myself the tuba and then when I--then--and then they had a good instructor at Pearl High School and his name was Professor Marcus--Marcus, M-A-R-C-U-S, Marcus [Marcus Gunter].  And he, he gave me more instructions on how to play the tuba.  But then when I left the high school and going into college, I realized that I couldn't--I couldn't major in tuba, not at Tennessee State [Tennessee Agricultural and Industrial State College; Tennessee State University, Nashville, Tennessee] (laughter) 'cause they didn't have anybody--so I left the tuba along and, and, and continued on with the bass violin 'cause I realized that at least I can play in various bands or at least I could--at least I could better myself in light of that it's something that I really wanted to do, and so I did.  I carried all through [U.S.] Army, through the [U.S.] Air Force, and through all that business.
Speaker 1: Okay.  At Pearl High School, tell me what happens during high school.  Are you involved in any activities--
Speaker 2: The only act- (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) besides music?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: No.  I only got--that--that's--that was the only time I, I have to, to deal with and that is to practice and to play band, in band, marching band, football games, basketball games, things of this nature.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That kind, kind of business.
Speaker 1: Were there any teachers that encouraged you to further your education?
Speaker 2: There was a teacher there at Pearl High, the director of band, and he encouraged me to stick with it and go ahead and, and, and make--and make the best out of this.  I said, okay, but I, I still couldn't find anyone to, to teach me the instrument that I really--I wanted to know--learn the more technical aspects of the instrument and I didn't get that training until I had left the, the Air Force.
Story_ID: 395642
Speaker 1: You graduate from high school [Pearl High School; Pearl-Cohn Entertainment Magnet High School, Nashville, Tennessee] in 1946, is that right?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And tell me what happens next.
Speaker 2: What happens next, I--then I--then I go to Tennessee State, which was called A and I--A and I College [Tennessee Agricultural and Industrial State College; Tennessee State University, Nashville, Tennessee] at, at that time.
Speaker 1: How did you decide to go to that school?
Speaker 2: That was the only school that I could go to that it wouldn't cost me any money to go to.  They, they--it didn't cost anything to go to Tennessee State then.  It was state supported institution.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And, went there for two years and then decided to go into the [U.S.] Air Force because either that or I would--I would--I would've gotten drafted into the--into the armed services [U.S. Armed Forces], so I decided to go there.  But, then, again, my twin brother, Reuben [Reuben Tucker], he had already been in the service for a couple of years anyway.  He had been in Japan, a few other places, and he tried to encourage me to come on in, so I, I went on in.  When, when I got in the service, they--I--they want to throw me into the kitchen to start--to be a cook.  I said--I said, "I can't cook.  I, I play music."  They said, "We don't need music in the kitchen.  We want you to cook."  I said, "I understand that, but, you know, I can't do it."  So I, I went to band school, the band school at Lackland Air Force Base in, in Amarillo, Texas [sic.].  And I was teaching other guys about music, but I couldn't pass it.  They passed, I couldn't pass.  So, finally I had to just talk my way into it.  So I talked my way into the next band, band director when we got to California, that I'm a bass player and the guy says, "Oh yeah?  Well, they need one over there."  "Oh, they need one over there?  Okay."  So I went over there and played and the guy said, "Oh, man, am I glad to see you," you know, and that's why I stayed for the--for the--for the--for the remainder of my four years, three months, and two days in--being in the Air Force.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Tell me about your other experiences in the Air Force at that time.
Speaker 2: Well, other than playing music, there, there wasn't too much other exciting things going on other than getting up early in the morning and, and making--and making formations or playing for parades and things of this nature.  There wasn't too (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Well, how, how were you treated?
Speaker 2: I was treated okay.  I was treated--I was treated okay.  Usually, when, when you're around a group of musicians that are pretty much on the same level, you don't have that problem of--that racial problem that--that did not exist at all when we were in the Air Force, none whatsoever.  It was--it was fantastic.  Even when I went into San Bernardino [California], nothing happened there.  Even when I went into Pasadena [California], even when I went into Hollywood [Los Angeles, California], nothing happened.  Nothing happened with me.  You know, I, I, I, I guess if, if you're looking for something to happen, you're, you're, you're bound to find it and I wasn't looking for that kind of stuff.  If, if anyone has that kind of a situation towards me, my attitude is that it's--they have a problem and that's not my problem.  That's, that's your problem.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 395643
Speaker 1: Well, you had alluded that you didn't know about prejudice or racism until you left home [Brentwood, Tennessee] (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Um-hm, um-hm.
Speaker 1: --so I was looking for an incident that might've happened.
Speaker 2: Well, when I left home to, to, to go to Tennessee State [Tennessee Agricultural and Industrial State College; Tennessee State University, Nashville, Tennessee], I was riding the bus and I was smoking a cigarette, and the man says, says, "You can't sit up front.  You can't sit--you can't sit here," and stopped the bus and put me off.  I, I had to get off the bus in the middle of--middle of nowhere, you know, boom.  There I am standing there waiting for the next bus to come to pick me up.  And I realized something was going on, something was happening.  This white guy was driving me and he, he kicked me off the bus, he's, he's telling me that I can't sit here and I can't sit there, and everybody else is smoking cigars and cigarettes.  Cigars and cigarettes were, were, were a big deal, but he didn't want me on the bus smoking that.  Oh, that was too much of a privilege for me to be dealing with.  So I, I put it all together and realized that this was really what's going on.  So from that day on, I adhered to the fact that I couldn't smoke on his bus.  That was his bus, so I gave him that privilege and kept on going.  I didn't have time to worry about those things, you know.  They was troubling to me (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 395644
Speaker 1: So what happens once you complete your tour of duty?
Speaker 2: Well, then I, I decided to go into Hollywood [Los Angeles, California] and to--into Los Angeles [California] area and try to find my way of playing with various musicians, expose myself to, to learn more about jazz, to learn--to, to learn more about what, what the scene is all about.  And as I did that, I, I ran into very extraordinary musicians such as Shorty Rogers, Marty Paich, Art Pepper.  The guy that helped me along was--his name was Warne Marsh.  He played tenor saxophone and he heard me play one day and he said, "Hey, we're starting up a band so I'd like for you to be a part of this."  I said, "Okay, all right."  So for about six months, every day for ten hours a day, it would be Warne Marsh and myself in this garage playing different tunes and, and learning, learning about the improvisation part of the--of, of the jazz scene and, and the structures of various tunes and various compositions, things of this nature, getting my head together, and that's why I know so many songs today.  I mean, I, I don't--I don't practice (unclear) again.  I haven't practiced that in thirty or forty years, you know, talking about practicing, but I can play particularly--practically any tune and every tune that, that I hear, and if I hear it once, I can play it or if I see it, I can read it.  Either way, either way you wanna go with me, I'm, I'm ready to deal with it and so life has been good.  I, I, I guess it was back then when you're talking about 1956, this was--and, and on up the line when this--when, when this situation happened.
Speaker 1: This is when you--you leave the [U.S.] Army in--
Speaker 2: I left the Army in (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I mean, I'm sorry, in the [U.S.] Air Force.  You went in the Air--
Speaker 2: It was--it was the Air Force.
Speaker 1: --Force.
Speaker 2: In '56 [1956].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And then I went to--straight into Hollywood and L.A. [Los Angeles, California] area to, to get hooked up--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --with this--with, with this whole musical scene.
Speaker 1: Did you learn to read music?
Speaker 2: I'm sorry?
Speaker 1: Did you learn to read music?
Speaker 2: I learned to read--I had to learn to read music.
Speaker 1: Did you learn it in college or--
Speaker 2: I, I learned it (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) how did you pick it up?
Speaker 2: I, I--no, well, yes I did learn it in college [Tennessee Agricultural and Industrial State College; Tennessee State University, Nashville, Tennessee] come, come to think of it.  I learned to read music in college.  I had to teach myself how to read music because I had to give a recital on the bass violin even though that never took place because I, I left college two years before I was ready to give a recital.  But--and when I got--and when, when I--while I was in the Air Force, I finally took a lesson from a, a professional bass violinist in L.A. about a year before I was out of the--out, out of the Air Force.
Story_ID: 428734
Speaker 1: I learned how to read music and I, I learned how to read s- some music in college [Tennessee Agricultural and Industrial State College; Tennessee State University, Nashville, Tennessee], but I did not know how the--from, from the, from the technical aspect of the instrument how to get across in certain positions and, and, and--to play.  You know, this, this is, this is a technical thing that is very, very intricate because there are no frets on a bass.  It, it comes feeling, knowing where it is, and it's all up here of, of where it is, and it's all up here, of, of where it is here, here.  It's, it's, it's one of those things that your ears and your mind and your heart--this is why it's so important to, to focus when you play music.  If you focus and pay attention.  This is why Tiger Woods is such a great golfer because he's, he's in total focus of what's happening.  I can't let my mind talk about or think about anything else other than what I'm dealing with.  It's like I'm talking to you this very moment 'cause that is--most important is to, to be able to concentrate.
Speaker 2: We were talking off-camera and you were telling me that when you got this kit for your first bass--
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: (Laughter) That it (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah.
Speaker 2: --didn't come with a bow, so--
Speaker 1: It didn't come with a bow.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: It did not come with a bow.  And, and I didn't get a bow until later on--until later, later on in, in life when I started--continued to, to play, when I say it, it was the bow that needed to go with this instrument.  And I can't really de- I can't really determine where and when I got that bow, but I, I know that I got it.  And then it turns out that I had to--that was a part of the instrument and so I finally got some technical advice on how to use this, this, this bow that, that was most important.  My teacher in Hollywood [Los Angeles, California], his, his name was Hollingworth [ph.], incidentally.  He was an extraordinary bass violinist, young guy, very young.  I guess then he was about twenty--twenty-six years old and he, he's playing (laughter), playing away.  And I, I missed out on those good, early years of, of learning the instrument the right way, but I finally caught up in learning the instrument to get me over the hump.  When I finally got over the hump, I had to go further over the hump because I had to be one of the best and turns out that I ended up as one of the ten top bass, jazz bass violinists, and that come from being able to pizzicato, to pick the instrument, pizzicato, playing, not from the bow aspect of it.  That's just--that's just the, the flavor and the, the, the dessert to the--to the meal.  It's certain endings and things of this nature you deal with the bow or not, not a solo instrument for me.
Story_ID: 428735
Speaker 1: So when you got out of the Army [sic. U.S. Air Force] and you went to Hollywood [Los Angeles, California], were you making a living playing the bass at this time?
Speaker 2: When I left Hollywood?
Speaker 1: No, when you went to Hollywood.
Speaker 2: Oh, yes.  Well (laughter) that was a very fortunate situation in my life.  When, when I--when I went with Warne Marsh who was the tenor saxophone who wanted me to become a member of his--of his--of his group called Jazz of Two Cities, that, that means New York [New York] and California.  Some musicians were from New York, some were from California, so they were called Jazz of Two Cities, and I became a part of that.  Then, other musicians in the industry began to hear me play in various places in various clubs, jazz clubs, and they said, "Well, who is this guy?"  "Man, this is--well, that's, that's Ben Tucker [HistoryMaker Benjamin Tucker].  He just--he, he just came out of the service, man.  He's playing with Warne Marsh."  "Oh, really?  This cat--oh, yeah?"  Then, they began to tune in, fine-tune me in.  This is what happened.  And they began to listen and listen and I began to get recording dates, I began to get concerts, I began to get calls from other musicians to go out and play with them in various clubs, and, pretty, pretty soon your name is all over the place.  And I was first call bass player in, in L.A. [Los Angeles, California] in nineteen f- in 1957, '56 [1956], '57 [1957], '58 [1958].  I left in '59 [1959].
Speaker 1: Left Hollywood in '59 [1959]?
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: Well, what bass did you have then?  You still didn't have the same bass that you--
Speaker 2: No, I didn't.
Speaker 1: --had originally (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I, I, I did not have the Kay bass.  I left the Kay bass behind.  I left--I left the Kay bass at home and, and--because I couldn't bring it along with me to the service because you go through basic training and you're moving and you're moving there.  But when I got to Hollywood, I bought another bass at the--at the musicians' union, and that's the bass that I have right now.  I still have it.  I, I bought that bass in 1956.  I couldn't bring the bass that I had in the [U.S.] Air Force with me because that belonged to the Air Force.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Okay.  So I bought this bass at the--at the Local 47 [American Federation of Musicians], Los Angeles, and they have a room full of basses.  I guess the room was about as half as big as my living room, loaded with basses.  I guess they had about forty basses and I went through them, through them all, and I picked this bass out and I paid $350 for this bass in 1956.  It's a spruce top and a maple back and the bass is made in Austria, and the bass is called Tyrolean.  It's a Tyrolean instrument from Tyrolean Austria.  Don't ask me how to spell Tyrolean 'cause I can't get the (laughter)--that's a--that's a tough name but I know--I know the--I, I know the--I know the name of the bass.  That bass, I played throughout my--throughout my career.  I've had other basses along with that bass and I, I ended up playing this, this Tyrolean bass.  I finally had to sell my other basses.  But this bass is--this is on 95 percent of all of my recordings throughout, throughout my life, from '56 [1956] to the present.
Speaker 1: And this is a, a very expensive bass, is it not?
Speaker 2: It is.  My bass is--my--the, the bass I have is valued at, at this date here in two thousand--2007 is valued about $96,000.  I only paid 350 for it.  But $350 for a bass violin in 1956 was a lot of bread, you know.  I could've--trying to raise a family back then, it was, was very difficult, paid some dues, paid some heavy dues.
Story_ID: 428736
Speaker 1: And when I, when I, when I left California, I went to, to Chicago [Illinois] to play a one-nighter with a friend of mine named Freddie Gambrell, a blind pianist, and we left Chicago--I left Chicago to go--to go to New York [New York] unannounced.  I had a friend that, that, that was--I could stay there for--I stayed in the house for, for a couple of weeks.  He was working with Ella Fitzgerald.  I could stay in this house.  But when he came back, I had to get out of his house and that's when--well, that's another story about New York because then I went into the lofts and all kinds of--sleeping in open air lofts and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, let's, let's, let's talk about it.
Speaker 1: Let's tal- well, sleep in open, open lofts and sleeping in--taking cold showers and eating sardines and cheese and crackers and--I did what--whatever it took to survive.  I, I intended to survive in New York City.  I didn't--I did not become frightened of New York City.  I became very adamant about achieving what I wanted to, to achieve, and that is to get in on the scene and begin to play with and for some of the greatest musicians that I can play with, okay.  I believed in myself, number one.  I had that--so, it went on and on and on.  The, the Local 802 in New York [Associated Musicians of Greater New York]--to become a member of Local 802, they have what is called a waiting period.  You had to wait six months in order to be in and play anywhere and everywhere as a musician in New York.  The, the first--the first month, you can only work one-nighters--the second month or the, the, the second two months, you, you can--you can go out of town but you gotta come back, okay.  You can go out of town but you gotta come back to--there had all kinds of crazy stuff.  And I used to sneak out of town with Roy Eldridge, the trumpet player, you know, and go out of town with Chris Connor, go out of town with, with [HistoryMaker] Billy Taylor and a few other people.  And finally, I got to six months in and then boom, I was ready to work.  But I couldn't--I couldn't work it because not too many people knew that I could read music, I could play, dah, dah, dah, and I'm available.  So, meanwhile, my money is running out, all the money I had because it's, it's something else.  And so one night, I said, okay, Tucker [HistoryMaker Benjamin Tucker], go out and take you a job.  I says, okay, Ben Tucker, go out and take you a job.  So I realized that Marian McPartland was performing at the Hickory House in Manhattan [New York], so I went to the Hickory House, sit down and ordered a cup of coffee.  I didn't have any money to buy a cocktail, didn't need a cocktail to tell you the truth.
Story_ID: 428737
Speaker 1: So I ordered a cup of coffee and I sipped on that until Marian [Marian McPartland] took an intermission [at Hickory House, New York, New York].  When, when the band took intermission, Marian, Marian was coming by and I said to her, "Marian, my name is Ben Tucker [HistoryMaker Benjamin Tucker]."  She says, "Oh?"  I said, "Yes."  I says, "I'd like to sit in and play a tune."  And she says, "Oh, what do you play?"  I said, "I play bass."  She said, "Hm, well, I'll see."  I said, I, I--I said, "I, I, I just wanna play one song, Marian, just, just one tune."  She said, "I'll see."  So, they took their little fifteen, twenty-minute break and she came back.  She says, "Okay, one tune."  I said, "Okay, great," got on the bandstand, I played my heart out.  Then, she went to the next tune.  I said, "Well, I'll have to be--leave the bass down."  She says, "Don't leave the bass down, come on--play this."  I said, "Okay."  Went to lay the bass down, "No, no, no, no, no."  I played the whole set, right?  I says, I--we finished, finished the whole set.  I said, "Marian, I, I enjoyed it very much."  And she said, "Oh, Tucker, I, I, I--where are you from?  Where--how long you been here?"  Bah, dah, dah.  Dah, dah, dah, dah, dah.  I said, "Well, here's my phone number, here's my telephone number.  If you--if you ever need me, please give me a call."  And so I went home, took the subway and went home.  When I got home, the phone rang and it was Marian.  She says, "Are you available to go on the road with me?"  I said, "Yeah, sure.  Let's, let's get on."  She says--she says, "You're playing intimidated my bass player and he--he's all upset, you know."  I said, "Upset over my playing?" She said, "He's upset."  I said, "Cool, cool."  I'm--(laughter)--all right, bring it on.  And that's how I, I got into the scene, played with her, went on the road, came back to New York [New York] and I start playing with Chris Connor.  I come back and I start playing with Roy Eldridge and all these guys and, and things--I was in the studio recording every day and all day and I said, oh, boy, you know.  I started dating my wife and--Gloria [Gloria Daly Tucker], and, and I wrote--I wrote a hit song for her called 'Comin' Home Baby' and, and that was a big hit.  I was on the road with Chris Connor when that thing was smoking with Herbie Mann.  I said, wow, wow, you know?  So I got a check for thirty-some thousand dollars.  I said, look out, man.  No more--no more cheese and crackers (laughter) and sardines.  And I went to Julius [Orange Julius], you know, those, those Julius stands they have in New York where they sell orange juice and hot dogs.  I, I went there to sit there and with thirty-three thousand dollars in my hip pocket and I ordered me the biggest hot dog and, and, and glass of orange juice and I was so happy, man.  The--I mean, I didn't need a steak, I didn't need this, I didn't need that.  You know, I just, just--I'm out of the woods, you know, and I have not looked back.  I have not looked back from that day to this day.  So I always say that if there's something that I really want to do in life and that I--it, it depends on me.  It doesn't depends on anyone else.  I got to come to grips and says, I can do it and I will do it and I will get it done.
Story_ID: 428738
Speaker 1: So--
Speaker 2: What, what (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) everything else is--everything has been peaches since then, you know.
Speaker 2: All right.  Well, well tell me--tell me more about recording your first record.
Speaker 1: Well, recording my first record was in California and that happened with Sam Cooke.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And s- I'm not sure if it was 'Darling, You Send Me' ['You Send Me'] or not was the tune that was on it, but I was so thrilled about what, what was going on.  It happened.  That was my first.  And then the record company called me back for another one, for--with another artist and it just goes on and on and on, you know.  L.A. [Los Angeles, California] was, was quite successful for me, the West Coast scene.  That was--that, that was my first.  And then Art Pepper, the alto saxophonist, he got a hold of me and we hit it off very, very well.  We loved one another.  We--musically, we connected, you know, and I made a bunch of stuff with him.  He died about fifteen years ago.  I'm sorry that's he's dead but that was--that was a good connection.  So I played with a lot of guys out there, Art Pepper, Bill Holman, Frankie Rosolino [Frank Rosolino], it just goes on and on and on.
Story_ID: 428739
Speaker 1: What year was this that you make the record that was the big hit for you?
Speaker 2: Oh, that was--that, that was--the big hit that, that I wrote was in 1961--1960.
Speaker 1: And tell me the name of it one more time?
Speaker 2: It's called 'Comin' Home Baby,' C-O-M-I-N, Home Baby.
Speaker 1: And you said you wrote it for your wife?
Speaker 2: I wrote it for my wife.  (Laughter) Yeah, it was funny--you know, it was funny.  She, she was--I was at the bar one night in, in the Hickory House [New York, New York], and a guy walks in and he sits down and starts talking to me.  And I tell--I tell him, I said, "Look, man, I need a place to stay.  I don't have a place to stay."  He said, "You don't?"  I said, "No."  He says, "I know a lady that, that maybe she, she could help you," and he calls Gloria [Gloria Daly Tucker].  Gloria was sick at the time.  She, she just got out of the hospital.  She's sick, so she tried to help me.  And I was so appreciative of someone trying to help me back then, I invited her to come to the Hickory House and be my guest and see Tucker [HistoryMaker Benjamin Tucker] was making some money, you know, I, I could afford more than a cup of coffee.  But she came.  She didn't come when I invited her to come, she came about three or four weeks later.  She was supposed to come like this week, she didn't come like until six weeks later, three, three to six weeks later.  She, she pops in.  When she walked through the front door, I said, that's her 'cause she came in with a girlfriend.  She had this mink hat on and, and mink around her neck and leather, leather coat and I said, ooh, look out.  And sure enough, it was her.  She walked in, the maitre d' seated them.  And when I came off the bandstand, I went straight to her and sit down next to her and I said, "Hey, there."  She (laughter)--she says, "You (unclear)," I said (laughter)--I played around with her.  I said, "Well, this is mine.  I want you.  I appreciate what you did, girl.  You're something else."  And it worked out.  And I just kept hounding her and hounding her from day in and day out for about six months and finally she gave in.  "Okay, all right, all right."  And so the result is she's my wife.  And I was practicing back then and I came across this melody on my instrument.  I said, hm, son of a gun. Played it.  In about ten minutes, I had the whole song written.  So I was working with Herbie Mann at the Village Gate [New York, New York] at the time and I said, "Herbie, I'm gonna teach you a song," right.  He says, "Cool."  So I taught him the song.  And they were recording live the next night and I taught the song to the vibraphonist and to the drummer.  Each, each, each musician I would teach, teach the song.  "Hey, man, this the way this go," (makes sounds).  And I went up and did one take live and it was a big smash, twenty-three minutes long, one tune.  Three tunes on the album, one tune that long, big hit.  And here I am again smiling from jaw to jaw.  The guy said (laughter)--it was funny.  It was funny.  I was on the road.  I left--Herbie went on the road with Chris Connor and, and while I was on the road, guys would tell me, "Hey man, you got a big tune in, in Cash Box and Record World," and, and, and I said, "Oh, really?  Okay."  I didn't know it until I saw it and then right here, there it was.
Story_ID: 428740
Speaker 1: And then I was playing with Mak- Miriam Makeba.  I don't know if you heard of her or not (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, Miriam Makeba.
Speaker 1: Okay, I was her first bassist, too, when she came to America from Africa--
Speaker 2: Africa, yeah.
Speaker 1: Wound up, [HistoryMaker] Harry Belafonte was working her, you know, sponsoring her.  We were working that day at the, let's see, there's the Village Gate [New York, New York]--the Vanguard [Village Vanguard, New York, New York], at the, at the Vanguard.  And snow was on the ground and a friend of mine from--white guy named Bobby Dorough.  We're born the same day, same month, about ten years apart.  He's a beautiful musician, song writer, lyric--he's, he's, and he's a lyricist.  And I said, "Hey, Bob, I got this hit song called--." And he said, "Yeah, Ben [HistoryMaker Benjamin Tucker], I heard about that."  I said, "Hey, look, look, look, man, why don't you put some lyrics to this thing, man?"  He said, "Okay."  Couple of days, he came back with the lyrics (singing), "Come on home, you know I'm waiting there for you.  You been gone, you don't know what I'm going through.  Since you been away, I been blue."  That's the first part, then, then it goes on about being coy, why you been--why are you so coy?  Oh, well, anyway, anyway, Mel Torme at that time needed a hit.  He needed a--he needed a hit in the worst way because he couldn't get arrested back then.  So, the president of Atlantic Records name is Nesuhi Ertegun says (unclear), says, "Mel, I want you to record this tune, 'Comin' Home' [Comin' Home Baby']." And Mel says, "Okay," went in the studio and I played bass on that and played it, Mel--didn't have quite a hit, he had a--he sold a half a million copies of--a half a million copies of--it was a hit.  I'm sorry (laughter)--but (unclear) that's music, you know.  And I--so he had a big hit, so I had two hits going on with Herbie Mann and now I got one on with Mel Torme.  And right now, I guess I got about 250 different recordings of 'Comin' Home Baby.'  If I go to the computer and pull it up, they'll just keep coming and coming and coming with commercials and all sorts of things, General Motors [General Motors Corporation; General Motors Company], General Mills, it just goes on and on and on every--I get--you know, I live on that check right now, you know.  It just comes in, "Hey, baby, what you wanna do?"  "Let's go to Europe."  "Okay, let's go to Europe."  But, Mel Torme did an interview on A&E and it's--and it's still there.  They, they, they will never erase it.  They can never get me--get it erased.  Mel Torme said on A&E, they said, "You recorded this tune, 'Comin' Home Baby.'"  They show the album, the name of the album called 'Comin' Home Baby,' it's in red.  He said, "Yeah, that piece of junk, you know, that piece of garbage and they made me record back when."  I said, that son of a gun is putting me down like that.  You, you, you have the audacity to do something like that.  I, I said, great, I'm glad you said it, man, because now people gonna wonder, like, is that a--is that a piece of garbage, really?  I'm just gonna listen to it again and maybe, maybe he stirred up some curiosities, you know.  But, anyway, that's what he said.  And now, Mel Torme has a son that is singing, his name is Mel Torme, and his first tune is 'Comin' Home Baby' so if it's (laughter) such garbage--oh, boy, I just laugh.  You know, life is beautiful, life is good, man.  I don't worry about this stuff, what they--
Speaker 2: That, that song was also featured in, in film, 'Get Shorty,' wasn't it?
Speaker 1: It was filmed in 'Get Shorty,' it was filmed in 'Calendar Girls.'  Did you see 'Calendar Girls' where all those ladies--
Speaker 2: When the--the ladies (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) were getting--were going nude?
Speaker 2: --from Britain?  Yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah (laughter), those ladies.  I tell you, that's wild, Cal- bunch of little old ladies pulling off their blouses, showing their breasts and showing--oh, go ahead baby, then 'Comin' Home Baby' (laughter), do-do-do.  I love it.  It's, it's 'Get Shorty,' 'Calendar Girls,' 'Getting Even With Dad' some more that I can't really think--I can't think of, crime, something to do with crime.  But, you know, it--
Speaker 2: So, so you're getting paid (laughter)?
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, I get royalties.  Thank goodness when you have a good publishing company, they have good contracts and good copyrights, sound copyrights.  That, that--that's--then--and, and then, I get foreign royalties.  I get foreign royalties from Broadcast Music, Inc.  And I get--I get domestic royalties on top of that, you know.  Comes June every year, they'll send me a check for ten grand [$10,000] come rain or come shine, boom, there it is.  From, from the foreign, I might get a check for $100,000 (laughter), who knows.  It just happens.  It just happen.  And, and, and, and, again, I don't question it.  I don't say, why this and why that?  It's--it happens.  That's the way it is.  That's the way it is.  Who says that?  Walter Cronkite said it (laughter) (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) "And that's the way it is."
Speaker 1: That's the way it is (laughter).
Story_ID: 428741
Speaker 1: So, this was in '61 [1961], so now in '65 [1965]--is that when you write 'Sunny'?
Speaker 2: No, I didn't write 'Sunny.'
Speaker 1: Okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I discovered 'Sunny.'
Speaker 1: Discovered it, okay.
Speaker 2: I discovered 'Sunny.'  The guy that wrote 'Sunny,' his name is Bobby Hebb.
Speaker 1: Oh, okay.
Speaker 2: H-E-B-B.  Now, Bobby, I was working at the Village Gate [New York, New York] with Herbie Mann the same time with 'Comin' Home Baby' was a big hit and Bobby, Bob- I, I went to a poker game one night and there's Bob sitting in this poker game.  And he says, "Ben Tucker [HistoryMaker Benjamin Tucker]," I said, "Hey, man."  Now, Bobby is from Nashville, Tennessee.  Bobby's mother [Ovalla Hebb] and father [William Hebb] are blind.  Bobby used to be on the side of, of--on, on the street corner at the Maxwell Hotel [Maxwell House Hotel] in Nashville playing the spoons (makes sounds), and then mom and dad playing the guitar and singing, and that's how they made their living, you know--you know, with the--with the little cup out there and this kind of business--they, they, they made a living.  Well, Bobby, Bobby turned out to be a very good guitarist and, and a singer, he's the son, and he wrote the song 'Sunny.'  So he says, "Man," he says, "I'm playing your--playing your tune in this restaurant that I'm working at."  I said, "Which one?"  He says, "'Comin' Home.'"  I said, "Okay."  I said, "Where, where is it?"  He told me 86th [Street] and--eighty--84th [Street] and, and, and 2nd Avenue.  I said, "Okay."  So I went up there and there he was in this little room, had, had the microphone wrapped around, you know, how they got the--and playing the guitar and singing.  I said, "Oh, yeah, that's cool."  I said, "Look, man, what else have you done of your own?"  He says--he says, "I wrote this."  He said, "Listen to this."  He played 'Sunny.'  (Singing) "Sunny," do-do-do, "yesterday my life--."  I said, "Wow, man.  What you--what you gonna do with it?"  He says, "Help me, Tucker."  I said, "Okay."  He says, "I need help because I'm being evicted out of my apartment, basically.  I got--I got--I got to leave."  He was at the Lenox Terrace up in the--(unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) In Harlem [New York, New York].
Speaker 2: Yeah, I said, "Son of a gun, you're being evicted."  So I said, "Look, I will try to help you."  This has been my thing all my life, helping people.  This--I get my consolation from--so, I went to Mercury Records downtown in, in Manhattan [New York], talked to a friend of mine named Bobby Scott.  "Hey, Bobby, I got this guy that can sing his heart out and listen this tune, man, 'Sunny,' it's a hit."  He said, "Tucker," he says, "you had one hit, 'Comin' Home,' now you think you got another."  I said, "Man, this is a smash, I know."  So he signed Bobby up.  They're going to the studio to record.  They, they put an arranger with Bobby.  The arranger records his song called 'Bread' and put that on the A side and Bobby comes out and says, "Man," he says, "we didn't record 'Sunny.'"  I said, "Look, man, you owe it to me.  You--I need--you owe it to--one time."  They went back in the studio and record 'Sunny,' one take.  There are two mistakes on it but nobody knows what it is and they put it out on a single.  So it's out for four weeks and nothing happened.  So I called my friend up at the radio station, WCHB [WCHB Radio] in, in, in Detroit [Michigan].  I said, "Hey, Williams [Bill Williams], this is Ben Tucker."  He said, "Man," he said, "your record is a dud."  I says, "What do you mean?"  He says, "'Bread' I'm playing."  I said, "No, man, no, no, no.  It's 'Sunny.'  Flip it over."  He flipped it over on a Thursday.  That Monday, it was a smash in Chicago [Illinois], Milwaukee [Wisconsin], all over the place.  I said, thank you, Jesus.  Thank you, Jesus (laughter), thank you, thank you, you know, right?  That's what you call being at the right place at the right time and knowing the right people at the right place--
Story_ID: 428742
Speaker 1: Did you publish--
Speaker 2: I, I, I published--I published 'Sunny.'  I was the publisher of 'Sunny' and then I sold my publishing out.  I made some stupid mistakes in life, you know, that--and, and that was one.  I shouldn't have sold--I shouldn't have sold, sold this out.  I, I left quite a few million dollars out, out on the table, quite a few million.  When I say quite a few, I'm talking about maybe about $150 million laying out there.  That's a lot of money.  But I, I did what I had to do.  I, I, I sold my rights out, then I came here and I bought WSOK Radio [Savannah, Georgia] with some of the money.  I put, put a group together and--because I believed in the free enterprise system and somehow or another African Americans have, have got to get into the free enterprise system if we're ever going to excel.  We, we, we got to do it.  We gotta stop spending money and giving it to someone else like Broughton Street [Savannah, Georgia].  It's all loaded with white merchandise.  Now, come on, fellas.  I mean, it was--once, it was an all-black clientele and now it is the most beautiful street--the most beautiful street in, in, in, in the United States of America.  Now at that time you got Banana Republic and, and all those beautiful shops up and down Broughton Street where they were--they were harvesting black trades, oh, man, you know.  Thing, thing--things have changed.  Things have cha- and, and, and, and I still talk that same talk.  Where are we?
Story_ID: 395654
Speaker 1: Well, we were talking about publishing.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And that you published 'Sunny'--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --and you said that you--you know, you sold the publishing rights, but you actually formed a production company, is that right?
Speaker 2: I, I formed a production company to deal with specifically radio and television commercials in New York City [New York, New York].
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what was the name of it?
Speaker 2: It was called Tuckrow, T-U-C-K-R-O-W, Tuckrow Productions [Tuckrow Productions, Inc., New York, New York].  And so, I formed it with a friend of mine who wrote the lyrics to 'Comin' Home Baby,' Bobby Dorough.  And his, his name is D-O-R-O-U-G-H, Bobby Dorough, Dorough (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay.
Speaker 2: Dorough.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But anyway, we formed a publishing company and we produced a whole bunch of commercials, Dutch Masters cigars, Hai Karate cologne, Esso, E-S-S--Esso gasoline.  As a matter of fact, we changed the Esso sign to Exxon [Exxon Mobil Corporation] and when--there's a big crane that went all out, out in sea and erected itself up, that's, that's--we, we changed that name from Esso to Exxon.  Hartford, Hartford insurance company [The Hartford Financial Services Group, Inc.], we got a tremendous Clio [Clio Awards] mention about that particular commercial, and that one was two cars coming together in slow motion and it goes together and the, the debris flows out after they collide with each other, just flows all over the place.  And this Judy Collins voice singing like that says, life--with her hand out, life is like a drop of water in the palm of your hands.  And, and the whole commercial was silent (laughter) and that was it, boom, I said all right, you know.  And, and it was great you know.  I had a ball doing that kind of stuff.  We did a lot of stuff, Chemical Bank in New York [New York], Bankers Trust.  It goes on and on and on.
Story_ID: 395655
Speaker 1: And finally, the executive, the executive director of LaRoche, McCaffrey and McCall, advertising agency in New York City [New York, New York], said, said to me, he says, "I, I need you to have lunch with my--with, with one my vice presidents," I'll think of his name in a second, and--he said, "because I have a ten-year-old son that can't multiply."  I said, "You're kidding."  He said, "No," he said, "but my, my--," this is a multimillionaire, he's a got son that can't multiply.  I said, "That, that's strange."  So I said, "Okay, I'll give it try, man, you know."  They said, "Well, why won't you have lunch with my--," Noel [ph.], J- Noel is the last, last name, Noel, Noel.  I can't think of his first name.  But anyway, we had lunch at this French restaurant and it was a topless restaurant.  I said, "Man, why you bringing me here to talk shop and you got these naked women in front of me.  Man, are you crazy?"  Well (laughter) anyway, we talked.  He says, "Tucker [HistoryMaker Benjamin Tucker]," he says, "my boss got this son and he can't multiply, he want you to help."  And I said, "Me?  Okay, all right, I'll help him.  I'll do my best.  And let me talk to my friend, Bobby Dorough," and Bobby Dorough--I said, "Look, Bobby, okay, we'll do it."  He said, "Well," he said, "we'll give it a try."  So, Bobby put it--put most of it together as if--he, he--the creativity of three is the magic number.  It was--it was a--it was a trial that he started.  Three is the magic number.  Three times three is three--three times nine--three times three is nine, all this kind of stuff, go through all the table, three times seven, took it back to the guy and said, "Now, what, what do you think of this one?"  And he said, "Oh, man, that's awesome."  So we did more tables, three, five, nines, and, and took, took it back.  He said, "Well, we need to find out if, if this will work."  So they sent it to the Red Bank School [sic. Little Red School House; Little Red School House and Elisabeth Irwin High School] in New York and gave it to the classes, and the classes, they fell out.  They--the kids had a hard time with math, they grabbed onto it because they could remember a rock and roll tune with--back then but they couldn't remember the tables.  But when you put it in the form that we put it in, it worked.  They sent it to the rural schools in North Carolina and it worked there.  So, they said, "Well, let's go to ABC and see what, what, what we can do."  Took it to ABC, ABC fell over because the FCC [Federal Communications Commission] was on ABC's back about children's programs to begin with, and the rest of it is history.  It's still--it's still rolling right along.  My rights--I, I sold my rights out of that to Bobby Dorough and I says, "You got it."  He said--he, he--he's--again, I made a wrong decision (laughter).  I keep making these wrong decisions.  You know, time, everything has to do with--has, has to do with time and sometimes if I wait and wait and wait and wait and wait, I say, well, it's not gonna happen now, and the minute I jump off, boom, there it--I say, ah, damn, Tucker, you crazy man.  What--I say what on earth is wrong with you?  Can't you--can't you wait a little longer?  No, it didn't happen, Tucker.  So--well, anyway, that's what happens with me and that's what happened with the production company [Tuckrow Productions, Inc., New York, New York].
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Right.
Story_ID: 395656
Speaker 1: So you take your funds now in--
Speaker 2: In stride (laughter).  I take my--I take my funds in, in, in royalties from compositions that, that I've written and I get a little pension from the--from the--from the union in New York [New York] from making all these records and films.  I used to do a lot of films with [HistoryMaker] Quincy Jones.  I've done a lot of stuff with him in New York.  It just--that, that kind of--that kind of a s- that kind of a scene, so I, I get a little--a little pension, not much, so I take that pension, put that in the bank and forget about it and see just how far that can go before I have to put it in some stock market and see how fast that, that will go.
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Whatever the case may be.
Speaker 1: So is it--at this point, we're in probably '72 [1972] now that you (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Nineteen seventy-two [1972].
Speaker 1: --you move--
Speaker 2: In, in, in nineteen--well, okay, prior to 1972, leading up to it, I sit down and have a conversation with my attorney, Sidney Libowitz [ph.], L-I-B-O-W-I-T-Z, Sidney Libowitz who is also Earl Graves' [HistoryMaker Earl G. Graves, Sr.] attorney as well.  And this--and Sidney and I became friends because of, of 'Comin' Home Baby' and 'Sunny' came into play, getting some legal advice and this kind of business 'cause I wanted to--wanted to get my funds together so I can get into radio.  Again, I had this, this African American free enterprise thing going on.  I mean, why can't I be a part of this system in the world?  That was--that was blowing my brain.  How--what's keeping me--I mean, I have the same brains as, as any white man on the face of this earth and you mean to tell me that the bank is gonna to tell me that I can't do it?  Okay.  I don't understand that.  So, I decided to do it on my own.  I formed a, a, a corporation [Black Communications Corporation] that, that, that I could bring together, musicians or bring people.  [HistoryMaker] Billy Taylor was one, Doug Pugh [G. Douglas Pugh] was another, and Earl Graves was another and, and Sidney Libowitz says, "Well, we can make that work, you know, I think."  But, meanwhile, Earl was trying to get the magazine [Black Enterprise] off the ground and he didn't have any money to put with me.  All I had with Earl was his name and, and, and I said, well, I need more than a name, man.  I need some money and I need some advice and I need--you know, I don't need--I don't need to put this thing together on my own off, off my back and then when I get it rolling, everybody gonna be riding me.  I don't need that, man.  I need--I need people to ride with me now.  So that's, that's what happens.  So my attorney and I, we went to Seattle, Washington to look at African American neighborhoods, communities to see if it was feasible, doing a feasibility study to see if it's feasible for me to buy a radio station in, in Seattle, Washington.  No, it wasn't feasible because the population wasn't large enough 'cause you was depending on local advertising and national advertising.  The regional advertising is where you gotta have enough audience to--that can deal with.  So we went to Louisville, Kentucky, and there's a station there.  There was a station available to buy.  I was buying it across the river from Louisville, which is in--which is in Indiana, and I guess there was about ten-block span across the river.  I was bleeding--I was gonna aim it right at the, the black station in Louisville, Kentucky, and knock him out.  That was my intention, to knock the station out of there.  I always had that intention of (laughter) fight.  I, I love a good clean fight.  I don't like to fight, fight.  I like a good, clean, legitimate fight, and that's what happened with me.  So, they got together on the other side of the river at, at the--at the Louisville station, WLOU radio station [WLOU Radio].  And--WLOU radio station, never forget that.  They had this African American minister who was a--who was the, the general manager, name is Saunders [ph.], and Saunders had it--had, had it in for me.  He was looking for a way to sue me or, or to get me out of--to get me out of Louisville so, so I wouldn't be--I would not compete because my philosophy then was total community involvement, economic motivation, and a training program for the minorities to be managers, program directors, and news analysts, and to, to bring a cohesive understanding between blacks and whites in, in, in, in the two--in the two cities.
Story_ID: 395657
Speaker 1: Once that happened, I had it made.  I mean, I--I mean, I could--I could still implement that this very day anywhere in the United States and it would make it because African America and white America, that's still far apart from each other.  We, we, we look at each other for vengeance.  I, I ran into black--now, I don't mean to get off the subject, but I ran into a friend of mine I played golf with, he's black, and I said to him the other day, I said, "Hey, man, what do you think of Dr. Phil [Phil McGraw]?"  "Oh, man, I can't stand Dr. Phil."  "Why?  What has he done to you?"  "Oh, man, I, I hate that."  I said, "What do you think of Oprah [Oprah Winfrey]?"  "Shoot, I don't even like Oprah."  I said, "How on the earth can you say that about Oprah?"  He said, "Man, she hasn't done anything for black America."  I said, "Is she supposed to?"  I said, "It's her money.  Just because she built--she built a school in Africa, you mean to tell me--." He said, "Well, she should build one here."  I said, "Well, she's been trying.  She--don't you realize, man, she's given Spelman [Spelman College, Atlanta, Georgia] a few million dollars?"  You know, he said, "She have?"  I said, "See, you don't know what you're talking about, man, so shut up and let me educate you, man.  Don't talk about people that are out there doing it.  This lady's done it."  I didn't mean to get off on that--off--on that scene, but, but that's what's happening, though.  You know, we got to--we got to pull it together and make this whole thing--make this whole thing work.  So then when I came to Savannah [Georgia] to buy this station, the, the way--the way I bought SOK [WSOK Radio, Savannah, Georgia] is because the owner, white, had a son that was a junkie and he, he had--he had overdosed and he killed himself, you know, shooting with the heroin back then.  He wanted to get rid of the station.  I bought the station for $450,000.
Speaker 2: You bought the station in Savannah?
Speaker 1: In Savannah.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Did you buy one in, in--oh, you didn't buy it (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) (Shakes head) I left $25,000 down in Louisville, Kentucky, and had to walk away from it because he filed--he filed--well, well, back up--back up a second.  I ran into Lenny Lyles who was the halfback with the Baltimore Colts [Indianapolis Colts].  He and I became very close friends in Louisville and I told him what I was going to do and how--what--and, and here's my memorandum and, and, and read it.  Well, the guy at the LOU station [WLOU Radio, Louisville, Kentucky] said that I was peddling stocks on the--on the station that I'm trying to buy in Indiana, so he filed a petition with the SEC, the Security Exchange Commission [sic. U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission], and no such thing went down.  So in order--if my--for my--Sidney Libowitz [ph.] and them--again, he says, well, look, man, he says--he says, "You spend a lot of money fighting this, this, this allegation, and it don't mean nothing, but you're gonna spend a lot of money 'cause you gotta get attorneys here, attorneys in Washington [D.C.]," dah-dah-dah, hearings and hearings and it drag on, drag on, and drag on.  He said, "Forget it.  We'll go elsewhere."  I said, "Okay."  So we left $25,000 right there in Louisville, Kentucky, right.  Now, g- coming here to Savannah, I came in this town totally unannounced again.  I didn't tell anyone that I was coming to Savannah, right.  Very interesting, isn't it?  The first person I met when I first came to Savannah was--his name was W.W. Law.  I'm on the plane--same plane with him coming to Savannah the day before I'm ready to close the station.  I meet W.W. Law on the plane and we start talking and I didn't know him, he didn't know me.  And the next morning, the first person I meet again was W.W. Law.  I interviewed him the next morning because you had to do an ascertainment of--in the community of problems so you can--the FCC [Federal Communications Commission] had a--had a rule, which was very good, you know, you need to ascertain and, and these are the problems in the community among the community leaders to find out what are the problems and how to program to meet those problems.  Today, the station don't have to do that.  They don't have to do nothing.  That's why the language has, has gotten so, so bad on, on radio.  That's why hip-hop has gotten so--gotten so--and, and rap has gotten so, so fantastically overwhelmingly overtaken the community and this kind of business.  It's, it's, it's awful, but that's what happened, okay.
Story_ID: 395658
Speaker 1: So you purchased the radio station.
Speaker 2: I purchased the radio station.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And--
Speaker 1: What was the first order of business?
Speaker 2: The first order of business was to find out what I was going to program and how I was going to program it.  Then, I ran into a lot of opposition from the people that were--that were at the station when I--when I walked in the first day.  They didn't wanna see me.  They didn't wanna hear me.  They didn't--'cause I'd never ran a station before in my life, but I was determined that what is needed on the air, you don't need a tremendous amount of experienced with it.  All you need to do is know what direction you wanna go in.  And so I had that--I had that laid out already in my own mind and down on paper, cool, so I went in.  A lot of people quit.  I didn't know that at WSOK [WSOK Radio, Savannah, Georgia] that at that time, they had a lot of shooting going on and other--drugs going on and, and up in the--in the ceiling there's all kinds of gunshots, you know, in the--in this--I had no idea this went down.  It's a good thing that they didn't tell me this 'cause I, I--I would have probably flipped out.  But then--but, but then, I, I had employees to, to, to get so down on me that they went and, and, and--to South Carolina side and bring--they brought the voodoo thing on me.  I went through the voodoo.  Let me tell, tell you about that voodoo business, you know.  The voodoo was that they would have dead cats laid out along the path of, of--for me coming to the station and that's supposed to redirect my, my directions in life, or what I need to do (laughter).  They were trying to control me, you know.  "Hey, hey, hey, boy, you can't do that (unclear)."  So, I would--I would get the rake every morning for about a month and rake this cat out the way.  One morning I came there and there was--there was a cross like this (gesture) with, with cat heads, nine cat heads, six and three like this laying up against the--I said, I don't believe this, man.  So I, I get the rake again and knock the--knock the--knock the cross down and kick the rake on in, in the back and just, just kicking it along and kicking it along.  I didn't wanna touch it, you know.  I just kicked it down there.  Finally, they gave up (laughter).  They finally gave up.  But, but, but some other things went on, you know, besides that in terms of running the station, trying--when, when I finally got the station moving forward, everything quieted down, the community believed in what I was doing and I was bringing community affairs, I was dealing with economics.  I, I even cleaned up the gospel program, bringing on churches and things of this nature, trying to make it--make it more better and, and trying to deal with them.  And, and I became number one in the market, that was the first forty-three days of, of being there and I stayed number one for about eleven years with an AM station, with 1000 watts a day and 250 watts at night, right (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Wow.
Story_ID: 395659
Speaker 1: What were some of the things that--you said you, you made a few changes.  Was advertising--your advertising strategy a little different (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, no, no, no.  The changes I made, the--you mean at the radio station [WSOK Radio, Savannah, Georgia], you're talking about?
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: The changes I made was, was in programming and how--and, and re- because what they had going on the air was, was garbage.  The guys couldn't read, they couldn't write, and, and they ripping, ripping AP [Associated Press] or UPI [United Press International] news and they're trying to read it and they couldn't read it.  You know, it was awful.  You know, my, my wife [Gloria Daly Tucker] would, would, would get the guy, get the paper, and she'd sit him down and she said, "Now, listen, let's, let's read this before you go on the air with this thing, and this is how you pronounce this word.  Open your mouth--." One guy--one guy is doing extraordinarily well in radio in America today.  He's--he has a, a, a lisp in his tongue and he kept bugging me.  He kept coming to the station looking for a job.  "Mr. Tucker [HistoryMaker Benjamin Tucker], I, I need a job in radio.  I love--I know everything that goes on in the radio station."  He listened to the station twenty-four hours a day.  He also looked at another station that didn't allow him to talk, but he just--he was pushing buttons, you know.  And, and he came to me after the third time, I said, "Look, I'm gonna give you--I'm gonna give you a chance.  I'll give you--I'll give you an opportunity, man.  But I don't want you to say anything on the radio other than time and weather.  That's all I want you to say.  But I'll split the bill with you.  I, I, I want you to go for a speech therapist.  I'll pay half, you pay half.  The reason I want you to pay half is because I want to put some burden on you for, for you to get your--get your speech together."  And this guy turned out to be my most important employee I have ever had in my life.  He's now running the, the, the big satellite FM radio throughout the world with jazz and gospel and all this kind of stuff.  His name is--his name is J. Bryant, Joseph Bryant, right.  I love him--I love him with all my heart.  He's, he's, he's doing great.  He's--he moved from here to Washington [D.C.], oh, the, the, the kid is--the kid is doing it and he loves it.  That--that's his life.  That's his--that is his entire life.  And that blows my mind when something like that happens, you know, so he turned out to be good for me.  But I had to sell the station because advertisers got into another--in--into another bag, and that is even though--even though I was number one, I couldn't--I couldn't impress upon national advertisers that I had the market.  They said, "But you're black."  I said, "So what?  I got the numbers.  Look, it's in Arbitron and it's also in, in Pulse, and, and, and what you want me to do?"  They said, "But you--you know--no, no, no, no, no, you black."  I said, "I know that."  So, for years and years and years, I couldn't get it.  So then I came up with my own survey of what black folks spent in Savannah, Georgia.  A few million dollars on shoe polish, baby food, you name it.  And it would go on and on and on and I published that in the Savannah Morning News newspaper for, for--and I, I did it once every month.  Hey, man, this is what black folks are spending, advertise--they said, "We don't need that" because--I couldn't--they said, well African Americans don't have an alternative but to come to my supermarket to eat, to buy food.  In a way, that's true.  They have--they, they have no other alternative but to buy my Chevrolet or my Oldsmobile.  They gotta come here.  And I--and I come--and, and I was telling them, I said, "Look, you, you need to go to Buford [Georgia]," (laughter) "and you need to go to Jacksonville [Florida] and see what's going on."  I didn't have their advertising, so what I had to lose?  Then, I had a Jewish program on the air.  I, I had the rabbi to come on.  The rabbi came on every Saturday morning.  It's called 'From a Jewish Point of View' [ph.].  The, the, the rabbi said, "I want all Jews to stop buying Pepsi-Cola."  I said, "Oh, man."  The re- (laughter)--the reason he want the Jews to stop buying Pepsi-Cola is because the Jews in Israel had a problem with Pepsi-Cola in Israel, and he said, well, you know, you don't support Israel, we don't wanna--we will not support you here in America.  And I was trying to get that point across to African American people, saying, look, man, this is what they are saying, why can't we say the same thing?  And they wouldn't hear me.  So when I got ready to sell the station, I, I went to the ministerial alliance.  I said, "Look, ministers, I want to give you the station 'cause I can't take it anymore.  I wanna get out."  And they said, "Well, we don't want it."  (Pause) Well, anyway, that's, that's my--that's part of my story, baby.
Story_ID: 395660
Speaker 1: The radio station [WSOK Radio, Savannah, Georgia] did other things also.  Where was it that you did the, the public service things like the sickle cell anemia screenings and, you know, that type of things?
Speaker 2: Yeah, well, I did start the sickle cell anemia program here in Savannah [Georgia] with the station, at the station, and it's still going on today, the sickle cell anemia.  It's headed up now at the EOA [Economic Opportunity Authority for Savannah-Chatham County Area] under the direction of John Finney.
Speaker 1: Were they (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And the awareness of that, again, started a, a reading program to teach kids how to read.  The lady got burned out that--out of her home a few months ago, her name is Carrie Rouse [ph.], she's living in a motel right now 'cause she has no home.  She was one of the teachers, dedicated teachers in Savannah [Georgia] to come to my aid.  Tried to bring an awareness and try to help people to understand that there is help.  There is somebody that can--that can help us, but we got to start speaking up and, and going for it.  So, John Finney picked the ball up on that and he's, he's been going with it for, for about thirty years now, I guess.
Story_ID: 395661
Speaker 1: So, who did you sell the station [WSOK Radio, Savannah, Georgia] to?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) I sold it to a group of white individuals from Biloxi, Mississippi, of all places.  They, they bought the station and turned around in six months' time and sold it again to another group, and this group that has it now is called Cumulus [Cumulus Broadcasting, Inc.]--Adventures or Cumulus.  I guess it's called--I think it's called Cumulus.  I'm not too sure what it's called, but they own seven radio stations in this market.  Then, I built an FM station and that's another long story to tell.  This, this station licensed in Hardeeville, South Carolina, which is seventeen miles away.  Well, put the station on the air.  We became number one in the market in seven days of being on the--on the radio station.  Never been, been heard of in history of communications period, number one total market.  But what I did, I went on TV and newspaper at the same time talking about what I was going to program and what I believe in and what I was going to do.  There will be absolutely no rap music, none of this garbage, and I just kept banging on the table, no rap music.  I can't stand this stuff and, and we don't need it.  So when I went on the air, the audience sitting there waiting to hear, well, what's he gonna play (laughter)?  And I come in with this--with this soft soul and no rap music.  All the beautiful soft soul, you know, Gladys Knight, you name it, all, all this, and number one in seven--'cause in the--in the mid- in the middle of a survey going out when I came on the air and Love 101.1 [WLVH Radio, Hardeeville, South Carolina], boom, right.
Story_ID: 395662
Speaker 1: So, one of my investors got cold feet and he says, he says, he says, "Man," he says, "I don't see the economy turning around and so I, I need to sell, I need to sell this.  I need to get out."  I said, "Okay, man, put it up for sale."  They put it up for sale.  We, we sold it to [President] Lyndon Baines Johnson's daughter, Luci, Luci Johnson [Luci Baines Johnson], President--Luci--for 2.1 million and six months later, she sold it for 11 million.  Okay, here again, I can't wait this thing out.  My timing is not--my timing is off.  I'm sorry.  But anyway, that's--but that's the way it is and I have no regrets about that.  I have no regrets about that, okay.  I did what I had to do.  I, I did what I needed to do and the, the other end--the other parts about this same story is about the land and this kind of business and, and going through green mail in Washington, D.C.  Well, let me--let me explain about the green mail.  The green mail is when the attorneys in Washington, D.C. are sitting there watching all applications coming across the FCC's [Federal Communications Commission] desk because when the application comes in, you can pull it and, and, and copy down another application, put your name to it and, and submit it.  That's all--that's, that's all you have to do for, for a radio station, that's all you have to do.  Okay, so, so they saw this coming across and they said, wait a minute, the station [WLVH Radio] in Hardeeville [South Carolina] is, is now moving it's, it's tower and have upgraded to 50,000 watts from 3000 watts.  I went from 3000 to 50,000 in five days and, and the people said, "Man, how you do this?"  Well, it's done.  But I had to find the land to move the tower to.  And, and, and, and FCC gives you a certain strip.  There was a sliver of land coming out of Hunter Army Airfield [Georgia] all the way up I-16 [Interstate 16], crossing Bloomingdale [Georgia] exit and keep on trucking.  And, and that--and, and, and it was about a four block span wide.  That means that if I go on the other side, I'm infringing with another station, if I come on this side, I'm infringing with some other station, so I had to be in the middle of all this, this sliver of land.  And I found some garbage land from, from Union Camp [Union Camp Corporation].  It was--it was wetland, it was flood land, it was wasteland, and it just so happened by the act of God, it had one acre of land above sea level, it's about this size.  That's where we put the tower, boom, straight up.  And then I--we, we filed with the FAA [Federal Aviation Administration] to let them know that this was gonna happen and it got accepted by FAA.  And then the airport came into play and says, well, wait a minute, there's a radio tower that's gonna come--and, and says he can't do that.  And so I got a note says, you can't--you can't do that tower.  So I--the FCC says, well, check it out and see if you've been grandfathered in.  Sure enough, they, they say yes, back then, I'm--I was grandfathered in so the planes got to fly over it now.  You know, they don't like it, but that's, that's, that's the way it is.  But--yes, baby.
Story_ID: 395663
Speaker 1: So now, you sell the radio station [WLVH Radio].  What year is this, the radio station in Hardeeville [South Carolina], you sell to Luci Johnson [Luci Baines Johnson] (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Luci John- I really don't--I, I don't have those dates--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --available.  I've, I've--I have even forgotten about half of the deal that has gone down to tell you the truth because so much has happened between that time and now.
Speaker 1: So what happens next then after you sell that radio station?
Speaker 2: After I sell, well, then I start playing--well, start playing music, back to my music again 'cause then I was doing music in New York [New York] and I didn't play for--from '72 [1972] until 1978 here in Savannah [Georgia].  So now, I'm focusing mostly on, on my music career.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And, and I stayed busy doing it.  I stayed busy doing it and, and I enjoy it.  I, I enjoy it very much, having free time to play golf, free time to play music, free time with my wife [Gloria Daly Tucker].  It--she may not--she might not say that, though.  She may say that I have no time at all with her, you know.  But that's neither here nor there.  We do the best we can with what we got.
Story_ID: 395664
Speaker 1: So, how did you come to be appointed by President Carter [President James Earl "Jimmy" Carter, Jr.]?  You wanna talk about that?
Speaker 2: Well, when President Carter was the governor here, here in Georgia, he, he had me on his crime committee here in the State of Georgia, and I was--I was a part of that.
Speaker 1: How did that come about?
Speaker 2: He was looking for responsible citizens to, to fight crime here in Georgia and also to be on the, the fair employment practices--fair employment practices committee [Georgia Fair Employment Practices advisory board] to, to bring about fair employment among African Americans in the State of Georgia, too.  Carter was a, Carter was a decent man, you know, very decent, very spiritual, very--Carter was a good man.  I saw him last time on television, he was crying over the fact that he had a dealing with Anwar Sadat, that Anwar Sadat had betrayed him and he went to--he--Carter got on his knees and prayed and went back to and saw Anwar Sadat after he prayed and made--and so when--Anwar Sadat changed his whole way of thinking.  He says, I'm with you.  I'll stay with you and Carter cried like a baby.  This was his last night, one of the last nights.  Carter was a--Carter was a very decent, decent individual.  I liked him very much.  And so when he became president, I supported him as--to become president.  I got on campaigns for--and when the, the opening came up for, for the Kennedy fine art advisory board [Advisory Committee of the Arts, The John F. Kennedy Center for the Performing Arts, Washington, D.C.], my name came up, and I was appointed to the--to the advisory board for four years.  And didn't do anything, but I was--I was--we go to Washington [D.C.], we stayed at the Durham--at the Durham--at the Durham Hotel [ph.], didn't cost me anything.  It was beautiful and, and I--we, we go to a meeting and when, when you get to the meeting, the meeting is already done, it's all over.  I don't know, but it was great that, that I did go there and get (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What about the selective service board?
Speaker 2: Selective service board.  I was--he appointed me to the--to the selective service board t- there was a group of people here in Savannah [Georgia] that was dealing with that, you know.  That again, you know, we lay it out, various avenues from, from the selective service board national.  They sent out the program for us to implement and we implement to make sure that the eighteen-year-olds are, are registered to, to, to be drafted and things of this nature.  And then when, when Carter became--was, was voted out as president and Reagan [President Ronald Wilson Reagan] came in, Reagan turned right around and signed, signed, signed the petition again to keep us (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So you were reappointed?
Speaker 2: I'd been reappointed by, by President Reagan.  And they'll send you a little something in the mail saying, you know, compliments of the president and I appreciate that, you know (laughter).
Story_ID: 395665
Speaker 1: So now you're back to, to playing your music.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Tell me who you're playing with and where you're playing.
Speaker 2: Right now?
Speaker 1: No, after this time.  This is in the--
Speaker 2: Oh (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) We're in '79 [1979].
Speaker 2: In '79 [1979].  I'm, I'm back in Savannah [Georgia] playing with various local musicians by and large.
Speaker 1: And who are some of them?
Speaker 2: Some of them would, would be Teddy Adams, the trombonist here, local trombonist here in town.  The piano player was--what is his name?  I got a mental block on him.  There are some guys named Bobby McMillian, tenor saxophonist, Stubby Mitchell would be on trumpet.  Ken Palmer is the guy that I wanted to name for the piano.  He's, he's an extraordinary musician here in town.  He was an alcoholic and I admitted him to Candler Hospital [Savannah, Georgia] on, on two occasions to be treated from, from alcohol.  You know, you get this fluid in your stomach and, and his wife left him, divorced him, his kids left and so forth and so on.  So, I took him under my own wings and, and admitted him into Memorial Medical Center [Memorial University Medical Center, Savannah, Georgia] for help.  The third time I took him there, he walked out.  He went in this door and out that door, and when I got to the front door, he was--he was steady walking, so I left it alone from that point on.  Then, later on in life, he died.  But, the, the--there, there aren't that many good musicians in Savannah anymore.  They--I wish we could attract some good musicians.
Story_ID: 395666
Speaker 1: Well, you then opened a, a club, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, then I opened a cl- nightclub in, in the ear- early '90s [1990s], '89 [1989] called Hannah's, Hard Hearted Hannah's [Savannah, Georgia].  My wife [Gloria Daly Tucker] wanted to name it that and so we, we went in, in, in--into the jazz club, took four months--six months to, to get--to get that going.  And finally, it, it kicked off and it was hot (background noise).
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: Okay.  But we kicked that off and it ran for ten years.  It had some great musicians come through--come through the club.  We would broadcast on a public (unclear) public radio every Saturday night for about four hours of live, live jazz.  We had, had a lot of--had a couple of movies that we filmed in Hannah's.
Speaker 1: What were--do you remember?
Speaker 2: 'Love Crime' was one with Sean, Sean, Sean Young--Sean, Sean, Sean (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Sean Penn?  No?
Speaker 2: My wife knows that.  I--and she's--
Speaker 1: Okay, but it was 'Love Crimes,' okay.
Speaker 2: It was 'Love Crimes' and it was--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --was--and it was filmed--took us about four days to, to, to film that.  And so Hannah's was, was the jazz mecca here, here in the Southeast.  I was there for one year and the, the landlord just said, hey, well, look, this club is, is a big success in the first year.  It was smashing, you know.  And so they decided to triple my rent in the first year.  I said, well, you're not gonna make me one of those (laughter)--one of those tenants that have--we'll have to get out of here, so I'm out of here.  Now, I'm not gonna lose $50,000 or $100,000 before I, I (unclear)--I can't make it because your rent is too high.  Not only that they raised my rent, tripled my rent, they also put a meter in to charge for water.  I said, you got to be kidding me.  It's city water (laughter), you know.  So I got out and went to the Hilton hotel [Hilton Savannah Desoto, Savannah, Georgia].  When I went to Hilton hotel, I think--I, I took the club up right across the street, out my front door, right, right there, called the Lion's Den.  I changed the name from the Lion's Den to, to Hannah's.  The hotel says, okay.  We got a big sign outside, Hannah's, packed the place every Thursday, Friday, and Saturday night.  It was great.  Now, the hotel says, well, look, we can make more money out of this deal, so we gonna charge you five dollars to get in--I mean, five dollars to park your car, five dollars to get in, and 7.50 or, or nine dollars for, for a cocktail, so when you walk in, you're gonna spend twenty bucks [dollars], boom, right then.  I said, look, fellas, let me get out of this, so I left there and went to The Pirates' House [Savannah, Georgia].  And the guy says, "Tucker [HistoryMaker Benjamin Tucker]," he says, "I, I, I really need you over here and, and anything you wanna do is fine with me."  I said, "Okay."  So we got upstairs and we, we ripped out the club that was up there before and it was full of dungeons and old dirty (unclear)--old dirty--it was a pirate house, you know.  But, anyway, it was filthy and it was called the Rainforest [ph.] for all intents and purposes.  But anyway, we cleaned it out and built a beautiful club upstairs called Hannah's East [Hard Hearted Hannah's East, Savannah, Georgia] with my--with, with an image of Ben Tucker playing the bass carved out on the sign.  It's still hanging out over there incidentally.  Well, the club was going on for about five years and I was making about 80,000 [dollars] a year, at the club and, and, and the owner says--or my partner says, you know, jazz musicians are making too much money, so I, I--I'm, I'm gonna need you to, to, to leave the club.  I says, okay, man, I'm, I'm--I--I'll leave the club, so I left the club.  He kept the club open for about another year and then he had to fold that up and get out.  They won't let me do my thing, but--you know, they--it's all because of interruptions, interruption.  And I haven't had that much--that great a desire to go into a nightclub again, so I, I--they been trying to get me to go into Kokopelli [Kokopelli's Jazz Club, Savannah, Georgia], which is down the street, and I don't know.
Story_ID: 395667
Speaker 1: Why didn't you buy a building or, or build one for your own club--
Speaker 2: Well, well (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) so that you would have your own space?
Speaker 2: Well, couple of reasons.  Number one, I needed expertise in food.  I needed to know how to buy it, cook it, and deliver it.  I can deliver it.  As an example, when I had Hannah's [Hard Hearted Hannah's, Savannah, Georgia], there was--there was a steakhouse directly jammed up next to Hannah's.  I made a deal with the guy.  The guy was selling black angus steaks for nine bucks [dollars].  I said, look, I'll buy all your black angus steaks for nine bucks, the same--the same thing you selling for in, in your restaurant.  I wanna cut a hole in this wall and I wanna have the health department to come in and to--and, and to--and to--and to verify this.  And when I want a steak, I give you a slip, you'll cook it, put the--you'll put it on my platter and send it back--send it back through, through the window.  He said, "Great."  I was selling like thirty, forty steaks for this guy every night.  He got--he got upset.  "Well, wait a minute, man.  Why is that you charging eighteen dollars and I only charge you nine?"  I said, "That was the deal.  I mean, you're not losing," (laughter).  So, that ended (laughter).  So I had no inventory but I had a clear--a clear--a clear deal going.  He says, "You got it too good."  I said, "I know I do, man.  You got the product and I'm selling it for you," but it didn't work.  It didn't work out.  But your idea--your thought is very--is, is, is, is on money.  If, if, if I had $400,000 to play with that I wanted to really take a gamble with because it's--you know, I got to buy the building, I got to put it together, and I got put, put, put sprinkler system and inside plumbing and that's extraordinarily expensive.  You gotta put a kitchen in, you gotta--you gotta meet all these regulations, you got--then, you got--it comes down to the chef.  Now, who's gonna cook the food that's gonna meet, meet, meet the requirement of your audience?  Now, if he gets mad with me one night because he--he's--I'm, I'm too successful for him, he, he, he walks out and I'm left--I got to go in the kitchen and cook, so I got to learn how to cook and cook as good as he can cook.  And that's what I believe in 'cause it happened to me in the club at Hannah's in City Market [Savannah, Georgia], had a bartender get mad, "To hell with you, Tucker [HistoryMaker Benjamin Tucker]."  He walks out.  Club was jam packed.  I said, "Keep walking."  I got behind the bar and served everybody, no problem.  They said can you make a certain, certain drink?  I said, "No, man, I can make you a scotch and soda or--," (laughter), you know, because I had to get by for that night.  And the next morning, I went out and start hustling and get me some bartenders in there.  And I'll never, never, never again get caught with my pants down.  I almost got caught then, almost, you know, but--
Speaker 1: Well, I mean, you seem to be a, a risk-taker because, I mean, you spent 400,000 [dollars] on the radio station [WSOK Radio, Savannah, Georgia].
Speaker 2: But, but, but, but see the radio station was, was--it's, it's not much of a risk like it is--like it is with a restaurant.  It's a--I knew I had an audience and that they had to come and spend a certain amount of bucks with me.  They didn't spend what they should have.  I mean, my highest revenue with the radio station was about 550,000 a year.  I should've been doing a million, million and a half, you know.  They gave me--they didn't--they, they, they, didn't want me to, to, to, to go bananas with and making money and being, being totally successful.  I understand the system that well, that well, you know, but to get my brothers and sisters to understand the system is something else again.
Story_ID: 395668
Speaker 1: So (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Let me, let me, let me make it very clear.  I'm not a militant guy.  I'm, I'm not angry, I'm not a militant.  I, I just don't understand what this--I just want fair playing ground, that's all.  Give me the fair--if, if, if, if this is what it takes for you, I'll, I'll take the same thing and, and I'll make a living out of it or I'll make it better or I'll make it acceptable, that's all.  Just because I think--I'm thinking all the time, how can I be better?  How can I make it better?  How can I--how can I live better?  How can I make the place live around in me, Savannah [Georgia], better?  What can I do to help to eliminate crime?  So I, I got on the board of The First Tee program here in Savannah.  I got on the Salvation Army board here in Savannah trying to get the Salvation Army in- introduced to the--to the community.  This is--African American people need to know that Salvation Army is, is good for you and you're good, but they don't, they don't cross each other.  I can't get them to advertise in the Herald newspaper [Savannah Herald].  I can't get them to, to promote it in, in, in The Tribune [The Savannah Tribune], the Salvation Army people.  They say, well--and, and you got a 53 percent black population and you're gonna tell me that they know what's going on and you--and you--and you talking to these country stations over here and--c'mon man, give me a break.  Fair is fair.  But anyway, I, I--if I wanted, if I wanted to do some good or be, be good--be some good to someone, I've got to be there in order to tell it like it is and, and, and to redirect their thinking in their mind.
Story_ID: 395669
Speaker 1: What part did you play during the Civil Rights Movement?
Speaker 2: When I got here, the Civil Rights Movement was, was just about over.  When I got here, they had a couple of riots, marches by a state representative.  One of them was Jesse Blackshear, was, was walking a group of kids on each--brought downtown to Broughton Street and they were getting ready to tear up Broughton Street and the mayor and the city manager and some of the aldermen came to--came to the radio station [WSOK Radio, Savannah, Georgia] at the--at the time in 1972 and said, "Hey, look, Tucker [HistoryMaker Benjamin Tucker], we need you to tell these people to, to cool it, to cool it until we can sit down across the table and talk."  I said, "You really got something to talk about?"  He said, "We're gonna talk."  So I went on the air and I told the people, "Hey, look, man, you know, like let's cool it for tonight and see what happens tomorrow."  That's the message I put out, and they cooled it.  Give you another case in point.  The motorcycle gang, gang came into town.  They housed themselves next door to the First African Baptist Church [Savannah, Georgia]--white group.  They got involved in prostitution, they, they got involved in stealing batteries, stealing, stealing from the general public.  The police chief at that time was Chief Galently--Gellatly [David M. Gellatly]--Gellatly--Gellatly.  Anyway, I'm messing his name up, but, but it's true.  And, and, and, and the, the chief and Major Light [ph.] and Sergeant--was the city--was the city, city councilman who was on the police department.  What was his name?  I lost, lost his name.  Anyway, they came to the station and wanted--and the chief wanted me to try to get these people out of--out of Savannah [Georgia], and I'm in the studio on the air.  I said, you're kidding me?  The chief can't, can't--man, the chief needs your help.  So I go on the radio, I do an editorial right off the top of my head.  I said, hey, folks, we got this motorcycle gang in town.  They're branding women on the behind with branding irons and stuff and prostitution is involved in a place called the Emerald Club [ph.] on, on, on Oglethorpe [Street].  The Chamber of Commerce [Savannah Area Chamber of Commerce] used to--well, the building is gone now.  And went on the air talking about these guys, putting my life on the line.  The NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] didn't come to help me.  The ministerial alliance didn't come to help me.  The community leaders didn't come out--I was the only dude out there all by my lonesome self, right.  Television station, WSAV [WSAV-TV, Savannah, Georgia], they heard my radio station--they, they heard my announcement.  They said, "Hey, look, Tucker, why don't you do one for us?"  I said, "You have your own general manager, why don't you do it?"  I says, "Okay," and I went and did it.  Anyway, just, just to--just to get--just to get the message out there.  And I got phone calls coming, saying, "Hey, brother, shit, man, I got a 357 magnum, man, I got a 12-gauge shotgun."  I said, "No, brother, we don't need the guns right now, we need to hold tight, but if I need, I'll call you."  That kind of thing went down.
Story_ID: 395670
Speaker 1: So my wife [Gloria Daly Tucker] and I--I, I said--I said, "Look, let's go to Charleston [South Carolina] to the Spoleto [Spoleto Festival USA] tonight."  It's like a Friday night, phew, we get away from this thing (laughter).  We went to Spoleto and, and, and got us a bed and breakfast room and stayed and come--came back on Sunday night.  When we got back, the motorcycle gang was gone.  They were out of here.  I had gotten together with the, the, the Jewish council, the, the ex-Jewish council.  His name was Don Kole, president of the, the Savannah Jewish Council [Savannah Jewish Council Inc., Savannah, Georgia].  I said, "Don, what can you do to help me get, get these guys out?" Because a Jewish man owns the building that they, they rented and not only that, the Jewish man--another Jewish man was leasing the building, so the Jews had the thing lock--I said, "Look, man, you got to cancel that on--cancel on this agreement."  He says, "I'll work on it."  Called them together and they cancel out on their agreement, on, on, on the lease and got them out.  And that--and that--and that--and that turned, turned the whole thing around.  I said, okay.  Now, Tucker [HistoryMaker Benjamin Tucker], now don't be crazy anymore, man, run out there (laughter) and, and do this because it doesn't make sense.  If, if everybody gonna come with me, fine, but out there all by your lonesome self, no, man, unh-uh.  I just had to tell you that because that's some of the stuff that went down in, in my life in this town that was--that, that was crazy besides being threatened twenty-seven times in Savannah [Georgia] by other people in, in this town like the KKKs [Ku Klux Klan] and the drug addicts and I had, had a program on talking about GIs coming in from Vietnam that, that, that are hooked on, on, on drugs.  Well, the, the VA, Veterans Administration [U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs] here in Savannah doesn't have anything to, to deal with drugs for, for GIs, in Charleston, they do.  I says, "Okay, call me, Ben Tucker, general manager, I'll take you to Charleston."  When I did that, the phone lit up.  "Hey, man, I'll go."  And then I got another phone call that said, "If you keep this, Tucker, man, we gonna--we gonna kick your butt."  So my wife and I went out to the Savannah Inn and Country Club [Savannah, Georgia] and, and the mafia owned the Savannah Inn and Country Club.  His name was Lou Rosanova [Louis F. Rosanova].  I walk in with my wife out there.  We like to have a--get her away from--to, to get--to get away from it again.  And Lou says, "Ben Tucker."  I said, "Yes, sir."  And he's a big, big dude.  He takes my hand, and he shakes me, shakes the whole body.  "How you doing?"  I said, "Well--," you know me, I said, "well, you know, right now I'm catching hell, man.  I'm being--life is being threatened."  He said, "Sit down."  I sit down.  He says, "Who, who--who's threatening you, man?"  He said, "You still got that white Mercedes [Mercedes-Benz]?"  I said, "How do you know I had a white Mercedes?"  He said, "I know everything."  I said, "I just bought it, man."  "I know you did." He said, "Tell me--," and I told him about this, this deal with the GIs.  He says, "You won't have no more problems with that."  I said, "You kidding me."  He said, "If you do, come back to me."  I have never been back to him again.  It dried up just like that.  But anyway, Savannah's been beautiful now.  I, I, I--I must say that I love Savannah.  I like Savannah.  Savannah is a good place to live.  Savannah is, is an opportunity place for African Americans to excel.  One small example of this is 514 Restaurant [514 West Restaurant and Lounge] on Martin Luther King Boulevard [Martin Luther King Jr. Boulevard].  The guy's got a club and he's being well supported by the people in this community, blacks and whites, mostly whites are supporting his restaurant, 514.  It goes--it, it goes to show you that, that there is a chance.  There's, there's an opportunity available.  All you have to do now is just take advantage of it.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 395671
Speaker 1: Now we went through the '80s [1980s] and we're in the '90s [1990s] and tell me about the Olympics [1996 Summer Olympics, Atlanta, Georgia].  You were involved in the Olympics (laughter) (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) (Laughter) The, the, the--well, the Olympics, I, I--they wanted me to, to play for certain functions of, of the Olympic- out, out on the boat.  We get on the boat with a group of musicians and we go, go out and when they finish the race and the race is going on or after the race.  I, I forgot exactly how that--how that went down, but I was there to, to play music for the various ceremonies, even when they lit the candle, the torch down on the river [Chattahoochee River], I was there, too, performed for them again.  They wanted some jazz and, and I was there to, to deal with that.  That was--that was interesting.
Story_ID: 395672
Speaker 1: Is that the same year you release a solo album, is that right?
Speaker 2: A what now?
Speaker 1: A solo album?
Speaker 2: No, no, no.  I don't have a solo album.
Speaker 1: Oh, no?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I released an album called 'Jazz in Savannah'--'Savannah Presents Jazz.'
Speaker 1: Okay.  And who was--who--
Speaker 2: And I (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) worked on that with you?
Speaker 2: I have John Colianni playing with me, he was Mel Torme's pianist at, at the time.  And the drummer was from Columbia, South Carolina, who worked with me for quite a while.  His name was--his name was Teddy Linder.  And we did a Christmas album.  And that--and that particular album called 'Jazz in Savannah,' the Christmas album was called 'Savannah Presents Jazz'--or 'Christmas in Savannah' I meant to say and 'Savannah Presents Jazz,' those, those two CDs.  As a matter of fact, I have a copy for you out in front when you walk out, you can take, take, take a copy 'cause Gloria [Gloria Daly Tucker] told me to get rid of them because they're, they're hanging around too long (laughter), or make coasters out of them or anything, you know.
Speaker 1: Oh, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, I'm, I'm planning to do another, another CD, another CD and we'll see what happens.
Story_ID: 395673
Speaker 1: And you became an advocate for diabetes?
Speaker 2: Yes because I'm a diabetic myself.  And, again, the information that is available to, to most people, we just--we don't--we don't wanna deal with it, you know, because diabetes doesn't hurt, doesn't hurt in any way, shape, form or fashion, but started working on your nervous system and just--and eats away with it.  Fortunately, I have--I have pretty good control of my diabetes, fortunately.  I have no, no diabetes in my eyes, none in my kidneys, none in my lower extremities, and none in my--in my nervous system in my body.  I watch--I watch my sugar intake and outtake.  I, I walk a lot to walk it down to get it down.  There, there--in Savannah [Georgia], there are a lot of amputations going on in Savannah, lots of it.  As a matter of fact, about three weeks ago, a man had a heart operation, and right behind the heart operation, he had two, two feet amputated and three fingers on the left hand.  Now, something, something went wrong in this case.  Either the doctor that did, did the heart surgery didn't know that the man was a diabetic or something went wrong because, because you just don't give a man a heart operation and then all of the sudden you look down, his feet are turning black, and then cut them off.  But then I've been trying to educate African American people, particularly African American people, women, because they have got to cut down on the sugar intake, all the soft drinks that they're eating and drinking, you know, blows my mind.  They, they eat too much fried food, too much potatoes, too much bread.  Then, they eat and they sit down.  If they could eat and walk, I'd say, okay.  But they eat and they sit down.
Speaker 1: So, how are you advocating this?  Are, are you connected with the diabetes (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I'm, I'm--
Speaker 1: --association?
Speaker 2: I'm, I'm connected with the--with the American Diabetes Association.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I told them that I will--I will deal with this only to talk--to be--to be--to be a spokesperson for the American Diabetes Association to tell people--and, and to bring them help.  In other words, I'll, I'll--whether with a doctor, with a nurse, I said, now, hey, man, look, don't take it from me, take it from the people who went to school for this stuff.  I mean, they know what's going on.  I just know what I have to go on and I'm gonna tell you all about it.
Speaker 1: Are, are we to look for a commercial?  You know, I know Patti LaBelle does a commercial.  Are you gonna do a commercial?
Speaker 2: I, I, I did one a couple years ago on, on, on, on diabetes.  I did one--I did one on--I forgot what it's about, nerves or--I forgot what it was about, high, high blood pressure or something like that.  Even that you know--I just try to do my thing and help the people in the church, particularly black churches.
Speaker 1: And, and, and tell me about, what church do you attend?
Speaker 2: I attend the Lutheran Church of the Ascension [Savannah, Georgia].
Speaker 1: Okay.  Any--hold any office there, or--?
Speaker 2: I was, I was on the, on the church council for about four years until about a year ago, two years ago, I came off.
Story_ID: 395674
Speaker 1: You have played with some phenomenal musicians.  Who did you enjoy playing with the most?
Speaker 2: Oh, oh, hm, that's interesting.  I guess I enjoy most of them equally as well because they, they are all professional and they are all good in their own rights.  In other words, they--I don't like--I don't like for someone to play--there's only one Oscar Peterson, there's only one [HistoryMaker] Billy Taylor, there's only one Marian McPartland.  Thank God that that's the way it is because if they all sound alike, I become very bored.  I can become very bored playing music in, in, in a heartbeat provided they become very stale, the same thing over and over again.  I'm the guy that--I, I like to create instantly, spontaneously, and extemporaneously.  I like to deal with that.  I'm serious about the music that I play.  I never get--I never get tired of playing because it's something that I enjoy.  As long as I'm creating, you got me all day, all night.  I'll, I'll deal with it.  But if it's gonna be a repetitious kind of a situation, over and over and over, man, you know.  It's just like playing the line dance for, for, for a dance, you know, dah-dah-dah and dah-dah-dah.  Oh, man, how much longer am I--am I gonna play dah-dah-dah, dah-dah-dah?  Let me play something else with that, you know, improvise on it.  Buddy Rich was, was, was an extraordinary drummer, Grady Tate, another extraordinary drummer, Billy Taylor, an extraordinary pianist.  I, I, I just--
Speaker 1: Did you play with Benny Goodman?
Speaker 2: Yes I did.  How'd you know that?
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Benny Goodman was a funny guy.  Now, Benny Goodman was a very difficult guy to play with, but when I played with him, he loved me to death.  He, he fell in love with me, you know.  But my friend, Benny Goodman, I love him to death.  He's a fast player, fast technician, you know, with the clarinet.  But he's a sloppy eater (laughter).
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: Benny Goodman would slop food all over his face.  He, he would eat almost like Stevie Wonder.  You know how Stevie Wonder--Stevie eats in three different bowls, three different bowls in front of him.  He reaches down and grabs with his hands going (gesture) like that.  And--but except for Benny, he get food all over his--all over his front, but I enjoyed him very much.
Speaker 1: What about Art Blakely [sic.]?
Speaker 2: Art Blakey was, was, was, was an incredible hard driving drummer.  He'd just drive you to death (makes sounds) he'd just drive you to death and--man, I tell you, I--he, he was incredible.  He was fantastic.  He brings out the beauty of the other musicians and, and I enhanced a guy like Art Blakey because if you pushing him and he's pushing you, you got two things that are happening and they're just unbelievable.  It's a--it's a marriage.  You know what a marriage is, right?  (Makes sounds) It just happens.  I love it.
Speaker 1: And, of course, Benny--[HistoryMaker] B.B. King.
Speaker 2: Well, B.B. King was very quick when I played with him.  It was in the studio.  I did a--I did a, a, a CD--I mean, a 45 single, you know, single recording with him.  We recorded two tunes, boom, and we were out of the studio.
Speaker 1: Okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So, I didn't really have much time to get with B.B.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But--again, you know, to be able to play with him is, is extraordinary.
Speaker 1: What about Freddy Cole?
Speaker 2: Freddy Cole wanted to play so much like his brother, Nat Cole [Nat King Cole], that--I almost played with Nat Cole incidentally.  I, I missed playing with Nat by three weeks and, and then he died of lung cancer.  But Freddy plays a lot like his brother, Nat Cole.  He wants to play like his brother, Nat Cole.  I like Freddy Cole.  He's, he's my friend.  He just, just can't play golf (laughter) (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) (Laughter) And that's another one of your past times, huh?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) One of my past times, is right.
Story_ID: 395675
Speaker 1: Well, tell us a, a short story about Peggy Lee.
Speaker 2: Peggy Lee was probably the, the, the most extraordinary musician I've ever met in my life.  She was--she was a fantastic performer.  She was a perfectionist.  She, she, she would hire only musicians that would play good for her and she, she--and believe me, there are great musicians.  She goes first class, she treats you like a human being all the time.  You, you fly first class, you stay first class.  Every show, she, she, she would come behind stage, she meet all the musicians, she will kiss each musician after going through her rundown (makes sounds) "Love you, Ben [HistoryMaker Benjamin Tucker]," (makes sounds) "Love you, Grady [Grady Tate]."  And she meant that, you know.  And after--and, and after, after every performance, she'll have a little party in the back.  They bring cocktails and food and sit down and relax and enjoy, boom.
Story_ID: 395676
Speaker 1: You told us a story off camera about going to, what, Indianapolis [Indiana] or Minnesota (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Minneapolis [Minnesota].
Speaker 1: Minne- Minne- Minnesota?  Where, where--
Speaker 2: Minne- yeah, Minneapolis--Saint Paul, Minnesota.
Speaker 1: Minnesota, okay (laughter).
Speaker 2: Right, Saint Paul in Minnesota.  When I was traveling with Peggy and I was going--we were flying into--to the Minneapolis university [University of Minnesota Twin Cities, Minneapolis, Minnesota] to do a concert and my bass was, was--it was in first class with me, and I took the bass off the plane, put the wheel on and rolled it through the airport, and when I got to the front door of the--of the airport, the door opens up automatically and the bass exploded right in my arms, my, my, my same 230-year-old bass violin, boom, blew up.  I thought terrorism had hit me.  We didn't have terrorism back then.  But I was coming out of a 72 degree Fahrenheit into 40 below zero all at one time.  So I often wonder, what does it do to your body when you meet this--that kind of contrast?  You know, it must--it must rip you--turns your--it's got to do something to the body, that kind of twist going on, but it blew my bass up.  My heart was broken.
Speaker 1: Did you get it repaired?
Speaker 2: I did.  Cost me $7000 to get my bass repaired.  It took me about six months to get it repaired, but it's back in order.  And then about twelve years ago, it fell off a bandstand here in Hilton Head [Hilton Head Island, South Carolina] and I had to get it repaired again.  It just--into pieces, my poor bass.  But I love it.  I watch it a lot better now.  I, I lay it down with, with--secure so it doesn't fall down.
Story_ID: 395677
Speaker 1: Was there anybody else that you would have liked to play with and you didn't get an opportunity?  You said Nat King Cole.
Speaker 2: Nat King Cole, I would love to have played with Nat King Cole.  He was such a natural.
Speaker 1: Was there somebody else?
Speaker 2: Well, Duke Ellington wanted me to play with him very badly, but Duke had a bad, bad reputation running from one city to the next with my money in his pocket (laughter) and I didn't wanna deal with that, so (laughter), oh, Duke (laughter).  "Tucker [HistoryMaker Benjamin Tucker], I want you, Tucker."  I said, "Yeah, Duke, I'll give you a holler," you know.
Speaker 1: Well, is there somebody that you haven't played with that you would like to play with now?
Speaker 2: Oh, there are a couple musicians, one is called Elam Yuthle [ph.].  He's a--he's, he's a, a Jewish pianist, extraordinary guy.  He comes every now and then to, to play.  I'd love to play some with him.  He's good.  I like--he, he has a creative mind, steady moving all the time.  I had a birthday party here with--here in Savannah [Georgia] last year and a lot--a lot of great musicians came up and played with me, Kevin Bales, Wy- Wycliffe Gordon and, and a few other guys, Bob, Bob Alberti, and that kind of thing.  So, yeah, yeah--I'm in Savannah, so I don't get to meet--see too many good people in the morning unless they happen to come by during the Savannah Music Festival, which is, which, which happens every year.
Story_ID: 395678
Speaker 1: I know you wanted to talk about Brentwood [Tennessee], where you grew up, how much the community has changed.
Speaker 2: Well, it has changed and it's changed tremendously.  You know, now you have multimillionaires with, with multimillion--with multimillion dollar homes all over Brentwood.  Brentwood's been--the, the, the poverty--the poverty in Brentwood has been totally wiped out.  That is one place I can say that no more poverty exists in Brentwood, Tennessee, not at all.
Speaker 1: What happened to the property that you grew up on?
Speaker 2: Well, my property was sold.  When, when Mom [Carrie Clayborne Tucker] and Dad [Joseph Tucker, Sr.] died, a developer came along and said, "Well, we, we wanna buy your property."  "What's the going price?"  Well, they gave you a song and a dance and, and I'm in Ca- where was I?  I was in New York [New York], I guess, and my brother [Reuben Tucker] was in California, and a few other--another brother's [Joseph Tucker, Jr.] in Ohio.  "Hey, man, what you wanna do?"  "I could use the money."  "Well, it's not that much money to be used, you know."  But they wanted to sell and I'm the kind of guy I don't like to get family feud going on over somebody, in particular with property.  Sell the property and let bygones be bygones.  That's where I stand with that.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Okay.
Speaker 2: And so I left Brentwood, and I'd like to go back and check Brentwood out.  Oh, by the way, my [maternal] grandfather lived, lived in Brentwood.  He, he died in Brentwood and his grave site is, is directly in front of the Hilton hotel and is being cared for by the Hilton hotel with perpetual care forever.
Speaker 1: Which grandfather?
Speaker 2: Grandfather Scott Clayborne, the one that played the bass (laughter), my man, my grandfather with the--with the silver dollars and the half dollars (laughter) under the bed, that man (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What did you--
Story_ID: 395679
Speaker 1: What did your mother [Carrie Clayborne Tucker] ever say about you playing the bass?
Speaker 2: Well, at first, mom didn't like it all because she knew I was gonna be an alcoholic, she knew I was gonna get on drugs.  Mom knew I was gonna go absolutely bananas and none of that happened.  None of that happened.  So she, she died knowing that I didn't--I didn't betray her.
Speaker 1: Did she ever get a chance to hear you play?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, she had--she, she--a couple of times she heard me play and she loved it.  She was--she was thrilled to death.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: What about your children?
Speaker 2: Well, my son is, is into film.  He's, he's (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What is his name?
Speaker 2: Wayne Tucker.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Wayne is into d- he's a digital film graphic touchup individual, and he's a very sought after individual in film in New York [New York].  He works for a company, what's called Color World [ph.].  It's changed its name now to something else, 297 [ph.] I think.  I, I forgot what it's called, but it's changed, changed the name.  But, he, he, he works at nighttime and he does something like $5 million worth of business every month.  That's a lot of money.  My daughter, you know, naturally, she died a little over ten, about ten and a half years ago, my daughter.  That's all the family (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What was her name?
Speaker 2: --I have.
Speaker 1: What was her name?
Speaker 2: Sabra [Sabra Tucker].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Sabra Benita Tucker, and--
Speaker 1: And what about your lovely wife [Gloria Daly Tucker]?  How long have you been married?
Speaker 2: Well, this is my second marriage and we've been married forty years.  She put up with me for forty years.  I was married for seventeen years before, so pretty soon I will have fif- fifty-seven years of matrimony (laughter).  No, I should--I, I better leave that alone.  I don't wanna get into that because, you know--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --somebody gonna say, oh, Tucker [HistoryMaker Benjamin Tucker], now what you doing talking out of school like that?  But I have a good wife and I have a beautiful wife, and everything is okay.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Okay.
Speaker 2: Did I patch that up okay (laughter)?
Story_ID: 395680
Speaker 1: What's next for Ben Tucker [HistoryMaker Benjamin Tucker]?  What would you like to do that you haven't done yet or something that you want to pursue again?
Speaker 2: Well, I wouldn't mind getting back into radio one more time to--because I feel that the only way the African American communities are going to--going to deal with it is somebody got to stand tall and let them have it, the truth, nothing but the truth.  No garbage, no grandstanding--tell it.  Get them involved.  Ge- turn this wheel.  Turn this thing that, you know, if they wanna get into it, they--give it to them.  If politician wants to, wants to deal with the community, then, then come, come to the station.  Let me talk to the politician and tell them, the commitment to the community.  You know, the, the--you know, I have more to say but I know how I'm gonna--I don't know how and when I'm gonna get to say it (laughter).  Maybe you have to come back again and talk to me again, but I, I--you know, if I had to live this life again, that's exactly what I would do.  I would stay in radio and would never get out of it.  I don't care if I lose every dime I have because it's important that, that the pipeline stays open.
Story_ID: 395681
Speaker 1: Tell me, how do you want to be remembered?  What do you want people to say about you?
Speaker 2: I love you.  I love you.  I love you.  I, I--I'm for real.  I'm, I'm, I'm honest (unclear) and I think you're beautiful.  There's more beauty than the outside.  I look for the beauty that is from within.  I can't help that.  I can't help it.  I, I feel it.  If I feel it, then it's got to be there.  I love it.  I love good people.  That's it, love, love, love.
Speaker 1: Is there anything that we have not talked about that you would like to say?
Speaker 2: I don't know.  Probably I'll think about it when you leave or walk, walk out the door and say, I wish I had said--no, but, but I do want to say, I, I do want to give thanks to the Savannah [Georgia] Links [The Links, Incorporated] for, for inviting me and, and for including me in the history making.  I owe it to them, a great deal of credit to, to them.  They are fantastic.  And I hope I'll never disappoint them.  I hope--I hope I will always make them very happy and very proud of Ben Tucker [HistoryMaker Benjamin Tucker].
Story_ID: 395682
Speaker 1: This was at the radio station at WSOK [WSOK Radio, Savannah, Georgia] in 1972.  As you can see, my wife, Gloria [Gloria Daly Tucker], and myself and my--and my afro.  See my afro that I--it was quite stylish then.  And we were going over some things, some details at the radio station in 1972.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, next.  Okay, go ahead.
Speaker 1: This is a, a, a jazz concert at the Newport Jazz Festival in Rhode Island with Herbie Mann.  I forget who was playing on the--on the piano, but that's Herbie Mann on flute and myself on, on, on the bass violin.  And that look--that, that looks like Willie Bobo.  He's, he's, he's deceased now, on the timbales.  Right, okay.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, next.  All right, tell us about this one.
Speaker 1: Yeah, this is the late great Art Pepper, alto saxophonist, and this is one of the first recordings that I've ever recorded in, in, in L.A. [Los Angeles, California], Art Pepper on the alto, Carl Perkins played a lot with his right elbow and, and fingers, myself on bass, and Chuck Flores on drums.  This was in the early 1956 and '57 [1957], Art Pepper.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: Well, there she is again, my beautiful wife, Gloria, and that's me, B.T. [HistoryMaker Benjamin Tucker], and that was taken for the Lutheran Church of the Ascension's [Savannah, Georgia] directory book, so I--that's a nice portrait of Gloria and I.  She's smiling away, happy as she can be.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: Okay, this is me playing the bass, Ben Tucker, and the guitarist is Howard Paul.  This was taken at the--I don't know where that was taken.  I, I can't, can't really make it out, but Howard Paul is playing the guitar.  And Howard owns a, a new guitar company in town called the Benedetto's Guitar [sic. Benedetto Guitars, Inc., Savannah, Georgia].  And there we are playing together, duo.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: This is my [maternal] grandfather, Scott Clayborne, Reverend Scott Clayborne.  This is my great-grand- but this is not great-great-grandfather, but this is my grandfather.  He's a great man, Scott Clayborne.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, next.
Speaker 1: This is--
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  You can go ahead.
Speaker 1: Okay.  This is my grandson.  On the left is Edwin Tucker [Edwin Grimsley], Edwin.  Then, on the right is my nephew, Billy Tucker [ph.].  He's in Pasadena [California].  And that one is in Brooklyn, New York, on the left, my daughter's [Sabra Tucker] son.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, next.
Speaker 1: Well, this is a picture I love very much.  This is my son at the bottom, Wayne Tucker.  He's grinning away and his dad at the--at the top, B.T.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, great.  Next.
Speaker 1: There's my son again, Wayne.  He was in the Cub Scouts, way back.  Wayne is close to fifty years old now (laughter).  I'd like to see when that was taken.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: This is my grandmother on my mother's [Carrie Clayborne Tucker] side, Lucy Clayborne.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.  Okay, tell us about this one.
Speaker 1: This is Ellis Marsalis [HistoryMaker Ellis Marsalis, Jr.] on the right and he and I were playing together at the--at Hannah's East [Hard Hearted Hannah's East, Savannah, Georgia], Ellis Marsalis.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  How's he doing?
Speaker 1: He's doing great.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 1: He's doing great and playing great.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Is he still in New Orleans [Louisiana]?
Speaker 1: He's still in New Orleans.  He was here--he was here about--he was here in September, September--he was here in October, I'm sorry, in October.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  I think the project is planning to work in New Orleans sometime this year.  We really should try to do an interview with him.
Speaker 1: Oh, man, he's, he's extraordinary.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Yeah.
Speaker 1: You just kind of spend the day with him, man.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Oh, yeah, really.  Okay, next please.
Speaker 1: That's B.T., bacon and tomatoes he's called.  No, that's Ben Tucker.  I'm playing there at--in Hilton Head [Hilton Head Island, South Carolina] and I was into playing.  That's when I had a beard and my wife didn't like it or she doesn't like it, and I was turning gray by the moment.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, next.
Speaker 1: Okay.  That's Longineu Parson [sic. Longineu Parsons II] on the left playing the trumpet and Teddy Linder on the drums, and Kevin Bales on the piano, and I'm playing the bass.  We were playing in Hilton Head for the elementary school.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, good.  Next.
Speaker 1: And this is an old dear friend of mine, Milt Hinton on the left--I mean, on the right and I'm playing the bass.  And he was in Savannah [Georgia] and he came up on stage to greet me.  It was just before he died.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 1: This was taken in Hilton Head at the Terry Reaney's home.  She's a--she's a jazz pianist and she's in real estate right now.  This was in her--at her home.  Who's playing?  Jo Jones--the great Jo Jones, pianist--
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Whoa.
Speaker 1: --playing piano.  And the great dentist is playing guitar.  His name is Sandy Termotto and Sam Atkinson [ph.] is playing the soprano saxophone on the right, that's it.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  You were playing a fretted instrument there, buddy.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I was playing a fretted--I was playing the--yeah, I don't like it, though.  I learned it--I don't like it.  I don't like it at all, man.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 1: That's, that's Kevin Bales on the--on the left, B.T. on--in the middle, and Teddy Linder as, as we just finished playing a job, drummer on the right.
Speaker 2: This is a picture of John Colianni on the left and I'm at the right.  This is a recording session I had of 'Savannah Presents Jazz' and 'Christmas in Savannah' in Hilton Head.  That's John Colianni.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Very good.  Next.
Speaker 2: My dear friend, Clark Terry when he was in Savannah for the Savannah Jazz Festival here a few years ago.  And he charmed me on the stage to play with me, Clark Terry.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  (Unclear).  Next.
Speaker 2: Here are a group of guys from Hilton Head, Ben Tucker on bass, Gordon Farbstein next who was the photographer of all these pictures, and that looks like Sam Atkinson there in the middle, next to Sam in, in a beige coat is Bob Alberti, and the drummer is--he, he just died about four years ago.  I can't think of his name right now, but I will later on.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 2: That's me playing in Hilton--playing in--for some kids again in Daufuskie [Daufuskie Island, South Carolina].  Daufuskie has a beautiful school over there incidentally, so I went over there to play and I took Bob Alberti with me there to, to play, Daufuskie Island.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 2: Now, here we are in, in Hannah's East, my--the, the jazz club that I, I owned for a while.  On the piano is John Colianni, tenor saxophone is Harry Allen, and Teddy Linder is on the drums and Ben, Ben Tucker on bass.  You can see the customers sitting on the left there listening in on what's going on, beautiful club.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Next.
Speaker 2: And here is a picture that I adore very much.  This, this is Tommy Flanagan, the late Tommy Flanagan.  He was playing at the Hilton Head Jazz Society [Bluffton, South Carolina] a few years ago, couple years ago.  I'm on bass and the drummer again is--well, I can't figure--I can't--I can't make him out.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 2: This is Joe Gransden on the trumpet.  He sounds like--a lot like Chet Baker and myself.  This is at Hannah's East again in my club.  You can tell by the beautiful hand-painted wall behind.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 2: And that's Terry Reaney (unclear), the, the, the, the jazz pianist I mentioned before that has a home in Hilton Head and we were playing probably in her home as a matter of fact.  She was having a Christmas party upstairs in her house and that's where it is, gorgeous.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 2: This--here we are with Bob Alberti on the left, pianist, used to be with 'Bob Hope' ['The Bob Hope Show'] and 'The Tonight Show' ['The Tonight Show Starring Johnny Carson'], Harry Allen on tenor saxophone, and the drummer is Bobby Hackett's son [Ernie Hackett], and then myself, Ben Tucker.
Speaker 1: Gordon Farbstein standing next to a painting at The Jazz Corner in Hilton Head, and I'm on the right, of course.  But the sculpture is by his wife, Sheri Farbstein, and it's supposed to be Ben Tucker, the, the sculpture supposedly representing me--I--for some reason or another (laughter).
Speaker 2: And there she is again, the queen, my wife, Gloria, and we're taking a picture together somewhere--oh, that--that's at Hannah's East, too, as a matter of fact.  That's, that's on stage, sitting there having a bite to eat, a cocktail or something, Gloria.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: This is a good picture of Gloria and I for, for the Lutheran Church of the Ascension.  This is another church photo for the directory.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: That, that's Gloria.  She's in her jean uniform, outfit, and I'm trying to be cool with a turtleneck, check it out.
