Story_ID: 219485
Speaker 1: [HistoryMaker] Judge [Wilford] Taylor, we're going to begin with me saying that my name is Racine Tucker-Hamilton, and I am the interviewer.  And Edgar Carey Lane is the videographer.  Today's date is Thursday, October 14th, 2004.  And this interview is taking place in Hampton, Virginia.  Now, if you would for the record, please tell us your full name, including your middle name, and spell it.
Speaker 2: Wilford Taylor, Jr., W-I-L-F-O-R-D, T-A-Y-L-O-R, Jr.  I have no middle initial.
Speaker 1: Okay, and the date and location of your birth?
Speaker 2: January 15th, 1950, which is, you know, that's a great day, Martin Luther King's [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] birthday.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: And location Newport News, at Riverside Hospital [Riverside Regional Medical Center], Newport News, Virginia.
Speaker 1: And your occupation?
Speaker 2: I'm a judge.
Story_ID: 219486
Speaker 1: Now, [HistoryMaker] Judge [Wilford] Taylor, the next couple of questions are just some People magazine-ish type questions.  So if you could just give me short answers--
Speaker 2: Okay, sure.
Speaker 1: --to these that'll be great.  Would you please share with us your favorite food?
Speaker 2: Beef (laughter).
Speaker 1: Your--
Speaker 2: I love beef.
Speaker 1: Your--
Speaker 2: Show me the beef.
Speaker 1: Your favorite time of year?
Speaker 2: Springtime.
Speaker 1: Your favorite color?
Speaker 2: Blue.
Speaker 1: Your favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Maui, Hawaii.
Speaker 1: And your favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: Let's see, let's fix it.
Story_ID: 219487
Speaker 1: Let's begin now talking about your family background starting with your mother.  Would you please tell us your mother's name, and where she was born, and where she grew up as a child?
Speaker 2: Zenobia Miller is her maiden name.  She was born in Fort Valley, Georgia.  She grew up in Fort Valley, Georgia, in of course the big South.  And 'course, she migrated to Hampton [Virginia] to attend Hampton University or Hampton Institute [Hampton, Virginia] at the time.
Speaker 1: And did she ever share any stories with you about what life was like for her as a girl in Georgia growing up?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, she--many, many stories, many good stories about life growing up in Fort Valley.  Of course, I spent a lot of my early years traveling down there visiting my, my relatives on her side.  As a child, we would spend many--oftentimes I would spend summers down there in Fort Valley.  But we had very fond, I had very fond memories of experience in Fort Valley, because it was the--my mother's family, everybody had land, a lot of land.  And they were--basically, my, my grandfather [James I. Miller], my mother's father, I didn't, I, he died before I could know him personally, but I read a lot about him.  He was one of the top farmers in the area.  He grew hogs, and he had, had some, he had experimental ways of treating the, the meat.  And--
Speaker 1: What do you mean by experimental ways?
Speaker 2: Well, it was he did something to preserve the meat, you know, dishing the salt.  I, I don't know how they do it, but he had, he had some ways.  He had some prize-winning hogs.  I mean he always would win with his produce as well as his livestock at the, at the county fairs.  And I do remember seeing many of his ribbons and, and awards that he won, because my grandmother [Hattie B. Miller] kept 'em over the years.  But he had accumulated quite a few, so he was a big, big farmer.  And, and everything--one thing my mother shared with me, that growing up, everything that they did, all the food they ate they, they either grew or, or they grew the produce as well as the, the livestock.  So they basically, it was, you know, they, they took care of themselves.  And it was a great life because they, they, they really wanted for nothing as far as food and clothing and, and just a life.  And they all owned, all of my, my mother's relatives owned land in Fort Valley, which was a great experience.
Story_ID: 219488
Speaker 1: And did she [Taylor's mother, Zenobia Miller Taylor] enjoy growing up on the farm [in Fort Valley, Georgia], or did, did she ever share with you, or did she long to live in the city and that kind of thing?
Speaker 2: Well, I think what she wanted more than anything was to get a good education.  'Course, they had a college there.  And actually, one of my great-grandfathers, I believe it was Fort Valley State College [Fort Valley State University, Fort Valley, Georgia] is the--well, maybe university has Fort Valley.  Any, I know it is Fort Valley--is the land grant college or university.  And so, some of the land was contributed by my, my mother's relatives and my relatives on my mother's side.  So, they had a, a very good school, and many of my relatives went to school there.  But she wanted to follow--we had a, we had a, a dear uncle, my father's [sic.] brother, Houser Miller [ph.], who came to Hampton [Institute; Hampton University, Hampton, Virginia] to be one of the administrators here.  And it goes he brought my mother from Fort Valley to Hampton Institute at the time.  And that's how she migrated here.  So she's always wanted to, to get a good education.  And that was the main purpose for coming to Hampton.
Speaker 1: And did she ever talk about what school was like growing up as a girl and that kind of thing?
Speaker 2: Well, yeah, she, she always shared with us how, back in those days, they call it, you know, it was, it was all segregated schools.  But it was, her experiences were I guess the same as mine.  She, she had fond memories of how the instructors really took care of the students and, and inspired them to learned, inspired them to read.  I mean she, she said that was a big, big thing that they did in school when she was growing up, very strong on reading.  And, and it was something that she really remembered about her school.
Speaker 1: And how would you describe your mother?
Speaker 2: Very, very loving, very caring, very family-oriented.  I mean she just would do anything for her family, her children, and very compassionate, very committed.
Story_ID: 219489
Speaker 1: Let's talk now a little bit about your father, starting with his name and his background, where he grew up as a boy.
Speaker 2: Wilford Taylor.  Of course, he's Sr.  I'm named after him, no middle initial.  And he was born and raised in Marion, South Carolina.  And that's--he's, he moved to Hampton [Virginia], or his family moved to Hampton when his older brother came to Hampton Institute [Hampton University, Hampton, Virginia] (laughter) and found life in Hampton to be very promising.  And back in those days, people were, would tend to migrate to, you know, northern cities from the South.  Well, my Uncle Jack [ph.], his--brother, George--we call 'em Uncle Jack--convinced the family to move to Hampton, and they did.  And so dad moved to Hampton with the family, and that's how he ended up here.
Speaker 1: How old was he when he moved to Hampton?
Speaker 2: I think he was about, he tells me sixteen, sixteen or seventeen.  He, he started high school I guess in Marion, but he ended up graduating from high school here in Hampton, at [George P.] Phenix High School [Hampton, Virginia].
Speaker 1: And did he talk at all about the move and what the move was like for him?
Speaker 2: Yes, he thought it was an opportunity to move north.  I mean they considered, you know, from South Carolina to Virginia north, northward move.  And he thought it would be great opportunity.  Of course, he started at Hampton, too.  As a result of his move--to Hampton, he, he started at Hampton, Hampton Institute to go to school there.
Story_ID: 219490
Speaker 1: Did he [Taylor's father, Wilford Taylor, Sr.] ever talk about life in Marion [South Carolina] as a little boy?  What kinds of things did he tell you about life there (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, again, they grew up in the Jim Crow segregated life.  And of course, they had a good life as well.  My, his father [George W. Taylor] owned and operated a barbershop.  He was a sole proprietor, a businessman in the community.  And, and so as a result of--I think he also had a minister in his family.  And so they were all very, very well, you know, versed in the religious aspects of things, as well as dad would spend a lot of time at the barbershop.  In fact, he became a barber himself.  That's how he, initially what he was started, started to do, you know, for a career, but he ended up changing over.  He, he joined the [U.S.] Navy after he came to Hampton [Institute; Hampton University, Hampton Virginia] 'cause of the war [World War II; WWII].  He went and joined the Navy for a short stint in the Navy, and then he came back and became a postman here in the City of Hampton [Virginia], a letter carrier.  And that's how, that's where he spent his, his career and his life work, as a, as a letter carrier--
Story_ID: 219491
Speaker 1: Do you know how your parents [Zenobia Miller Taylor and Wilford Taylor, Sr.] met?
Speaker 2: At Hampton University or Hampton Institute [Hampton, Virginia].  They met at college.
Speaker 1: Well, do you know like the story of how they met?
Speaker 2: No, they didn't, they don't discuss that.  I, you know (laughter).  I've never really asked them about that.  This will trigger it.  I'm gonna ask 'em about that next time I see 'em, how they met and tell me about, you know, to tell us about that, that love story.
Story_ID: 219492
Speaker 1: How would you describe your father [Wilford Taylor, Sr.]?
Speaker 2: Father is very--hard work.  He believed--very, very, very strong work ethic.  In fact, he, both my mother [Zenobia Miller Taylor] and my father are probably, next to my wife [Linda Taylor], are my role models.  Because my dad worked sometimes three jobs to, to provide for his family and to educate his family.  You know, I went to school off the second and third job.  He paid for my college and as well as my brother [James W. Taylor] and my sisters.  And then when we finished school, my mother went back and finished her degree because she'd dropped out, but she went back and finished.  As soon as my baby sister [Michelle T. Ferebee] finished college, she went back and earned her degree and became a teacher, as a result of, you know, her training.  But my dad, what, what I--my dad did all that on his jobs.  And he was just a strong, strong advocate for education in order to make a better life for yourself.
Story_ID: 219493
Speaker 1: How far back can you trace your ancestry, George [sic.]--[HistoryMaker] Judge [Wilford] Taylor?  Do you know if your people came from free people, slaves?  How far back can you trace your ancestry?
Speaker 2: Don't know.  I've never really considered that.  I can remember back to free people.  I can't remember any slave connections.
Speaker 1: Do you know--
Speaker 2: I know they were there, but I can't, I just don't, I'm not aware of any.  We've never really discussed that with, within the family.
Speaker 1: Do you know if, how your mother's [Zenobia Miller Taylor] family acquired their land?
Speaker 2: That's a good question, really don't know that.  I know that, I mean it was a significant amount of land in Fort Valley, Georgia, substantial holdings that many of 'em still have down there.  But I can't remember that.  You know, I've never really heard the story of how they acquired that land.  That's a good question.  I'm going to have to pursue that when I finish this.
Speaker 1: And what can you tell us about your grandparents?  Did you spend a lot of time with your grandparents?
Speaker 2: Well, I, I, I knew my grandmother on my mother's side because--
Speaker 1: What was her name?
Speaker 2: Her name was Hattie, Hattie [B.] Miller.  And she lived to about nearly a hundred years old.  She was a long, you know, they're long livers on my mother's side and got to spend many of, many days with her when I visited in the summer.  And, and she was, she was just, she was a great person and a strong, strong family.  And I can see where my mother got many of her, her virtues, from my grandmother.  Grandmother very, was very strong, a very, a very strong believer in getting a good education, make a better life for yourself.  She encouraged that and made sure she came--she was present at all of our graduations and all of our, you know, accomplishments through school.  She would spend a lot of time with us and participated, and she encouraged us.
Story_ID: 219494
Speaker 1: And when you would go to Fort Valley [Georgia] during the summers, what kinds of things would you do there?
Speaker 2: Just play in the--a lot of playing in (laughter)--they had a big peach orchard and a lot of pecan trees.  And it was just a big farm.  We didn't have a lot of animals at the time because they were--when I was growing up, it was mainly farming the, the peaches and the pecans.  And so I spent a lot of time doing that, playing with my cousins and other relatives in Fort Valley, spent a lot of time doing things on the campus at Fort Valley State College [Fort Valley State University, Fort Valley, Georgia] at the time.  That, that was the name of it.
Speaker 1: What kinds of things?
Speaker 2: Well, we would go have our summer classes in Richmond [Virginia]--type classes, swimming classes or something, you know, a lot of recreational things we would do on the campus, but mainly just to take classes in Richmond, a lot of, you know, I can remember taking art classes and, and doing things like that in Richmond, some, some academic.  I can remember years going down doing some academic reading classes, things like that.
Story_ID: 219495
Speaker 1: And what about your paternal grandparents?  Did you spend time with them?
Speaker 2: Well, again, my, my grandfather [George W. Taylor] on my father's [Wilford Taylor, Sr.] side died before I got to knew him but spent a lot of time with my grandmother [Mary M. Taylor], my father's mother, who was--
Speaker 1: And her name?
Speaker 2: Her name was Mary.
Speaker 1: And what do you remember about her?
Speaker 2: I remember she was a very devout; she was a Christian; she was a Catholic; she was a staunch--you know, she practiced the Catholic faith.  And, and as a result of that, actually, that's (laughter), that influenced my mother [Zenobia Miller Taylor], and, and, and I was raised a Catholic actually.  That's how I started out, in the Catholic religion.
Speaker 1: She influenced your mother?
Speaker 2: Yes.  And so, but we spent a lot of time with her on weekends and sometimes baby, you know, she would babysit with us.  And, and she was just a wonderful person.  I mean we, we had a great relationship.  She used to make the best fruitcake.  I loved her fruitcake.
Story_ID: 219496
Speaker 1: [HistoryMaker] Judge [Wilford] Taylor, tell me what is your earliest memory of growing up?
Speaker 2: Earliest memory was, actually, when we moved, the earl--I remember moving from--we, when we first--when I was born, I guess I spent many years in a neighborhood called Dunbar Gardens [Hampton, Virginia].  And we moved from the house that we originally--that I can remember, and I was maybe four or five years old.  And I do remember that transition to the new house.  And, and my dad [Wilford Taylor, Sr.], my mom [Zenobia Miller Taylor] and dad bought a house in Aberdeen Gardens here in Hampton [Virginia], which was, right now it's a historic, it's on the historic register as a neighborhood that was built, and it was post-war [World War II, WWII], and it was built for homeownership for black residents here in the City of Hampton.  It's one of the first major developments.  It was, back in those days, it was a real nice home.  Although it was--it wasn't a project, so to speak, but, but it was homes that were owned by the residents.  And so my mom and dad bought a house.  And, and I can just remember very fondly how excited they were and how, how great it was to go in and to our own house.  And I was four or five, maybe six years old, somewhere in that age range.  And it was just a great time.  It was so exciting, I mean to go out there and, and move into this brand new house.  And, and it was our own house, and my parents were really proud of that accomplishment.  And I just thought that was a great thing to do.  And I mean to this day, the Aberdeen neighborhood is a historic neighborhood because of--it was one of the first in the City of Hampton.
Story_ID: 219497
Speaker 1: Tell us a little bit about the neighborhood [Aberdeen Gardens, Hampton, Virginia].  Can you kind of describe it for us, describe the community, your block?  What was the name of the street you lived on?
Speaker 2: I lived on Jordan Drive in the Aberdeen neighborhood.  And it was, it was a village.  I mean it was one of those places where everybody in the neighborhood looked out for each other.  It was truly--and when you, when you hear stories about how the village raises the, the child, well, that literally happened in Aberdeen when I was growing up.  I mean we, we virtually--I can't think of any criminal behavior.  I mean I can remember maybe one or two kids that got in trouble, and sometimes you, you know, you would see 'em, and you knew they were bad.  You know, I mean you knew something.  They did something bad, and you didn't see 'em anymore, but that was so rare.  I mean, growing up, I can count on maybe two fingers the number of people that, that got in trouble, that, you know, that you just didn't see 'cause they were--you know, we, we understand now--probably incarcerated somewhere.  But it, that didn't happen in that neighborhood.  It was, it was a neighborhood that people essentially got along with each other.  You didn't have a lot of problems, didn't hear of any drugs.  I mean every once in a while you would see somebody drinking alcohol.  You would see a beer or something, beer can or something laying around but never heard of any drugs, no real violence, or crimes, or criminal activity.  And everybody just kind of got along.  And you, you really didn't have--I mean you go, you went out to play, and you had a time that you would come back.  And it was not a lot of problems with going to, you know, the, the far end of the neighborhood, for example.  And we had just about--you could go just about anywhere in the neighborhood, and it was relatively, it was safe.  And--
Speaker 1: And was it--
Speaker 2: --we had a lot of fun.
Speaker 1: Was it mainly a residential neighborhood--
Speaker 2: Yes, it was resident.
Speaker 1: --or were there--
Speaker 2: It was all residential.
Speaker 1: Okay, so no corner store or anything like--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: --in the neighborhood?
Speaker 2: We had one corner store on, one corner store--I do remember that--that everybody sort of flocked to whenever they need small items.  And then further away, maybe a couple of miles away, you had a big supermarket.  But it was just one corner store.  I do remember that.
Speaker 1: And were most of the people who lived in the neighborhood, were they professional people or was it--
Speaker 2: Working class, it was mainly working class.  You had a lot of teachers and, but mostly working class, working class, the middle class at that time.  That's, that's who lived and supported this community.
Story_ID: 219498
Speaker 1: Can you tell us a little bit about what holidays were like in your house growing up?  Like, what were Christmas and Thanksgiving and Easter, were they pretty festive times(simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Happy, joyous (laughter).  We'd spend a lot of--you know, you, of course, you would, you'd walk from school, and you got to play and, and certainly, the Christmastime a lot of gifts, 'cause we did that; we did exchange gifts and got toys.  I mean it was just a happy time, a lot of good eating, good food.  That's the one thing we always had.  I mean you could go anywhere and get good food.  I can remember that growing up.  Everybody cooked well.
Speaker 1: What was your favorite holiday growing up?
Speaker 2: Probably Christmas because of the gifts, 'cause you got gifts, and everybody was happy to, to do, as a child--
Story_ID: 219499
Speaker 1: Can you kind of give us an idea of what daily life was like for you as a small boy?  You'd wake up in the morning.  Then what would you do next?
Speaker 2: Well, we had--the whole focus of my childhood was school, going to school and, and 'cause we'd wake up and have, you know, have breakfast and go to school.  And you would come home, take a short break, and then you'd do your homework.  And then you could get to play a little bit, because homework was always first.  You had to do your homework.  And you would take a little break every once in a while, get a little snack.  But you'd have to do your homework, and, and then you could play just a little bit.  But it was mainly school.  That's what we did growing up.
Story_ID: 219500
Speaker 1: --What kinds of things did you enjoy playing with your friends?
Speaker 2: Sports.  We had a real strong, in the neighborhood, a strong, strong sports program, I mean football in the winter, baseball in the spring and summer, bas--a little bas--not much basketball.  We played some basketball.  But it was mainly football and baseball.  Those were the two sports that we, we played.  And eh, just about everybody played on the team, and there were several teams in the neighborhood.
Speaker 1: Which was your favorite: football or baseball?
Speaker 2: Football.  In the summertime, we spent a lot of time swimming, too, because that was a big thing around here.  I mean, the parents tried to encourage all of the kids to, to learn how to swim, because we're so surrounded by water.  And so we would spend a lot of time in, in the swimming--I spent a lot of, of time, my family, my brothers and sisters [Jill T. Pope and Michelle T. Ferebee]--my brother [James W. Taylor] and sisters and me learned how to swim.  We, we did a, did a whole lot in the swimming pool, which I enjoyed that in the summer times.
Story_ID: 219501
Speaker 1: Could you give us your siblings' names in their birth order, including yourself?
Speaker 2: Well, James [W. Taylor], I have my, my--next, my brother is James, born after me.  And then I have--probably a year and half behind me.  And then I have my oldest sister, Jill [T. Pope].  She's exactly ten years younger than me.
Speaker 1: Wow.
Speaker 2: And then probably about a year and half, two years behind her, my baby sister, Michelle [T. Ferebee].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That's how it works, so there are four of us.
Story_ID: 219502
Speaker 1: [HistoryMaker] Judge [Wilford] Taylor, tell me what sights, sounds and smells remind you of your childhood and remind you of growing up.
Speaker 2: Well, the sights were the--sights, sounds and smells.  Well, let me start with the smell, 'cause that's crab (laughter).  We have a crab--you know, Hampton [Virginia] is known as the crab town, because we used to have a couple of crab factories here.  And when they were basically--I guess after, there's something they do after they take all the crab meat out of the crabs, and they crush the crab shells up and I guess to make fert--I don't know what they do with it.  But it's a terrible odor (laughter), so you know when they were making crabs.  You could smell that in the City of Hampton.  And that was really the only foul smell that we had around here.  And, but you know it was a good thing because it was a lot of crabmeat was being produced, 'cause we used to eat plenty of crabmeat growing.  I can remember that, 'cause it was rare--fairly reasonable because it was plentiful.  I mean it was so much of it, and it, and it was fresh because you could get it right off the boat.  And the other one, what were the other two?
Speaker 1: Sights, sounds, and smells, but let me--are there any good smells that remind you of growing up?
Speaker 2: Well, I would say the four seasons.  What I, what I liked about Hampton, you experienced the four--the fresh smell of springtime and summer.  There was just something about the air and also early fall, because of its--has the, you know, weather changes in the fall.  It becomes a little cool, and you can really smell the freshness in the air, especially in the fall, early fall and early spring, as the weather changes.  And those were great, great experiences because that's the one thing I love about this area, with--one, one of the reasons I love--I'm gon' stay here, 'cause I enjoy the four seasons.  You experience all four seasons in, in Hampton Roads [Virginia].  And, and you can always smell it.  You can tell when, you know, seasons are coming because of the o, you know, because of the Christmas in the air, crispness in the air.
Speaker 1: And what about sights and sounds?
Speaker 2: Well, it was not much to see.  It was pretty--Hampton was, was a city, but it was a small, small city in my view.  I mean you don't compare this to let's say New York City [New York, New York].  You don't have the bright lights.  You don't have the, a lot of noise.  So it was not much to see.  What, what we had, we had trees.  We had a lot of--you know, good people lived pretty good in, in this city.  There's a lot of neighborhoods where, black folks particularly, were doing quite well.  I mean it was--one thing we didn't see, and I, you know, I, I mean it's, you didn't see a lot of poverty and a lot of blight.  So, what you saw in Hampton was people living good.  I mean you, you, you saw that.  It was very noticeable in our community.
Speaker 1: And what sounds?
Speaker 2: Sounds?  Kids--probably the biggest sound that I could--you know, the football games.  You know, I was a very, very (laughter), very active in football especially, lot of crowds and just the sports activities whenever we would play, just the, the cheering.  And those were the sounds that I can remember as a child--the encouragement we got from the--sports activities.
Story_ID: 219503
Speaker 1: --What other memories do you have of growing up?
Speaker 2: Well, I have very fond memories.  I mean I had a really a great childhood.  It was very, very, as I said, the community was supportive.  My education was really, really, it was a lot of fun.  I mean the teachers that I had were very demanding.  I can remember that.  The teachers were very encouraging.  The teachers were very positive.  My mother [Zenobia Miller Taylor] and my father [Wilford Taylor, Sr.] were very positive.  And, and they encouraged us to do our best at all times.  And I can just remember that that was always encouraged and always supported as a child.  No, I had very fond memories growing up.  I mean it was just a great life.
Story_ID: 219504
Speaker 1: Let's talk a little bit about school.  What was the name of your elementary school you were attending (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Aberdeen Elementary [School, Hampton, Virginia].  It was from the, based on the neighborhood.
Speaker 1: And who were some of your teachers there, and what was elementary school like for you?
Speaker 2: Oh, it was, as I said, it was great.  Ms. Taylor [ph.], my first grade teacher, who I see--we go to church together, and I see her all the time now.  Ms. Hale [ph.] was my second grade teacher.  Well, I could go, I mean I could spend the whole session on, on my teachers.  But it was, it was one of those situations where the teachers were very, very supportive of all of us.  I mean they--and I tell 'em now when I see them.  I'm just so thankful that, that they didn't give up on us, that they (laughter), that they encouraged us, and they stayed with us even as we were stumbling sometimes through those lessons, that they, they knew that we had potential as children.  And, and they were very, very supportive, and--I mean and we knew that as children.  They cared about us.
Speaker 1: Did any of your teachers have a particular influence on you in elementary school?
Speaker 2: Yeah, my first grade teacher, Ms. Taylor.  I used to bite my fingernails, and she couldn't stand that (laughter).  She would really reprimand me.  "Stop biting your nails."  You know, I was, I had that little quirk.  And she was, I can remember her always telling me to stop.  My third grade teacher, Ms. Presley [ph.], was a very avid reader; she loved to read.  And I just can remember I had fond memories of sitting on her lap and, and her reading to me in, in the classroom.  I can remember that, and I used to really enjoy that.
Story_ID: 219505
Speaker 1: Tell us a little bit about what type of student you were during the [Aberdeen] Elementary School [Hampton, Virginia] years.
Speaker 2: Well (laughter), I thought I was a pretty good student.  I mean I, I'd rather play, you know, I'd rather play (laughter).  I enjoyed reading.  That was the one thing I did, and I think that's the, that was the, that was my salvation, that I, I read a lot, because my mother [Zenobia Miller Taylor] really encouraged me to read.  She's an avid reader, and she just wanted us to read.  And so we read a lot, and that helped me through school.
Speaker 1: What kinds of things did you like reading when you small, in elementary school?
Speaker 2: Everything.  I, you know, I enjoyed my--
Speaker 1: Was there any particular series?
Speaker 2: No, no, I just enjoyed any kind of reading, you know, that, that I could understand.  I can't remember any, any particular, any book or, I mean I just enjoyed it.  Encyclopedias, I will, I will say, I mean I did read.  My mother always kept encyclopedias around the house.  I do remember that, and I used to enjoy reading those things.  And, and of course, we had National Geographic.  That was a big thing back then with the, with the real, you know, nice pictures.  But, the encyclopedia was probably was, that was my biggest joy, just going through that and, and just picking out sections to read.  I enjoyed doing that.
Speaker 1: And during elementary school, what type of child were you?  Were you--you know, kind of well-mannered or mischievous?  What type of child were you?
Speaker 2: I would say well mannered.  I mean I didn't get many spankings.  I can remember getting spanked some (laughter).  I can remember misbehaving some.  But for the most part, I was, I thought I was pretty well behaved.  I was, I was, I was chosen to be the groom in the 'Tom Thumb' wedding in the first grade (laughter).  And I can remember being an angel in the, in the Christmas play, with my white sheet and you know, angel hat, you know, as I called it.  So I got chosen for those roles, and I thought that was pretty good.  I don't think they would have chosen one of the bad kids to do it.
Story_ID: 219506
Speaker 1: So, [HistoryMaker] Judge [Wilford] Taylor, during the [Aberdeen] Elementary School [Hampton, Virginia]--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --years, did you have dreams and aspirations at that time?
Speaker 2: Well, I had dreams of wanting to, you know, accomplish some things in life, but I, you know, didn't know exactly what I wanted to do at the time.  You know, my--that's one thing I said, my mother [Zenobia Miller Taylor] was just so positive.  She was always so encouraging that we could, you know, be anything that we wanted to be in our lives as long as we, you know, stayed in school--had got acquire, you know, achieved a good education.  That was just a big thing that both she and my dad [Wilford Taylor, Sr.] always instilled in us.  I can remember that early.  It was always a topic at the dinner table, how you can achieve and do things in life, make your life better, but you have to go to school.  So we learned that in elementary school.
Story_ID: 219507
Speaker 1: You had mentioned earlier that your family went to church, you were Catholics.  Do you remember the name of the church that you attended and what those experiences were like?
Speaker 2: Saint, St. Martin's [st. Martin de Porres Catholic Church, Hampton, Virginia].  Actually, it was St. Martin Catholic Church, right off the campus of Hampton Institute [Hampton University, Hampton, Virginia] at the time.  That's the church we went to for many, many years.
Speaker 1: And what were your experiences like in church?
Speaker 2: Well, that was, (laughter) it was a Catholic church.  I mean it was, they were still using Latin back in those days, which I, so I didn't really understand the service, I have to say.  But it was very--I mean it was a Catholic service, very structured, very--you know, the pope determined what, how everything went.  So we went to, you know, I did catechism.  I experienced that and 'course went to church.
Speaker 1: Were you an altar boy?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Was your brother [James W. Taylor] as well--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --you know.
Story_ID: 219508
Speaker 1: Where did you go to junior high school?
Speaker 2: I went to junior high school--actually, I split between Y.H. Thomas [Junior High School, Hampton, Virginia] and George Wythe [Junior High School, Hampton, Virginia], it was two different--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --high schools.  And that's, it was a decision I guess--my mother--my parents [Zenobia Miller Taylor and Wilford Taylor, Sr.] made to send me from Y.H. Thomas to George Wythe.  I don't know why to this day why I changed over, but both of 'em were out, they were not in my neighborhood.  I mean they both, both junior high schools were away from, from the neighborhood.  And I can't tell you to this day why I switched from one to the other.
Speaker 1: What were your experiences like in junior high school?
Speaker 2: Well, again, it was mainly sports.  I, you know, I became, as I, as I became older and I was playing a lot of sports in the neighborhood, I sort of excelled in, in, on the football side and so, played a lot of football in junior high school.  And--
Speaker 1: And--
Speaker 2: --that was a big thing back then, you know, because we were, you know, still developing as children.  But I--was very active in, on the football side.
Speaker 1: What were some of your favorite subjects in junior high school?
Speaker 2: Social studies, geography.  I can remember that.  I always, I was very intrigued with maps and, and history.  I was very, very interested in history, and I like, I enjoyed reading about the past.  Those were the main subjects.
Speaker 1: And what type of child were you in junior high school?  Were you still the same kind of very obedient, that kind of thing, or--
Speaker 2: Yes.  Yeah, I didn't change that much in junior high school, really.  I was pretty outgoing.  I was not an introvert.  I mean I was a pretty outgoing, personable type; you know, I, I enjoyed being around people, socializing.  I did that sometimes too much, I can remember (laughter).  One of my favorite teachers, Ms. McDonald [ph.], I'll never forget her.  She was just a very outstanding teacher in the sixth, seventh grade I believe.  And, and sometimes I would have to--I can remember her telling me to stop talking so much (laughter) in class.  But she was a great teacher.  She inspired me quite a bit.  She was, she was an avid read, and, and she inspired us to read a lot.
Speaker 1: And during junior high school, who was influencing you?
Speaker 2: I mean the, the other kids I guess--you know, there was a lot of peer pressure--and my coaches.  The main, the main influences really were my coaches.  I will, I will say this: I, I learned, I picked up--my mother was very, very interested in music.  My mother loved music.  She's a jazz--she just loved jazz music.  And so, she encouraged me to play, play the saxophone.  Well, I, I chose to--wanted me to play music, but I chose the saxophone.  And, and we had a, a real, real good band.  It was a lot of fun, so I, I joined the band and picked up the saxophone in junior high school.  That's where I learned how to play the instrument.
Speaker 1: And did you enjoy playing--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --the saxophone.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I loved it.
Story_ID: 219509
Speaker 1: Tell me a little bit about--were you starting to have some thoughts around this time about: this is what I want to be when I grow up; this is what I want to do when I grow up?  What were some of your thoughts in that area?
Speaker 2: I wanted to--when, I started then, and somehow I--because I enjoyed maps and, and, and looking at pictures of other continents, I wanted to, for some reason, I wanted to be an airline pilot.  That's what I started.  You know, and I can remember in junior high school [Y.H. Thomas Junior High School and George Wythe Junior High School, Hampton, Virginia] coming up with that, having that notion that I wanted to fly airplanes, and just became interested in that, started around that time.
Story_ID: 219510
Speaker 1: Where did you attend high school?
Speaker 2: Hampton High School [Hampton, Virginia].  That was--of course, back then we had two high schools.  Essentially, we had a segregated community.  And of course, you had the black high school, and you had the majority white.  And Hampton High was the majority white.  But I started in 1965, and of course, that's when they started integrating schools, actually before that.  But I was part of the first group of, large group, about thirty of us, black students went to Hampton High.  I can't say we integrated because prior to me going, maybe two or three years prior to me, there were maybe one or two black students that integrated Hampton High School.  And that was a big--you know, Hampton High, of course, it was named after the city, and that was the predominant high school in the city, which meant it had all the resources and all the good things and, that you could have in a school.  Well, my mother [Zenobia Miller Taylor] and father [Wilford Taylor, Sr.] wanted me to have those or have access to those things as well, those resources, so they sent me to Hampton High.
Speaker 1: And around that time, it was the height of the Civil Rights Movement.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: So, what were your experiences like at Hampton High?
Speaker 2: Well, I have ambivalent feelings about it or experiences.  I mean I think in the long run it turned out to be one of the best things to happen to me.  Because, again, many of my friends went to Phenix High [School, Hampton, Virginia], which was the majority black school.  And you know, as I said, growing up in, in a segregated community like that, like we were in Aberdeen [Elementary School, Hampton, Virginia], it was, it was very nurturing, and everybody cared about you.  And I really, you know, as a child, I mean it was really not the, not really a problem, except I guess my first, my first encounter with racism or, or bigotry as I, as you would call it, was I do remember, I do remember days when we would have books, and sometimes pages would be torn out.  And I would notice that the books were used.  You know, we never got any new books in the, in elementary school.  And I, and it started, I started questioning that.  Why are these books, you know, why are these books not really nice?  And you--
Speaker 1: Because it'd be a new year?
Speaker 2: Yeah, and you knew something was wrong with that.  And of course, I learned later it had to do with, it was a result of segregation that we got the secondhand books or texts that came from the--when the, when the white schools, majority white schools got finished with them and they passed them on to us.  And I learned that after the fact, probably starting in high school.  That's when I really discovered that.  And so, again, that was the, you know, one of I guess the motivations for my mother and father saying no, I want you to go to--instead of Phenix High with all your friends, I want you to go to Hampton High as sort of a pioneer blazing new trails, I guess you could say, in integration.
Story_ID: 219511
Speaker 1: --At the time when you were in high school [Hampton High School, Hampton, Virginia], were you starting to become interested in the Civil Rights Movement?
Speaker 2: Um-hm, yes, I was, because it was very well publicized.  And [Reverend Dr.] Martin Luther King [Jr.] became a household name.  And we would watch it on TV, and, and we started following many of his, you know, the things that he was doing along with others.  And--
Speaker 1: What were some of your thoughts about the Civil Right Movement?
Speaker 2: Well, I, I didn't really understand why we had to do that until we needed--I didn't understand why, what the resistance, why we had to try to prove ourselves that way, why we had to overcome things that we were trying to overcome in the community, the barriers, the, the bigotry, why we had to do that.  And of course, I experienced it firsthand at Hampton High.  I mean going in and, and quite clearly, there was a group of people in that, in that school of the other race that didn't want us to be there.  And so, racial epithets, I mean you, you would read stuff; you'd get threats and--and you would hear things in the hall; and people would call you names.   And I mean we went through all that at Hampton High School.  And sometimes you had teachers that didn't wanna, want you to learn, basically.  I mean it, it was clearly a, a noticeable difference between the nurturing that we got at our Aberdeen Elementary School [Hampton, Virginia], those black teachers, and all my teachers virtually.  I had, I think I can remember one black teacher at Hampton High.  All of 'em were white or majority race.  Now, I have to say, most of 'em were--once we got there and they realized that we were there for good, they accepted it.  And we became part of the school, and we learned just as much as the other students.  But, but that were was a noticeable and there was a significant number of teachers and students that didn't want us to be there at that time.  And they made it well-known, and it was a, it was a tough, tough thing.  And that's what I mean; that was the negative.
Story_ID: 219512
Speaker 1: And growing up in Hampton [Virginia], did you ever read about or did your parents [Zenobia Miller Taylor and Wilford Taylor, Sr.] ever talk about, did you ever hear about what was happening in Farmville, Virginia, and other places where they were shutting down the public school system in an effort not to integrate, or--
Speaker 2: No, we never talked about that.  But I do remember taking trips.  I do remember us taking trips to Fort Valley [Georgia] or to South Carolina, Fort Valley, Georgia.  And oftentimes, we couldn't, we couldn't eat, you know, in a restaurant.  We had to find places off the road, off the highway, off the beaten track to--eat.  Or, I can remember just, you know, going to a service station, and you had colored only here, you know, or something to that effect.  And so you knew there was, it was just a badge of distinction there that just made it, made you feel inferior.  I mean that's, it's just why can't I use the regular bathroom?  Why does it have to be for colored only?  And I can remember those experiences growing up as a child.  And, but it was mainly when I would travel south.  So we didn't really talk about what was going on in around the State of Virginia.  As an aside, you know, I, I talked--my wife [Linda Taylor] was a plaintiff in one of the, one of the school cases in New Kent County [Virginia], Green v. New County--New Kent County School Board [Green v. County School Board of New Kent County, 1968].  And she, her parents made her a plaintiff in that case to integrate and, and--well, not, not so much to integrate but to--because they had shut down in New Kent County, based on the massive positions of movement.  And of course, my father-in-law and mother-in-law joined in with the plaintiff to file suit against that county.  And so I had more discussions with my wife, you know, after we met--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --about that era of the Civil Rights Movement.  But my experience was mainly what I experienced here in Hampton and traveling south to my, my mother's home and my father's home.
Story_ID: 219513
Speaker 1: What were some of your favorite subjects in high school [Hampton High School, Hampton, Virginia]?
Speaker 2: Same ones, mainly, I enjoyed, I enjoyed the, I enjoyed the reading classes; I enjoyed history; geography; I enjoyed the civic social studies type classes; actually, I enjoyed the, I enjoyed the shop.  You know, we call it shop, the drafting.  And then you had a drafting class, and then you had a, had a, actually, a hands-on, making stuff.  I enjoyed doing stuff with my hands as well.
Speaker 1: What kinds of things did you make?  Do you remember?
Speaker 2: Well, I used to--
Speaker 1: Did you make those little, little gifts for your parents [Zenobia Miller Taylor and Wilford Taylor, Sr.] and that kind of thing--
Speaker 2: Yeah, I did that. And I tried to make things--well, I enjoyed, yeah, just little gifts and then sometimes statutes--statues, and boxes storage type things, and I--just, you know, anything that you--tables, things like that, real easy stuff to make.  I enjoyed doing that in high school.  But I also played football, very active in football.  And, and that was a, that was big--that probably took a lot of time.  A lot of my activities, or I, you know, a lot of my school extracurricular activities was taken up on the football field, on the gridiron.  And see, Hampton High got a big football tradition around here and still does, by the way.  Back in those days, it was very, very strong; they had a very strong athletic program.  And of course, I was part of that.  I came from, you know, the Aberdeen [Gardens, Hampton, Virginia] community in the, in the Pee Wee--we call it Pee Wee football--and baseball leagues.  And we were pretty well trained.  I mean several of us that went to Hampton High had, did pretty good at Hampton High playing football and, and baseball and basketball--
Story_ID: 219514
Speaker 1: Who were some of your friends in high school [Hampton High School, Hampton, Virginia]?
Speaker 2: Oh, well, I had most, mostly the black kids because we had, now I had--you know, quite a few of the white kids that I--as a matter of fact, my, my colleague here on this bench [Hampton Circuit Court, Hampton, Virginia], there, there are four of us that sit on this bench in the, in Hampton [Virginia].  And the chief judge now, Judge Hutton, Christopher [W.] Hutton, was a friend of mine.  We played football together, and we were friends on the football field, but we were also friends back then.  Yeah, another judge, who, Judge [Albert W.] Patrick [III], who sits as a general district judge here, well, was a, he was also one of my classmates in high school.  And we were very good friends.  I was--he was a basketball player.  I didn't play basketball, but, of course, we were all, you know, athletes at the time, and we were good friends back then.  I mean 'cause you know you, as you grow up you, you--people you go to school with, but you, but there are people that you go to school with, but there are people that also that you associate with, and you have friendships.  And these two, I had those kind of relationships.  And there were others like that.  I mean not just on the gridiron.
Story_ID: 219515
Speaker 1: I was real active in the, in the Key Club--that was a Kiwanis--I mean I did join clubs.  As I told you, I was very outgoing; I was not an introvert.  But, but I'll tell you one thing I really did in high school [Hampton High School, Hampton, Virginia] that was a lot of fun, and I was in the thespian club, and so I acted in some of the plays.  And that was a lot of fun, because I got my first trip to Broadway [New York, New York] with a group from Hampton High School.
Speaker 2: What did you all go see?
Speaker 1: We--'Man of La Mancha'.  I'll never forget that.  That was a Don Quixote show.  They had it on Broadway, and I got to see Don Qui--you know, the, the play 'Man of La Mancha.'  And--
Speaker 2: And were you just in awe or--
Speaker 1: Oh, I was just, you know, I was in awe.  And I'd been to New York [New York].  My, my mother [Zenobia Miller Taylor] had a sister who lived in New York City, in the Bronx [New York, New York], and we would go up and visit her in the summertime.  And so I'd been to New York before as a teenager, but there's nothing like going up there just with a group of kids.  And, and we stayed not in the Waldorf [Hotel, New York, New York].  I don't remember the name of the hotel, but it was just so--it was the first time I was in a hotel like that on my own in downtown, you know, in the Broadway district.  And it was just a whole lot of fun.
Speaker 2: Were you thinking that perhaps you'd like to be an actor when you grew up?
Speaker 1: No, no, I still had that airplane pilot in my, in the back of my mind, and that's what I wanted to do.
Story_ID: 219516
Speaker 1: You graduated from [Hampton] High School [Hampton, Virginia] the same year that [Reverend Dr.] Martin Luther King, Jr.--
Speaker 2: Right, 1968.
Speaker 1: --was killed, assassinated.  Do you remember that day?
Speaker 2: Yes, absolutely.  It was, it was a tragic day, because, again, we'd been following Martin Luther King.  I mean he was, he was really very prominent and on the news, as you know.  And, and this was the peak or the height of the Civil Rights Movement, and it was moving.  I mean it was--and he was doing great things.  And of course, he was assassinated.  But I'll never forget it.  Hampton High, they called, the principal got on the, on the PA system and called in all the black students and, and let us have a session together.  And they brought in a couple of teachers and a couple of counselors and talked to us about that.  But they were very well aware that it was a sensitive matter for the community.  And I'll never forget that, the, the call on the PA system saying come to the, you know, come to, they told us to come to--I forgot where it was, a room.  And, and then they explained to us and told us what had happened.
Story_ID: 219517
Speaker 1: So when you were in high school [Hampton High School, Hampton, Virginia], what were some of your thoughts about college?
Speaker 2: Well, I was actually going on a college football scholarship.  I mean that was my goal.
Speaker 1: But did you, did you think you--
Speaker 2: To go to college?
Speaker 1: --were going to college?  Were you thinking about going--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --to college?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, I knew, I knew I was going to college because (laughter) my mom [Zenobia Miller Taylor] and daddy [Wilford Taylor, Sr.] had already--and all of my aunts and uncles, I mean the whole neighborhood, the Aberdeen [Gardens, Hampton, Virginia] neighborhood.  I mean everybody was expected--if you had, if you had the ability, you had to go to college.  And that was just something that was second nature.  We didn't think about it.  I mean there was never a thought not to go to college in my, in my family.  Everybody had to go to college, if you were able to do it.
Speaker 1: What were you thinking you wanted to go to college?
Speaker 2: Well, initially I was going, I wanted to go to Virginia State [College; Virginia State University, Petersburg, Virginia] because that, 'course that was the big, you know, state university for black kids.  So I, I had a cousin--my cousin, George [Taylor], who pioneered at University of Virginia [(UVA) Charlottesville, Virginia].  He was one of the first blacks to, to integrate the University of Virginia.  And he was about two years, three years ahead of me.  'Course, I was not that interested in UVA.  I wanted to go to a black school, so I didn't really--
Speaker 1: Why did you want to go to a black school?
Speaker 2: Because of my experience at Hampton High.  I wanted to get back to a black environment because it was, it was really a struggle.  I mean, again, it made me a better person, I will tell you that, my experience at Hampton High, because I had to face racism and, and deal with it and overcome it in, you know, in the high school setting.  And I felt that I was success--I felt that we--I was able to do that, because I did achieve in the classroom and did well on--the gridiron and made some good friends.  I mean I, I felt that we, you know, many of my classmates did.  The black students overcame it.  And--the people got into good colleges.  I mean we, we did really well, the overall, when I look at the class and many of my friends, where they went to school for college.
Speaker 1: So how was the decision made that you would go to Hampton [Institute; Hampton University, Hampton, Virginia]?
Speaker 2: Well, I--it was a choice between Hampton and Virginia State.  And, and I guess it, it just came down to most of my family, my aunts and uncles and, and of course my mother had started there as well as my dad.  And just about everybody else in my family that surrounded me were Hampton graduates.  And so I was influenced by--it was just the, the pull of the family.  I just chose that over Virginia State.  You know, it's (laughter), I could--there was no other reason.  I can't think of any other reason why I went to Hampton other than just because I had several of my aunts and uncles that were graduates of Hampton.
Story_ID: 219518
Speaker 1: And what were your experiences like at Hampton [Institute; Hampton University, Hampton, Virginia], and what organizations were you active in?
Speaker 2: Well, Hampton was a great experience, because I, that's where I acquired the skills that really had, really set me off in, in, you know, in, in my career now, even what I'm doing now, because that's where I learned how to really think and, and develop my reading and, and all of my skills to, you know, to acquire more knowledge.  I mean that's, that's the one thing that Hampton instilled in you, that you, you have to continuously go out--(unclear)--in school, that you know, education is a lifelong--I mean that's what they instill in your head: it's a lifelong endeavor.  I mean you just, you never stop learning.  And so my experience at Hampton was just that.  I mean it was another--it was a very nurturing environment.  I mean most, when I was at Hampton most of the faculty lived on campus, so--
Speaker 1: Lived on campus?
Speaker 2: Yeah, they lived on campus.  So you got to see faculty before, during, and after class.  I mean it was, it was very noticeable.  I mean now, I guess they moved away.  I mean mostly two people live on campus now with students.  But, but it was a very, very closed-knit group and very nurturing.  And I mean when I was a student they were taking roll.  I mean you, you couldn't--I mean most colleges, once you went to college, you, you pretty much were on your own.  Whether you went to class or not was your decision.  But at Hampton, I mean I'll never forget that.  They, they took roll.  If you didn't go to class, you, you had to sit down and explain that to your instructor, your professor.  And that was a big thing because--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --still, we were still young and immature, and we needed that guidance.  I mean so, it was more of a, that kind of environment at Hampton that they kind of closed ranks on you and made sure that you went to class and did your work.
Story_ID: 219519
Speaker 1: I didn't play any sports [at Hampton Institute; Hampton University, Hampton, Virginia].  I just decided not to, ended up not playing sports, but I was real--I was a business major.  And I was active in the business--we had a club, business club.  And, and I joined a social group.  I didn't--back then, of course that was the, I guess still the Civil Rights Movement was ongoing as well as the, the revolt against Vietnam [War].  And so, we basically rebelled against all the traditional things.  So the Greek-letter fraternities were not very popular.  So, you had to grow out of that movement, a proliferation of social clubs.
Speaker 2: And which, which social club did you join?
Speaker 1: (Laughter) I have to you, I'm a groover, groove, groove.
Speaker 2: You're a groove (laughter)?
Speaker 1: Groove Phi Groove [Social Fellowship, Inc.] (laughter).  I know.  I joined--well, I was a found, I was one of the founding charter members of the Hampton chapter Groove Phi Groove.  But it was, and it was mainly all the people that would normally join, you know, Kappa [Alpha Psi Fraternity] or Alpha [Phi Alpha Fraternity] or Que [Omega Psi Phi Fraternity], that didn't wanna do it then because of the, just it was because those were Greek-letter organizations.  They were traditional.  Nobody wanted to do anything traditional.  We just wanted something to bind us together at--and you can name it anything.  And we just picked that, and it just, and it--but it turns out that all of the men that joined it were just good people.  I mean they were all good students or good athletes, just good people.  And we just all banded together and under, under the statement.  You could have called it anything.  I mean that was--
Speaker 2: And--
Speaker 1: --not the point, to be a member of a Greek-letter fraternity.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: It was just to be together as a group.
Speaker 2: And in some places the grooves actually ran the yard and were like the big men--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --on campus.
Speaker 1: Yeah, back in those days--
Speaker 2: Was that the case at Hampton?
Speaker 1: Yeah, it was, back in those days, it was very, a very popular group and all the popular guys.  I just happened to be tagging along.  But I was one of the founding members of that.  I was, you know, and we started it.  And so I did that more of a, as a rebellion.  Of course, I'm sent--after I graduated, and I joined the Kappa Alpha Psi as an alumni in Petersburg [Virginia] when I was on active duty in the [U.S.] military.  So I came to my senses and came back to the Greek-letter fraternities.
Story_ID: 219520
Speaker 1: --So you were a business major [at Hampton Institute; Hampton University, Hampton, Virginia].
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: What were you thinking that you wanted to do career-wise?
Speaker 2: Well, I wanted to go and become an investment banker on Wall Street [New York, New York].  And so I--
Speaker 1: Why?  Were you influenced by someone, or did you meet someone, or?
Speaker 2: Just business.  That was my study of the business, and, and I thought I understood the business method.  You know, I became really fascinated with the compounding concept of, of money.  And, and I was very, very in--economics was a very popular class at that time, and I enjoyed economics.  And, and so I wanted to do something in the business field.  So I, as--a matter of fact I, my third year, I spent a year at, as an intern on a co-op.  We call it cooperative education--with Johnson & Johnson, the, the company in New Brunswick [New Jersey].  The headquarters was in New Brunswick.  You know, they make Band-Aids (laughter), Johnson & Johnson and all the stuff that they make.  And I spent a year interning with that company in management.  And that was a great experience living in New Brunswick.  And so--
Speaker 1: What was it like living in New Brunswick?
Speaker 2: Oh, it was, it was just a lot of fun because I--had a roommate who was also an engineer, engineering intern, a co-op student.  And we just had a ball.  We lived one block from, from the girls' college [Douglass College; Rutgers University, New Brunswick, New Jersey] there.  I forgot the name of it, of, of Rutgers University.  And it was just so much fun, because you had a lot of, lot of experience, but you didn't have a whole lot of responsibility as an intern.  And we got up and went to work, made good money.  And so you had, you know, had, I had access to money and spent a lot of time in New York City [New York, New York].  And you know, it was just a lot of fun; it was a fun time.  And, but at that same time I got to experience some, some, some good experience in business management.
Story_ID: 219521
Speaker 1: What were some of the classes that you enjoyed most in college [Hampton Institute; Hampton University, Hampton, Virginia]?
Speaker 2: Well, I enjoyed, as I said, economics.  I enjoyed marketing.  It was a very popular and good class for me.  Management, I enjoyed that.  Those were the main core classes that I--marketing, economics, business management, that kind of--
Speaker 1: Any favorite professors during college?
Speaker 2: Yeah, Dr. [William C.] Brown.  He was the marketing, Bill Brown, he was my marketing instructor.  And he was a very, very, very astute, very articulate, wise instructor.  And he was very, very concerned about, you know, making sure that we came to class, and we paid attention, and we did our work.  He was a, he was a perfectionist, and he inspired a lot of students.  Bill Brown, I'll never forget him.
Speaker 1: And--
Speaker 2: He's deceased now.
Story_ID: 219522
Speaker 1: And who were some of your friends in college [Hampton Institute; Hampton University, Hampton, Virginia] and that kind of thing?
Speaker 2: All those groovers [Groove Phi Groove Social Fellowship, Inc.], you know, the good, all my buddies that were (laughter) that was--
Speaker 1: All the grooves that were running--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --the yard (laughter).
Speaker 2: Yeah, it was a, all good friends.  And I got pretty serious at the end.  My senior year we had a, there was a grant from the [Virginia] Department of Education [VDOE] to establish a drug abuse prevention and education program.  And it had to be student-run and directed, and I was chosen to be the student director.  So for my senior year, I was running the Hampton University [sic. Hampton Institute] drug education program.
Speaker 1: And was it a program for students at Hampton or--
Speaker 2: Yeah, students at Hampton.
Speaker 1: --public school--
Speaker 2: No, it was students at Hampton.  And what, it was a multifaceted program, and it had to have, we had a class, had a three-hour class.  You took a class on drug abuse, and you learned about all of the different drugs of abuse and what they did, the pharmacology, you know, what they did, you know, how the drug affected your body and, and in some ways to help, you know, prevent it.  And we had a clinic.  We had a, an intervention clinic we call it, basically, a place where students could come if they were overdosed or--'cause, 'course the big drug--
Speaker 1: Were you seeing a lot of drug activity then?
Speaker 2: Yeah, oh yeah, marijuana was a big, big drug of abuse.  We didn't see a lot of cocaine or, or--
Speaker 1: Or heroin, what about heroin?
Speaker 2: Some, some heroin, no cocaine, didn't even, didn't even mention that word back then, I mean, but some heroin and a lot of coke--lot of marijuana and a lot of psychedelic drugs like LSD and others that, that people were abusing in the college setting.  And so we were a program that was run by students.  And it was, it was a great experience.  And, and the many--and so I was a director, and we had a lot of students that were worked in the program.  I mean we got our tuition paid (laughter) that year through that program because it was a pretty big grant from the Department of Education.  And so some, those were some of my dear friends.  We got to know each other because we worked.  We not only went to school together, but we worked together that year.
Speaker 1: Do you feel like you helped a lot of people through that program?
Speaker 2: I think we did.  I think it, it was a--we accomplished quite a bit, especially with the class.  A lot of students took the class because it was a novelty and easy--I'll say easy, but it was not a, not a tough academic class.  I mean you just had to come and participate and, and sit and--very interesting lectures.  We would bring people from all over the, the country to come in and give lectures.  And so it was a pretty interesting class.
Speaker 1: And did a lot of students take advantage of the clinic and--
Speaker 2: Yeah, we had, we had quite a few people that would come in and crash.  And we would have to--we had now, when I said student-run, we had every, every student-- you know, every employee or worker in the programmer had an adult that was basically watching over us.  I mean we had--so for the clinic, for example, we had psychologists.  We had these counselors on, on the campus, and they were there to help us.  I mean we weren't doing this stuff on our own.
Speaker 1: Right, right.
Speaker 2: But it had to be, again, under the grant it had to be student-run and directed.  So, if we had a problem, we'd pick up the phone and call one of the faculty members.
Story_ID: 219523
Speaker 1: [HistoryMaker] Judge [Wilford] Taylor, you graduated from Hampton [Institute; Hampton University, Hampton, Virginia] in 1972.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: What were you thinking you were gonna do once you graduated?
Speaker 2: Well, I had to go in the [U.S.] Army.  See, part of my experience at Hampton I joined ROTC [Reserve Officers' Training Corps].  And so I was trained and you know, received my commission as a second lieutenant upon graduation, so I joined the Army.
Speaker 1: And your commitment to the Army was for how long?
Speaker 2: Three years, yeah.
Speaker 1: And where were you stationed?
Speaker 2: Fort Lee, Virginia.
Speaker 1: So you weren't too far from home?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: And what were your experiences like at Fort Lee?
Speaker 2: Well, it was a great experience.  I mean the Army started next--you know, at each, each experience in life up to that point had been great.  And, but it was, you know, Army can provide some of the best experience that a person can really receive in life.  I mean because they give you a responsibility.  That's the, that's the benefit to the [U.S.] military.  But they also give you the resources and the guidance you need to be successful.  You cannot fail in the military if you try.
Speaker 1: And what did you do in the Army?  What was your job?
Speaker 2: I was an instructor.  I was a financial management instructor at a school in Fort Lee.  So I had to join a faculty, basically, and, and become part of the training.  I was a trainer.  I didn't really do--I was infantry.  I was in the infantry, but was assigned to the school.  I had a, also a finance background, business background.
Story_ID: 219524
Speaker 1: You also got your master's degree.
Speaker 2: Yes, while I was on active duty [in the U.S. Army at Fort Lee, Virginia], and that was, while during my tenure.  During my du--[U.S.] military duty I went to school at night and on Saturdays at the University of Richmond [Richmond, Virginia], which was nearby, Petersburg [Virginia], and was awarded the master's of commerce, which was a specialized MBA-- finance and banking.
Speaker 1: And were you still interested in working on Wall Street [New York, New York] and being an investment banker?
Speaker 2: Yes, I was, I was.  I still had that.  I'd kind of changed over from--since, you know, I, I wanted to fly airplanes and didn't, didn't really do that.  When I went and joined the Army, became a finance instructor as an infantry officer (laughter).  And so that, I says, well, I'll go ahead to Wall Street to become an investment banker.  And that's what I'd planned to do until I met my now wife [Linda Taylor]--
Story_ID: 219525
Speaker 1: And so how did you meet your wife [Linda Taylor]?
Speaker 2: I met her--I was on [U.S. Army] base [Fort Lee, Virginia] one day.  And one of--as I told you, I became a Kappa, member Kappa Alpha Psi fraternity.  I pledged that while I was at Fort Lee in the [U.S.] military.  And my job was to notify all of the new members that were assigned to the base about the--when, when we knew about them--about the meeting, you know, the time and place.  So I had a name and an address on base.  And I went to his house to tell him about the meeting.  And, and Linda, my future wife, opened the door, and I fell in love (laughter).  It was love at first sight.
Speaker 1: And the rest is history, huh?
Speaker 2: Yes, yeah twenty-eight years later.
Speaker 1: So you all married in 1976?
Speaker 2: Seventy-six [1976], um-hm.
Story_ID: 219526
Speaker 1: And so what did you do after you [and Linda Taylor] got married in 1976?
Speaker 2: Well, what I did, now I had, I still had--I met her '74 [1974].  And I had to make a decision, because in '75 [1975] my three-year tenure at Fort Lee [Virginia] had ended.  And it--and I had, I, I had received orders overseas to another assignment.  I believe it was Korea.  And I decided I didn't want to do that.  I didn't wanna make a [U.S.] military career, although the military had really been good to me.  You know, it paid for my master's degree [from University of Richmond, Richmond, Virginia].  Of course, it essentially paid, you know, helped me pay for my undergrad [undergraduate degree], between my dad [Wilford Taylor, Sr.] and Uncle Sam, through ROTC [Reserve Officers' Training Corps], and that, that drug program [Hampton Institute drug education program] that we had at Hampton [Institute; Hampton University, Hampton, Virginia], that helped me pay for my undergrad.  But, of course, the master's I used the in-service G.I. Bill.  And that's the other great thing about the military.  You can get, you can get your education; and you get good work experience; and most important, you get the sense of--you served your country.  I mean it was just a great feeling.  And at that time, I was just, I was really maturing to the point that, that service of country was just so important to me.  And I got to do it, and it was a great experience.  I met some great people while I was on active duty.  I mean some of, some of the people you meet are just, just fantastic.  And so, as a result of that, I decided I wanted to do something else with my life.  And again, it didn't--you know, the fact that I'd become really, really interested in this young lady--her name was Linda Holmes at the time--and I just didn't wanna leave.  In fact, she was on her way to Atlanta [Georgia], because she was born and raised here in, in Virginia, New Kent County [Virginia], and that's where she lived.  She was teaching, and she was ready to, she just graduated from college herself, and she was ready to--she went to Norfolk State University [Norfolk State College, Norfolk, Virginia].  And she was ready to go Atlanta, 'cause that's, that was the mecca, as you know, even now, for, for black folks.  And so she was on her way.  And so we met.  I was on my way to Korea; she was on her way to Atlanta.  And so we met and fell in love.  And so, of course, as, as you know how the military works, you have to meet your orders (laughter), or you have to do something else with your life.  So I decided I was gonna do something else.  So I resigned from active service.  I'd, I'd made my--I'd paid my, paid back, or essentially committed, or fulfilled my commitment to the military, my three years.  And so I decided I was just gonna get out.
Story_ID: 219527
Speaker 1: But I had to do something else, and so I applied to law school.  It was more of an afterthought than it was to become a law--I mean I had not really thought about being a lawyer up until that point.  I says, let me try this, this profession and see what it's like.  And I applied and got in, got into William & Mary [Law School, Williamsburg, Virginia].  And it was just fortunate that I got in to William--actually, I got into all the schools, just about all the schools that I applied at--to.
Speaker 2: Where else did you apply, William & Mary, and where else?
Speaker 1: The University of Richmond [School of Law, Richmond, Virginia], Howard University [School of Law, Washington, D.C.], and George Mason [University; Antonin Scalia Law School, Arlington, Virginia].
Speaker 2: Why did you choose William & Mary?
Speaker 1: To be close to Linda [Taylor] (laughter).  That's the real reason, but, but it had, it had a great reputation.  And, and when I went there, the students--again, you're influenced by, by the students.  When I went there to interview, I had a real good interview with the dean.  And they have this organization called the BLSA, Black Law Students Association [National Black Law Students Association (NBLSA)], and they just, basically, took me in and embraced me and wined and dined me and, and convinced me that I should go to William & Mary because it's a great school.  There weren't many black students there.  They were still trying to get more students.  And so I was just impressed.  And it was close to Linda and fairly close to Hampton [Virginia] where my parents [Zenobia Miller Taylor and Wilford Taylor, Sr.] were.  So I was on pretty familiar grounds.  So I said I'll just choose this school.  That's, and that's why I chose it.
Story_ID: 219528
Speaker 1: And what were your experiences like in law school [William & Mary Law School, Williamsburg, Virginia]?
Speaker 2: Oh, it was the hardest, one of the hardest things I'd ever done.  Law school and law studies, just professional study is really hard.  It's rigorous, and it's intended to be that way.  It's a tough experience because you have to, you have to perform, and you have to demonstrate that you can, you know, do the work.  And the problem with it is, well, that's a good thing because, you know, the bottom line is that clients wanna know that their lawyers are competent when they have problems.  They wanna know if their lawyers are capable.  And the only way you can acquire that is through good training.  And so that's why law schools and medical schools, all the professional schools are real tough because they have to produce people that can perform.
Story_ID: 219529
Speaker 1: So when you were in law school [William & Mary Law School, Williamsburg, Virginia], what were some of your favorite courses in law school?
Speaker 2: Well, probably, I enjoyed the, the clinical classes, when you learned how to, trial advocacy for example, or we had an internship, things like that, the--classes I call 'em on the fringe, the things that we would, we would learn how to do or some of the skills that we would learn.  The tough thing about law school, especially at Marshall-Wythe [School of Law], William & Mary, was all of the grading was anonymous.
Speaker 1: What do you mean?
Speaker 2: Well, when you write a paper you don't put your name on it.  You just put your social security number.  So theoretically, the professors don't know who you are.  It's all based on your performance.  That's how--and that's, that's the way every law school operates; that's how it's done, so they don't know who you are, personally.
Speaker 1: So it can't be too subjective.
Speaker 2: No, they have to--well, it is subjective.
Speaker 1: Well, not really, because, you know, a lot of times--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --when you know someone--
Speaker 2: Yeah, I understand.
Speaker 1: --and you like them, you might--
Speaker 2: Yeah, right, it can't be, right.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: There's not some--and--you know, I--we always wondered whether the professors knew who we were, but, but they don't, or they didn't.  I mean they, they assured us that they didn't know who we were when we turned in our papers.  And they was just based on your social, you'd put up the last four of your social, four numbers of your social security number.  And that's how they grade you.  So it was truly, truly an anonymous grading situation where you had to perform.  And so, what they were looking for was whether you could demonstrate the requisite legal skill in solving the problem, at least on paper, that you were confronted with.  And that's, and that's what made law school so demanding and so tough.  You know--it's something--we call it a jealous mistress, and that's--and so what you spend, ended up doing for three years, it's three years of just nothing more than a Spartan-like existence.  All you do is eat, live, and sleep the law.  And it's the same way with any professional school.  I mean, and, and the reason, again, they do it is because they want to make sure the lawyers are competent to, to handle cases.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: And so, what that meant was that you had to compete, truly, with other students.  You had to be competitive.  And you had to perform, and you had to perform to the standard.  Like you said, it was no subjective grading.  I mean it was all based on--did the student answer the question?  Did the student apply the law properly in this case and--resolve the dispute in the manner that he or she was taught.  And if you did, you got a good grade.  If you didn't, you failed.  There was no in-between, and that made it really tough.  It was hard.
Story_ID: 219530
Speaker 1: What about evidence?  Did you enjoy that--
Speaker 2: Yes, that was--
Speaker 1: --course a lot?
Speaker 2: --that was a great class.  I mean that was a lot of fun.  I had a real good instructor for evidence.  It was a tough class, but it was a lot of fun.
Speaker 1: And were--did you have some favorite professors in law school [William & Mary Law School, Williamsburg, Virginia]?
Speaker 2: Um-hm, Dr. [William F.] Swindler, who taught constitutional law.  That was a real--I was very interested in constitutional law because, again, we were still riding on the heels of the Civil Rights Movement.  And many of the cases, I spent a lot of time on cases surrounding the Brown v. Board of Education [of Topeka, 1954] and all the cases that led up to that.  And so constitutional law was a pretty interesting class because it covered so many different areas not only on the civil side but on, but the criminal procedure and all of the things that, you know, affect our lives, constitutional law.  So that was a real interesting class, and we had a real good professor that taught.  I, I really enjoyed that.
Story_ID: 219531
Speaker 1: What was the climate like at William & Mary [Law School, Williamsburg, Virginia], particularly for African American law students?
Speaker 2: Competitive, it was tough.  It was hard because, again, they didn't care, you know, really what color you were.  All they cared about was whether you could answer the question, whether you could solve a problem using the techniques and the skills that they taught you in class.  It was tough.  And, and, and we had support groups.  We had, we had study groups.  We had study groups with the white students; we had study groups with the black students; we had study groups with some of the professors who had tried to help us out.  So it was a very supportive environment.  But when in the, in the final analysis it was you had to stand on your own, and put down your last four social security numbers on the paper, and you had to perform.  And that made it real hard.  I mean you, you couldn't get any help from your classmates.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: You had to perform on your own, so that made it tough.  And it was like that for everybody.
Story_ID: 219532
Speaker 1: What kind of law were you thinking you wanted to practice?
Speaker 2: Corporate law.
Speaker 1: Oh, that's--right.
Speaker 2: (Laughter) I was gonna go--you know, I still got my mind on Wall Street [New York, New York], go to the big corporation.  But, you know, back in those days they really weren't hiring, you know, black students.  We, we had to go into trial practice, which I ended up doing.  And I'm really thankful for that because that turned out to be a great experience for me, trial practice.
Speaker 1: So you, you and a good friend, Bobby Scott--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --started a law practice.
Speaker 2: Yeah, he recruited me out of William & Mary [Law School, Williamsburg, Virginia].  He came to William & Mary.  He was, he was very active in the political process.  He was in the [Virginia] General Assembly.  He had just won an election I guess in '76 [1976].  I started in '75 [1975], so '76 [1976] I believe was the year he won his first election to the House of Delegates here in Newport News [Virginia].  And--
Speaker 1: And he's actually a, a congressman now, a U.S. congressman now.
Speaker 2: Yeah, he's a member of [U.S.] Congress now, but he started out in the general, Virginia General Assembly--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --in the House of Delegates.  And he just needed some help helping with his law cases, and so he came to William & Mary.  At that time, in '76 [1976], by the way, that's when I married Linda [Taylor].  We got married in '76 [1976].  And so I was--I had to get a job (laughter).  So that was, that was what I did.  And he, he invited me to join him, and we formed the law firm, Scott and Taylor [Scott, Coles, Brown, Taylor, and Melvin, P.C., Newport News, Virginia] in 1970--'78 [1978].
Story_ID: 219533
Speaker 1: And what were some of the first cases that you [Scott and Taylor; Scott, Coles, Brown, Taylor, and Melvin, P.C., Newport News, Virginia] handled?
Speaker 2: Well, we handled, we were a general practice law firm here in, in the Hampton Roads [Virginia] on the peninsula.  Our office was in Newport News [Virginia], but we practice in mainly Hampton [Virginia] and Newport News but also the Hampton Roads region.  And it was general purpose.  We had handled cases for, you know, any kind of case that, or problem that a client would have we would have we would try to help 'em with it.  It was a general practice, we--general purpose practice.  Bobby Scott had, he really had specialized in personal injury litigation.  And so I came in and helped him with that, as well as we expanded the property and some contract work and--then of course the criminal defense work.
Speaker 1: Do you remember some--are, are there cases that come to mind that really stand out to you?
Speaker 2: We had several.  I had a couple of cases that I was appointed to that I call high-profile bank robbery cases that I was defending in the federal courts.  That was always tough.  Federal court--federal litigation is, is really, it's really interesting, and it was very challenging.
Speaker 1: What, why is federal litigation a little different?
Speaker 2: Well, because the rules of procedure here in, in, at least in this district of Virginia, they were pretty, pretty formal.  And you had to follow the rules pretty strictly.  They had, you know, when cases were set for trial and you had to, you had to be ready (laughter).  And federal courts don't provide as much latitude sometimes as state courts and, and things like that and procedures.  And so you had to always be ready, always had to have, have your stuff together when you went in that federal court.  It was just something about the federal court that required that.  I mean it should be that way any, in any court, but for some reason you just, you, you seem to have a higher sense of urgency in the federal court.  And so that was a challenge, representing bank robbers in, in a federal court.  We had some pretty interesting personal injury cases that Bobby, you know, handled that, you know, I helped him with, and that was a lot of fun.  And we did some, some real important cases to, you know, to help clients.  I mean we spent a lot of time with the smaller cases, resolving family disputes.  We had just a wide variety of cases.  I can't, you know, no one case sticks out in my mind.  It was just a great experience.  I, the one thing I, I enjoyed about the practice is, of course, Bobby being a politician, it was very--you know, he spent a lot of time working civic affairs and working on the political end.  And of course, my job was to mainly take care of the, the, the client base, and so I enjoyed that.  So I got a heavy dose of practice real early, taking care of both of our clients.  And, and that was very enjoyable, and it was really worthwhile.  Our relationship, Bobby and I, and my relationship was very good because we--you know, he was the rainmaker.  He brought in all the business, and, and I would spend all the, you know, a lot of time working it.  And--now, of course, after several years, we--the workload got to be a little overwhelming, and so--
Speaker 1: Let me ask you this, [HistoryMaker] Judge [Wilford] Taylor: in the beginning, were your, was your clientele predominantly black, or was it mixed?
Speaker 2: Predominantly black.
Speaker 1: Um-hm, um-hm. Were you all like the, the go-to firm for African Americans?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I thought we were.
Story_ID: 219534
Speaker 1: We [Scott and Taylor] joined with three other lawyers, black lawyers: Sharon Coles-Stewart, Milton Brown, and Joyce Melvin-Jones.  They were in Newport News [Virginia] as well, and so we decided to join together.  And, and we formed the Scott, Coles, Brown, Taylor and Melvin P.C. [Newport News, Virginia] law firm.  It's a, we, for a little while, we were probably the biggest African American law firm in the State [of Virginia].  And I don't think--well, I take that back.  There was Hill, Tucker & Marsh, the big firm--
Speaker 2: Yeah, in Richmond [Virginia].
Speaker 1: --out of, out of Richmond.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: They were, they were much bigger.  But in this region we were pretty big.  We were pretty, you know, and we would--yeah, I considered us one of the go-to firms at that time.  I, and I really enjoyed being--and then what happened, we just expanded and did more of the same.  It was just more of the general practice.  And we, we brought in three just very outstanding lawyers.  And basically, we joined up; you know, we just joined firms and pooled our resources.
Speaker 2: And so the merger took place in 1981?
Speaker 1: Yes, around that time.
Story_ID: 219535
Speaker 1: Let's talk little bit about in 1983 when you became the deputy city attorney [for Hampton, Virginia].
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: How did that come about?
Speaker 2: Well, I guess at that time I was practicing I was, had, it was just a great experience.  I enjoyed the practice of law.  Of course, we [Scott, Coles, Brown, Taylor and Melvin P.C., Newport News, Virginia] were growing.  The staff was growing, and you know, our caseload was growing.  Things were going well, and opportunity presented itself in the city attorney's office in Hampton.  And, and I was in, interested in that.  I took a class in law school [William & Mary Law School, Williamsburg, Virginia] in municipal corporations, which is basically city government law, and became interested.  And, and the city attorney offered me a job, and I, and that's when I started I guess, you know, again, pioneering.  I became the first African American attorney to work in the city attorney's office.  And I just thought that was a great opportunity to come back home and to become a deputy city attorney, a different kind of practice.  You, you get in and you represent city government.  You--your department heads and the city council.  You, basically, you just try to help them with their legal problems and, and issues.  And so it was a great, great experience.  And so it was an opportunity to become, you know, a first, and, and I took it, and left private practice, and joined the city attorney staff.
Speaker 1: What were some of the--your accomplishments as deputy city attorney [for Hampton, Virginia]?
Speaker 2: I would say preventive law, working, making city department heads more aware of the legal implications of what they do.  My focus and the focus of the city attorney was preventive law, to try not to create a situation where you have to end up in court litigating.  I had several cases that went, ended up in court, but we, we were successful.  I mean I was able to be, you know, to, to litigate successfully cases that did go to court.  But I would say the most important thing was to prevent a lot of law cases in court and to get the managers to understand that they need to prevent and be, be cognizant of legal implications of what they do.  And that was our big, big I guess claim to fame.  And so I enjoyed spending a lot of time in meetings, and, and advising, and counseling department heads, and, and also helping city council avoid litigation.  And I, I thought that was, that was the way to do it.  And city manager at the time--I mean city, the city attorney at the time encouraged us to take that approach.  And so, that was a big, big thing, big accomplishment I felt.  I mean, I can't point to any one thing, how it helped, but I just know that, that many department heads were able to stay out of trouble based on counsel and advice that, that I helped them with.
Story_ID: 219536
Speaker 1: And what was like the racial makeup of the city government employees at that time?  So this is the early '80s [1980s].  Was it pretty--
Speaker 2: It was mostly white in Hampton [Virginia]--
Speaker 1: And--
Speaker 2: --although the city was becoming increasingly black.
Speaker 1: Did you meet any resistance?
Speaker 2: No, actually I didn't, not, not, not at all.  Because, again, the issues were discharge--you know, each of the city department heads, and, and we would represent various department heads in their legal issues.  The issues were: how can, how can I carry out my mission and, and not get in legal trouble?  And quite frankly, they were, they didn't really care about, you know, the color of my skin as I gave 'em--you know, what they cared about was the effectiveness and the quality of the legal advice.  I could see that.
Story_ID: 219537
Speaker 1: --What was it like for your, your family, your parents [Zenobia Miller Taylor and Wilford Taylor, Sr.], to have you back home [in Hampton, Virginia], you know, working in [city attorney's office]--
Speaker 2: Well, of course they were proud, you know, and it was be, being a first or being in that area is a kind of specialty in the law.  And, and you don't see too many black attorneys going into that area, even though, although now it's, it's opened up quite a bit.  And you have more and more black attorneys in municipal law.  But it was sort of a specialty, a first time.  And, and I was, it was an opportunity to pioneer and do something first, and do something good for the community in my view.
Story_ID: 219538
Speaker 1: In 1985, you became a first again.
Speaker 2: Yeah, well, that was an opportunity.  Again, there was a vacancy created in the [Hampton] General District Court [Hampton, Virginia], which is the--(unclear)--of course, you know, we have two levels of court, trial courts: general district and--
Speaker 1: Could you kind of--
Speaker 2: --circuit--
Speaker 1: --explain?
Speaker 2: Yeah, general district court--you define a court by its power of jurisdiction.  General district courts in Virginia, as we call 'em, are limited jurisdiction courts.  They handle, everything that you do as a court is based on statute or the Constitution.  That's where you get your authority from.  General district courts were limited.  They handle traffic cases; they handle misdemeanor charges; they handle small--when I say small civil, I mean that's, right now the jurisdiction is the civil dispute, up to fifteen thousand dollars.  In the juvenile called domestic relations district court, they handle family matters.  And so, but they're limited in their jurisdiction.  But of course, the other side to it is that that's where most of the cases start and they stop.  That's where most cases are, in our system of courts.  And so I got a chance to--they created another court, general district court, in the City of Hampton [Virginia].  And so there was a vacancy.  I threw my hat in the ring, and so I got--and that was really quite an experience.  Yeah, and that was first.  I went to the Hampton Bar [Association, Hampton, Virginia] for the--Hampton Bar had never endorsed.  And the way you get to be a judge is you have to, you have to compete at the bar level.  And the bar then makes an endorsement.  It's kind of a (laughter) a pro- a procedure.  And then, in Virginia, you have to be submit--you have to go to the [Virginia] General Assembly and get the majority vote of the General Assembly.
Story_ID: 219539
Speaker 1: So you have to get a majority of votes from [the Virginia General Assembly]--saying that this is the person we'd like to have [as Hampton General District Court judge].
Speaker 2: Well, that's the way it, when I, in '85 [1985], that's the way it worked.  No, the, the--you don't have to.  What, what you have to get is a majority vote of the General Assembly.  You don't have to get a bar endorsement.
Speaker 1: Right.  So you kind of have to lobby the General Assembly then?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes, you have to do that.  But back when I became a judge [on the Hampton General District Court, Hampton, Virginia] in '85 [1985] that was the protocol.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: You had to go through a bar association.  And so I went to the Hampton Bar [Association, Hampton, Virginia], 'cause they had never endorsed a black person for a vacancy.  Now, I have to tell you, I was the first to be appointed a full-time judge, but I was not the first black judge on the peninsula.  We had two other judges that came before me: Philip [S.] Walker and William [Thomas] Stone--
Speaker 1: But you were the first full-time.
Speaker 2: Yeah, first full-time.  But those are two of my role models, are very outstanding gentlemen, and, and had they wanted to be full-time judges, they would have been (laughter).  But they didn't want to.  They were had very, very lucrative practices and, but they were part-time judges.  They were just substitute, we call 'em substitute judges, but I was the first full time.  But what happened, in '85 [1985], the vacancy came up, and I went to the Hampton Bar and asked for the endorsement, and they gave it to me.  I was endorsed by the Hampton Bar for the first time, the first African American to be endorsed by the Hampton Bar for a, a judicial vacancy in Hampton.  And of course, I went to the General Assembly, and I was elected a judge.  And I became the first judge in Hampton and Newport News [Virginia], actually, on the peninsula.  As you, you know, the Hampton and Newport News, we're part of Hampton Roads [Virginia] on this side of the water.  I became the first African American judge, full-time judge on the peninsula.
Story_ID: 219540
Speaker 1: What was the process in terms of lobbying the [Virginia] General Assembly?
Speaker 2: It was (laughter), it was not easy.  It was a tough--well, I--I'll say this: it's like anything else in life, you know, I--it's, it's based on the person that you are.  Of course, I was born and raised here, and everybody.  And, and my parents [Zenobia Miller Taylor and Wilford Taylor, Sr.] have--well-established in, in this neighborhood, in this community, well-respected.  Of course, I was a product of the public school system.  I was, again--they knew that.  And of course, I, I had a good practice in private practice.  My mentors in the practice [Scott, Coles, Brown, Taylor and Melvin P.C., Newport News, Virginia] trained me well, and, you know, all---I'm talking about my law partners in the firm, starting with congressmen, well, back then Attorney [Bobby] Scott.  And so we--you know, I presented all of that, that I had, I had the qualifications; I had the background.  And I was kind of young.  At that time--
Speaker 1: Yeah--
Speaker 2: --I was only thirty-five.
Speaker 1: --just thirty-five.
Speaker 2: And that was probably the biggest, that was the biggest negative, I guess you would say.  I was so young at the time.  I think I was probably, when I was appointed [to the Hampton General District Court, Hampton, Virginia], probably youngest judge in the State [of Virginia] at the time.  Thirty-five was kind of young for this.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: I mean it's--but, but, again, I had the qualifications to do this, and I had the experience.  I had been active in the community.  Although I was not politically active, I was active in civic affairs, doing things in the community, trying to help make it better.  And so, and probably what was really critical was my relationship and the, and the work I'd done in the city attorney's office, relationship with the city council members, who were the local elected officials, who all weighed in and, and helped me get this job.  So, again, it was a groundswell from all of that to the General Assembly delegation who took me in.  That's what happens.  They literally take you to Richmond [Virginia], and, and that's where you are interviewed by committees of the, of the General Assembly.  And, and then they qualify you, determine whether you're qualified to be a judge.  And we call it, what is called the Courts of Justice Committee in both the House [of Delegates] and the Senate [of Virginia].  So, my legislators who are legislators representing Hampton [Virginia] took me to Richmond.  And I went before those committees, and, and they determined I was qualified.  And, and when that happens, the General Assembly votes on you, and you gotta get a majority in both houses, and I did, in 1985.  And so I, and then I became the first full-time judge in Hampton--
Speaker 1: Who--
Speaker 2: --or Newport News [Virginia].
Story_ID: 219541
Speaker 1: Do you remember, during this process--was there any legislator who gave you a particularly hard time?
Speaker 2: No.  I had unanimous support from all of the legislators.  And it was because of, again, what I'd done in the community up to that point; again, my background and my training, you know, the, the, the, all the way back from, you know, just being raised and how I was raised.  I mean they all knew all--I mean that's, that's the kind of stuff they check out about you.  They go through all that with you, and of course, the civic work, and, and the work in the city, and the work in, the good work in my law firm [Scott, Coles, Brown, Taylor and Melvin P.C., Newport News, Virginia], former law firm.  All of that with a strong community of support convinced those legislators that we needed to have me on the bench.  And again, it was just, you know, just God's grace that I, that, that it was me.  I just think it was, it was time.  You know, it was an idea--I mean it was time for Hampton [Virginia] to have some diversity on the bench.  The city was becoming increasingly black, and we needed to have that.  I mean I think that's critical; that was important.  That was one of the main reasons I, I did, I didn't really aspire--you know, it's hard.  You really can't aspire to be a judge in Virginia or any--I guess you can do it in the states that you run for judge, you run, stand for election.
Story_ID: 219542
Speaker 1: [HistoryMaker] Judge [Wilford] Taylor, so in 1985 you served the general--
Speaker 2: [Hampton General] District Court [Hampton, Virginia]. Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --district court as the first full-time African American judge.  Can you tell us a little bit about some of the cases that came before you?
Speaker 2: Yes, well, we did a variety of cases.  Traffic cases were the predominant cases, I mean, on any given day.  And that's where all the police officers and the state troopers and, that Sir Hampton [Virginia] write tickets.  So you have to deal with those, hundreds of people coming through the system every day.  The criminal cases are our responsibility, or the responsibility of the general district court is to handle the misdemeanor cases.  Those could be petty larceny; it could be drinking and driving; it could be anything involving a crime that you can get less than, a year or less in jail.  General District Court also handles the felony preliminary hearings.  And that's where the first case comes out to determine whether a person should go to trial in the circuit court, where I'm sitting now, then, of course, civil disputes up to fifteen thousand dollars, and then all of the municipal, the city ordinance violations.  And this is the dog (laughter), the dog warden and the, and the building codes, zoning administration, weed and debris ordinance, all the violations of those kind of cases of ordinances are brought before our General District Court.
Speaker 1: And are they--
Speaker 2: And so we had a wide variety of cases.
Speaker 1: Are they all kind of mixed in, or is there like a day for--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --certain things--
Speaker 2: Well, we separated them.  I mean that's the way we would handle--there were three of us working, and we would just kind of rotate around, and, and each day or each week or each month, I mean depending on how you were organized, you would handle a certain kind of case.  It was fun; I had a great time; it was a great experience.
Speaker 1: Any particular cases that come to mind?
Speaker 2: No.  I would say (laughter) probably the--the city ordinances cases.  A lot of cases where, where you bringing--you know, these are ordinary citizens that come in, that just happen to be charged with violations, the traffic cases.  Those are the kind of interesting cases that you come, and some, many of the landlord--civil disputes, landlord/tenant cases.  And you get just everyday people coming into court and for various reasons, and you have to deal with their problems.
Speaker 1: Do you see--
Speaker 2: Those, those were the in, that was the interesting part of the case, of the job--
Story_ID: 219543
Speaker 1: Did you have a lot of people come before you [in the Hampton General District Court, Hampton, Virginia] who, you know, you knew and you grew up with--
Speaker 2: Some people, yeah.  Yeah, we saw some people there that you happened to know, but that's, that, but that's because in Virginia you have to live in the city that you're presiding in.  And I'd happen to--be raised here, so I, I did know a few of the people that came before me.  Now if they were too close, I would, you know, disqualify myself, because we had two other judges that could hear cases.  So, that's really not a problem.  If you, if you really know somebody close, you can withdraw from the case and get somebody else to hear it--
Story_ID: 219544
Speaker 1: And on your first day on the bench as a full-time judge [for the Hampton General District Court, Hampton, Virginia], do you remember that day?
Speaker 2: Um-hm, yeah, very, it was, I was nervous.  I was scared to death.  I'm sure that I was more afraid than the people sitting out there in the audience.  And I don't remember what I--it was traffic day, I had traffic court that morning, and it was really, really interesting to get through it.
Speaker 1: And how, and how did things go as the day progressed?
Speaker 2: I thought they went pretty well, I really did, because it was, you know, I, I got through it.  I survived it (laughter).
Story_ID: 219545
Speaker 1: --Let's talk about 1995--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --when you were appointed to the circuit, [Hampton] Circuit Court [Hampton, Virginia].  So, how is the circuit court different from [Hampton] General District Court [Hampton, Virginia]?
Speaker 2: Well, Circuit Court, again, the general, it's called a court of general--jurisdiction.  It's the next level trial court in Virginia.  And circuit courts handle everything.  We handle everything.  General District Court was limited.  In Circuit Court we handle any and every kind of dispute, and--which includes felony cases.  We handle both misdemeanors and felonies.  Those are the, you know, how the major cases where you can, well, actually, you can be put to death.  We have death penalty in Virginia.  Only circuit judges can put people to death for certain kinds of crimes.  We handle--or you can go to the penitentiary for life.  We handle all of the civil disputes, multimillion dollar, you know, just unlimited, we call it unlimited jurisdiction, which unlimited amount; you can sue for any in a circuit court.  General District Court you only sue for up to fifteen thousand dollars.  We supervise jury trials.  You don't get jury trials in general district courts, but you get jury trials in circuit court.  So that's the main difference.  It's general--circuit court is a court of what we call general jurisdiction.  Circuit courts are--everything you do is on the record.  You have a court reporter.  That's not required in the general district court, so there's a big difference.  Circuit court is the highest court of, of record, the highest trial court in the State of Virginia.  And so it's, it's a very significant court.  Most litigation stops at the circuit court.
Story_ID: 219546
Speaker 1: Any particular high-profile cases [in the Hampton Circuit Court, Hampton, Virginia] that come to mind that were particularly difficult or--
Speaker 2: Well, yes.  Probably the most difficult cases are the family disputes that we resolve in circuit court.  I think that's the most important thing we do.  It's because family is the fabric of our society.  And when, when the family disputes, when there's a divorce or when there's a feud between the husband and wife, something, or the child is not behaving, all those family matters are brought in, when they're brought in this court, that's where we have the toughest, toughest cases, because you have to resolve it in a way that you can hope will help the family and generally help the, help society, help the community.  Because as the families go, that's how society goes, in my view.  So the toughest thing, high--you know, these are not high-profile cases, but they're real important, and they're, they're very tough.  Now, yes, we have high-profile criminal cases.  We have that on occasion.  And every once in a while we'll have something civil that's pretty high-profile.  But I think the most important thing we do is resolve family disputes.
Speaker 1: Have you ever had to sentence someone to death?
Speaker 2: Not, no, I haven't.  I have not had a capital murder case yet.  I've sentenced people to life in the penitentiary without parole for committing terrible crimes; I've done that.
Speaker 1: Was it hard?
Speaker 2: Yes, it's always hard.  It's always hard when you take somebody's liberty away from them, especially for life; that is tough.  I agonize over that every time I do it.
Story_ID: 219547
Speaker 1: What kind of reputation do you think you have as a judge?  And I wanna ask you like from two different--perspectives.  What do you think lawyers think about you as a judge?  And what do you think defendants who are, you know, defended or prosecuted in your courtroom think about you as a judge?
Speaker 2: I think, think they would say that I'm tough on--you know, tough when, when--but, but I'm fair.  I think they would say I'm tough, but I'm fair.  I, I follow the law.  I try to--I mean that's, that's job number one, to--follow the law.  But, and I'm courteous to the litigants.  I treat people like I would expect to be treated, 'cause I think it, it's God's grace that I'm sitting in there on the bench versus standing before the court.  So it's the grace of God that's, that's the fine line; that's the distinction.  And so I treat people like I would expect to be treated if I were on the other side.  So that's what they would say about me.  And, and I don't--I like to be--I like to run a court in an efficient and businesslike--and my business training comes out and my [U.S.] military training.  I try to run an efficient court.  I try not to waste people's time.  I try not to delay.  I try to reduce delay in, in the proceedings, and I think that's so important for a court.
Speaker 1: Is it a fair label that--are you tough?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.  It's fair.
Story_ID: 219548
Speaker 1: What do you think about some of, like the high-profile cases that we see now on television, not necessarily starting with O.J. [People of the State of California v. Orenthal James Simpson, 1995], but kind of starting with O.J. [Simpson].  You know, it seem, it seems like now, you know, we really--people, you know, we have an opportunity to really be inside the courtroom, even though, you know, they may live far away.  I mean do you think that that's a good thing, or what do you think about just like the role that the media plays?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I, I think it's a great thing.  I think we need more media.  I wish the court, I wish the courts were shown on TV all day every day, because it's so important that people understand better.  I think that's the biggest problem we have with our court system, that so many people, the public don't understand what we do and why we do it.  I mean it's, it's real hard to explain to the public the presumption of innocence, that a person is presumed to be innocent at all stages of a trial, and that you have to prove, in a criminal case, you gotta prove the case.  The state or the commonwealth has to prove the case beyond any reasonable doubt.  Of course, that's the judgment call that the jury or the judge has to make.  But still, that's one of the most important virtues of our justice system.  And, and as a result of that, people may not understand when a person is found not guilty, that somebody on the jury or, or the judge may have had a reasonable doubt about the guilt.  And you may have suspicion.  You may have, you may just know that he or she did it, but if there--if the trier of fact has reasonable doubt, then that person has to be found not guilty.  Or, if, if the government violates that person's constitutional rights in trying to collect evidence, for example, you can't use it.  Now, he or she may have done it, but you can't use the evidence if the government didn't follow the rules.  People don't understand that.  Those are constraints that lawyers operate, and judges, and courts operate within.  And, and sometimes people will see results, where a person is acquitted.  But what they don't understand is that somebody didn't follow the rules, or there may be some reasonable doubt about what happened.  And so, it's really tough to explain that.  And that's why I'm all in favor of cameras in the courtroom, but not just for the sensational stuff, for everything--
Speaker 1: For the everyday--
Speaker 2: --so, so that people can see the whole case--
Story_ID: 219549
Speaker 1: How do you like working with juries?  What do you think about--
Speaker 2: Oh, it's great--
Speaker 1: --our jury trial system?
Speaker 2: --I love it.  I love it.  I think it's, it's, to me it's the crown jewel of what we do in the, in the justice system, both civil and criminal, because you have a panel of laypeople to make the decision.  I mean that's, that's the, that's the buffer.  That's the govern--that's the buffer between government and, I would say outrageous government action and--individual, the dignity of the individual.  And the jury sits there, and they can make that decision.  You don't have to leave it up to a judge who works for the government.  You have a, a panel of laypeople, your peers, that can decide your fate.
Speaker 1: Do you--
Speaker 2: And I think it's great.
Speaker 1: Do you think that some--
Speaker 2: I enjoy it.
Speaker 1: --sometimes it's hard to--or do--to define exactly what a jury of your peers means?  Because, you know, for a professional person, you know, of your, a jury of your peers could mean something different.  Do you think that, that's sometimes a little hard to define?
Speaker 2: No, not really.  I think it's, it's not so much in technical terms.  It's more in life terms.  A jury of your peers would be registered voters.  It would be adults.
Speaker 1: What about racial makeup?
Speaker 2: Well, that's, that's, a jury of your peers would be an equal, a pretty--a distribution of the community.  In other words, the, the racial makeup of the community, it should be, it should be representative.  I mean if your, if your city, for example, if you live in a community that's had fifty-fifty black-white, your jury panel should be just about that.  That's, so it's really easy to define, in terms of your peers, yeah.  It doesn't have to be your professional peers.  It's just where you live, how you live.  And it can be made up of some of your professional peers, but I think it's more important to have just a group of people that live in the neighborhood, that live in the community.
Speaker 1: Do you think that the, the jury, the jury system is a good one?
Speaker 2: I think it is.  They--I'll say this: I've never changed a jury verdict.  I think they get it right every time.  And most, most judges don't change the jury verdict.
Story_ID: 219550
Speaker 1: And tell me a little bit, [HistoryMaker] Judge [Wilford] Taylor, about some of the changes that you've seen in the nature of crimes that are, are coming before your court [Hampton Circuit Court, Hampton, Virginia].
Speaker 2: Okay, drugs, drugs are driving most of the crime.  I'd say nine, eight or nine out of ten of the cases are driven by substance abuse.  People are addicts, and they're going out robbing, stealing, cheat--doing everything criminal to sustain their drug habit, to get drugs, to do something to get money or to get drugs.  And the money of course is to buy drugs, would be used to buy drugs.  And so it's, so the nature of it is, I mean it's still the same.  I mean people--it depends on this, the nature of the habit and the degree of a resistance that the victim--if it escalates to something really violent, then that's what happens.  But the nature of it, the underlying cause of most of the crime in our community is substance abuse right now, from what I, from where I sit.
Speaker 1: And in your time on the bench, have you seen an increase in the number of women who are, are, are being charged with crimes?
Speaker 2: Yeah, because of drugs, more and more women, not a significant increase, but a, but a pretty large increase.
Speaker 1: What about African Americans?
Speaker 2: Well, that's the majority.  There's a disproportionate number of young blacks that appear before the court.  That had, that was there from day one, since '85 [1985].  I mean it's been that way.  That hasn't changed.  And I'm still struggling trying to figure that out.  I think it has a lot to do with the, the rampant open, openness of drugs in the black community and because it's so easy for the police, for the law enforcement to go into a, a drug, drug infested area in the black community.  And it's like shooting fish in a barrel.  You just sit, you know, across the street, and you can see the drug transactions, and you go in and you arrest them.  It's just for some reason it's rampant in the black community, and I don't know why.
Story_ID: 219551
Speaker 1: What are your thoughts about sentencing guidelines, like mandatory sentencing guidelines?
Speaker 2: Well, I--we have in Virginia, we have voluntary guidelines, and I think that they help.  They, they help ensure that the system is fair to all people.  And the way it works in Virginia is that in every criminal case, felony case, I get a, a range, a recommendation based on factors, a formulae.  And I have to decide whether I'm gonna sentence within the range or depart.  Whenever I depart from the range, as a judge, I have to just give a reason.  But I'm not required to sentence within the range.  And that's different from the federal system, where you--
Speaker 1: Right, what are, what are your thoughts about that?
Speaker 2: Well--
Speaker 1: Do you agree with mandatory sentencing--
Speaker 2: I, I think it's--
Speaker 1: --guidelines?
Speaker 2: --I think it's good in certain cases.  In some cases--because that's, that reflects the will of the, the--it's a democratic appro--when the general--when the a legislature passes a, a law that says that you shall sentence according to a certain mandated formula, and, and you see that in gun cases; you see that sometimes in drug cases, repeated drug cases; you see, for example, in drinking and driving.  You know, third and fourth offense drinking and driving requires mandatory sentences.  Well, in those kinds of cases, that reflects the will of society.  So, you know, frankly, I don't have any problem with that.  That's, that's not my call.  See, we don't make the law.  Judges don't make the law, so I can't really criticize that.  I will say that I think if I had to--you know, I, I like the latitude of a sentencing guideline that gives, makes it voluntary, that I, that doesn't require me to sentence on a mandatory basis in every case.  But I would say to you that, no, mandatory sentences sometimes are good for the system.
Speaker 1: Well, what about like the disparity in, like, for example, in drug cases, how the sentencing guidelines for, like, crack cocaine, which is often found in an African American community, compared to regular cocaine, like, there, there is a disparity there.  And that's often--
Speaker 2: Well, the disparity comes from the, it's the two, it's the state versus federal system.  Again, that's, I can't really explain why the federal system requires certain mandatory sentences for, let's say crack cocaine, and the states don't.  I mean that's just a matter of legislative preference, so I can't really comment on that.  I--wouldn't know what to say.  I mean that's just the choice of the congress, on one hand, to require certain kinds of sentences for crack cocaine, and most states don't do that.  And that's just a difference between those two legislative bodies.
Story_ID: 219552
Speaker 1: [HistoryMaker] Judge [Wilford] Taylor, tell me a little bit about when you look back over your life, what stands out the most to you and why?
Speaker 2: Well, what stands out is just the, the love, and, and the, and the nurturing, and the encouragement I got from my mama [Zenobia Miller Taylor], and my daddy [Wilford Taylor, Sr.], and my aunts and uncles growing up to in, inspire me to, to do what I'm doing now.  I had no ideas when as growing up as a child that I would be sitting--that I would have been the first African American judge on the [Virginia] Peninsula.  Because, to me, as I was saying earlier, that I just think that when people walk in--when, when you have a system, and government should--reflect the, the community that it serves.  When you have a system of government like we have, it's so important to have a diversity of people that, that manage and, and, do the job of government.  And in this case, third branch of government, the court system.  And I just think it, it inspires and--instills respect for the system when you have diversity.  When people walk in, whether they like my decision or not, they can say well, at least we--might get a fair shake in that system because they have women; they have blacks; they have, you know Hispanics sitting on the bench in the high level, you know, in the, in the high, high levels of the government.  And so I think it was, to me, one, it's a great accomplishment for me, and a great feeling, and a, and a blessing to be able to say that I was able to do this for this community.  And, and I just feel real good about that, you know.  When my days are done, I, you know, I, I will have this to look back on, that, that, yes, I was the, the one that established this diversity here in Hampton [Virginia].
Story_ID: 219553
Speaker 1: Do you think you're a role model?
Speaker 2: Yes, yeah, you have to be when you are, when you're sitting at the top.  And you know, I'm at the highest level of this profession, you know, as a trial court [Hampton Circuit Court, Hampton, Virginia].  I mean you--I'm at the high; I'm at the top.  And, and it's a humbling, more humbling experience than anything else.  But it's, you have--yes, you are a role model.  And you know, I see it all the time.  I mean I'm, I'm invited to schools, and, and I do go.  I think it's important that, that people in my position go out and, and share with the community how we, how we got here.  And I'm--and what I tell him, that I'm standing on the shoulders of Bobby Scott, and Joyce Melvin-Jones, and Sharon Coles-Stewart, and Milton Brown, my law partners, Phil [S.] Walker and, and, and Bill Stone [William Thomas Stone], the first judges in Hampton [Virginia], in Newport [News, Virginia], and, and on the [Virginia] Peninsula.  These are--Thurgood Marshall and, and [HistoryMaker] Oliver [W.] Hill, all of the people that, that were with the Brown v. Board of Education [of Topeka, 1954], all the cases, my mom [Zenobia Miller Taylor] and dad [Wilford Taylor, Sr.], my wife [Linda Taylor].  All these people that are behind me and supporting me, I'm standing on their shoulders.  And so, it's important to, to share that with people, that you don't make it on your own in this society, in this life.  And yes, I'm sitting here.  And there is another, we have another outstanding jurist, Bonnie [L.] Jones, who happens to be a black female-- black female here in Hampton, doing a great job, another role model.  She's in the [Hampton] General District Court [Hampton, Virginia].  But we stand on the shoulders of all these people that came before us.  And, and so I think it's so important that people--and so, yeah, you're automatically a role model because, again, growing up in Aberdeen [Gardens, Hampton, Virginia], did I think I would ever rise to be chief judge?  I, you know, I just passed that to Judge [Christopher W.] Hutton.  You know, we rotate--(unclear)--of the court system in the City of Hampton, administering and responsible for the administration of justice in the City of Hampton.  Did I ever think I was gonna do that as a child?  No, but my mother, and my father, and all my aunts and uncles, and all of the role models, or the people, the adults and, and, and teachers that I had in my community said oh, you can, you can be whatever you want to be.  Well, at that time, I didn't think about doing this (laughter), but now I'm here.  So, yes, you're, you're automatically a role model when you're in a position like this, and, and I feel good about that--
Story_ID: 219554
Speaker 1: What advice do you have for people who are interested in a career in law?
Speaker 2: Well, you have to be a good student.  You have to--the, the key to--first issue is you gotta have good character.  You gotta have integrity that's above reproach, 'cause that's the, that's job number one, to establish yourself with your integrity and your character, 'cause that's what really will carry the day.  I mean you can be brilliant.  You can have all the intelligence, but if you don't have good character, you cannot, you can't be a good lawyer.  So, you gotta have good character, and you have to be a good student.  You have to be able to read, and comprehend what you read, and be able to articulate.  That's the key, 'cause you do a lot of reading and a lot of--you have to comprehend it.  And so, you have to be a good student.  You gotta make good grades.  And third thing is that you need to be involved in the community, because law is a service profession.  It's a calling.  It's a service profession.  It's really not intended to be (laughter) a money-making--and you, you gotta make money.  You gotta earn a living, but the first purpose of law is to serve.  And so you have to have that commitment to serve.  So those are three important things that you got to have.
Story_ID: 219555
Speaker 1: And is there anything that you've already done that you wish you would have done differently, any regrets?
Speaker 2: No.  I, you know, I'm really proud of my [U.S.] military accomplishment.  And although I re--left active duty after three years, but I spent twenty-five years as a reservist and, and achieved the rank of colonel.  But I didn't travel in the military.  I mean I, I have just fond memories.  I mean one--I met such great people.  The [U.S.] Army paid for my law training, you know, along with my wife [Linda Taylor].  You know, she was a schoolteacher, so she helped send me to law school [William & Mary School of Law, Williamsburg, Virginia] (laughter).  But it, it helped a little bit with that little G.I. Bill that came in.  But, really, it was her teaching salary that took care of us during, during law school.  But that just shows you how the Army has been just great to me.  And the one thing I didn't do is I didn't travel.  So we're gonna try to do that when I retire from this bench [Hampton Circuit Court, Hampton, Virginia], spend a little time traveling.  That's about the only thing.  I, I probably would have spent more time with my kids [Patrice D. Taylor and Derek H. Taylor] growing up.  I spent a lot of time doing things to achieve in the law profession.  I'm, I've been honored to be invited back to teach at William & Mary as--adjunct faculty at the law school.  I teach a class called trial advocacy.  And that's a clinic that we teach law students, third-year law students, how to try a case, how to conduct a jury trial.  And, and they keep inviting me to come back and teach it, so it must be going all right.  But, of course, that requires a lot of preparation and a lot of time away, you know, at home, where I'm studying.  And I would say, you know, that's something that I didn't have to do, but I enjoy doing it.  I feel like it's giving back to my profession, and it's also in, influencing the next generation of lawyers.  And I just have a good feeling about that.  But the regret is, of course, I have to take time from family to do these extracurricular things that, that I've been doing, all--my life.
Story_ID: 219556
Speaker 1: And how would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: As, as somebody that really made the [law] profession better, that made the community a little better by setting the example of, of trying to be a fair, a fair jurist, fair judge, to mete out fair dispositions in civil and family and criminal cases, and that, you know, I, that I, I did the jump, and that I measured up to the community expectations of what I should be doing and maybe went a little further, because I think that's something that we--and that's another thing that my parents [Zenobia Miller Taylor and Wilford Taylor, Sr.] taught me, that sometimes you have to really--and when you, when you're black you have to do more than is required and more than is expected of you.  And I try to keep mindful of that.  And, and hopefully they'll say that about me when it's all over, that, that I did make that contribution, that I did raise the bar of performance and quality of the judicial system in Hampton [Virginia] when it was on my watch.  And, and I'm able to do that through, again, teaching in the law school [William & Mary School of Law, Williamsburg, Virginia] and, and the service I've rendered in the [U.S.] military.
Story_ID: 219557
Speaker 1: Okay, this was 1976, one of the happiest days of my life.  This is when Linda [Taylor] and I were married.  This is our wedding picture.
Speaker 2: This is a picture of my--
Speaker 1: I'm sorry, hang on one second, [HistoryMaker] Judge [Wilford] Taylor.  Watch--yeah, okay.
Speaker 2: Well, this had to be (laughter) nearly fifty years ago (laughter).  This was a picture of my mother [Zenobia Miller Taylor] and father [Wilford Taylor, Sr.] with me on their lap.  My sisters [Jill T. Pope and Michelle T. Ferebee] and my brother [James W. Taylor] have been superimposed in this picture.  But the original was just the three of us, my mother, and father, and me.
Speaker 1: So you said, so this one was taken probably 1950--
Speaker 2: I was, I had to be two or three years old.
Speaker 1: --nineteen fifty-eight [1958], so 1952 or--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --or early '50s [1950s].
Speaker 2: Early '50s [1950s].
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: This had to be seven or eight years ago, I guess.  This was the marriage of my sister.
Speaker 1: Okay, so, late '90s [1990s].
Speaker 2: And this is late '90s [1990s].  And this is a family portrait of my mother and father, sisters and brothers, and their family, families.
Speaker 1: And that's my darling daughter.
Speaker 2: Hang on one second, Judge Taylor.  I'm sorry.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  That's all right.  You can talk while I'm focusing.  It's, you can go ahead.
Speaker 2: Okay, go ahead, Judge Taylor.
Speaker 1: She had to be--this is Patrice [D. Taylor].  She had to be--she's twenty-five now, so she had to be, what, four or five in this picture.
Speaker 2: Or maybe two or three.
Speaker 1: Two or three maybe.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Two or three.
Speaker 2: Okay, so--
Speaker 1: She's--I'll say two.
Speaker 2: Two?
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: Okay, so this is probably.
Speaker 1: And she's twenty-five.
Speaker 2: She's twenty-five now?
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: Okay, so--
Speaker 1: Born in '79 [1979], so this would be what?
Speaker 2: Early '80s [1980s].
Speaker 1: Early '80s [1980s].
Speaker 2: Now this one says 1974.
Speaker 1: Yeah, '74 [1974].
Speaker 2: That's when, this is when I was awarded my first medal on active duty at Fort Lee [Virginia].  I was awarded the Army Commendation Medal for my performance as an instructor, financial management instructor.
Speaker 1: Do you know who the other gentleman is in the--
Speaker 2: Yeah, he's the colonel--I don't know his name, but he's the colonel commandant of the Army Logistics Management Center [sic. Army Logistics Management College; Army Logistics University, Fort Lee, Virginia].
Speaker 1: And this is 1974.
Speaker 2: Seventy-four [1974].
Speaker 1: Let me see if his name is on the back.
Speaker 2: Does it say?
Speaker 1: Wilkinson [ph.].
Speaker 2: Yes, Wilkinson, Colonel Wilkins.
Speaker 1: Okay, I'm sorry.  Say it again, judge.
Speaker 2: Colonel Wilkinson.
Speaker 1: Okay, great.
Speaker 2: This is a portrait taken about three years ago, four years ago, I'd say, at church.  This is our church photo with my wife, son [Derek H. Taylor], and daughter, and my mother-in-law, my wife's mother--
Speaker 1: Okay, what's--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Althea Holmes [ph.].
Speaker 1: Althea Holmes, okay, great.  In about what year did you say?
Speaker 2: Three, four years ago.
Speaker 1: Okay, so 2000.
Speaker 2: That's a picture of Patrice in probably sophomore in high school.
Speaker 1: Okay, so, late, mid to late '90s [1990s].
Speaker 2: Right, mid to late '90s [1990s].
Speaker 1: And that's Derek in elementary school, same year, mid, mid to late '90s [1990s].
Speaker 2: Okay.
Story_ID: 219558
Speaker 1: That is a high school [Hampton High School, Hampton, Virginia] portrait of me (laughter).  That would be '70--let's see, '70--I graduated in '78 [1978], so '76 [1976].
Speaker 2: Six--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Sixty, I mean '68 [1968].  So it would be '67 [1967], '66 [1966], '67 [1967], somewhere in that timeframe.
Speaker 2: That picture was taken in '03 [2003] by--I was sworn in by the chief judge, Christopher [W.] Hutton, my high school classmate that I talked about.  He was chief judge of the Hampton Circuit Court [Hampton, Virginia], and that's where he swore me in for this term that I have, my current term.
Speaker 1: And you said 2003, right?
Speaker 2: Two thousand three [2003].
Speaker 1: That was a picture where I was awarded Role Model of the Year by 100 Black Men [of America, Inc.] in 2000.  That's a portrait picture of Linda [Taylor] and me.
Speaker 2: Right, your wife, Linda.
Speaker 1: This is a picture with my mother [Zenobia Miller Taylor] and my wife.
Speaker 2: Your mother's name again?
Speaker 1: Zenobia.  And I was promoted to colonel in the U.S. Army.
Speaker 2: About what year?
Speaker 1: Ninety-five, 1995.
Speaker 2: That's a picture of my daughter [Patrice D. Taylor] now grown.  This happened--they're both AKAs [Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority] at their regional conference in 2002.
Speaker 1: That's a picture of Patrice, my daughter, at age two, one and a half.
Speaker 2: Let me see if there's a date, 1975.  And do you know who the person--
Speaker 1: Yeah, Ollie Brown [ph.], Colonel Brown, Colonel Ollie Brown, who was the now commander of the Army Logistics Management Center [Army Logistics Management College; Army Logistics University, Fort Lee, Virginia].  And this is when I was resigning.  He gave me my second medal for my performance when I resigned from the active [U.S.] Army to go to law school [William & Mary Law School, Williamsburg, Virginia].
Speaker 2: And what year again?
Speaker 1: Nineteen seventy-five [1975].
Speaker 2: Okay, this one says '76 [1976].
Speaker 1: Nineteen seventy-six [1976], that's when I joined the Army Reserve as a lieutenant.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: That's age five or six, yeah, age five, right around that time, because that's--I, I recognize my, my, my cowboy boots.
Speaker 2: Okay, so 1955?
Speaker 1: Fifty-five [1955].
Speaker 2: Same year.  Actually, that would have been two, maybe a year, '54 [1954].  This is when I was a child.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: This is a ca--this is a picture of my son's graduation from boot camp at Fort Benning, Georgia, in, in June of this year, of 2004.
Speaker 1: Okay, and--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: And I'm giving--he's giving me his first salute.
Speaker 1: And what's your son's name again?
Speaker 2: Derek [H. Taylor].
Speaker 1: And here's another picture of--that's--(unclear)--'cause--and he's smiling, and I'm smiling because I'm so proud of him.
Speaker 2: This is a picture taken in 2003 with Chief Justice Leroy [R.] Hassell [Sr.], who's the chief justice of the Supreme Court of Virginia [Richmond, Virginia].  He's, he's our leader.
Speaker 1: This is a picture of me presiding over a meeting of the Sigma Pi Phi Fraternity, the Beta Lambda Boule, which is the organization of Sigma Pi Phi in Hampton Roads [Virginia].
Speaker 2: In about what year?
Speaker 1: This was last year, 2003.
Speaker 2: This is a picture of Linda, my wife, pregnant with our son, Derek.
Speaker 1: About what year?
Speaker 2: That would have been '83 [1983].
Speaker 1: This is a picture of our daughter, Patrice, giving me a gift and congratulating me on my promotion to the circuit--my investiture ceremony in 1995, when I got promoted to the circuit bench.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Story_ID: 219559
Speaker 1: Yeah, that's my law school [William & Mary Law School, Williamsburg, Virginia] graduation day.  It's a picture of my two dear friends.
Speaker 2: Could you go left to right?
Speaker 1: Okay, I'm in the far left; Bryan Milborn [ph.], who is a judge on the Eastern Shore now; and Milton Reid [ph.], who is a executive with Virginia Power--Dominion Virginia Power, the power company of Virginia.
Speaker 2: Okay, about--I'm sorry, what year?
Speaker 1: This was 1978.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: This is a picture of my wife [Linda Taylor], standing next to me, my two sisters, and my brother.  And this was taken around 1980.
Speaker 2: Your sisters and your brother's name?
Speaker 1: There's James [W. Taylor].  Sitting next to him is Jill [T. Pope], my oldest sister, and standing next to my wife, Linda, is Michelle [T. Ferebee], my youngest sister.
Speaker 2: Okay, Taylor, last name--(unclear)--
Speaker 1: All right, Michelle Ferebee, Jill Taylor Pope, and James Taylor.
Speaker 2: This is a picture of Derek [H. Taylor] and Patrice [D. Taylor], our daughter and son, taken four years ago.
Speaker 1: So 2000?
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: That's a picture, that's Derek's picture with his golf attire.  He was a member of the golf team at Kecoughtan High School [Hampton, Virginia].
Speaker 2: Okay, and about what year was that?
Speaker 1: That would be his senior year, nine--three years ago, so that would be--
Speaker 2: Two thousand one [2001].
Speaker 1: Two thousand one [2001].
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: All right, that's the same family picture we took 2000.  It's a family portrait.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: That's my wife.  Doesn't she look beautiful?
Speaker 2: She does.
Speaker 1: Two thousand [2000].
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: Another picture of Lin--my wife and me.
Speaker 2: And I'm sorry, just say the date again, year again.
Speaker 1: Year 2000.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: All right, that's a picture with Bobby Scott at my, was that my fiftieth birthday?  Yeah, fiftieth birthday party, so that would have been four years ago.  I'm fifty-four, so--
Speaker 2: So, 2000.
Speaker 1: Two thousand [2000], that's 2000.
Speaker 2: Yeah, and that's another party at the--another picture at the birthday party with, with my dear friend, childhood friend, Bobby Vassar, who was also on Bobby's staff, Bobby Scott's staff.
Speaker 1: How do you spell Bobby Vassar's name?
Speaker 2: V-A-S-S-A-R.
Speaker 1: This is graduation from Hampton University [Hampton Institute, Hampton, Virginia], May of 1972.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: These are, my staff has showered me with gifts at my fiftieth birthday.  They told me that I was over the hill, nineteen--I mean 2000.  And I'm not.
Speaker 2: (Laughter) That's right, 'cause you're only as old as you feel, right?
Speaker 1: That's right.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: Now, is that you?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, and is this your family?
Speaker 2: No, I don't, I, I--
Speaker 1: (Unclear)--but that's you though, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, that's Dunbar Gardens [Hampton, Virginia].  Yeah, but that's me.  I was probably two years old.
Speaker 1: Okay, so, like 1952.
Speaker 2: Yeah, 1952, two years old.  Look at me.
Speaker 1: Yep, who would have thunk it?
Speaker 2: Well, that's what, that's what I said, I, I had no idea I was gonna be doing this.
Speaker 1: Now, [HistoryMaker] Judge [Wilford] Taylor, this isn't your family, right?
Speaker 2: I don't recognize that one.  I'm down at the bottom, but I don't know who else is in the picture.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: That's with my brother, James.
Speaker 1: About what year you--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: I was five years old.
Speaker 1: Okay, so 1955.
Speaker 2: Fifty-five [1955].
Speaker 1: Okay, and James Taylor.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Which one is you?
Speaker 2: I'm on the left, and James is on the right.
