Story_ID: 296499
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe.  I'm interviewer today for The HistoryMakers, our videographer is Scott Stearns.  Ma'am, could you please state your name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: The name is [HistoryMaker] Barbara L. Thomas, B-A-R-B-A-R-A, Thomas is T-H-O-M-A-S.
Speaker 1: And what does the L stand for?
Speaker 2: Ha, ha that's a secret.  Louise (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well, that's not bad.  There are a lot of Louises out here with middle names.  I mean, that's, most of the Ls seem to stand for Louise.  But what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: Place of birth is Dublin, Georgia, December 5th, 1947.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: Currently I'm president and CEO for the National Black MBA Association.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what is today's date?
Speaker 2: July 21st, 2005.
Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: You're in the conference room, the headquarters of the National Black MBA Association in Chicago, Illinois.
Story_ID: 296500
Speaker 1: Now before we go into depth, there are five People magazine-ish type questions that The HistoryMakers requires that that requires everyone answer.  They, they only require a short answer, these little questions.  The first, the first one is, do you have a favorite food?
Speaker 2: Yes, I do (laughter).  And you wanna know what it is, right?
Speaker 1: Yes, what is it, please, yes?
Speaker 2: Krispy Kreme Doughnuts.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: They originated in Georgia too.
Speaker 2: Oh, really.
Speaker 1: Yes, they did.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: At, Atlanta [Georgia].
Speaker 2: Oh, okay.
Speaker 1: They were introduced to me by 'Driving Miss Daisy.'  Morgan Freeman was picking 'em up for Miss Daisy.
Speaker 2: Oh, all right.
Speaker 1: The local Krispy Kreme.  But, and do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: I do, it's purple.
Speaker 1: All right.  Do you have a favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: No, no, I like all the seasons.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you have a favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: As long as it's near the water, it doesn't matter what city, what state, or what country.  I just enjoy the water.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: One that I use often and that is, I'm blessed.
Story_ID: 296501
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now I'm gonna ask you about your family history.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: I'm gonna ask about your mother's side of the family and your father's [Horace Sanders] side.  We'll start with your mother's side of the family first, all right.  Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: Jerrie Lee, and you want her maiden name as well?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Tart, T-A-R-T, Sanders.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now how do you spell Jerrie Lee?
Speaker 2: J-E-R-R-I-E.
Speaker 1: And, L-E-E--
Speaker 2: L-E-E.
Speaker 1: I think, okay.  T-A-R-T, Tart?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: Sanders.
Speaker 1: Sanders, okay.  And what is her date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: Her place of birth was Milledgeville, Georgia, and she was born January 15th, 1920.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Shares a birthday with Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.].
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now what can you tell us about her side of the family in terms of the ancestors there?  How far back can you trace your ancestors on your mother's side?
Speaker 2: I really wish we could.  As far as we can go back it's just my great-grandfather.
Speaker 1: Do you know much about him and what he was doing?
Speaker 2: No, very, very little.  We know that he was a slave.  But there's very little that we have been able to capture because my mother's family is rather small and so many of them have passed on.  So we were not smart enough to capture a lot of the family history.
Speaker 1: Do you know where, where he was in servitude at and was--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: --was it in Milledgeville or--
Speaker 2: I would, I would think so because the family pretty much clustered in that area.  If not Milledgeville some place within the Georgia area.
Speaker 1: Okay.  But he was, I guess, manumitted in 1863 with everybody?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: (Unclear) with the--
Speaker 2: I would, I would say so.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: All right.  And that's your great-grandfather?
Speaker 2: My great-grandfather.
Speaker 1: What's his name, his name?
Speaker 2: Oh.
Speaker 1: Or if you don't, it's all right.  Or his last name may, maybe.
Speaker 2: It was Tart.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.  Now, are there any stories that are passed down from that side of the family about--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: --about slavery or Reconstruction or just trying to make it in, in Georgia--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: --in those days?
Speaker 2: No, not, not from my mother's side, no.
Speaker 1: Okay.  I mean, any observations that you had of life down there, you know, I mean, or when you observed your grandparents and that sort of thing?
Speaker 2: Well, I guess, you need to know a little bit about my history and you will understand.  So maybe I need to go there first.  I was a, a child, I was one of thirteen children, okay.  And out of the thirteen children I was the one child that was raised by a foster family.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Okay.  So gathering a lot of the back history of my mother and my father was challenging.  At the age of fifteen, I reunited with my original parents.  However, I continued to live with my foster parents [George Monroe and Georgia Monroe] for, until I was about seventeen years old.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well, I'm gonna ask you some of these questions anyway, though you may not know but a lot of people, don't know, so don't feel bad.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: And now I will ask you about your foster parents too because they, they certainly had an influence on you, so.
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.
Speaker 1: They raised you.
Speaker 2: They had a great influence on me, um-hm.
Speaker 1: So, so any, did your mother talk about growing up in, in Milledgeville or talk about going to school and--
Speaker 2: Yeah, my, both of my parents, I was a child of, of not a well, I did not come from a well-educated family.  I am a first generation college grad, okay, in, in my, in my family.  And both of my parents, my mother really she completed I think high school that as far as she did (unclear), and I don't even think she graduated, it was eleventh grade.  Of course, she worked as a, she had a domestic life, she worked as a housekeeper.  That's how she grew up, you know.  Her, she was raised by her grandmother, so she was not raised by her immediate parents and that's what she was taught.  So both of my parents were uneducated.  My father only completed elementary school.
Story_ID: 296502
Speaker 1: Now what was your father's full name?
Speaker 2: Horace Sanders.
Speaker 1: S-A-N-D-E-R-S?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And do you know his date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  He was born April 1st, 1919.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And was he born in Milledgeville [Georgia]?
Speaker 2: No, Fort Valley, Georgia.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Fort Valley, Georgia.  Okay.  Now do you know much about his ancestor, you know, ancestry, I mean, your--
Speaker 2: Well, he came from a very, very large family.  My father was mixed.  His mother died when he was a baby.  And so I never had the opportunity to meet my grandmother on that side.  He was then raised by his aunt, his great-aunt.  But his father, I did finally get to meet my grandfather later in life before he passed away, and my grandfather was East Indian.  And my father's mother was mixed between African American and Caucasian.  She was the child of a slave mother's child.  So it was very different, you know, very, very mixed family.  My--
Speaker 1: Now what's the story about the grandfather who was an East Indian?  I mean, what, what happened?  I mean, how did (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) We could never, we could never figure out how that all happened.  We wanted the opportunity to gather history from him and when we tried to do that he had reached that age where he was just unable to recall many of the things in the past, you know, so that we could capture it.
Speaker 1: Where did he say he was from?  And did, where did people say he was from?
Speaker 2: That's, that's, that has always been a family secret.  That's why we actually tried to gather that information before he passed away.
Speaker 1: Did he speak with an Indian accent?
Speaker 2: Yes, he did.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: He did.
Speaker 1: Okay.  There's a story there some place (laughter).
Speaker 2: There is a story but unfortunately we could never find out what the story was.
Speaker 1: What was his name?
Speaker 2: Hmm, George [ph.].  And with the name as Sanders, the part we do, we did learn was the name was not always Sanders, that along the way, it was originally Saniford [ph.] and somehow in the translation as time went on, you know, passed down it ended up being Sanders but we did learn that the name was Saniford.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now do, do you know, are there any stories handed down from your father's side that you--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --know of?
Speaker 2: And not that I am aware of because again I was not with my parents so I wasn't in the day to day interaction with grandparents or cousins or, you know, so forth to hear a lot of the stories.  As a, as an adult I began to try to explore that area but didn't put a lot of effort into it.  And, and regret not doing it.
Story_ID: 296503
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now well tell us about your, your foster parents.  Who, who were they?
Speaker 2: It was, my foster mother's name was Georgia [Monroe] and her husband's name was George [Monroe] believe it or not, Monroe.  My foster mother when I went to live with them and they took me as a newborn baby into their homes.  They were both rather elderly at the time, as well.  So my foster father only, I, I believe, I was somewhere around the age of around six when he passed away but I just remember him so well, you know, clearly I could see him.  So at that young age there was, you know, I don't recall any history behind them.  They were, for some reason, and my foster mother never shared, they owned quite a bit of real estate and how they came into this real estate was never, you know, I never shared that information but that was their way of supporting, you know, that was their income.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what did they do for a living basically then (unclear)?
Speaker 2: Farm.
Speaker 1: Farm, okay.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.  They were farmers.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So is this true for your, your parents [Horace Sanders and Jerrie Tart Sanders] as well, I mean, well with your mother, you know, (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) My mother did domestic work.
Speaker 1: --domestic work.
Speaker 2: My father, I, I am smiling because my father was very special to me.  Once I discovered my father, he was a very special man.  Although he was not an educated man, he had a lot of common sense and he was an entrepreneur in his own way.  He owned, and back in those days, it was unheard of, of an uneducated person owning anything and he owned several gas stations, several taxi services, so he was, and he taught himself.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So this, this is your birth father, right?
Speaker 2: This is my birth father.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, okay.  Let's see so did you, all right.  So your, your foster parents George and Georgia Monroe, they raised you in what city?
Speaker 2: In Dublin, Georgia (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) In Dublin, Georgia, okay.
Speaker 2: I was in the same city with my parents and my siblings.
Story_ID: 296504
Speaker 1: Now do you have an earliest childhood memory?
Speaker 2: I'm not sure what you mean by that.
Speaker 1: Well first, what's the first thing that you remember ever?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) I have, first thing that comes by my mind when you say that is I can see it so clearly.  As a little girl growing up with my foster parents [George Monroe and Georgia Monroe], I was the only, it wasn't a foster home, it was just a, a couple that was raising me.  And they were very strict.  And they taught me, basically my foster mother taught me how to be a lady.  All of our meals were, the table was set with china and silver and tablecloths.  But I was always isolated from other children.  So I always said I wanted to be a preacher when I grew up because the only books in the house, other than my school books, was the Bible and that is something that we read three and four times a day.  So I would play under the shed, the wash shed, with my wooden dolls that my foster father made for me and my Bible and I would preach to my, my dolls.  And that just was the first image that came to my mind 'cause it was so clear and I was very happy playing with my wooden dolls.
Speaker 1: Well, the image comes to mind of, more of a Methodist kind of church with the, the dolls not really responding (laughter).
Speaker 2: Yeah, well (laughter).
Story_ID: 296505
Speaker 1: Who do you think you take after in your family, your, your, your parents [Horace Sanders and Jerrie Tart Sanders], your foster parents [George Monroe and Georgia Monroe] or is there anybody else that you think you--
Speaker 2: I feel that, and everyone says this, that I take after my father.  My father had an attitude that there was nothing that he could not accomplish.  There was nothing he couldn't do.  And so I think my way of thinking, my style, everything is really, and I look like my father.  So I think I take a lot from my father.  A lot of the teachings, of course, came from my foster parents.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Is there a story about how your parents met that's been passed down?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And well, well see (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And you don't have a lot of history here do you?  (Laughter) See I told you.
Speaker 1: Well, you know, these are stories that can be actually researched even now--
Speaker 2: Hmm.
Speaker 1: --on some level--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --you know, as people.  But, you know, a lot of people don't know that much about their family.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: I mean, you're not the only one that doesn't know a lot about--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --some know less and some know a lot more.
Story_ID: 296506
Speaker 1: Well describe for me where you grew up in, in Dublin [Georgia], I guess.  What--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --what were, what were your surroundings like and what were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up?
Speaker 2: Okay.  Well, in growing up with my, my foster parents [George Monroe and Georgia Monroe], we had a big, you know, big southern wood house.  We had no indoor toilets, I mean, we had the outdoor shed that we went too.  My, parts of my duties was doing the laundry and collecting the eggs from the chicken coop.  And, of course, at a certain time of the year, we would, you know, kill the chickens.  And I think that was always an interesting thing for me was the process that we used to do that for our dinner.  I always had plenty to eat but the thing I think we, we grow up when things happen in our childhood we say well I'll never, I'll make sure that that doesn't happen to me when I grow up, is that I grew up with one dress, which was a dress that you only wore on Sundays to church.  And to school I wore overalls and what they called brogan shoes.  And I walked to school every day.  School from the house that we lived in was about four miles so you walked to school with your bucket lunch and back home.  But I was happy for some reason, I was always a very happy child and maybe because I knew nothing else.  My stomach was always filled, although I didn't have pretty clothes like many of my, my schoolmates did but I was always a very happy child.  My life was always filled with, filled with solid spiritual beliefs.  And I always had this thing that I'm going to be someone special and someone great when I grow up.  And I'm going to make sure that no child every goes without clothes or goes hungry, that's the life that I want to live.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now was church, I guess, church was a big part of growing up.
Speaker 2: Center part of our life.  Center part of our life.  We--
Speaker 1: What church did you attend?
Speaker 2: It was St. Paul A.M.E. Church in Dublin.
Speaker 1: Okay.  How did I know you were Methodist then?
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: Those dolls (unclear).
Speaker 2: My dolls, right.
Speaker 1: Right.  Okay.
Speaker 2: And it was Sunday school and church and then evening worship.  So all day Sunday you spent the time in church.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Was, did you, well did you have a, a strong relationship with the pastor in church?
Speaker 2: No, I didn't.  I think outside of my foster parents my strongest relationship was with, at least two of my teachers.  One that actually sort of adopted me.  That was Miss Lucy Laney Perry.  And she would take me to her house after church on Sundays, and every Sunday I knew I had a brand new pretty dress that she had bought for me.  And she was one of the teachers at our school.  And that was during my, you know, my early years, elementary [Susie Dasher Elementary School, Dublin, Georgia]--
Story_ID: 296507
Speaker 1: Now what's the name of your school?
Speaker 2: The elementary school was Susie Dasher Elementary School [Dublin, Georgia].
Speaker 1: Susie Dasher, now how do spell that?
Speaker 2: S-U-S-I-E.
Speaker 1: S-U-S-I-E.
Speaker 2: Dasher--
Speaker 1: D--
Speaker 2: --D-A-S-H-E-R.
Speaker 1: D-A-S--
Speaker 2: H-E-R.
Speaker 1: --H-E-R, okay.
Speaker 2: Elementary School.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Susie Dasher.
Speaker 2: Right.  And my high school was Oconee High School [Dublin, Georgia].
Speaker 1: And well how do you spell that?
Speaker 2: O-C-O-N-E-E.
Speaker 1: O-C-O--
Speaker 2: N-E-E.
Speaker 1: --N--
Speaker 2: E-E.
Speaker 1: --E-E.
Speaker 2: High School.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.
Speaker 2: And then in high school I was always a little girl so I guess I was a little spoiled brat by many of the teachers because I was always tiny in height and size.  And so I was again adopted by one of the high school teachers that really, really made an influence on my life.  And that was Miss Nellie Coleman who really gave me the strength, the direction, the support to really go out in the world and soar were the things that she taught me.
Speaker 1: Now, how would you describe yourself as a, as a young girl growing up?  I mean, what were you interested in and what would people say about your personality?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) I always wanted to be a, a, a speaker.  So I focused a lot around speeches.  Every opportunity that I had, I, I spoke in high school. So, I guess, that's what people would say about me.  I was a very outspoken person, you know, I always wanted to be the, the leader.  So I think I began to develop leadership skills even in high school with not being aware that I was.  I was also a speed typist so I was one of the few people in high school that managed to get an office job.  And that was again unheard of for a black child in a small town like Dublin [Georgia] but because I was such a speed typist, I was able to, to get a first, the first office job.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: (Unclear).
Speaker 1: I wanna go back to grade school in a second here and--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --did you have a favorite--
Speaker 2: Ooh.
Speaker 1: --subject in grade school?
Speaker 2: I'd say science.  Yeah, I would, I, I would say science was my favorite, was my favorite subject and it was a subject that I excelled in.
Speaker 1: Were there any particular teachers that were like mentors to you or helped develop you?
Speaker 2: Well as I said Miss Nellie Coleman.
Speaker 1: Okay.  She's a--
Speaker 2: And, and Mrs. [Marine] Bacote was the two teachers that truly, truly mentored me.  Let me share something, when you grow up and you have thirteen sisters and brothers and you grow up in a foster, with a foster family and then you hear of many of your sisters and brothers passing away while you are a little girl because today it is only four of us that remain, you develop somewhat of a complex.  You know, you go into yourself.  And once I did get around my sisters and brothers because I was raised in a different environment with a different attitude, I was taught to be a lady, to walk a certain way, to speak a certain way, in the South and during my younger years, my skin was a lot fairer, you're sort of separated.  So I was often told you're nothing and you never will be anything.  And so these teachers taught me that I am somebody and I can be anything I really want to be.  So I started out very young determined to be successful, determined to excel and to, to, to be in my words at that time better than my sisters and brothers.  I'm gonna show them that I can be someone.
Story_ID: 296508
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now was Susie Dasher Elementary School [Dublin, Georgia] named for a local person that--
Speaker 2: Yes, it was named after Miss Susie Dasher who was an African American teacher that was well respected in Dublin [Georgia].  So the school was named after her.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  And Oconee High School [Dublin, Georgia], now what's the story on that name?
Speaker 2: I, it was just on Oconee Street and I think that was just (laughter) how the name came about to be.  I don't know any history behind the name of Oconee.
Speaker 1: It sounds like an Indian [Native American] name--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --you know.  But, okay.  So now in high school, you know, what was your primary interest as a student in high school?
Speaker 2: Getting out of school.  (Laughter) Again, science.  Yeah, that that was always something that intrigued me, you know.  And again that's the one subject that I excelled in.  It was the one area that I put a lot of interest in.  I, for Christmas I got my first little chemistry set and blew a hole in the ceiling of the house experimenting but it was always an area that I enjoyed.  Again, understand that I grew up in a family where, in an environment where I was not allowed to go play with the other kids or participate in school activities, after school I had to go home.  I had to go home, do my chores, you know.  So I didn't, I didn't have an opportunity to really enjoy many of the extracurricular activities that many of my classmates could enjoy.  I did have an opportunity to go to the prom and my dad [Horace Sanders] took me.
Speaker 1: Now that's unusual.
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Yes.  But he wouldn't, they wouldn't allow me to go with the young man.  The young man I had met at the school 'cause our prom was held in the school auditorium but my father took me there and he brought me back home.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So he just, he kind of chaperoned you to the--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --prom and, and stood back, back and (laughter)--
Speaker 2: Yes (laughter).
Speaker 1: I see.
Speaker 2: So I was a well-protected child.
Speaker 1: Yeah, did you feel well protected at the time or did you feel--
Speaker 2: I was embarrassed (laughter) 'cause no one else's parent did that but mine, you know.
Speaker 1: Let's see did, did he, did it harken back to I think it, his [East] Indian roots at all?
Speaker 2: I, I don't know.  It was just, just what he believed in.  And it could be because my sister at the time had gotten pregnant before graduating from high school and I guess the thing was I don't want that to happen to another one of my children.  I, I, you know, the, the old southern roots.  So I was, I was well cared for and well protected in, in their eyesight.
Story_ID: 296509
Speaker 1: Well we were talking about high school--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --I know that.  We were talking about high school and what, how many students were at Oconee High School [Dublin, Georgia]?
Speaker 2: Ooh, ooh.  You would ask me a magic question like that, you know (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Well it's not a--
Speaker 2: --when you get my age you forget those things.
Speaker 1: --it's not an exact question but just kind of in the ballpark.  And was it, is it a all, all black high school or was it--
Speaker 2: Oh, absolutely.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: In those days, you know, schools were, you know, not integrated.  It was, you know, we, we had our own schools, our own high schools, our own elementary schools and our own neighborhood, you know.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I would say at Oconee, gee, two or three hundred.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, it was a lot of us.
Speaker 1: All right.  So every year about how many would graduate do you think?
Speaker 2: Oh, in those days every one graduated.  The teachers made absolutely sure, you know, that you did what you had to do.  And, and it wasn't just the teachers, it was at home.  I mean, I, I remember acting up in school and I got beat by the principal and by the time I arrived home, my foster mother [Georgia Monroe] already knew so she was waiting at the door with a switch.  So (laughter) I got another one.  So you, you know, you didn't have, any one in those days, if they did not graduate they dropped out as getting pregnant, you know, or family pulling them out of school for family reasons but if you were in school, they made sure that you met all the criteria.  So you had pretty much every one graduating in the class.
Speaker 1: Yep, they had a very low drop out.
Speaker 2: Very low, very low.
Speaker 1: People didn't feel like they were angry to be in school or--
Speaker 2: Um-hm (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (simultaneous) Like that?
Speaker 2: --no, no.  I mean, you had more fun in school than you did well, (laughter) than you did any other time.  That was the place to be was in school.
Speaker 1: And people were working otherwise, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: My, my--
Speaker 2: If you weren't in school, you were working.  I mean, the summers I worked in the cotton field, I picked cotton to make my money for my school clothes or whatever I needed.  And, you know, at a nickel is a hundred pounds, I had to pick a lot of cotton but I did.  And I, and I had fun in the cotton field because you were with your friends and you worked but you played as well.
Speaker 1: That's something though, even in those days a nickel for a hundred (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Nickel for a hundred pounds of cotton.
Speaker 1: --pounds of cotton, that's--
Speaker 2: Yes.  And then you figure out ways can put a brick in the sack to (laughter) get the weight up and things like that but the, the master always caught us so we didn't, we didn't get away with too much there.
Speaker 1: Yeah, that's something.
Speaker 2: But that's what we did in the, in the summer, we worked.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And so the black people in, in, in Dublin [Georgia] all lived in the same area or, or where you--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: --it was kind, kind of a rural area kind of scattered?
Speaker 2: No, no there was, I lived in the city, (laughter) okay.  And then there was the rural area.  And, and the country kids went to school out in the country.  Although we had a small farm, my foster mother, we lived not in the more upscale area but my parents [Horace Sanders and Jerrie Tart Sanders] did.  My parents lived in an area called Scottsdale [ph.] and that's where the more well-to-do African Americans lived was in the Scottsdale area.  And, and then the real farmers lived out in the country in what we called Buckeye [Georgia].  But I lived sort of in the city area.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And so we all went to the same school.
Speaker 1: Now were you a good student in school?
Speaker 2: I'd say I was a, I was an average student, you know.  I wasn't outstanding but I passed, I had no choice but to pass everything.  And Cs were not accepted at my house.  You know, it was an A or a B.  And you had to explain the B, you know.  So I would say that I was, I was an average student.
Speaker 1: And what, what was your favorite subject?
Speaker 2: Science.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Science always (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It was favorite, all the way that was a, and, and I don't know how I ended up in business and finance but I did.
Speaker 1: What aspect of science fascinated you or, or, or held your interest?
Speaker 2: Well, I was always interested in what made things tick.  What was, what, what, you know, I, I was always dissecting frogs and catching butterflies.  And, and, I guess, maybe because I would watch my foster mother, you know, with the chickens, like I keep going back to the chicken story and it just amazed me of how did that egg come out of that chicken to create another and so that always, I was always having inquiring mind about that.  So that was just an area that always interested me.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Was the science teacher a favorite of yours?
Speaker 2: Yes, she was, she was.
Speaker 1: Okay.  What was her name?
Speaker 2: Miss [Marine] Bacote.
Speaker 1: I'm sorry, how do you spell that?
Speaker 2: B-A-C-O-A-T-E [sic.], I believe, that's how she spelled it.  She is one of the last of our high school teachers that is still alive.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I think she's a little over a hundred right now.
Story_ID: 296510
Speaker 1: Did you ever run for class office or anything like that or--
Speaker 2: No, I wasn't allowed to do that.
Speaker 1: You weren't allowed--
Speaker 2: No--
Speaker 1: --by your--
Speaker 2: --my, my, my family didn't, you know.  I had to, I couldn't because if you were a class officer you had responsibilities, you have to stay after school, you know, things you had to do and I couldn't do that, I had to go home.  One year I did make Miss Slag [ph.] and that that was a group from the library team and that's 'cause they picked my name out of a hat so I got to ride in the homecoming float, you know.  But no I had to go home and, I had to be home (laughter) within a short period of time after school, I was timed.  So I didn't--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --participate in a lot of things.
Speaker 1: Now what was the name of the, you, you, you became Miss what?
Speaker 2: Miss Slag.
Speaker 1: Slag?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: That doesn't sound very glamorous but--
Speaker 2: Oh, oh, no it was glamorous.  At homecoming time you had the homecoming queen and then you had representations from all the various clubs.  The Slag Club [ph.] was the library club so I was a, you know, a geek, what could I tell you.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: (Unclear).
Speaker 1: Now what does Slag, does Slag stand for something or--
Speaker 2: It did but I tell you I can't remember what it was.  But when I wasn't in class I was in the library.  So that's kind of how I got to be Miss Slag.  As I said it was who are the girls that, and it had to be a girl, you know, that was a part of the library, that was always there either reading or helping, you know, keep the books up, or doing little things in the library, and my, you know, my, during my break time in school [Oconee High School, Dublin, Georgia].  And so I was there and I was one of the ones selected and the names went in the hat and out came my name so I was Miss Slag.  But it was glamorous, I had a beautiful float and a pretty dress.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: Now you graduated in '65 [1965], was it '65 [1965] or--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 296511
Speaker 1: Okay.  And when you, well, in that part of Georgia was there any civil rights activity going on there?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, I was a naughty little girl (laughter).  I did have one experience and it was really an accident.  And Georgia gets very, very hot and you walk every place.  I mean, you know, teenagers didn't drive their parents' cars, you, you walked.  And we were not allowed to go into any of the white restaurants.  And in the department stores there is a water fountain and it would say what, white and colored.  But our water was always hot and it would never come up to high but the white fountains water was always high and icy cold.
Speaker 1: In the cooler--
Speaker 2: And, yeah.
Speaker 1: --or water cooler.
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.  And so one day we were cutting through the department store, Belk's Department Store on our way home and it was hot and I wanted a drink of water and I just figured no one was watching so I thought I'd steal some water from the white fountain and next thing I know the sheriff had me by the shoulders (laughter).
Speaker 1: The, the sheriff himself?
Speaker 2: The sheriff, right.  He just happened to be in the, in the store.  Like, I really got quite a lashing.  But because he knew my father [Horace Sanders] I didn't get thrown in jail but I probably would have.  So I thought since I got away with that I could get away with something else.  So then there was, we used to have a drugstore and it had a soda fountain but we weren't allowed, I mean, we could go in and order if we wanted to but you had to stand over in the back, you weren't allowed to sit.  And I decided one day to sit down.  Well, that was the time I got taken down to the jail house.  I didn't get locked up but it frightened me enough to know that I dare not do those things again.  But there was a lot of picketing, you know, a lot of protesting and it started back in the '60s [1960s].
Speaker 1: Now did you keep up--
Speaker 2: In Dublin [Georgia].
Speaker 1: --with civil rights activity?
Speaker 2: Yeah, you know, as far as reading and what was going on.  And I was, of course, very anxious to, you know, to participate in it but, you know.  You didn't have as much going on in Dublin as you did in Atlanta [Georgia] or Macon [Georgia], the larger cities that surrounded us, you know.  But our voices were, their voices were heard, you know.  But my parents and foster parents [George Monroe and Georgia Monroe], you know, at that time I was back with my parents, didn't allow us to participate, you know.
Story_ID: 296512
Speaker 1: Was television a big part of growing up at all?
Speaker 2: We had the first television in, on our street so that was an exciting thing for us.  Everyone would come to our house and got to watch television on, on the particular street.
Speaker 1: What were your favorite shows in those days?
Speaker 2: Well it was back in the soap opera, I'm trying to remember what soap opera.  I think it was '[The] Edge of Night.'  'Edge of Night' and I don't know, was it 'Days of Our Lives' or 'As the World Turns', that's what it was, 'Edge of Night' and 'As the World Turns.'  We would run home from school to watch the soap operas.  You know, that was it.  And you were only allowed to watch so much television anyway and it didn't stay on all night so, you know, but.
Story_ID: 296513
Speaker 1: Was, was Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] a big figure in, when you were growing up?
Speaker 2: Not, not really, not really.  'Cause remember, I mean, we knew of him and what he was doing but because I didn't live in Atlanta [Georgia] and really wasn't in the midst of it, you would read about it and you would watch what was going on, and it was someone that I had always wanted to meet, you know, but never had the opportunity.  I think I became much more, well I know I became much more involved when I left Dublin [Georgia] and moved to New York [New York].  And that's when life started to change differently at that point in time.
Speaker 1: Now when you were a senior in high school [Oconee High School, Dublin, Georgia] did you, did you envision yourself going to college at that point or did you, what, what--
Speaker 2: Yes--
Speaker 1: --what did you think you were gonna do?
Speaker 2: --I did because it was like something you were supposed to do.  And when I say that if you grew up in what I described as the country, the Buckeye [Georgia] area, unless you were a child of a school teacher or someone like that, you saw your future as going back to the farm, you know, helping the family with the farm.  But we, as we said, we grew up in the city, so all of our friends and everyone their plans was to go on to college, and clearly it was go to Atlanta, you know, to Morris Brown [College, Atlanta, Georgia] or Spelman [College, Atlanta, Georgia] or Clark Atlanta [Atlanta University and Clark University; Clark Atlanta University, Atlanta, Georgia] to school.  So I always knew that I would.  Now my life turned around a bit because at that time I was living, I had moved in with my, my biological parents and my mother [Jerrie Tart Sanders] and father [Horace Sanders] separated.  And my mother left Dublin and went to New York to live with her sister.  And my mother sent for me to come to New York [New York].  So I didn't just jump right into school because then things were different, it was how would, how would I pay for school, you know.  So I worked for a while.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: In New York (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay.  Okay.  So you joined your mother in New York and found work there.
Speaker 2: I joined my mother in New York, right.
Speaker 1: Where, where was she living in New York?
Speaker 2: She was living in Harlem [New York, New York] on 148th Street and, is it 7th Avenue [Adam Clayton Powell Jr. Boulevard], god, (laughter) I remember that huh, with my aunt.
Story_ID: 296514
Speaker 1: All right.  Now how did you like New York [New York], I mean, were you (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I loved it.  (Laughter) Oh, god, I got on the Greyhound bus with my shoe box with my pound cake and my fried chicken and I was going to the big city (laughter).  And that was my first experience so I, I was really excited.
Speaker 1: That sounds like Stevie Wonder's 'Living for the City.'
Speaker 2: (Laughter) My kids hear me tell this story now they would not believe it but it was, it was an exciting time to go to the big city.  And I had a lot to learn and learn quickly, you know, because growing up in Dublin [Georgia] no one bothered you, you could walk the streets at any hour, you know, but then I had to learn that living in the city life was different, a lot different.  And I had never lived in an apartment building, had never seen tall buildings, so and my aunt lived in an apartment building in, in Harlem [New York, New York].
Speaker 1: So you're saying it was more exciting than intimidating for you?
Speaker 2: Yes.  I guess maybe I was too stupid to be afraid but I wasn't, you know.
Speaker 1: Was, was New York what you expected it to be or was it different?
Speaker 2: I could not even, it was, it was different.  It was a lot more than what I expected 'cause you just look at it, pictures in a book but then when you walk around and see all the people and the tall buildings, it just, it made a difference.  But for me I saw opportunity.  That was when I was sure, I was absolutely sure I was going to make it--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --was once I arrived in New York.
Speaker 1: What, what was it, what encouraging signs did you see, I mean, see, I mean, anything in specific that really encouraged you?
Speaker 2: Well, I guess, because one of the things I knew I had to do was to get a job.  And I, my first job in New York was with, was in Harlem with a group called HARYOU-ACT [Harlem Youth Opportunities Unlimited - Associated Community Teams, New York, New York].  And it was a program funded by the government where you helped all of the inner city kids.  And I again had very, very strong administrative skills.  Remember I was a speed typist in high school [Oconee High School, Dublin, Georgia] so I was very good at that and I was able to land a job immediately.  And I felt a good feeling about what we were doing, the impact that we were having on the lives of those kids to go out into the inner city community and to see children, again, I had this thing about clothes, that didn't have clothes and really didn't understand, and to teach them the ways to learn how to clean their homes and just basic things, it said to me this is what I wanna do, this is my life's mission is to make a difference in the lives of every person that I touch and I come in contact with and I know that God has a plan.  So I just said I gotta follow that plan whatever it is.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now that, the HARYOU-ACT was really like one of these landmark kind of programs--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --in the history of, in the, in, in the, of the black community of the United States see.
Speaker 2: Um-hm, um-hm.
Speaker 1: I think, John Henrik Clarke worked in HARYOU-ACT and--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.  It was--
Speaker 1: --other people we have interviewed--
Speaker 2: --a lot of us, yeah, that worked there.  And then that program had really just started up when I (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) artists--
Speaker 2: --you know.
Speaker 1: --and actors and stuff were (unclear)--
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, worked for HARYOU-ACT.
Speaker 1: --Janet (unclear) one and there's a lot of people we interviewed really--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --in Los Angeles [California] that were a part of it.
Speaker 2: Yeah, it was a great, it was a great program.  It was really a wonderful--
Speaker 1: Lou Gossett [HistoryMaker Louis Cameron Gossett, Jr.], I think was part of that at one time and, you know.
Speaker 2: And I, I, I worked alongside probably many of those people and they were just like me, (laughter) you know, just out there trying to, to make a few dollars and, and to make a difference.
Speaker 1: So you did mostly administrative things?
Speaker 2: I, I started out doing administrative work but then I had the opportunity to get in the field and that's what I liked the most was, was working on, on the community projects, you know.  That's, that's the part I, I enjoyed the most.  And it made me feel like I was grownup, you know.  I was kind of on my own and kind of growing up at that time.  And that's actually where I met my husband, (laughter) was in the HARYOU-ACT program.
Story_ID: 296515
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well, tell us about that, what, what, what happened, I mean--
Speaker 2: Well, he was just a country boy from South Carolina (laughter) just like I was and was working in the program as well.  And I always wanted, I felt that until I got married I could never really be on my own, have my own place and be grown as you can say, although, you know, age meant nothing if you were still living with your parents and I was still living with my mother [Jerrie Tart Sanders].  And I missed my father [Horace Sanders] a lot and so he asked me to marry him and I said sure after dating for about four months (laughter).  And we had nothing, we struggled.  And at that time I, I had started to school, the money that I was, I was making, you know, I was putting toward helping me to, to go to school.
Speaker 1: Now where did you, did, did you go to school at first (unclear)?
Speaker 2: I actually started out at City College in New York [The City College of New York, New York, New York].  I left there and I went to Bernard Baruch [Bernard M. Baruch College of the City University of New York, New York, New York].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Got a few more dollars so I could (laughter) move on up.  So, I think, I know that a lot of good things came out of my marriage.  And one of the things, I mean, other than my children that brings great joy to me is that I wanted my father to give me away and I wasn't gonna settle for anything else.  So to do that my father had to come to New York [New York] from Dublin [Georgia], and he did.  And as a result of that my parents reunited.  And to me--
Speaker 1: Now that's a story that's--
Speaker 2: --that was, you know, the most important thing of all.  And my mother say now as a result of that before my father died, and my father died three years ago, that those were the happiest days of her life, from the time that they reunited and then they moved back to Dublin, not immediately, but years later when they retired to, to just enjoy life together.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So that's a good memory.
Speaker 1: Yeah, it is that's something that a lot of children wish they could accomplish--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --secretly or whatever but did you have any designs to, I mean, had you planned that, did you think that might happen if you got 'em together?
Speaker 2: I, I hadn't, I hadn't thought about it but once I saw my father immediately I wanted them together.  And I probably encouraged it and did a few things, throw a few temper tantrums, as I often did to get my way, and it brought them closer together.  After my wedding he stayed for a week or two and then he went back and I didn't realize that they were still communicating, next thing I know, he was moving to New York and it was great.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It was great.
Speaker 1: All right.  So, so did you get married in '65 [1965] as well, was it (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, no--
Speaker 1: --that's a--
Speaker 2: --we got married in, I got married in '60 [1960], hmm, when did I get married?  (Laughter) Isn't that scary?
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you got there in '65 [1965] and you started working for HARYOU-ACT [Harlem Youth Opportunities Unlimited - Associated Community Teams, New York, New York] at--
Speaker 2: Yeah, '66 [1966], '67 [1967]--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --I got married in '67 [1967].
Speaker 1: Sixty-seven [1967]?
Speaker 2: Sixty-seven [1967], I think, it was, ooh.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yes, because I had my first daughter in '68 [1968], okay, yes.  I got married--
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: --in '67 [1967].
Story_ID: 296516
Speaker 1: So you started going to City College [The City College of New York, New York, New York] was, was, was it that year or--
Speaker 2: No, I started at City College I think it was in sixty--'cause I was going part time--'66 [1966], sixty--'66 [1966], '67 [1967], yeah, around that time.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, 'cause then I went on over to Baruch [Bernard M. Baruch College of the City University of New York, New York, New York] in '68 [1968].
Speaker 1: Now what were you majoring in in college or what, what were you focusing on?
Speaker 2: Finance.  Yeah, I, that that ended up being what I did for a living for, for many, many years was--
Speaker 1: Now why the shift in, emphasis from science to finance?
Speaker 2: Darn if I know (laughter).  I don't know what happened.  I guess, it's something that just, I, well there, there was a similarity there if you think about it, you know.  Math is a science if you think about it.  But I don't know it was just something.  I had said when I started college I wanted to be a doctor and it got a little rough.  So I found that math came easy, for some reason to me it was like a second nature.  And so that's the road that I pursued.  And then through my career it was, that's what I focused on up until this particular position as a CEO, I was a CFO for many, many different organizations.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, so you finished your, your degree in finance at Columbia [University, New York, New York]?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: And--
Speaker 2: Right, my, my, I got my master's [degree] from Columbia.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: My, my undergrad from Baruch.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And my grad from Columbia.  And I finished at Columbia in '73 [1973].
Speaker 1: Okay.  So when did you get your undergrad from Baruch?
Speaker 2: I got my undergrad from Baruch, let's see that was in '68 [1968], '69 [1969], well I had to go back, some other studies so '70 [1970], 1970.
Speaker 1: Okay.  At Columbia University.  Okay.  So was, was this a M.B.A.?
Speaker 2: M.B.A.
Speaker 1: M.B.A. from Columbia in 1970--
Speaker 2: Three [1973].
Speaker 1: Three [1973].  Okay.  All right.  Those, I mean, I think for some reason a lot of people, I, I think, you know, black people, I, was there, would I be telling the truth if I said there was a wave of black people getting M.B.A.s for the first time in, in the early '70s [1970s]?
Speaker 2: Yeah, that was really, I'd say '68 [1968], '69 [1969] is, more like '69 [1969] is when the wave really started, the doors started to open up more.  I mean, you had, you know, those, the forefathers that was before us, but, yeah, the wave started to open up in the late '60s [1960s] where you started to see more--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --African Americans get, going for their M.B.A. degree--
Story_ID: 296517
Speaker 1: It seemed to be just having coming along around, come along the same period of time a lot of people I know did the same thing.
Speaker 2: Um-hm, um-hm.  Well, I mean, I, I was just very, very fortunate because when I left HARYOU-ACT [Harlem Youth Opportunities Unlimited - Associated Community Teams, New York, New York] I went, I landed a secretarial job working for CBS Television, Black Rock on 51st Street [sic. 52nd Street].  And so -
Speaker 1: So what, what year was that, you started at CBS?
Speaker 2: I started at CBS in 1960, let me see, I got married, oh, wait a minute, '67 [1967], yeah.  I started in '67 [1967].  Darn, yeah that's right, CBS in 1967.
Speaker 1: Okay.  What, what did you do at C, at CBS?
Speaker 2: Well, I started out as a, a clerk in the radio division at CBS.  And what I did is I typed checks all day long.  I just typed all of their checks.  It was a manual thing.  And that's how I started out.  And my whole thing was just to get money so I could go to school.  And back at that time companies were helping people, you know, with their education, people that they felt had some potential so I did get some education, a lot of educational support, financial support from CBS and that's really how I got through school.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And then I just started to move up the ranks within the company.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, so how, how many years did you work with CBS?
Speaker 2: Twenty-five years (laughter).  I have my gold Tiffany clock (laughter).
Speaker 1: So you, so you were doing, you know, these typing checks and then began (unclear)--
Speaker 2: Oh, not, not for twenty-five years.
Speaker 1: Yeah, but you--
Speaker 2: I did--
Speaker 1: --but you rose in the, what, what are some of the milestones of those twenty-five years?
Speaker 2: Oh, god, that was, it was a, really it was phenomenal.  I was very blessed there because I started out in the radio division doing the checks.  And then an opportunity opened up in the news division.  And again, it was a administrative position and I was processing expense reports for news reporters.  And in doing that I was one that was always would chat with anyone that was around to learn what was going on.  And then I managed to get evening jobs working in the newsroom, you know, as well.  Just delivering packages, doing whatever they needed me to do, especially around election time.  It was always really, really busy then so we got extra work there.  And I was noticed by a gentleman [Donald Bryan (ph.)] that I didn't realize that was watching me with how I worked and I was one of those that was raised to, you know, you do your job and you do it well.  And I left and then an opportunity opened up in television, the television division.  And so I shifted over to television where I managed what we called back in those days, commercial inserts, cut-ins.  And I managed all of the commercial inserts for all of the CBS affiliate stations.
Speaker 1: Now a cut-in would be different from a regular commercial?
Speaker 2: A regular commercial.
Speaker 1: And a (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) A cut-in is if you are running a network program and you have network commercials but it's running in Chicago [Illinois], you cut-in and show a local Chicago commercial and that's called a cut-in or a commercial insert.  And you were only allowed to do certain types of commercials, at that time it was very strict, in a certain amount of time.  And CBS had over six hundred affiliates at that time so I had to monitor and manage all of the commercial inserts for the CBS affiliates, you know.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And that was, that was the door that started to open for me once I did that and I did that job well, again, it was noticed so that I was moved to a directorship position in finance, managing the television finance division.  And then I went on to CBS School of Management [New York, New York].  I was the first African American woman to finish the CBS School of Management.  And there I went on to senior, yeah, senior vice president is when I retired.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 296518
Speaker 1: Well tell us about the CBS School of Management [New York, New York].  You know, is CBS the only network to have its own school of management?
Speaker 2: I, I don't know.  I don't know if other networks had it.  But I, I, I remember us going to the old Ford mansion up in upstate New York, I can't even remember where, but I was just very surprised that I was selected and again it was the same gentleman Donald Bryan [ph.] who had watched me.  And he basically said to me that he saw a lot of potential in me and he was going to help me, you know, learn the ropes and make my way up the ladder.  And I received a memo saying that I had been selected to go to the CBS School of Management, which was a total shock because first of all I was black, and to me that was a very prestigious place and you didn't, you know, you didn't get to go in there.  But what they did is they selected people that they felt had potential and the company wanted to invest in because they saw you as a long term employee that they could truly see the return on their investment.  CBS School of Management basically taught you how to dress, how to speak, which pieces of silverware to use when you're out on a client meeting, you know.  We did simulations, but with the simulations then back, if you were the president of CBS, you know, how would you run this company.  So you had a full day where you were the president.  These are things people are doing now that CBS was doing way back, you know, in the '60s [1960s].  It, I guess, in its, one could say that it brainwashed you because I went out and bought more pinstripe, black and blue pinstriped suits than I ever knew in my life because that was what, that was the dress.  But it really prepared you to be ready to step out and meet with their key clients and negotiate business for the company.  So that's really what it was all about, preparing you for that.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, so an emphasis on style and culture and how to--
Speaker 2: Exactly.  Exactly.  But very few people were selected to attend this, go through this.  So I was very, very privileged to have had that opportunity.  And it was a, you know, it was much, much more intense and I'm sort of giving you the, the high level of it but there was a lot of intense time.  We were up very early in the morning, you know, to very late at night going through trainings that they had provided for us.
Speaker 1: How long did it last?
Speaker 2: I think it was about two and a half weeks of--
Speaker 1: And--
Speaker 2: --just intense.  And you didn't go home to your family.
Speaker 1: And about what, what year was this (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That's what I'm trying to remember.  I believe, if I remember it was in 1973, I have to look at my, my award, my, that I received from them.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: My diploma.
Story_ID: 296519
Speaker 1: You are elevated then to a senior vice president pos-?
Speaker 2: Before I left, yeah.  I, I was senior, now not when I was at CBS School of Management [New York, New York], I was still--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --you know, working my way up.  But when I finally left CBS I had moved from New York [New York] to Boston [Massachusetts], that same gentleman [Donald Bryan (ph.)] once again came to me and said to me we want you to move to Boston, that's how I got to Boston, to run the finances of our station in Boston.  And my response was that I don't know the first thing about running a radio station.  And his answer to me was I will teach you everything you need to know, just let me know if you accept the opportunity.  Hi, absolutely, (laughter) you know, I will take on anything.  And so I accepted that opportunity and moved to Boston and it was quite an experience for me because I didn't realize at the time that I really was going to examine what was going on there.  And we ended up selling one of the stations and revamping and downsizing and reengineering through all of that and I was the key person that they wanted to really manage that whole process.  I actually built a brand new radio station from ground up that was part of my work that I did there.  So I was senior vice president of finance for radio when I left.  I started in radio, went through news, television, and, and actually ended up retiring from the radio division.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  Now, when did you retire?
Speaker 2: In 1980, '89 [1989].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It was 1989 [1989].
Speaker 1: All right.  Now what were your plans when you retired?  What, you know--
Speaker 2: Well, the reason why I decided to, to leave at that time, things were, you know, getting a little tight financially for the, for the television, you know, for, for the company.  And a lot of focus was on the bottom line, people were being laid off or you were given early retirement opportunities.  And I decided at that time that I really wanted to leave a legacy.  That I, I, I, my saying was if I died tomorrow, what would they say about me, what have I done, and all I've done was work for a big company and make money for them.  So I decided that I was gonna take a year off, rest, and then I wanted to work in the community.  I wanted to go back because the impact of HARYOU-ACT [Harlem Youth Opportunities Unlimited - Associated Community Teams, New York, New York], stayed on my heart all those years.  And I didn't get that year's rest because at the time, I don't know if you're familiar with the New England Hospital for Women and Children known as Dimock Community Health Center [Complex, Boston, Massachusetts] was a, a very large and important medical facility in the community in Boston, in the Dorchester [Boston, Massachusetts] community, was about to go into receivership.  I had gained a reputation through the years at CBS as a financial turnaround specialist, you got a problem, give it to me financially and I'll help you restore it.  And so I was asked to come and help Dimock Community Center out, to help pull them out of receivership and turn them around financially.  And I, and it was a community work, it was what I wanted to do anyway.  And so I took on the task at the time.  And we were very successful by the way.  It is just a phenomenal facility today that is servicing just thousands and thousands of people.  And after completing that task I decided that's what I wanted to do.  So then I went to another health center to help them with this, a similar type project.  In doing that, of course, I was volunteering my time, working with the National Black MBA Association, with the local chapters.  I volunteered there, working with the chapter locally and then going on to volunteer to work at the national conferences just as a volunteer.  And I continued my work.  When, my last place I worked before I came to Chicago [Illinois] was for the YWCA in Boston.  And again, chief financial officer there.  And then I was asked to come to Chicago to take on the task of the chief financial officer for the National Black MBA Association.  So I came to Chicago in May of 2001.
Story_ID: 296520
Speaker 1: Well tell us, what, how the, of course, the National Black MBA Association came out of a era when black professionals were forming, closing ranks around black organizations, Association of Black Psychologists and--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --African Heritage Studies Association, all of, you know, black, National Black Police Association.  Tell us about the formation of the National Black MBA Association and why it was formed in the first place?
Speaker 2: Well, we were talking about the time when African Americans were really pursuing their M.B.A. degree, it started to really branch out.  It was back in 1968 when a group of, of African Americans that were working toward their M.B.A. degree, to begin to talk about the fact that there were very few of them.  And that networking and that camaraderie among them was really important to help them through the times because you didn't see a lot of us, you know, in school at that time pursuing a master's degree.  So in, finally in '69 [1969], I think it was late '68 [1968] they started to talk about what is it, you know, we need to do.  And then in '69 [1969] they formed a group and I think it was a group of about sixteen people at the University of Chicago here in Chicago [Illinois], a group that says we need to start our own, you know, organization.  And, you know, and the purpose of it was to build the pipeline, was to start to develop the pipeline and ways that they could continue to encourage other African Americans to pursue this degree and to build a network so you had a network of, of M.B.A. America, African Americans to be there to support each other because now as you go into corporate America with these degrees it's not easy.  And so they formed the National Black MBA Association in 1970.  That's when the association started.  And it started as I said with a group of sixteen, had no office space or anything, all volunteers, and it just began to grow from that point forward.  The pipeline filled, the organization just began to flourish.  And I believe in the 1980s we moved to this location and we have been here since, this is the first headquarters--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --for the association.
Story_ID: 296521
Speaker 1: What kinds of activities does the association engage in?
Speaker 2: Well, our main focus, if you would ask someone today, and we are working on changing that, when you think of the National Black MBA Association what first comes to your mind and that would be our national conference because we host the largest national conference in the nation for African Americans.  So our conference is focused on professional development.  We have the largest career exposition that exists.  Currently we have over 370 of the Fortune 500 companies that are on our career fair floor because they know there they can find the best and the brightest employers, employees, I should say, to work with their companies.  We not only provide the career opportunities and the professional development but the networking opportunities, the chance to network.  It's almost like old home week when you see people you have not seen for many years.  But many of them that are successful we bring back to speak at our conference or participate in our conference, like the Ken Chenaults and the Dick Parsons [HistoryMaker Richard Parsons] of the world, that come back, so you have a chance to chat with them, to be with them, to network with them, and to learn from them of their successes.  And then we have the business schools that are there to recruit as well.  So there is a lot that goes on at that conference and that is the main or has been the main focus of the organization.  I took on, I served as interim CEO for a while, and took on the helm of finally president and CEO a year ago.  So May of, where are we 2005?  In May of 2004 I was appointed president and CEO.  And clearly I knew then that we had to change the focus.  We really had to enhance our image and the brand of the organization because so many people will say I never heard of the National Black MBA Association, it was sort of the best kept secret.
Speaker 1: They think it's the NBA [National Basketball Association].
Speaker 2: Huh?
Speaker 1: Or think it's the (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) You think of N-B-A--
Speaker 1: (Unclear)
Speaker 2: --instead of M.B.A.  And so we have now launched many new programs, we have thirty-nine track, chapters across the country, several interest groups that are there.  At one point we had a presence in the UK [United Kingdom].  We have launched new products, we have year-round products, year-round employment opportunities, an employment database that is unbelievable.  So there are a lot of programs.  I think the most, the program that brings the greatest joy to my heart, again it goes back to my roots, is our Leaders of Tomorrow program, which is the high school program, where we don't focus on those smart kids, we focus on those students that have C and C minus averages that have potential.  And we work with them, we mentor them, we tutor them, and then we provide them with scholarships to send them on to school and we have so many success stories as a result of the work that we're doing here.
Speaker 1: How many scholarships do you provide each year?
Speaker 2: We give an average, between our thirty-nine chapters and the national office a little bit over a million dollars per year out in scholarships.  And they're undergrad, grad, and Ph.D. scholarships.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: You know.
Speaker 1: You know, I had no idea you, you all had the largest conference in--
Speaker 2: We do (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Of any conference in the nation.
Speaker 2: Of any conference, right.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: Yeah, we draw a lot of people into our cities.  Our conferences right now is booked through 2014.  Because of the size of the conference and the requirements we have to book very early, and we can only go into the larger cities because they can't, most of these can't accommodate the size of our conferences, space that we require, and the housing that we require, you know, the number of hotels that we take up in a city when we, when we come into town.
Speaker 1: Yeah, that's something (unclear)--
Speaker 2: And, of course, there's that famous--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --case competition that we, that we host every year.
Speaker 1: You, so you can only hold the conference in certain cities because--
Speaker 2: In certain cities, right.
Speaker 1: --very few have the capacity to be able to--
Speaker 2: To, to accommodate.
Speaker 1: --accommodate it.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Yeah, and we have, we've had some ouches where we have gone into cities that, you know, that really could not handle us and our participants weren't, rather weren't happy.  You know, our experience in Detroit [Michigan] where we booked every hotel there was and sent people over to Canada because (laughter) we just ran out of space.  So it is, it is a sight to be seen and I encourage you should, you should come and see it.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now--
Speaker 2: That's the life of [HistoryMaker] Barbara [L.] Thomas (laughter) (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) That's the--
Story_ID: 296522
Speaker 1: Well, the, the National Black MBA Association, well you, you described it pretty much, but you, you got like, how, how many members are, are there nationwide?
Speaker 2: Well, there are over a hundred thousand African American M.B.A.s and we represent that hundred thousand.  Now we have about eight thousand financial members and, you know, what that's like.  But of the hundred thousands many of them they come to our conference year after year.  And if we can find the magic of having one hundred thousand members, I'd say my mission would be accomplished.
Speaker 1: That's right.
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: Yeah.  So what is the climate like now?  I mean, is, do you think the climate is better than ever for, for young people with, with, black people with M.B.A.s or, or, or is it, is it, well let me put it this way first, is the climate good for people to acquire an M.B.A. today?  Is it, is it as good as it was in, in the '70s [1970s]?
Speaker 2: I would say yes, it is.  There's a lot of research and a lot of controversy around what is the value of the M.B.A. degree.  And then now you have a lot of the online programs, you know, is it the same amount of value that you get from that program, is it just a degree.  To me it is as valuable or if, if a more valuable now than it was in the '70s [1970s].  And getting the M.B.A. degree it really prepares you for business.  And it's that classroom and team interaction that really prepares you to step out there in corporate America.  And when you talk about opportunities, it's different today than what it was in the '70s [1970s].  Seventies [1970s] we were looking for the opportunity to walk through the doors of a company.  And we had affirmative action and all those things to, to sort of help the way but it was still a struggle.  Today the struggle is different.  The struggle is because there is so much competition.  Companies are looking at diversity different now.  They're no longer looking at it to say counting numbers, well we've got X number of African Americans, X number of Hispanics.  Well they're looking at is what is the value that you bring to the table.  I want a smart African American working for me, not because their African American, but because they can bring to the table ideas and ways for us to penetrate the African American market.  So it's all about the almighty dollar, you know, that goes back.  So the, the focus is, is different but it's still a challenge, just a different kind of challenge.
Story_ID: 296523
Speaker 1: I guess, what is the, well what future plans does the organization [National Black MBA Association] have?  I mean, what, what's, what's its future plans?  I mean, how, what, what's its growth plans?
Speaker 2: Well, we have a very ambitious goal and one is to increase our membership.  But we've been looking at ways that we can expand our services.  That we can take some of those valuable things that we have housed under our conference and open up that opportunity in some of the local markets.  So this year we started what I call the [Local] Empowerment Initiative.  And we took one of our tracks from conference and we experimented with it so far in two cities.  We took Stedman Graham's track, 'You Can Make it Happen[: A Nine-Step Plan for Success],' and we took it into Atlanta [Georgia] and into St. Louis [Missouri] and it was a great success.  What this does is allow people who have not had an opportunity to attend conference to actually experience one of our main workshops.  We're doing that in markets where we have chapters, and then we're also now going to venture into markets where we do not have chapters.  In December we go into Jacksonville, Florida.  In 2006 I'm gonna penetrate Mississippi and Macon, Georgia.  Those places that never have an opportunity and expose those African Americans to what this organization is all about and what we can bring to them and to help their lives.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And then we recently launched our new product, Intential [ph.] which stands for infinite potential.  It's an online product that has an assessment tool and an executive coach to help you throughout your career, from a student right straight through.  A lot of people don't understand the value of a coach.  So we're, we're providing that opportunity for our membership.  So from those products alone we see our membership will definitely increase.
Story_ID: 296524
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, what other civic activities are you involved in?  I, I, I know this takes a lot of time but you, you probably, like a lot of people in a position like yours, are involved in a, a number of other things (unclear).
Speaker 2: I would love to be involved with a lot more things than I currently am, understanding that I've been in this position as permanent for a year, so my focus has really been about growing this organization [National Black MBA Association].  So 99 percent of my time, it, it's, it is here.  It's either at headquarters or on the road really pushing our organization forward.  But when I'm not doing that, I am very active in my church.  My spiritual life and spiritual grounding is extremely important to me.  So I work a lot in the church helping people understand really how to, Christians have a struggle sometimes in the business world, you know, and how do I manage that, so that is one of my main mission.
Speaker 1: Now what church do you attend and when did you move to Chicago [Illinois] (unclear) (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I moved to Chicago in May of 2001 is when I moved here.
Speaker 1: And, and that's because the national headquarters was here (unclear)?
Speaker 2: Because the national headquarters was here and I came on board to be the CFO for the national organization.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what church do you attend?
Speaker 2: I'm at Friends For Life Covenant Church out in Flossmoor [Illinois].
Story_ID: 296525
Speaker 1: Now we always ask this question and it's, what are some of your hopes and concerns for the African American community today in general?
Speaker 2: Let's start with concerns.  My concern is really around the youth and their value and importance of education.  Their, their value and importance of money.  I, I, when we were growing up, we really put a lot of focus on saving and investing.  And I worry about our youth whether they focus more on living for today and not planning early enough for tomorrow.  It's like, well tomorrow will come when it comes, you know, I'm not gonna live to be eighty and ninety anyway so let me enjoy life.  So I worry about that because I think about my father [Horace Sanders] who struggled to build his little business, and in his dream he would have loved to have left that business to a member of the family to continue to grow and expand, and we don't see a lot of that anymore.  And I recently visited Hilton Head [South Carolina] and to see so much of the property that our ancestors had and wanted to pass on to their children but they didn't find the value and the importance of that and so all that real estate went for naught.  So I'm very concerned about us getting the word and, and, and helping our young people understand the importance of owning and saving and investing.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So I guess that's also my hope and dream that we're able to accomplish that.  And to continue with building that pipeline for more M.B.A.s.
Speaker 1: Did, did you, this may be a risky thing to ask but, would you, what, is there a particular school you think that has the best M.B.A., M.B.A. program--
Speaker 2: No--
Speaker 1: --today or--
Speaker 2: --I don't have a favorite (laughter).
Speaker 1: You don't have a favorite?
Speaker 2: Now I run the National Black MBA Association, the business schools are my partners, I dare not answer that--
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: --but no, honestly I really don't.  I really don't--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --have a particular one.
Story_ID: 296526
Speaker 1: All right.  Now, when you look back at everything you've done to this point, and you're still relatively young by the standards that we have of interviewing people (laughter) really they're in their eighties and nineties and so forth.  What, is there any major thing that you would do differently now if you had it to do again?
Speaker 2: Well, I would definitely go back and recapture the history (laughter) of my family if I had to do something differently and really understand more of my roots and where I came from.  But I think, I, I, I know what I, I would, I would enjoy life a little bit more.  I think my life has been very serious and very focused.  And I haven't take a lot, not taken a lot of time to smell the roses, to really enjoy life more.  I have just been driven to accomplish and I think that is something that is so important, is to find that work life balance and to be able to enjoy some of what God has given us.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That's the main thing I would do differently.
Story_ID: 296527
Speaker 1: Likewise when you look back on everything you've accomplished to this point, what would you consider as your legacy?
Speaker 2: Well, I say to my staff here [National Black MBA Association] often I want, the reason why I'm driving so hard is because I want to leave my legacy.  I was asked a question once if I had to think about what someone would say once I had passed on what would I want it to be.  And it's really about the fact that truly I have shown that I have made an impact on the lives of every person that I have touched, a great impact.  That I have opened their eyes, opened their minds to help them look at life differently and to help them reach their dream or reach their infinite potential.  So clearly I, want many people to say as a result of something she said or something she did, she made my life so much better.
Story_ID: 296528
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now tell us about your family.  You know, did your, your parents [Horace Sanders and Jerrie Tart Sanders] get a chance to see you as a successful business person?
Speaker 2: Yes, my mother is still alive.  She is blind but she knows the things that I'm doing and she's very, very proud.  Regrettably, I would more than anything have loved for my dad to have been around to see me when I was appointed president and CEO of this organization [National Black MBA Association], I think it would have made him such a proud man.  But I believe he was proud of me just for who I was and what I have done in life.  So as a result of, of the work that I'm doing, I have encouraged my brothers, my brother, at least one of my brothers and my sister and my nieces and nephews, they have all gone to pursue their M.B.A. degrees.  My niece just received her M.B.A. degree last month and my nephew has received his second M.B.A. degree.  So I know that I'm making a difference.  So it's not just me, as I said I wanted to be better now that I have been blessed to accomplish what I have so far, and there is yet so much more that I want to do.  It's now reaching back and bringing them along with you that is so important.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And your nuclear family consists of, I mean, how many children do you have?
Speaker 2: I have two daughters and I have four and a half grandchildren (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.  Four and a half?
Speaker 2: Four and a half.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: The other one will be here in September.
Speaker 1: Okay.  I don't know if I should have asked that--
Speaker 2: (Laughter) No.
Speaker 1: --How we get a half but, okay.  All right.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 296529
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, is there anything we have not asked you that we should ask you or that you need to address before we ask our last question?
Speaker 2: No, I don't think so.  Not that I, not that comes to mind, no.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Our last question is similar to legacy but a little bit different.  How would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: I didn't answer that?
Speaker 1: Well, it's a, within the context of legacy people tend to answer it but I'm always instructed to ask that question anyway.
Speaker 2: Okay.  I, I--
Speaker 1: So--
Speaker 2: --I could answer that.  It's almost like I wish I could show it to you.  At our conference last year in Houston [Texas]--
Story_ID: 296530
Speaker 1: Ah, yes, we were, I was asking you how, how, how you would like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: Okay.  Well, as, as I said I wish I could show you but at our, our conference in Houston [Texas] I asked our photographer to put together for me certain key shots of myself.  And I wanted it put together with music so when I passed away, I wanted this played at my memorial service.  And what it showed was every shot, I had a smile on my face.  I mingled with people, I was light on my feet.  And so I want to be remembered as a person that loved the work that she did and every person that she came in contact with.  That that was the joy and that was why I lived, was for what I do.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well, thank you very much.
Speaker 2: Thank you.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: It's been great.
