Story_ID: 14486
Speaker 1: I want you to state your name and spell it for us.
Speaker 2: Okay.  I'll do it.  Dempsey J. Travis, D-E-M-P-S-E-Y J as in John, Travis, T-R-A-V-I-S.
Story_ID: 14487
Speaker 1: No pork.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Um-hmm.
Speaker 2: What is your favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 1: Hmm.  No favorite.  I've been everywhere.  I've traveled in I guess all the major countries except two.  I've never been to India and never been to Australia.  But other, other than that, I've covered them all.
Speaker 2: Your favorite, favorite time of year?
Speaker 1: Fall.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Favorite saying?
Speaker 2: You don't wanna hear that.
Speaker 1: Yes I do.
Speaker 2: Oh, "Gee!" (laughs). That's my favorite saying--"Gee golly, golly gee!"
Story_ID: 14488
Speaker 1: I want first to have you start out by talking about your youth.  And you were talking--.
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) You, this, this sounds like workshop.  But go ahead.
Speaker 1: Workshop?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  That's nice.  Go ahead.
Speaker 1: Okay.  But I want you to talk about your youth.  You know, and sort of growing up here in Chicago, about your mother and father.  And so I just (unclear)--.
Speaker 2: I, well I was born at St. Luke's Hospital [Chicago, Illinois] which was 14th [Street] and Michigan [Avenue] in 1920 February 25.  At that time, black folks had to use the Indiana Avenue entrance.  We couldn't use the Michigan Avenue entrance.  I didn't learn that 'til I was a bit older.  I didn't realize I was born at a segregated hospital, but I was.  I used-- I was a healthy child.  I had a bad habit of, of biting people when I was little.  When I was two years old, I used to run behind the little girls and bite them, you know.  And don't ask me why I did that. (laughs)  But, but that was a habit.  And then, of course, I was afraid of thunder and lightning.  I remember cars were high enough for me to be able to crawl under them.  I can remember in 1923 crawling under a car when I heard a fire engine coming down the street.  At night--we lived near the lake at 35th [Street]--what--36th [Street] and Cottage Grove [Avenue].  And you could hear the foghorns at night from the, from the boats.  And I always thought that was the boogeyman, and I'd hide under the cover.  It was just some strange things, you know.  And don't let me have seen a fun--a scary picture, and then you hear the fog.  Then I was really scared.  But not, what, what can you, how can you hide under the cover?  But I did.  But all and all, I mean, my life as a youngster was--was interesting.  I mean I was always busy.  I guess at age five I was into entrepreneurship.  A fellow opened a barbershop at the, at the retail level of the building we lived in, at 3609 [South] Cottage Grove--this is 1925.  So I went down and asked him if I could have a job as a barber.  Well, come on, give me a break.  He says, "No, but I, you can pass out my cards."  So he gave me his business cards and told me to pass them out on the east side of the street.  Well, energetic me wasn't satisfied.  'Cause there wasn't enough people on the east side of the street.  So I started passing them out on both sides of the street.  But Cottage Grove was a busy thoroughfare.  Now I saw this streetcar coming--'Big Red' we called them back then.  And I ran across--I knew I could beat the streetcar.  But I didn't see this car, this 1922 Ford on the other side.  And, of course, I was hit and ended up in the hospital.  Now that's how my first job ended, by going to the hospital.  I broke, I guess I fractured a leg.  My mother [Mittie Travis] was satisfied that I was going, wasn't gonna die when she tickled me at the bottom of my feet and I started laughing.  She said, "Well he's gonna be alright."  I can hear her voice right now saying that.  Then I went from there to selling perfume.  Back then, in the funny papers they would run advertising.  If you sold so many bottles of perfume, you were entitled to either a sled, a tricycle or a electric train.  Well I never won any of those prizes.  But I made a bit of money in that I was able to not sell (with emphasis) the perfume, I would give it to people.  And they would in turn smell it and give it back to me and give me the dime too, you see.  So I had the perfume and, and the money.  And from that I went to Chicago--selling 'Chicago Defenders' [African American newspaper].  My whole life has been kind of a doing something.  I was never one who was idle.  And more or less a loner in the sense I learned how to play by myself.
Story_ID: 14489
Speaker 1: We still have the sewing machine--my mother's [Mittie Travis] sewing machine--a Singer [brand name] sewing machine.  I used to envision that as a bridge.  And I would crawl under this sewing machine and--you know, like I was Tom Mix [actor], which was a cowboy.  And somebody hiding from somebody else--now nobody's in the room but me, but that was--so when I see a kid today, who can play football by himself, I see a kid with a lot of imagination.  'Cause that's exactly what it takes.  But I didn't realize that.  And I guess about that same period of time, I started taking music lessons when I was five.  And they insisted that I learn how to play the piano.  And I played a recital at the West Point Baptist Church [Chicago, Illinois], which is located on the northwest corner of 36th [Street] and Cottage Grove [Avenue].  The church is still there.  And I played this solo, and my folks were there, and they were proud of me.  And of course, as time went on, they convinced me that I was gonna be a great piano player.  And this leads me to Duke Ellington.  In 1928, I heard Duke Ellington over the wire service, coming out of the Cotton Club [Chicago, Illinois].  And I was just absolutely fascinated with the sound of that music.  I can't explain why, but it was--it was fascinating.  It was, it wasn't like the other stuff that you heard, it was different.  It had depth, it had a rhythm that I hadn't heard before.  1931 my parents took me to the Oriental Theater [Chicago, Illinois]--January 13, 1931, to see Duke Ellington for the first time.  It was actually his first time in Chicago.  And this guy was so handsome and so debonair and so sophisticated.  And they said, "You gonna be the next Duke Ellington."  And I absolutely believed it.  Obviously I didn't become Duke Ellington.  I became something else, you see.  But I, up until I got to high school, I thought there might have been a possibility.  And then I ran into people like Nat King Cole who was in high school the same time I was there.  He was a great piano player even at eighteen.  Well he was probably sixteen if I was fourteen.  And then there was Dorothy Donegan who was in my class--great piano player.  John Young--there were a lot of great piano players.  There's a fellow by the name of Thomas Rigsby who I talked to just yesterday, who I heard play a song called 'If You Were Mine.'  I'll never forget the day I walked into the auditorium of the--DuSable High School [Chicago, Illinois]--and this guy was sitting down in the pit during the lunch hour playing 'If You Were Mine.'  And he played it just like Earl ['Fatha'] Hines.  I don't know whether you've ever heard of Earl Hines.  But if you heard--Earl Hines is one of the great piano players.  Well I thought Thomas Rigsby was equally as great and I still think that.  I've never heard anybody play that song like that before.  And I haven't heard anybody play it like that since.  But--and then at age thirteen, I became a professional musician.  At age sixteen, I was a union member.  You had to be sixteen to get in the Musician's Union.  And I formed my own band and I had a band around town, I guess up until the war.  And that's about my youth.
Story_ID: 14490
Speaker 1: Mr. Travis, I wanna go back and just have you talk about your mother [Mittie Travis] and father [Louis Travis].  What were they like?  I mean your, you know, what, what kind of people were they?  What do you--have any of other sort of--what was your home life like?
Speaker 2: Oh tranquil.  I mean my father was a laborer.  He never made more than fifty dollars a--.
Speaker 1: I'm sorry, could you start again?  With your hand there you'll block the microphone.
Speaker 2: Okay.  My father was a laborer at the stock yards [Union Stock Yards, Chicago, Illinois].  Most black men during that period of time either worked at the stock yards or the steel mills, or iron factory.  Not educated, but very wise, but I didn't realize how wise he was until I was thirty-three and he was dead.  My mother was always a housewife.  Although she only had one child, my father insisted that she stay home and take care of me.  Now as if I needed taking care of, but--maybe I did, I don't know.  And so they were great card players.  They used to play [bid] whist back, back in those days.  And they belonged to a group of people, which they called a bunch.  And every fourth week, one of them would have this house rent party.  And at the house rent party, you sold chitterlings and macaroni and served whiskey.  And you had a piano player to come in to entertain the people.  And you may make ten, fifteen, twenty dollars which was almost half the rent.  Keep in mind that we needed to have, have rent parties.  Because rents when black people moved in apartments automatically went up.  And yet our salaries went down or stayed the same.  And I can remember I was happiest on the Sundays after the house rent parties--they were always on Saturday night.  Because then I knew I could get an extra dime for [soda] pop and candy and, of course, show fare.  That--that is how I remember them.  And my father, as we go further--as I got older, he would always punish me if I did something wrong.  And the way he would punish me was stop me from working.  He learned that I enjoyed working.  So, "How can I get this boy to behave himself--to stop him?"  And so even when I was making more working on weekends as a musician than he made all week, if I stayed out an hour later than he thought I should have, he would take me off the job.  Now that doesn't make--that don't make no economic sense, but that's it.  So what happened I today at eighty [years old] working everyday doing two or three different kinds of jobs.  Simply because I don't look at coming to my office as work--it's another dessert.  He made work seem like a dessert.  And so I'm continually enjoying that dessert.  And I found that being able to do that has, has kept me active, mentally and physically.  And when I look around at my contemporaries, I think, "Those people who retired ten, fifteen, twenty years ago, they're either dead or something happened to them."  But they're not interesting, they're about as interesting as last year's newspaper.  And I think that the only way that you can survive in these times or at any time--if you look back at some of the men who made some of the greatest contributions, they were men who managed to live a long time.  And that was because they had certain kinds of lifestyles, and they were always working at something.
Story_ID: 14491
Speaker 1: Mr. Travis I wanna--you know, we all--well  we have--you know we have our parents.  And a lot of times we're sort of a combination of our parents.  And I'd like to know what--you spoke about your father [Louis Travis].  What from your mother [Mittie Travis] is in you, and how has she really influenced your life?
Speaker 2: Oh gosh!  My father was a piano player.  I forgot to tell you that.  He was a Saturday night piano player.  So the music thing came from his side, I mean he was the one person who was insisting that I become a piano player.  But he insisted that I do that.  He also insisted that I--my mother made me practice two and three hours a day, even as a kid.  And that's necessary.  I would say as a writer today--at any age--the discipline that I learned from having to practice daily has transferred to my ability to write daily.  I mean I have the discipline to sit down--I know a lot of people who are in the writing business--they're reporters, they're this and that.  They've never written nothing more than a column.  Because they don't have the discipline to sit down to write a book.  And that's where I think the discipline comes into play.  Now my mother, she's, she probably finished seventh or eighth grade.  But she had a, a flair for the theater.  So she would take me to see ballets.  She'd take me to see like 'Native Son.'  She'd take me to see 'Showboat.'  You know, all kinds--she'd take me to the theater on Saturday down at the Roosevelt [Theater], the Chicago [Theater] or the United [Artists Theater], or the Palace [Theater]--all these theaters.  And you didn't see many black people in the Loop [Chicago's central business district] during the period I'm talking about.  I mean, if you saw another couple or another two people, that was a whole lot.  So it was that kind of exposure.  I was the kid in the neighborhood--now we weren't rich by no means, I just told you what my father made--but we lived a rich style, culturally in, in our minds.  And I think that had a lot to do with the way I turned out.  And I think I ha--I can't credit nobody except my parents.  I mean they were there.  And as I said earlier, I didn't realize how smart my father was until he had been dead, I mean maybe ten years or more.  And I said, "Gee!  That guy was smart."  Because then I began to run into some of the things that he had done and he had made me do, that, that--what came in handy.  That I wouldn't have done on my own.
Speaker 1: Now just one more question about your parents.  Where were they from?  I mean--.
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Oh.  My mother was from Birmingham, Alabama and my father was from Atlanta [Georgia].
Speaker 1: And how did they end up here in Chicago [Illinois]?
Speaker 2: Well my father was recruited.  Back then his brother was recruited as a, as a strikebreaker for the Pullman [Palace Car] Company.  This was back just before the [World's] Columbian Exposition in 1892 [sic, 1893].  My father was recruited to come and help build Mandel Brothers [department store].  I guess that's now Carson Pirie Scott & Company [department store], as a laborer.  His brother was recruited--it was three boys--to come and break the strike at the Armour--Armour and Company [meat packing business]--the stock yard [Union Stock Yards].  So, I mean that's how they got here.  They were recruited--they actually sent for them.  They'd come down on the--or they would bring them back on the train and just recruit them.  I mean just recru- bringing black--and there was a need for labor.  There was a need for strikebreakers.  There was a need for breaking the unions and black folks were used for that purpose.
Story_ID: 14492
Speaker 1: Now I'd like you to put your growing up in context--in historical context.  And I can ask this question of you.
Speaker 2: Um-hmm.
Speaker 1: But what was Chicago [Illinois] like, you know, back then?  What kind of place, you know, really was it?  And--.
Speaker 2: Well, I had, I had no place to compare it with because I hadn't been any place, you see.  To me it was the greatest city in the world.  But I can say that because I hadn't been no place in the world except Chicago.  I didn't ru--I began to run into Jim Crow racism in the music business.  I remember the first gig I played at the Southtown--no, Southway Hotel [sic, Southmoor Hotel].  which was at 67th [Street] and Stony Island [Avenue].  It was a very fancy hotel out there, right across from Jackson Park.  And I had to use the freight elevator to go up to play the gig.  And this was common, I mean blacks were not able to use the passenger elevator, in that sense.  But on the other hand, as musicians we were treated differently than most people, because of what we did.  Now we may have been sent up on the elevator, but people who wanted to hear us treated us just like kings, you see.  I mean they loved the music, they loved what we did and they treat us--treated us respectfully.  I can't imagine him treating--had they done differently, I mean we would've been different.  I mean we, we're not peace- peaceful people.  I mean if you really upset us.  I mean we're not--what I mean, there was never nothing to send me off saying, "Ooh, these are some real bad people."  I mean I just thought that's the way things were.
Speaker 1: You know, what I'm curious about, because you talk about living--you know,  you were at 3609 S. Cottage Grove [Avenue].
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Um-hmm.
Speaker 1: It was mainly--you know, you were the only black family in this white building.
Speaker 2: Yeah, the first one.
Speaker 1: Right.  And--or the first.  But what was Chi--that's what I'm trying to understand.  What was Chicago--were there black sections of town?  Were there--.
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) No.  No I mean the south boundary at that time was 39th Street.  And I can remember when I was about--my cousin and I attempted to go to the Oakwood [sic, Oakland Square] Theater, which was at 39th [Street] and Drexel Boulevard, and they wouldn't let us in.  We went to see the, what's it, Douglas Fairbanks in 'The Three Musketeers.'  They just didn't admit black folks.  So that shows you 39th Street was a boundary.  The east side--from Cottage Grove, no blacks lived on Ellis [Avenue] or Lake Park [Avenue], which was right in back of where I lived on Cottage Grove.  I would say our boundaries were Cottage Grove to the Rock Island Railroad [tracks], 22nd Street to 39th Street.  Then you had the jump.  You had the--those people who came here and moved into Robbins, Illinois, which was an all black town.  As a matter of fact, I had an uncle who was the Chief of Police in Robbins.  And then--not my father's brother, but my mother's brother-in-law--or my aunt's husband.  I put it that way, I guess it's the same difference.  Then what else?  I, I mean it was those kinds of things that--and, of course, my people--I was conceived during the Race Riot of 1919.  Being born in February of 1920, I was pretty much on my way.  Maybe five months, three, four, something like that.  And, of course, I knew all about the race riot, because of--my folks constantly talked about it.  And, of course, the brothers constantly talked about the riot and what happened.  And I was always a listener.  And not only was I a listener, but I retained what I heard.  And, of course, I can remember seeing Marcus Garvey for the first time.  I guess it was 1924, '25 [1925], at the Eighth Regiment Infantry [sic, Eighth Regiment Armory], which is 3519 S. Giles [Avenue], which just have reopened as a military academy.  As a matter of fact, the first military academy in the city of Chicago--and not in the city of Chicago, in the country.  Public.
Story_ID: 14493
Speaker 1: But the Chicago [Illinois] back then--I mean can you--okay--.
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Okay, okay.  Here, Chicago was a (pause)--a nightclub town.  I can remember walking from my house to the State Theater, which was at 3507 S. State Street, to see 'Tarzan' and see Tom Mix and just see William McCard (ph.)--well I guess his name was William McCard.  And various--Charlie Chaplin, Douglas Fairbanks, Jr.--now that was a black theater.  Just north of there, there must have been nine other theaters like the Vendome, the Grand, the Monogram, the Pickford--there was a lot of theaters.  And then mixed in with the theaters was all kinds of nightclubs.  There was the Sunset [Cafe], there was the [Harmon's] Dreamland [Ballroom], there was the Royal Garden [Royal Gardens Cafe].  There was the Elite #1 [Cafe], there was the Elite #2 [Cafe].  When, when they say, say that New York had a Renaissance, there was a Renaissance in Chicago at the same time.  Only I think we invented it.  We just--for reasons unknown to me, we didn't have any writers who were writing about it.  They had Langston Hughes and a lot of other writers in that time who wrote about the, the Harlem Renaissance.  There was a Renaissance in Chicago.  And the proof of it is Shelton Brooks, a great piano player who wrote 'Some of These Days.'  He worked at [Robert] Motts's Pekin Theater which was at 2700 S. State Street.  He wrote 'Some of These Days,' he wrote 'Downtown Strut-' 'Darktown Strutters's Ball.'  And 'Darktown Strutter's Ball' is actually all about State Street of that period.  And when I say that period, I'm speaking about 1910, 1915, 1920.  So in that sense, I mean Chicago was a very alive town.  Okay, better than that, when the Cotton Club in New York opened in 1923, they imported all of their musicians from Chicago, imported the chorus girls from Chicago, imported the waiters from Chicago, imported the entertainers from Chicago.  So now we obviously wasn't half-stepping.  And the first manager of the Cotton Club was Jack Johnson [boxer] who was also the champion, who was also a Chicagoan.  So don't tell me we were in the, we're in the woods.  No we were way out of the woods--nobody was writing.  And I would think that would probably have a lot, a lot to do with me at a late point in my life saying, "Well look, if people in my generation don't put this stuff on paper, it'll disappear."  I used to always say, "You know, if we don't write about d'ghetto by the year 2020, he'll be d'white (laughs)."  Look, I mean, you know, if you talk about some of the great French writers who were black, nobody knows they're black.  'Cause they write like--they write about them like they were white men.  Okay.  You know.  You take 'The Three Musketeers.'  That was written by a black guy.  Some people think he was a white guy.  No--white.  Then you had the fellow out of Russia.  I can't think of his right, name right--a great writer.  They got a big statue of him in the middle of Moscow (pause).  Alexander Dumas.
Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) Oh (unclear).
Speaker 2: Alexander Dumas.  That's right.  Yeah.  And so then we got [Alexander] Pushkin, you see, also black. You got a lot of black guys.  But nobody writes about it.  And I said,  "You better get this stuff on paper, because otherwise they will have disappeared during the 21st century."
Speaker 1: That's right.
Speaker 2: Um-hmm.
Story_ID: 14494
Speaker 1: Okay.  I think Chicago [Illinois] (pause) Renaissance and its hallmark to the world is its business community.  We were--there's no town in the country that had a comparable business growth as Chicago had.  We had the Douglas National Bank which was organized by [Anthony] Overton in 1922.  We had the Binga State Bank organized by Jesse Binga in 1908.  We had Charles Murray's Hair Pomade, which was nationally distributed, which was organized in 1921.  You had the 'Chicago Defender' [newspaper], which was a nationally distributed paper organized by Robert [Sengstacke] Abbott in 1905.  You had the 'Half-Century Magazine,' which was organized in 1912.  And it was--that's also an Overton product.  It was in color--it was--to that period what 'Jet' [magazine] or 'Ebony' [magazine] is today.  We had between 31st [Street], 39th [Street], Federal [Street] and Cottage Grove [Avenue] over 800 businesses.  We were so far ahead of anybody, any black community in the country, that it was like everything was standing still.  And this was true up until the '50s [1950s].  'Cause I can remember--you know, I used to travel to New York frequently on business.  And they would ask me.  I mean, "What is it that Chicago has that we haven't gotten in New York?"  New York couldn't (unclear) until Jackie Robinson and a group of guys organized that bank [Freedom National Bank of Harlem] on 125th Street.  They had nothing.  We had had three or four or five--we had so many banks we--some of them have gone out of business before they had organized the first one, you see.  So I mean I think that would certainly be it.  There's no question in my mind about it.  We turned out more businessmen and more business people and more business institutions.  And then if you bring it up to date, you've got 'Ebony' and you've--I mean right up to--right up to  today.  You had Soft Sheen [black hair care products], you had Johnson Products [black personal care products], you had--you just had everything.  All these things were Chicago.  You can't point to another town in this country or another city in this country who can--can point to those kind of achievements.  So if there's anything that we stand out for, it's our business acumen.
Speaker 2: And--.
Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) Supreme Life Insurance Company [of America].  Okay, now--more interesting, in 1950, we had fourteen black-owned life insurance companies domiciled in Chicago.  Today we don't have none.  I mean you attribute that to integration?  I don't know.  But we don't.  I mean we're going out of the world backwards.  But if you talk about the history of this town--there may be some other things, maybe some guy may come up with an Internet enterprise or something else that might revolutionize an industry.  But I'm waiting.  And of course then you've got the successfuls, the John Rogers Juniors [Founder, Ariel Capital Management Corporation] and people who've done--extremely rich.  Young guys forty [years old] or over who've done well.  But I mean if you go back from a historical perspect- you've got your John H. Johnsons [Founder, Johnson Publishing Company].  I mean, I.  Oh, and there was a--we had taxicab companies.  I remember the Priority Taxicab Company.  And you got the [William] Abernathy Cab Company. Then which is--just a whole--Your Company--the first one I can remember was Your, Y-O-U-R, Your Company which was a company that catered to black folks in Chicago.  Because Yellows [cab company] and Checkers [cab company] wouldn't pick you up.  So it ain't new that they, the white cabs--Yellow Cabs and Checker Cab pass right on by.  They've been doing it for a long time.  So to me I don't think I could say any more about what is Chicago's Ren-, Chicago's renaissance is a business.
Speaker 2: And why do you think that? Why do you think this was a good--I mean there are--.
Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) I think white folks were meaner in Mississippi than they were any place else. (laughs)  And, therefore--I know, I really do.  That was a mean town.  I mean that was a mean state.  And those Negroes left there in a hurry, you see.  And I would think in 1930, '35 [1935], seventy-five percent of the Negroes in Chicago were from Mississippi.  But Mississippi Negroes were business people.  I mean those who were in the business, they were business people.  And then many of them brought their businesses to Chicago with them, you see.  They followed their parishioners, or they followed wherever they thought the money was gonna be made.
Story_ID: 14495
Speaker 1: I wanna go back now to your group.  Your si--I wanna go back to your teens, and then I wanna go to the Army.  But back when you were--you had your own performing group, you know, your own band.
Speaker 2: Um-hmm.
Speaker 1: What was that whole experience like?  And, you know, you--I know you talked about in your book, you know, becoming a card-carrying member--.
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Yeah, um-hmm, um-hmm.
Speaker 1: --and, you know, you were working at--I think you were working at the stock yards and (unclear).  But I just--.
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) I was working in a paper factory.
Speaker 1: Okay. Sorry.
Speaker 2: That's right, and they saw me--.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: But I was too embarrassed to go back to work (laughs) 'cause I was double-dipping.  Okay.  And, of course, they were--that was--.  Okay back to that period hearkening, music offered a certain escape and certain opportunities that nothing else offered.  If you had to be--if you wanted to be famous--and we only had one famous boxer and that was Jack Johnson--you had to be a musician.  And musicians were just a special breed.  An entertainer was a special breed.  I mean these were people who dressed well, who looked well and apparently were living well--apparently I say.  But they were the stars, and if you wanted to see them--there was no television, so you had to go to the nightclubs to see them.  I mean you see them as guests or you see them as entertainers.  I wanted that.  Music to my generation is what basketball is to this generation.  They created stars.  Music created stars--created the only stars that we had--the only stars we had were musicians.  Period.  'Cause it--this is before gospel.
Speaker 1: So in your group--talk about your group.
Speaker 2: Oh I mean I was never, I was never an--I was always adequate.  I was never a good piano player.  But I was better than the average businessman--I was way ahead as a businessman in the music business.  And, therefore, I always had good jobs.  And I was able to hire the best musicians.  They didn't play with me 'cause I was a great piano player.  They played with me 'cause they knew they were gonna eat, you see--it's all about eating.  I mean, that was it--and we just--we played everywhere.  And I could always get a job.  I mean, I could always talk to somebody and say, "Look--,"  I mean, I could sell anything.  I guess I was always a salesman.
Story_ID: 14496
Speaker 1: Let's talk about your experience at Roosevelt University [Chicago, Illinois].  Or also if I don't--I mean I could talk about your classmates at DuSable High School [Chicago, Illinois], I could talk--.
Speaker 2: Let me say this--let me help you.  And I think this would be of interest to your audience.  I found that although I was the youngest member of my own band and most of the guys were not quite old enough to be my father, but nearly old enough to be my father.  I always had a great deal of respect for people who were older than myself.  I always thought they might be able to tell me something.  And I always had that ear open to learn.  I would say that much of my success was that in music and out of music, and primarily out of music, all of my best friends were people who were actually old enough to be my fath- parents.  Earl B. Dickerson [President, Supreme Life Insurance Company of America, Chicago, Illinois] who was certainly thirty or forty years older than I am.  George Harris thirty to forty years older than I was.  I could go right down the line--T. P. Harris--right--all these people.  Robert [Sengstacke] Abbott [Founder, 'Chicago Defender' newspaper]--all these people were my friends, but I was never projecting myself as a contemp- one who was as wise as they were.  I was always willing to sit on your knee or sit on the floor and listen to what you had to say.  And I think that's where we miss out.  And they could see that I had this respect for them as individuals.  And therefore, they were willing to give to me their wisdom.  And, you know, I never neglected anything.  Now some of it wasn't so smart, I mean some of them wasn't as bright as they thought they were, but I never told them that, you know.  But I think that is where young people miss out.  I mean I have people who work for me today who probably really think I don't know anything--I'm stupid.  I mean hell, I would have given any price to have worked for a person like myself forty years ago.  I'd probably still been working there for him.  Or fifty years ago.  They wouldn't even let me in a real estate office.  I mean black broth- black real estate people wouldn't let me in.  I didn't get a job.  I had--I went to get a job with a friend of mine's mother, who I used to call every Sunday.  I'd call him--he was always gone, and so I'd talk to his mother.  Mrs. Robertson--I never will forget that.  And she said, "Mr. Travis,"  she said, "you know what?"  And she said, "We got a friend--Ted's got a friend named Smith.  He's doing very well in the real estate business.  And I know that you are a better salesman--although you're not selling anything--than he is.  I'm gonna see if I can arrange for you to meet him."  Well months passed by and I met Mr. Smith.  Mr. Smith invited me over to the West Side where he was working--to Richard King's office, which was on Warren, about 2400 W. Warren [Boulevard].  And I sit there for eight, nine weeks--back then, all you had to do was sign an application and you'd get a salesman's license.  Well, at the end of  the ninth week, the secretary came in and said, "Oh I'm so sorry Mr. Travis.  But we forgot to notarize your application.  But I'll do it now."  I said, "No.  Don't bother."  I says,  "I'm gonna do something myself."  Well in that nine weeks sitting there observing these other people, I came to the conclusion I knew as much as they did, and they were doing it.  And I'd never done it before.  So the guy--Mr. King, Richard King, he said, "Well, you've never sold anything."  But he didn't know that.  "No, I never sold no real estate.  But I've been selling all my life."  And then he realized that, "Okay, if you will stay with me, I'll open an office for you--a South Side office for you, and you'll be in charge."  "No."  I left.  I went down and took the broker's exam--after all I had finished college, so it was no big thing.  And I just started out zero.  Didn't even have a dollar.  I tried--a fellow by the name of Henry Fort who died a couple of years ago, who was also a musician--we worked together--he worked with Nat [King] Cole.  I said, "Henry," I said, "Look, you can have half of my company for twenty-five dollars." (laughs)  And he owned a building, so we was gonna put our office in his building.  He couldn't, he couldn't buy that.  He kicked his own behind many times since then, you see.  But that was the way it started.  So what did--what happened?  I didn't--I needed fifty dollars to buy a city license.  And you know who lent it to me?  My mother [Mittie Travis].  And where did I hang it?  In my bedroom.
Story_ID: 14497
Speaker 1: And it was a girl who was rooming with us by the name of Addie Montgomery.  She had a--she was from Mississippi.  She had a friend who was a lawyer, and he came over to visit with her--he was also from Mississippi.  And he said, "I understand you're a real estate broker."  I said, "Yes."  And he said, "How'd you like to use my office?"  He worked in the post office in the evening.  And so he was--office was--(pause) yeah--that was it.  He was gone--he left--2:00 [P.M.], which means--meant that the office was available from 2:00 [P.M.] to 6:00 [P.M.] or 7:00 [P.M.].  And I said, "Okay."  He said, "You don't have to pay me nothing until you make a commission."  And so I went down there rent free--3509 S. State Street [Chicago, Illinois]--that's where my first office was.  This is 1949, so we're talking about over fifty years ago.  And one day I came back--I hadn't made no money, it was difficult--and the office was empty.  He had moved across the street to the Binga Arcade Building, which was on the northwest corner of 67th Street--a building built by Jesse Binga [Founder, Binga State Bank], a person I mentioned earlier.  And so I had to go out and get a desk--my desk was an orange crate, and my seat was a bucket, you know, a bucket that you use--a scrap bucket.  And my first client was a fellow by the name of Dr. Allen L. Wright who just died five or six months ago.  He walked into that office and he says--now we were also classmates at DuSable [High School, Chicago, Illinois]--he walked in the office and he said, "What do you have to sell?"  Now he was a perfect poker face.  'Cause I would've laughed like hell seeing a fool sitting in the middle of an office on a bucket with a--with a orange crate as a desk.  But he didn't.  He acted as if this was a normal (laughs) operation procedure.  And I said, "Well I got a house at 1641 S. Drake [Avenue] on the West Side."  And he said, "That's a nice neighborhood."  He said, "I'd probably like to look at that."  I said, "Well we'd have to go over on the streetcar.  'Cause I don't have a car."  I didn't have a car. (laughs) In real estate, don't have a car.  And he says, "I have one."  And so he--his wife was out--and she--they're both dead now.  He died six months ago.  She's been dead about two and a half years.  And we went to the West Side.  And they liked the building.  And that was my first sale.  And I never looked back from that point forward.  So I'm saying, you know, somebody down the street would tell you, "Well Travis started out with a great big bucket of money and everybody made it easy for him."  That's a lie.  I mean, even after I got started, you see, there was those gaps.  I remember I did everything.  I was in law school.  I got married.  I went in the real estate business--all these things at the same time.  And things got kinda tight.  'Cause that deal hadn't come to fru- fruition and it got tight.  And I said, "Well--."  A friend of mine invited me over to his house--[Edward] Eddy Spraggins who's also dead--see all the people I knew are dead. (laughs)  That's what I'm telling you, the line is getting short.  He invited us over for Thanksgiving dinner.  And we enjoyed it.  And so we got ready to leave.  His girlfriend Lill says, "Take some of this with you."  And she gave us dressing and turkey and pie and cake and a lot of stuff--salad--potato salad and we were so happy.  'Cause we were hungry and we didn't have nothing to eat. (laughs)  We were in bad shape.  So after that, I got a job, a temporary for thirty days, counting--doing census.  And, of course, I did that well.  I mean I did it extremely well.  They put me in a 'bucket of blood' down there at 24th [Street] and Indiana [Avenue].  That's a building where they killed somebody every--every other night, you know.  And so they put me in there, but I was able to get in.  I used a tactic.  I'd kick the door when I got--kicked the door, and I went, I said, "Government!  Bam!" (laughs)  And they would open the door, and whoever's in the bed craws out from under it.  And I just count it and count it and count it.  And the government wanted to make me a regular census taker.  I said, "Nah.  That ain't it."  And then I went back to what I do--did regularly, you know, my real estate thing.  And then from that point to this.  I mean I laid that big check from the Wright deal on--on the bed for my wife [Moselynne Hardwick Travis] and said, "Here we are baby.  We're on our way."  And that's the way it was.
Story_ID: 14498
Speaker 1: Okay.  But, you know, the thing is--the time that you--from the time that you start in real estate--,
Speaker 2: Um-hmm.
Speaker 1: --and especially I would say in, you know, the '60s [1960s] and '70s [1970s] it was sort of a critical time, a vantage point from which to see the Civil Rights Movement--,
Speaker 2: Um-hmm.
Speaker 1: --because a lot of the things that happened, you know, were around issues of housing.
Speaker 2: Um-hmm.
Speaker 1: So I just wanted you to sort of address, you know, that whole thing.  The growth of your business, and also your involvement politically and within NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People].
Speaker 2: Well, 1952 I hired [United States] Congressman Gus Savage [House of Representatives, Illinois] to be my Administrative Assistant.  I had a knack for trying to hire friends to--who were smart.  I also tried to hire Harold Washington [Mayor, City of Chicago, Illinois].  I couldn't get him.  I also tried to hire--when they'd finish law school, I'd try to hire them--[Carol] Moseley Braun [United States Senate, Illinois].  I--she sat right where you're sitting right now.  And I tried to--no, she went to work for [Richard H.] Newhouse [State of Illinois Senate].  She wanted to stay in that kind of activity.  I found--I was, I became a life member in NAACP in 1953, '54 [1954].  When I became a life member, there was not a hundred life members in the entire country.  Because Brown vs. Board of Education [Topeka, Kansas] had not been won.  It was after that decision that things began to open up, and people began to see that the NAACP was more than four letters, you see--or five letters.  And I was subsequently made President.  And of the--when we had the largest chapter in the country.  We actually had 50,000 card-carrying members in the NAACP.  I followed a fellow by the name of [Theodore] Ted Jones who was a CPA [certified public accountant], and also affiliated with Supreme Life Insurance Company [of America].  He was the President prior to myself.  And who did--followed me?  Several of the fellows who became bishops--one was--bishop--I can't think of it.  He had the church [Coppin Memorial AME Church] at 56th [Street] and Michigan [Avenue].  And then, then Daniels followed him.  This--you got a whole series.  But that was, that was during that period that I met Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.] and met all that other Civil Rights--and then, of course, I organized King's first march in 1960.  When he marched on the convention.  That was August 1960.  The purpose of the march was to get the Republicans [political party] to put a civil rights plank in their--what do you call it?
Speaker 1: Platform.
Speaker 2: There you are.  See, I knew you would--you'd help me.  In their platform.  You're a good lawyer. (laughs)  Lawyers always know how to help their clients out.  But then I just stayed active--I was--I just stayed active.  And then I became President of the N--well prior to that, I was President of the [Chicago] Real Estate Board.  Then after that, I organized and chaired the United Mortgage Banks of America.  Organized it in '60 [1960] and remained the Founder and Chairman and President until 1974.  And then I was getting too much print in the 'New York Times,' 'Washington [D.C.] Post,' 'Boston [Massachusetts] Globe,' 'Wall Street [New York] Journal'--front page print.  And the guys got jealous and said, "Well, you know--."  'Ebony [magazine] 100,' you know.  And said, "We'll get rid of him."  You know.  "It's too much."  And so they put me out.  They voted me out and gave me a plaque.  The plaque is up there on the wall now.  You know how long that organization lasted after they put me out?  Six months--it was all over.  See now they--I worked pro bono [without compensation for the public good] and I--that dessert thing that my father instilled in me was what made me do the kind of job I did.  It wasn't about money.  It was about accomplishment.  It was about getting the job done.  And that's the story.
Story_ID: 14499
Speaker 1: What is your view about the Civil Rights Movement?  Do you think that it was a positive or a negative?
Speaker 2: I would say I think that the Civil Rights Movement was a positive--definitely a positive, if we look at--look at it from the Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.] point of view.  You know, I can remember going to visit my wife's [Moselynne Hardwick Travis] hometown.  She's from Cleveland, Tennessee.  And then going to Atlanta [Georgia]--and this is prior to King.  And having to take my car into--I was driving Packards back then--into the Packard place and I'd go to get a drink of water.  And the, and the man said--and the guy come up, "No, you can't drink out of that fountain."  No, don't tell me.  Yes.  The Civil Rights Movement changed a whole lot of stuff.  Now my wife don't wanna remember when I used to put her on a front [train] car next to the coal, going to see her folks in Tennessee.  'Cause back--that was the black car, you know.  I mean the Civil Rights Movement has done a lot of things.  I'm not saying that we as recipients of the Civil Rights Movement have done what we're supposed to do.  I don't think we, we've marched forward as we should have.  But I think the movement itself--the opening of the movement, the opening of the doors, the opening of interstate transportation.  I mean that's--that's as American as apple pie.  I mean I--it's just (with emphasis) had to happen.  And King was the guy to do it.  And Rosa Parks, I mean these are people who did the job.  But I'm--it was a given--it's almost a given  that somebody would have to come along or have a blood bath.  It could very well have--it could be just the opposite.  Just a lot of people slaughtered.  So, you know, I think it was--I can't say enough about those people who lead--see that's, that's what so disappointing.  There are a lot of young people today who know absolutely nothing about the Civil Rights Movement.  Know absolutely nothing about the people who died (with emphasis) in the Civil Rights Movement, absolutely know nothing about the sacrifices that a lot of us had to make for the Civil Rights Movement.  They just think that things are so nice now.  That this was the way it, it always was.  It was not like that at all.  And that the one thing I like about my Jewish brothers.  They won't let you forget the Holocaust.  But we wanna, we wanna forget the Civil Rights Movement.  And it's stupid.  Absolutely stupid.
Story_ID: 14500
Speaker 1: What are your hopes for the black community?  You've lived a long life--,
Speaker 2: Um-hmm.
Speaker 1: You've seen--.
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Not long enough.  Now I got another twenty years.
Speaker 1: Okay.  You've got another twenty years.
Speaker 2: That's right. (laughs)
Speaker 1: You can make it.
Speaker 2: Well hey!  Wait.
Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) Your mother lived to ninety-five.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  But her aunt lived to be 113, so--.
Speaker 1: And--see, so I--no, I'm serious.  I think you can make it.
Speaker 2: Oh I know it.
Speaker 1: You're in good shape.  Your mind, nothing is wrong with your mind, that's for sure.
Speaker 2: Alright.
Speaker 1: But I'm just saying from the vantage point--I mean, what do you really--what are your hopes for the black community though?
Speaker 2: Hmm. (pauses) What are my hopes.  Well I mean to put it simply, to do the best it can, you see.  But really, I mean it seems like there are a large number of us are on a path of self-destructing.  And I'll make the point that every morning I get up, I'm as high as I ever wanna be.  And yet there are others who don't feel that they're living unless some sort of foreign chemicals is in their body.  I don't think that you can think clearly, chemicalized.  I mean I just don't think so.  I'm not saying that the whole world has gone mad, but a great percentage of it has.  I mean, I've owned enough property and seen enough people self-destruct--good people self-destruct, and I don't understand it.  I mean so--and 'The Man' is feeding it to you.  I don't know, I don't know no black people importing drugs.  I don't know no black people who really control it.  I remember there was a statement in 'Godfather [motion picture].'  You probably remember the same thing.  He said, "Okay, we don't wanna handle dope.  But let them have it up in Harlem [New York].  They ain't nothing but animals anyway."  And, if you go back, that picture's what, twenty years old?  A lot of truth in that statement.  "Let them have it.  Let them destroy themselves."  And I've seen it.  People destroying themselves.  Crazy things are happening.  And it's all drug related.
Story_ID: 14501
Speaker 1: Business community.  Why do you think business--black people being in business is so important?
Speaker 2: Well I think it's important because you're living in a capitalistic system.  And you're measured by your success as entrepreneurs.  I mean why shouldn't we measure ourselves?  I mean, how can we be in a system, a capitalistic system and act like socialists?  I think business is important.  And I think--that's simple.
Speaker 1: Of your accomplishments as a businessperson, a successful entrepreneur, what are you most proud of?
Speaker 2: Most proud of?  My writing.  I think that is one of my contributions.  I mean, you know, people say, "Well, what is your monument?"  I've done it already, you see.  And I think that's the satisfaction.  Having done it.  And now I have a foundation where we send forty, fifty kids through college every year.  And we've been doing that for over a decade.  But that's what your supposed to do.  And I'm fixing to do something else a little bigger than that.  But I mean--but that's again what your supposed to do.  I just think there's a need to continue to, to help and reach out.  'Cause there are, in spite of what I see, there are some people who are trying.  And there are some people who I think would carry it through.
