Story_ID: 650269
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe. I'm interviewer today for The HistoryMakers. Our videographer is Scott Stearns. Ma'am, could you please give us your full name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: Priscilla Ann Taylor [HistoryMaker Priscilla Taylor], P-R-I-S-C-I-L-L-A. Ann, A-N-N. Taylor, T-A-Y-L-O-R.
Speaker 1: All right. And, ma'am, what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: December 30, 1949 in Fort Pierce, Florida.
Speaker 1: And what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: Well, actually, I have been an owner of my own insurance agency [Priscilla Taylor Insurance Associates, West Palm Beach, Florida]. I was a lawmaker, and, presently I'm working as a consultant.
Speaker 1: Okay. And you're a member of the Florida Legislature; right?
Speaker 2: I was in the Florida House [Florida House of Representatives]. I was a commissioner for the port authority [Port of Palm Beach District Commission] and a Palm Beach County commissioner [Palm Beach County Board of County Commissioners].
Speaker 1: Okay. All right. And what is today's date?
Speaker 2: Today is March the 11th, 2017.
Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time? And you don't have to give your address, but--
Speaker 2: You're at, at my residence in West Palm Beach, Florida (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay.
Story_ID: 650270
Speaker 1: Before we go into depth, there are five lightweight questions we always ask, and they only require a short answer. First one is, do you have a favorite food?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Fried chicken.
Speaker 1: Okay. Favorite color?
Speaker 2: Blue.
Speaker 1: A favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Fall.
Speaker 1: A favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Europe, Spain.
Speaker 1: Okay. And the last one is, do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: It's not enough to, to know the right thing to do, it's best to do it right. So, that's (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay.
Speaker 2: --always been my philosophy.
Story_ID: 650271
Speaker 1: Now I'm going to ask about your family history. I'm going to ask about your mother's side of the family and your father's [Willie Johnson (ph.)] side; but we'll start with your mother first. Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: My mother is Mary Bacon [Mary Taylor Bacon], B-A-C-O-N.
Speaker 1: Okay. Is Bacon her maiden name, or?
Speaker 2: Taylor is her maiden name.
Speaker 1: Okay, Taylor. Okay. All right. And what, what is her date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: She was born in Fort Pierce, Florida. She was born August 28th, 1934, and she is deceased.
Speaker 1: Okay. And, well what can you tell us about your mother's side of the family? How far back can you trace them, and what were they doing?
Speaker 2: Well, actually, I was raised by my mother's parents. My mother had me when she was a young--young, and so my grandparents raised me. Very hard workers. They--my grandmother came from Blackville, South Carolina, and my grand- (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What was your grandmother's name?
Speaker 2: Iretha [Iretha Minus Taylor], I-R-E-T-H-A. And her maiden name was Minus, M-I-N-U-S, and--but Taylor was her maiden name, I mean, her married name.
Speaker 1: Okay. And what--well, is there a story behind her name?
Speaker 2: Iretha?
Speaker 1: Or Mi- yeah, both. Or Minus is definitely--is there a story behind that?
Speaker 2: Uh, well, you know, they were very progressive people. But, if there was a story, I'm not quite sure. I know that I do have a relative who's tracing the background, and, so far, he's gotten to where one of our great-great-grandmothers is from Europe. But we haven't, you know, we have the Indian [Native American], obviously, there; but we're still tracing it.
Speaker 1: Okay. That's interesting. I've never heard Minus as a last name, you know, before.
Speaker 2: Yeah, that was her maiden name.
Speaker 1: Okay. All right. And she--do you know her date of birth?
Speaker 2: Actually, she was born in 1912, but, you know, in December. We had to get the census from then. But she died in the '80s [1980s], so we don't have exact information.
Speaker 1: Okay. And your grandfather, what was his name?
Speaker 2: His name was Charlie Taylor [Charles Taylor, Sr.]. And he was from Edison, Georgia, and he was born in 1910.
Speaker 1: Okay. And your, your grandmother was born in Blacks--
Speaker 2: Blacksville, South Carolina [sic.] (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Blacksville, okay.
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: Is there a--is there a story about how they came to come to--
Speaker 2: To Florida?
Speaker 1: Fort Pierce, yeah.
Speaker 2: I, I really, you know, don't know the specifics on how they ended up in Fort Pierce. I know my, my grandfather actually had a little farm. His family had a farm in Georgia, and--but, you know, once they came here, I guess, thinking for a better a life I'm assuming. And Fort Pierce was where they landed.
Speaker 1: Yeah, 'cause usually, migration takes place north. People go north.
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: But we've had a couple interviews where people came, you know, to Florida. Because Florida was, I guess, an opportunity because of this land in those days.
Speaker 2: That's possible (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) All the development.
Speaker 2: And it was close. I mean, for them to come down--I think they probably--my grandfather might have gone to Miami [Florida] first and then came back up here to Fort Pierce. Not up here because we're in West Palm [West Palm Beach, Florida]. But that--I think that's how I understand it.
Story_ID: 650272
Speaker 1: But my father who's, you know, he actually did go north. And his name was Willie Johnson [ph.]--that's my dad (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay. All right.
Speaker 1: And so he did migrate up to Rochester, New York. As a matter of fact, he lived there--he moved there when I was a kid.
Speaker 2: Okay. Now, when was your father born?
Speaker 1: My dad was born probably 1932, I think.
Speaker 2: And where was he born?
Speaker 1: Fort Pierce [Florida].
Speaker 2: Okay. All right. So, okay, I'm gonna go back to your mother [Mary Taylor Bacon]. But--so did you see your mother row- I mean--
Speaker 1: Oh, yes.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: But it was typical of how we grew up when we were kids, you know, especially in my situation; which was probably not unusual for children then. But I thought of my mother as my older sister. And but, yeah, she was--she was in my life. I just thought of her as a sister and not a mother.
Speaker 2: So did she have you when she was--
Speaker 1: She was--she was young (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) a teenager?
Speaker 1: I think she was like fifteen.
Speaker 2: Okay. All right. All right. And your father, likewise, was young, I guess?
Speaker 1: Yes. Uh-huh.
Speaker 2: So how--did, did you know him growing up, or did he?
Speaker 1: Well, I knew him. He would--he didn't live in Fort Pierce. Obviously, he lived in Rochester. But whenever he came to town, he would come by.
Story_ID: 650273
Speaker 1: What was it like when your mother [Mary Taylor Bacon] grew up in Fort Pierce [Florida]? I mean, did your grandmother [Iretha Minus Taylor] and gra- we- did your grandparents talk about it, or did your mother talk about what Fort Pierce, Fort, Fort Pierce was like in those days?
Speaker 2: Not when they were growing up, you know. They didn't really talk about it. I just know my grandparents worked hard, you know. They, they were hard workers. My dad [Taylor's maternal grandfather, Charles Taylor, Sr.] worked in the packinghouse, the food industry, and my grandmother did house work. Their thing was to make sure that their children had access to good education because she had two who went on to college and worked at--my brother, Charlie [Taylor's maternal uncle, Charles Taylor, Jr.], was at Southern University [Southern University and Agricultural and Mechanical College, Baton Rouge, Louisiana]. Irma [Taylor's maternal aunt, Irma Taylor] went to Johnson C. Smith University [Charlotte, North Carolina]. And, you know, I think their, their thing was to make sure that the children had access to education and, obviously, good lives.
Speaker 1: Okay. Now, did, did your mother get a chance to go to college?
Speaker 2: No, my mother did not. My mother married [Pete Bacon, Jr.] and had her other, you know, had her family; and she did not go to college.
Speaker 1: Okay. Okay. So--all right. Now, in terms of your father [Willie Johnson (ph.)], what kind of work did he end up doing?
Speaker 2: My father owned his own business, I understand, in Rochester [New York]. He owned a paving company. And he also worked for the government up there, but I don't know a whole lot about that other than that.
Speaker 1: Okay. Okay. Is there a story about how your parents met, or?
Speaker 2: I would assume that he was a nice looking young man and my mother was a nice looking young lady, and somehow they made--well, I won't say a mistake, but I was born.
Speaker 1: Okay. So they don't talk about whether they met in church or we met in school, or (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I--no, no.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I think it's probably all in the neighborhood. Fort Pierce is only so big, you know.
Speaker 1: Okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I think probably most people knew each other, you know. But as far as how they met, I never knew.
Speaker 1: Did they get married, or did they st- or did they stay together at any point (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) They did not marry. They did not stay together.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 650274
Speaker 1: When you think about their personalities, from what you know of them--I know your father [Willie Johnson (ph.)] wasn't around that much. But if you think about their per- their personalities, their, their interests, their talents, what they look like, who do you think you take after the most?
Speaker 2: I think I probably take after both of them. I think look wise I look like both of them, except my mom [Mary Taylor Bacon] was a very small lady.  But they were--my dad was an entrepreneur, and I have that entrepreneurship spirit in me. My mother, you know, was really a family lady. She wanted to make sure that her family--because she had--she has--had another daughter [Brendalin Bacon] and four boys [sic.], which were my brothers and sister and--but she provided for them, and she worked. But I can only say that my parents--it appeared, from both sides, were hard workers and wanted to, you know, do well in society; and they did.
Speaker 1: Okay. Okay. Now, did you--were you influenced more by your parents or by your grandparents?
Speaker 2: My [maternal] grandparents.
Speaker 1: Okay. All right. And so did you kind of learn a lot of the traits or inherit traits from them that you--
Speaker 2: I think probably most of my traits I inherited from my grandmother [Iretha Minus Taylor] and my grandfather [Charles Taylor, Sr.]. My grandmother was a very strong woman, and, you know, she provided, you know. She worked as well as my grandfather. But she had good sense as far as making sure that the home was provided for. My grandfather was a worker, you know. He took care of his family. But my mother was--grandmother was the one I feel that I took a lot after because she was really strong; and, and I think I follow her footsteps.
Story_ID: 650275
Speaker 1: Tell us about your siblings. You have five, right?
Speaker 2: That's on my mother's side.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah, my mom [Mary Taylor Bacon] had (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Oh, your--so you have more then, on your father's--okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, my dad [Willie Johnson (ph.)] has children on his side--
Speaker 1: So00
Speaker 2: And my mother has, you know, she had another daughter and--actually, she has three sons, really, so I'd say four.
Speaker 1: Okay. So it's four?
Speaker 2: Yes, four, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And then my dad had, I think, about six boys.
Speaker 1: Okay. So that's--yeah, that's ten siblings; right (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, they were all--but, yeah, exactly. But my father, his family is up in Rochester [New York]. And, you know, he's deceased now, but--and my mother, Fort Pierce [Florida].
Speaker 1: So I take it you're closer to the four--
Speaker 2: In Fort Pierce.
Speaker 1: --in Fort Pierce.
Speaker 2: But even the ones from New York, too, though because we keep in contact.
Speaker 1: Okay. Well can you name them all for us in the order that they were born, if you--
Speaker 2: Well, on my mother's side, you have Brendalin [Brendalin Bacon], you have Bobby [Bobby Bacon], you have Nathan [Nathan Bacon] and Ronnie [Ronnie Bacon].  That is five, isn't it, or four but whatev-
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And Ronnie, okay? And my father, his oldest son was Michael [ph.]. He had another son named Gary [ph.]. And I don't have all of those names for you.
Story_ID: 650276
Speaker 1: Do you have an earliest childhood memory?
Speaker 2: I just can remember, you know, we didn't have a--Fort Pierce [Florida], we had dirt, dirt roads, you know, and we travelled dirt roads. And I can remember my--the neighbors on one side, we had Mrs. Johnson [ph.] who owned--they owned a bar. And then you had, on the other side, Mr. Ben [ph.] and Ms. Rosetta [ph.]. And I can remember that, from even the earliest age, my [maternal] grandmother [Iretha Minus Taylor] prepared me, I think, as--to be a businessperson. I would sit down on Saturday mornings, write out the grocery list and write out all the places where I needed to go to pay her bills. Because all of the other, you know, I mentioned Irma [Taylor's maternal aunt, Irma Taylor], Charlie [Taylor's maternal uncle, Charles Taylor, Jr.], the other adults had gone off to college. And so I must have been a very young teenager, probably twelve, thirteen years old. Fort Pierce, as I said, was a small place. So I would actually walk, pay all the bills and then end up at the grocery store and then take a cab home. So, you know, I didn't have the, the duties probably as some girls did at home to cook and all those things. My, my job was to take care of the business end, and that's what I did.
Story_ID: 650277
Speaker 1: Where is Fort Pierce [Florida] in re- in re- what's the closest big city, I guess, around Fort Pierce?
Speaker 2: I--well, you know, you--probably West Palm [West Palm Beach, Florida] is the biggest city closer to them. But it is sixty miles, about sixty, sixty-five miles north of where we are right now. It is on the east coast. It's called the Treasure Coast. So you have Fort Pierce, you have Stuart [Florida] and you have Indian River [Indian River County, Florida], which is Vero [Vero Beach, Florida]. So they're all considered to be the Treasure Coast.
Speaker 1: And why is it called the Treasure Coast?
Speaker 2: Well, they're, you know, it's not so much south, you know, but it is still on the east coast. It's not so much north. It's sort of, you know, on the Treasure Coast. It's on the water. It's on the coast.
Speaker 1: So it has nothing to do with any treasure or anything, or does it?
Speaker 2: To my knowledge, if it, you know, if it did, we didn't find it.
Speaker 1: Because I know that ships supposedly scuttled here, by different pirates and that sort of thing (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right. But--
Speaker 1: And--
Speaker 2: --and it was off the coast.
Speaker 1: And off the Florida coast.
Speaker 2: Exactly. Key West [Florida], mainly, um-hm.
Speaker 1: Um-hm. Okay. Okay. All right. So what were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up?
Speaker 2: You know, my dad had the most beautiful yard--my [maternal] grandfather [Charles Taylor, Sr.]. You know, he was--he loved keeping his yard. And I can always remember my swing, which was on the east side of the house.  And I would lay in the grass and just look up in the sky, because it was just that soft and beautiful. So the nature, you know. And then he had the poinciana, the different flowers, you know. Unfortunately, I got hay fever and couldn't--you know, start sneezing all the time. But he just had flowers, and the yard was gorgeous. And that's really something that always sticks with me, because I try to make sure I--I'll probably never have my yard like he kept his, but I certainly try to keep it nice.
Story_ID: 650278
Speaker 1: Where did you start school?
Speaker 2: I started school in Fort Pierce [Florida]. I went to Frances K. Sweet Elementary [Frances K. Sweet Elementary School; Frances K. Sweet Magnet School]. Obviously, I went to kindergarten first. Had a Mrs. Wright [ph.] who had kindergarten in her house. But my school, first one was Frances K. Sweet.
Speaker 1: Now, who is--do you know who Frances K. Sweet was?
Speaker 2: No, I don't. The principal was Mr. Calhoun [ph.]. I can remember that.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But I don't remember who Frances K. Sweet was, obviously (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) The reason why I ask is there's a lot of the black schools in little towns named after somebody--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --in town that did something, I mean, that actually built the school or was the first teacher or something.
Speaker 2: Exactly. I'm just, you know, not sure.
Speaker 1: Okay. And this was an all-black school, too?
Speaker 2: It was. Uh-huh (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah. All right. So--
Speaker 2: And a black community.
Speaker 1: Right. And this is--I mean, these are the days of school segregation, isn't this?
Speaker 2: It was.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Uh-huh. At Frances K. Sweet, it definitely was. Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: Okay. So about how--what was the, I guess, the demographics of Fort Pierce in terms of black and white?
Speaker 2: Probably--
Speaker 1: And others.
Speaker 2: --black. Maybe--at that time, maybe about 40 percent black, you know, 60 percent other, yeah.
Speaker 1: Were there a lot of Indians [Native American] around in those days?
Speaker 2: They had Indians around. It was sort of a transient though because we had the, the orange groves and things around. So people, you know, would come like during certain times of the year and pick oranges and tomatoes and then go back north, you know, during the off season. But, you know, I mean, that was home for us, so, you know, we had probably about a 40 percent population.
Speaker 1: Okay. So at Frances K. Sweet Elementary, what courses attracted you?
Speaker 2: Well, I was just in elementary school, so, you know, you had your reading, writing and arithmetic and science and those normal courses.  And I always liked, you know, the reading part of it and the arithmetic, surprisingly. I liked math at that time.
Speaker 1: Okay. Okay. All right. Did you have a favorite teacher at Frances K. Sweet?
Speaker 2: You know, they used to call--said you had pets, the teachers had pets.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: One of my favorites was Ms. Jackson [ph.].
Speaker 1: Okay. So you were the teacher's pet for Ms. Jackson?
Speaker 2: Well--
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: --I hate to say that, but I think I did get some little preferences there (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay. All, that's all right (laughter). It's okay to be the te- teacher's pet. They--you have to earn that spot, really, you know (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right. Exactly. I worked hard.
Story_ID: 650279
Speaker 1: So now when you were growing up, they passed Brown versus the Board [Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka, 1954] and all that, and the Civil Rights Movement is, is kicking up all over the country. Was there, was there talk about the Civil Rights Movement in Fort Pierce [Florida]?
Speaker 2: You know, Fort Pierce, we were sort of not as it was in other parts of the country. I can remember my--Irma, my sister [Taylor's maternal aunt, Irma Taylor], being at Johnson C. Smith [Johnson C. Smith University, Charlotte, North Carolina] when they had the sit ins there. But I remember we had a little drive in place to go get drinks. And when things were erupting across the country, I think some of that, you know, sort of might have spilled over down into Fort Pierce. But we didn't have the marches and the things that were happening in other parts of the country. And I think, you know--but I saw it. I knew what was going on. And, obviously, you know, we were all concerned, you know, and wanted to, you know, because you had your segregated schools, but you had the teachers who truthfully, to me, worked hard with the black students to make sure that we excelled. I was one of the ones who got, you know, went to a--left the segregated school and went to an integrated school. And I can tell you from this day that I noticed the difference, because the teachers, the black teachers really cared and made sure that the kids got their work.  When you went to the white schools, it was like--even one of the teachers said to us, you know, "Hey, I have mine. You get yours if you want to."  And I guess they were saying it to everybody, but we were there the first time I ever heard a teacher say that its students. But, but, yes, segregation was happening, and things were beginning to change.
Speaker 1: Thought you have a better environment in the black schools in terms of the teacher-student--
Speaker 2: I think so (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) relationship. Yeah.
Speaker 2: I really do, because the teachers cared about you, you know, and it was nothing--and one of my favorite teachers was Mrs. Stubbs [ph.], you know. It wasn't anything for her to stay late, you know, to make sure that you understood her algebra, because that's what she taught. Either Mr. Jefferson [ph.], who was the principal at Lincoln Park [Lincoln Park Academy, Fort Pierce, Florida], you know, who made sure that the kids stayed in order. You know, they didn't have the issues that some of the teachers have now, you know. But this was in--I left Lincoln Park and went over to Dan McCarty High School [Fort Pierce, Florida], which was the, the white school at the time.
Speaker 1: Okay. All right. I had a good question, and I just--it just blew--okay. So when did integration start? What year did they do that?
Speaker 2: Well, I graduated from high school in '67 [1967], and for--I was at the white school for three years. So sixty- '64 [1964].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Down here, probably six- well, that, you know--
Speaker 1: So what were you like a sophomore (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) probably '64 [1964], '63 [1963].
Speaker 1: --when you started--
Speaker 2: Freshman, yeah.
Speaker 1: Freshman?
Speaker 2: Sophomore. No, sophomore (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Sophomore? Okay. At Dan McCarty? Okay.
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: And--all right. Now, can black folks vote in Fort Pierce?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: So it wasn't like some places in the South where black folks could not vote and that sort of thing? So you could do that, so that's a big difference. So all right. And it--in terms of the integration of the schools, did that--was there a lot of rancor around that, or was that easily done in Fort Pierce?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I, I think there--I won't say easily done, you know, but--and if you talk to some, they might have said there was a lot of things that were happening. But as I said, there were no marches happening in the community. It was just that the integration started, and they had the schools of choice. And, and then some of the kids were just bused, because I was bused to the--Dan McCarty. And we just had to go to make sure that we integrated these schools.
Speaker 1: Okay. All right. Now, did--was--did you go to a middle school at all?
Speaker 2: Actually, during that time, Lincoln Park was high school and middle (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay. Okay. All right.
Speaker 2: Um-hm. So I left Frances K. Sweet [Frances K. Sweet Elementary School; Frances K. Sweet Magnet School, Fort Pierce, Florida] and went to Lincoln Park in the seventh grade.
Story_ID: 650280
Speaker 1: Now was church a big factor in growing up?
Speaker 2: For me it was a very big factor. My family was very religious. My mother--my [maternal] grandmother [Iretha Minus Taylor], was Pentecostal. But I was Presbyterian, so the kids grew up Presbyterian, right.
Speaker 1: How did that, how did that work? Now, you're living with your grandmother; right?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: So how did you end up becoming a Presbyterian?
Speaker 2: Well, the Presbyterian church was not too far from where I lived in Fort Pierce [Florida]. And, you know, she went to the Pentecostal church when she did you know, and I was involved with the Presbyterians. I mean, the teachers, you know, because a lot of teachers and things went to the Presbyterian church.
Speaker 1: Okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) As a matter of fact, when my kindergarten--Mrs.--the lady who taught me in kindergarten, I think she was part of the Presbyterian church. But that is where I went to church--
Speaker 1: Did they (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) until I moved here [West Palm Beach, Florida].
Speaker 1: Okay. So did the teachers invite you to the church, or how did--
Speaker 2: You know, I, I really don't know. But I know Irma [Taylor's maternal aunt, Irma Taylor], my--the older one, she went to the Presbyterian church.
Speaker 1: Okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Matter of fact, she went to the university--you know, Johnson C. Smith [Johnson C. Smith University, Charlotte, North Carolina] is a Presbyterian university. And as I said, the church was not far from where I lived. It was in the community. But, for me, that's all I knew. I would visit the Pentecostals sometimes with my grandmother, but that wasn't often.
Speaker 1: Now, that had to be a dramatic difference, the Pentecostal church and the Presbyterian church just--
Speaker 2: It was really a big difference, a big difference. But I think I was made to go to Pentecostal when I was younger. But when I was able to make my choice, I ended up at the Presbyterian.
Speaker 1: Did you like the Presbyterian better?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yes, I did.
Speaker 1: Did--you didn't have to be at church as much; right (laughter), if you were a Presbyterian?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, we had--we had the youth programs on Sunday afternoons and then during the week. And, you know, during the summer you had bible school. You spent as much time as you wanted to. And then I would go away to camp in the summers because the Presbyterians had camps and--and that, even then, was prior to going to an integrated school. You know, those camps and things like that were integrated. It was black and white.
Speaker 1: Okay. I never thought about--so Johnson C. Smith was associated with the Presbyterian church (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It's a Presbyterian college.
Speaker 1: Okay. I did not know it. I did not know it.
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: Yeah. All right. All right. So the black Presbyterian church and--yeah. I know that Pentecostal is a lot more, more demonstrative in their--
Speaker 2: Yeah. They had a lot, you know, a lot of singing and a lot of all that. But the Presbyterian is quieter, and, and I liked that. And, actually, until I moved here--because--down to Palm Beach County [Florida], I still went to the Presbyterian church. We don't have Presbyterian churches here in Palm Beach County that are black Presbyterian churches. They're all mixed. And my--and, actually, when I moved here, I joined one. But I did want my children [Vita Chavis and Sean Chavis] to have the experience of being in a diverse congregation, so I became Episcopal then, you know, so that--because I didn't want--I wanted them to experience both so, you know.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So that was when I changed.
Speaker 1: Okay. Is there a whole lot of difference between the Episcopal church and the Presbyterian?
Speaker 2: Not a lot.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Not a lot. You know, we're an offshoot of Catholics a little bit (laughter), you know, with Episcopal. So, no, it's not a lot.
Speaker 1: Oh, okay. All right. So you had the chance to participate in organized activities in a church setting?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And camp in the summer?
Speaker 2: A lot of times that was my only activity was the, you know, with the church, yeah. So, yes. Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: Okay. Do you remember who the pastor was when you were growing up?
Speaker 2: We had Mr.--Reverend Barnett [ph.]. We had Reverend Morgan [ph.]. And, you know, with the Presbyterian churches, if you're in between a pastor, you know, we had a white pastor for a long time, they would send to the church who was, you know, we respected him a lot. And I cannot think of his name right now but--but, yes, those two are the ones that--more recently after I was, you know, older.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Is it--I guess the bishops appoint the ba- the pastors--
Speaker 2: Yeah, exactly (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) for each church? Okay.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Story_ID: 650281
Speaker 1: So you started at Lincoln Park High School [sic. Lincoln Park Academy, Fort Pierce, Florida]; and then go to Dan McCarty [Dan McCarty High School, Fort Pierce, Florida]. Did they--were you the--you were part of the first group to integrate Dan McCarty, right (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes. Uh-hm.
Speaker 1: All right. So were you prepped before you went? Did they give you some kind of a orientation about what to expect there or, you know, either before you went or after you got over there?
Speaker 2: I don't recall being prepped to go to school. You know, we just went to school. I know that once we got there, though, some of the kids, you know, their classes were different, you know. Harder, in some cases, than what ours were at Lincoln Park. But that could be, too, because a lot of--I got in some college prep classes, you know, which I didn't have over at the other school. But I don't recall being prepped by anyone, you know.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So they didn't have a college prep track at--
Speaker 2: At Lincoln Park (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) Lincoln Park?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, it's been a long time. They probably did. I just don't remember.
Speaker 1: Okay. So you got in a college prep track at Dan McCarty?
Speaker 2: For one class.
Speaker 1: Oh, okay.
Speaker 2: That I remember, uh-huh.
Speaker 1: So were you majoring as a business major in school or what?
Speaker 2: In high school?
Speaker 1: I mean, yeah, in high school? I don't know how--or track in it. Because they used to have--I know, when I was in school, they--this was in Ohio, though. They had, like, a business track, a general track and a college prep track.
Speaker 2: If--it was probably a general track. I don't recall being in any other--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --track for a specific career.
Speaker 1: So were you--well, how were your grades in those days? Were you like a top student, or (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Probably average.
Speaker 1: Average?
Speaker 2: I think all of us, once we went over to the white school, our grades probably suffered a little bit.
Speaker 1: Okay. Did they have better equipment and everything at McCarty (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) They did. They had--they had new books and things that we didn't have at the Lincoln Park.
Speaker 1: Okay. Yeah, that's usually laboratories and things--
Speaker 2: Right. But we had labs at Lincoln Park, though.
Speaker 1: Did you? Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: All right. So it wasn't that big a deal (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It was different--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --but it was--I mean, we did have, you know, we had science, obviously, so we did have laboratories and things like that. At Lincoln Park they had the junior college [Lincoln Junior College; Indiana River State College, Fort Pierce, Florida], which was right next to the--to the high school. So, you know, we--it wasn't like it was like a little backwoods school.  We did have some good things there.
Story_ID: 650282
Speaker 1: How were you treated? I mean, I heard--well, we've heard a lot. We've interviewed people with the Little Rock Nine, and Norfolk 17, other people that--and, you know, they had the worst experiences, I think, but--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And some people's experiences, there's some good and some bad. Did you--how did the students treat you there, at Dan McCarty High School [Fort Pierce, Florida]?
Speaker 2: You know, it was--it was different for them, too, I think, as it was for us. And even though it was an integrated school, we still--the blacks hung with the blacks and the whites hung with the whites, you know. I do feel that there are a lot of things, you know, that we, as black students, might have missed out by going to the white school. Even though the black school would allow us to participate in some things, you know, like, a lot of the organizations that you have on black campuses, you know. And then, on the white campus, you--we didn't get involved in those, which we might of--could have gotten involved in them. I don't know. But, mostly, you know, we didn't. Now, the boys who played sports found it easier than the young ladies, the girls.
Speaker 1: Yeah, we hear this story so much from (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah. Yeah, the boys, you know, like--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --that played football or they played basketball. And so they were widely accepted a little bit more so than the young girls, the girls. Because, you know, we, we weren't in those sorority type clubs that they had, because they didn't have black people in them, you know. So--but, overall, we stuck together.
Speaker 1: Okay. Okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) You know.
Speaker 1: All right. Did you have any black sports stars there at--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --McCarty?
Speaker 2: Actually, we did. We had Kenny Showers [Kenneth Showers]. Kenny died about two years ago. We had Leon Porter. You know, they all played sports, you know.
Speaker 1: Okay. Now, was interracial dating an issue when--there?
Speaker 2: You know, I wouldn't have been able to bring anybody home black anyway, but white would have definitely not been acceptable. So if it was, we didn't--no, it wasn't.
Speaker 1: Okay. Okay. So--all right. So when--did you have any favorite teachers at Dan McCarty?
Speaker 2: You know, I did. Mrs. Schwavsworth [ph.]. She was--she was an elderly lady, but she was real nice. And I think she taught music appreciation, really, but she was very nice to everybody. And there was only a few teachers who really--you felt that, perhaps, there was the bias there, because others kind of knew what they were there for. And I can't recall, maybe one black teacher was out there. We didn't have that many black--I don't even recall them, you know. We might have but I can't recall. But some of the teachers, you know, did their job. You know, their job was to teach and to--and some of them did, you know. But I know there were some teachers, like the one I told you who said that he had his and, you know, and you could pick up those vibes from some of them, you know.
Speaker 1: Okay. Now, were you involved in any extracurricular activities at all at Dan McCarty or at Lincoln [Lincoln Park Academy, Fort Pierce, Florida]? Because you said that they let you do things at Lincoln, too.
Speaker 2: Well, you know, when I was at Lincoln Park, I mean, you know, we did, you know, the athletic things. I'm not, you know, never been one who did the basketball and all that, track and stuff like that; but I did like sports.  So I was, you know, part of the extracurricular things that they had. I played in the band when I was Lincoln Park. I didn't play in the band at Dan McCarty, you know.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah. So probably could have, maybe. I don't know, you know. But, but I did not at Dan McCarty, but I did at Lincoln Park, so.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: Did you miss it?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, you're at a different school, so the environment was different. So I don't know, you know. If I had stayed at Lincoln Park, I probably would have progressed higher with it, but, but I don't--won't say that I missed it, missed it, you know.
Speaker 1: And did you run for any student offices or anything in high school?
Speaker 2: We didn't do--no, I don't, I don't, you know, there wasn't enough of the black kids who would have been able to vote, you know, for us to put us in. But I know at Lincoln Park I was like--I think one year I was Miss Lincoln Park, which I think was like ninth grade or something like that, and, you know, and a student council, you know, some officer there. But once we went over to, to Dan McCarty, I don't think many of us actually got into those type of organizations there.
Speaker 1: Yeah, so what it sounds like to me, this has taken a toll--
Speaker 2: I think, you know, when (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) you know, or did you--
Speaker 2: Yeah, I feel--that's why I said I do feel that it did take its toll in a certain way. I do. Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah. Okay. Now, when it came time for prom, did you go to the prom at Lincoln Park or at Dan McCarty (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I think I went to both.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Uh-huh. I think I, I know I went to Dan McCarty's prom, and I think I went to Lincoln Park's prom, too.
Speaker 1: Okay. All right. All right. So how long did Lincoln Park last after Dan McCarty was integrated?
Speaker 2: Well, actually, Lincoln Park is still around. Probably one of the top schools. It's no longer a high school. I think they've made it into a junior high or elementary or something like that, but it's one of the top schools in the country. Dan McCarty closed. I think they, they built another school, I think (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay.
Speaker 2: That's my understanding. I do go back to some of their reunions, you know.
Story_ID: 650283
Speaker 1: So on the verge of graduation, what kind of counseling did you get about--or did you consider college? Or what kind of counseling were you getting at, at Dan McCarty [Dan McCarty High School, Fort Pierce, Florida]?
Speaker 2: When it was time to graduate, actually, I graduated in '67 [1967], and I got married after I graduated from high school.
Speaker 1: Okay. So you weren't thinking about going to college at the time of graduation (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I think I was thinking about it, but, you know, for the HBCUs [historically black colleges and universities], you know, obviously, at the Dan McCarty, they weren't counseling us on black schools, you know. And they had the junior college in Fort Pierce [Indian River Junior College; Indian River State College, Fort Pierce, Florida]. And I was thinking about going to college but, you know, whatever happened, I ended up, after a year, marrying.
Speaker 1: Now, did you--I mean did you--did you ever talk to a counselor about college, or did they ever talk to you about going?
Speaker 2: I don't recall.
Speaker 1: Okay. All right. Okay. So--all right. So you got married right after high school?
Speaker 2: Well, a year later.
Speaker 1: Year later?
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: Okay. In sixty- okay. Nineteen sixty-eight [1968]. All right. So what did you do right after high school? Were you--
Speaker 2: Actually, I was recruited. I think that's probably what took me off, you know, I was recruited by BellSouth [BellSouth Corporation].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I--because they were trying to hire minorities, I think, at that time. So they recruited me, and I became one of the people that worked for them, that was recruited out of that class.
Speaker 1: So this is--so did you get recruited in '67 [1967]?
Speaker 2: I think it was right after high school.
Speaker 1: Oh.
Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay. Because I remember, in '68 [1968], so many people got jobs and never had them before. So many things--because of the assassination of Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] and the riots and all that, people got hired all over the place--
Speaker 2: Yeah. Well, I (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) that had never been, yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah. I know AT&T [AT&T Inc.]--well, what was it then? I think it was Southern Bell or BellSouth at that time. They started recruiting black kids.
Speaker 1: Okay. You got recruited prior to Dr. King's assassination?
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: And so what did you do at BellSouth?
Speaker 2: I was a toll operator.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And then I moved up and became somebody's secretary.
Speaker 1: Okay. Just any old body, or was it somebody important (laughter)?
Speaker 2: No, it was impor- (laughter) it was--he thought he was important, yeah. He was (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) He thought he was (laughter)?
Speaker 2: He was one of the managers. He was one of the regional managers, yeah, yeah (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay. Okay. All right. So you were--yeah. So you had a pretty good secretarial job? I mean, I guess--
Speaker 2: I did, yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) working with somebody that--
Speaker 2: Right, right.
Speaker 1: And if a regional manager is--
Speaker 2: He was a regional manager.
Speaker 1: --had you as secretary, you must know--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --what you're doing, because this is--
Speaker 2: Well, I guess I knew what I was doing.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: But I'm sure I did and even after then. But I left there and went someplace else.
Speaker 1: Now, did you have children at--right after you got married (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I, I had--from my first marriage, I had two children [Vita Chavis and Sean Chavis].
Speaker 1: Okay. All right. So at this period of time, when you're like eighteen, nineteen, did you have--
Speaker 2: Yeah, uh-huh (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)you had kids. One--
Speaker 2: I think my daughter, I had her at nineteen.
Story_ID: 650284
Speaker 1: We have a note here that you got involved--you started your own insurance business.
Speaker 2: I did.
Speaker 1: And was this--when did this happen in relationship to, I guess, BellSouth [BellSouth Corporation; AT&T Inc.]?
Speaker 2: Well, actually, I left BellSouth and went to work at Grumman Aerospace [Grumman Aerospace Corporation; Northrop Grumman], which was--
Speaker 1: Okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) in Martin County [Florida]. This was af- you know, after I was married. I was working at Grumman, and I met this insurance agent there who would come on the premises, you know, and talk to the, to the employees about insurance. And I met him. And he was with Travelers [The Travelers Indemnity Company], and I knew he was very successful. And I felt that, if he could be successful at it, I probably could do the same thing. So I actually left Grumman and went into the insurance business.
Speaker 1: Okay. Now, let me get the dates here. Now, when did you go to Grumman?
Speaker 2: I left--I--god, well, my daughter [Vita Chavis] was born in '69 [1969]. So I think I must have been at Grumman, probably, in '72 [1972], maybe. No, no. Grumman might have been about '69 [1969].
Speaker 1: Sixty-nine [1969] (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I had my daughter in '69 [1969], so it must have been '70 [1970].
Speaker 1: Seventy [1970]?
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: Okay. All right. And you were at Grumman how long?
Speaker 2: Probably about two years, two or three years.
Speaker 1: Okay. So you started your agency in '72 [1972]?
Speaker 2: I went to--this was me--not me starting my agency. I was working for an insurance company then.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So it had to--started working there, I think, in '73 [1973], maybe.
Speaker 1: Okay. So this is Travelers; right?
Speaker 2: Travelers, uh-huh.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: As an agent, though.
Speaker 1: Okay. Okay. As an agent, okay.
Speaker 2: And after I was with Travelers, you know, I met this young lady at my church. And she was with Allstate [Allstate Corporation], and she had told me about a position at Allstate. Because I was traveling--I was living here, in West Palm [West Palm Beach, Florida], but I had been driving back and forth, you know, to Stuart [Florida]. So I went to Allstate, got hired. One of the first females here, in Palm Beach County [Florida], working in their casualty continuing area, which handled the larger claims. And I did that for two years. And, after then, I went into the agency field again.
Speaker 1: I can just imagine. I, you know, just sitting here I--insurance in Florida must really be more complicated than it is in some other states because of the hurricanes and the natural (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It is. It is.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: And, actually, after being in it for a while, I really experienced that because of the hurricanes. But it was, it was an industry where, you know, with the life and health, you know, you had the little penny policies and things that our parents might have taken out. But I was in the casualty--in the other field, you know. I was a general agent. And so that allowed me to get involved in the bigger policies that companies have. And after doing that for a while--and it was very--a very successful venture that I engaged in. I then opened my own office. I became an Allstate agent, but I was allowed to open my own office. And that's when I became independent.
Speaker 1: Okay. So about year is this?
Speaker 2: That had to be, probably, about '86 [1986], maybe.
Speaker 1: Okay. And what did you call your agency?
Speaker 2: It was--it was an Allstate agency, but it was a neighborhood agency.
Speaker 1: Okay. So it didn't have a--didn't have any other name (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It was [HistoryMaker] Priscilla Taylor.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I always just use my name.
Story_ID: 650285
Speaker 1: Were Allstate's [Allstate Corporation] policies friendly to the black community in those days, or?
Speaker 2: I think it was like probably most of these companies. They redlined, you know. Black areas paid more insurance. I found that very interesting. When I actually became an agent, I noticed how most black people, regardless of whether they had perfect driving records or they were in the assigned risk pool, paying more money for insurance; and that was one thing that I took upon myself. I said, "Well, I've got to do something to make sure we get people out of this assigned risk." And, you know, they might be paying two thousand dollars for a policy, should be five hundred dollars, you know. But, yes, that was happening. But, you know there was a lawsuit, I think, filed which stopped that. But, yes, it was happening.
Speaker 1: Okay. On the inside of that, did you find yourself, like, stuck between the company and the community--
Speaker 2: Well, you know (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) trying to change their policies?
Speaker 2: --companies always have a way of doing things, you know. They might say, "Well, if you work in zone A, you know, and you have a certain amount of losses, then you're going to have to move out of zone A and go into zone B." So you remove the title redlining, but in a sense you are because, you know, all the people in zone A are people--are minorities. So they can't get insurance, the pre- the preferred policy, because they live in zone A. So, you know, and most people are not going to move out of a certain area just so they can get an insurance policy, but they're paying a higher rate.
Story_ID: 650286
Speaker 1: Your insurance agency was in Palm Beach Co- County?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: So when did you move to Palm Beach County [Florida]? This, this sneaked up on us just now (laughter).
Speaker 2: I moved to Palm Beach County in '74 [1974], I think.
Speaker 1: Okay. That's when you were with Gru--
Speaker 2: I left Grumman [Grumman Aerospace Corporation; Northrop Grumman]. Yeah (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Travelers [The Travelers Indemnity Company], I guess.
Speaker 2: --because I was--right, exactly.
Speaker 1: You were with Travelers then; right?
Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay. So that's when you moved, okay. All right. And, well, this was your first time living someplace else, right, other than in Fort Pierce [Florida]?
Speaker 2: Exactly.
Speaker 1: So, yeah. So how'd you like West Palm Beach [Florida]?
Speaker 2: Well, when I was young, you know, my mom [Taylor's maternal grandmother, Iretha Minus Taylor] would let me get on the Greyhound bus and come down here and shop, you know, because they had the bigger stores, Burdines and all of the malls and things like that. So I was familiar with it up to that, you know, knowing about West Palm Beach. But it was also close enough for me to still be able to come home to see my par- (laughter) you know, see them, so. But I still felt I was moving to the city. So, you know, I, I--it was, it was ni- I mean, obviously, it was different from Fort Pierce, from where I was from.
Story_ID: 650287
Speaker 1: In the '80s [1980s], now this--as you're--when you were an insurance executive, you got involved with the National Association of Negro Business and Professional Women's Club [National Association of Negro Business and Professional Women's Clubs, Inc.], right (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right, um-hm.
Speaker 1: And now, tell us about that. Now, who started that, that organization, and what's the significance of it? What are the--what's their pro- project?
Speaker 2: It was started by Ollie Chinn Porter. It was based out of Washington, D.C. And I think they started it with some educators who probably put it together originally, you know, but then it was opened up to businesswomen across the country. And they, truthfully, do a lot of work, you know, as far as families and things like that. You know, it was just a way for people to benefit from the successes of others. You know, you hear about what they're doing, the mentorship and the things like that which were happening. And they were started during a time when we needed to have that unity.
Speaker 1: Okay. Did you work with--was Ollie Chinn Porter still alive when you--
Speaker 2: Oh, no. She was one of the founders--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --but she was deceased, yeah. I think, when I came in, we had--I think, Jacqui Gates [Jacquelyn Gates Shipe] might have been the president. But, you know, we had people from all across the country that was involved in the Negro business and professional women's organization. And it's still in, you know, it still exists. It just did a lot of things, you know, to make things better in the minority community.
Speaker 1: Okay. Okay. Founded in 1936.
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: Ollie Chinn Porter. I think this is the first mention we've had of this in this kind of detail, you know.
Speaker 2: Oh, really?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So you helped start the local chapter here; right?
Speaker 2: Yeah. And, actually, here, in Palm Beach County [Florida], there was a chapter, but, you know, you know how you have younger people come up? At the time I was one of those younger people coming up, so we felt that we had a lot in common, myself and another--the late Thyra Starr [Thyra Echols Starr]. She and I, working together, started the Greater Palm Beaches Business and Professional Women's chapter [Greater Palm Beaches Business and Professional Women's Club, Inc.] here, in Palm Beach County. And, you know, we focused on trying to educate people, you know. Because, heretofore, you know, a lot of times, in the minority community, we think of education, of social work as it, you know; but we don't go beyond thinking about the business world and how you can be successful owning your own business and things like that. So, you know, as a chapter here, in Palm Beach County, those are some of the areas that we worked in and, certainly, trying to strengthen the families, because families always seemed like, to have been under attack in some way or the other. So we worked to try to strengthen the family.
Speaker 1: Okay. At some point, now, you became the Southeast District governor of the national association of Negro and professional business and professional women; right?
Speaker 2: Yes, uh-huh (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay. About what year was that; do you remember?
Speaker 2: That probably was, what, eighty- maybe '89 [1989]. I'm not sure, truthfully.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I think I did it at--was the governor, I think, for four years. And I had seven states that came--seven or eight states that were under my leadership at the time.
Speaker 1: Okay. Now, during this time, were you going to school, too? Or did you--
Speaker 2: Probably maybe taking one course, but not really seriously pursuing.
Speaker 1: Okay. Okay. But this has--but working with this organization, was this--were you working with any other organizations other than the National Association of Negro Business and Professional Women?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, I've always been involved, you know. I was in the insurance industry, so, obviously, I was involved in some of those industries. I was with a member of the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People], a member of the Urban League [National Urban League] and worked with them, you know. So, I've always, you know, been involved in different organizations.
Story_ID: 650288
Speaker 1: So when did you go back to school? Now, you, I guess, was it the '90s [1990s], or?
Speaker 2: I went back in the '90s [1990s]. I went to Barry University [Miami Shores, Florida], got my undergrad degree. And, actually, when I went back, I was with Allstate [Allstate Corporation] because they paid for my education there, you know (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay.
Speaker 2: And, you know, it was learning, and you appreciated it even more then, you know. I think that's when, when adults go back to school, they appreciate it even more. But it was, you know, a very wise thing that I did, and I was grateful that I did do it.
Speaker 1: And--okay.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: All right. So were there any special teachers or professors or anything, you know, at Barry that you remember?
Speaker 2: Not really. Because, you know, we were all adults. I mean, you know, some of us were older than the teachers (laughter), truthfully. But, you know, it was just the idea of learning things that you don't even think about, you know. I can remember one of the teachers with the--he was in the theater and things like that and looking at one of the movies, "Rosebud" ['Citizen Kane'], you know. It was just, it was just interesting. And the students at that time, you know, we'd all gone through our challenges. So, you know, we were--most of us were adults in that--but we had some who were just coming out of school. But we sort of were supportive of each other, shared ideas; so it was good.
Story_ID: 650289
Speaker 1: I mean, in those days were you paying very much attention to politics and--in this area?
Speaker 2: Well, it wasn't long after then, though, that I did, because then I went on--after finishing up my undergrad, I went on to work on my master's degree.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And, actually, when I was working on my master's is really when I first got into politics. I was writing a paper on international trade, and I would always pass by the Port of Palm Beach [Riviera Beach, Florida]. And they had--one of the commissioners, I think, didn't run. And I ran for his seat [on the Port of Palm Beach District Commission], and I won it. And that was my introduction into politics. And it was really, truthfully, wonderful. I enjoyed it. You never enjoy running for office. But, once I won, it was just an experience that I always will cherish working--being there at the port.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Traveling the world, you know, seeing how--other places, challenges and things like that. Because it was more like a business, which my background is business, so being at the port was like a business.
Speaker 1: Explain what that is for--a lot of people have no idea what you--what you're talking about in terms of--
Speaker 2: Well, as you know, ports, trade, international trades and things like that in cargo (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So this is like a sea port, actually a sea port?
Speaker 2: It's a sea port. It is a sea port.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And the one here, in Palm Beach--ports are situated different in different areas. But the one here is more like a, you know, it's partnership, you know, it's government, quasi governmental. Because you compete, actually, with the business world, you know. You can bring in, you know, companies that are doing the same thing that the port was doing. So you, in a sense you're competing with the business world. But--and here, in Palm Beach County [Florida], we did not levy taxes, so we could--we had that ability, but we did not do it. So the dollars that we made were dollars that we generated from business, so. And from the--being from the business world, my thing was, you know, dealing with competition, which the port did, and making those business decisions to elevate us to be the best that we could be.
Speaker 1: Let me just--so the Port of Palm Beach is competing with other ports for--
Speaker 2: Well--
Speaker 1: --for shipping and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, right. Yeah.
Speaker 1: That's what you're saying?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But even though the Port of Palm Beach was limited because of our size, you know. We couldn't, obviously, get cruise ships that were in Broward County [Florida] or Dade County [Miami-Dade County, Florida] because we don't have the depth. But you compete for businesses. Because if you could get a company here to set up business at the port from Dade or Broward, that is money coming into the port.
Speaker 1: Okay. So these are the consideration of how--these are things that determine how big a port is? I guess, the depth of the water and the--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yes. You can only--
Speaker 1: I guess the shelter that the harbor offers and natural--
Speaker 2: You can only take ships up to, you know, you have to be able to come in the Gulf Stream and things like that. And if the ship is too big, it can't make that turn, so. Yes, all of those are considerations.
Speaker 1: Now, explain how the Gulf Stream works (laughter).
Speaker 2: Well, you know, you have (laughter) where water in, different places water meet each other, you know. That's the Gulf Stream. And then sometimes it can be turbulent (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) It's like a current in the ocean; right?
Speaker 2: It's a current.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: It's a current, and it can be turbulent at times. And, you know, if a smaller ship try to turn into that Gulf Stream, it can actually wreck it, you know.  So, actually, they, you know, and you have pilots, you know. You have your pilots in the airplane, but you also have pilots at the port. And these pilots make sure that the navigation is safe.
Speaker 1: Okay. Yeah, okay. So if you didn't know the coast, you could, like, crash your ship (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah. You can--
Speaker 1: --smash your ship?
Speaker 2: You can go and run aground, uh-huh.
Speaker 1: Okay. All right. All right. So this is--so were you--where you grew up, in Fort Pierce [Florida], there wasn't--it's on the ocean; right? It's not on--
Speaker 2: It is.
Speaker 1: It is? Okay.
Speaker 2: Uh-huh, yeah.
Speaker 1: All right. But did you have, like, the same kind of like--
Speaker 2: They didn't develop their port.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: You know, they, they have a port there. But, actually, Fort Pierce is a private--they have a private owner, I believe, of the port. Who--as right now, they want to develop it, but the private owner is not selling it to them, so, you know.
Speaker 1: Okay. So the, the Port of Palm Beach is owned by the city?
Speaker 2: Yeah, it's, you know (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) The, the county or the--
Speaker 2: --it's--1926 it was established by the U.S. government.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, um-hm (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) All right.
Story_ID: 650290
Speaker 1: The position you sought was--?
Speaker 2: I was actually the commissioner for the port authority [Port of Palm Beach District Commission]. And while I was there, I served as chairwoman on two occasions, which you're nominated and chosen by your peers on the board. I think it was five of us.
Speaker 1: Okay. So you're one of five people in charge of the port (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Uh-huh, right.
Speaker 1: Okay. Commissioner of the port authority. All right. Okay. This is a position I couldn't have imagined if I hadn't had this interview with you, because I wouldn't have imagined that such a position existed.
Speaker 2: It exists and it's really--I can say out of all the positions I've had, I think this was the one I enjoyed the best.
Speaker 1: And why? Why, why did you enjoy it so much?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, you--it's like you interact with other countries, you know, because you have ports all over. So, you know, you get trade coming from China, from Africa and from--now, Cuba is opening up and--and, actually, with our port [Port of Palm Beach, Riviera Beach, Florida], we were set up for trade with Cuba because of the roll on and roll off, so.
Speaker 1: Now, what's that? What is the roll on and roll off?
Speaker 2: It's just, you know, like if a ship pull up--a cargo ship pulls up, they're able to roll their things off.
Speaker 1: Oh, okay.
Speaker 2: And it's--yeah, uh-huh. Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay. So the simplest things don't make sense to somebody from the Midwest. See, I don't have that in (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) (Laughter) Right, right.
Speaker 1: --where I come from, you know.
Speaker 2: Well, we have it here, yeah. Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: But okay. All right. So--all right. So that's--all right.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So you had a chance to travel to other--some of the other countries?
Speaker 2: Yeah. Well, you know, we went to London [England]. Yes, I did travel, uh-huh.
Speaker 1: And where else? London--
Speaker 2: Obviously, you know, you have the Caribbean. So I think it was Saint Martin, Canada.  What they have is a trade association called the port authority, American Association of Port Authorities or something like that. So each year they hold their meetings in different parts of the world.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: So you get your expenses paid to these meetings?
Speaker 2: Well, as long as you're--
Speaker 1: Yeah--
Speaker 2: --traveling on behalf of the port.
Speaker 1: Yeah, the port authority.
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: Okay. So this is--once you find out about it, it's a--it's not a bad--
Speaker 2: It's not bad.
Speaker 1: --place to be in, you know.
Speaker 2: No, it's not.
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 2: If you're in business. I mean, you know--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --because you appreciate it more if you're in the business world.
Speaker 1: You hadn't imagined this job existed prior to doing this research, right?
Speaker 2: Right. I was--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --doing my paper on trade [at Barry University, Miami Shores, Florida]; and, once I got into, then I saw what it was all about.
Story_ID: 650291
Speaker 1: Now, you were telling me off camera, you were the first African American to serve in this position (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) First African American woman.
Speaker 1: Woman, okay.
Speaker 2: Um-hm, um-hm.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah, who was the first African American, you know?
Speaker 2: Jesse Ferguson [Jesse Ferguson, Sr.]. Mr. Ferguson is deceased now, but he was the first African American to serve at the port [Port of Palm Beach District Commission].
Speaker 1: And when was that? When did he serve?
Speaker 2: God, it had to be probably in the '80s [1980s], I would imagine.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Because, you know, before, I mean, you know, black people didn't serve on those type boards (laughter), so, you know. Yeah.
Speaker 1: So was it increased political involvement by black folks created, you know, a presence on it?
Speaker 2: I think it was the opportunity to see people of color in different places where they weren't before.
Speaker 1: Okay. All right. So--all right. So Jesse Ferguson was the first, and you were the first black woman to serve?
Speaker 2: Yes, uh-huh.
Speaker 1: Okay. All right. So how long did you stay as a commissioner with the port (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I served there, I think, for six years; and then I ran for the Florida House of Representatives.
Speaker 1: Okay. All right. So--
Speaker 2: And while I was there, as I said, I was chairwoman twice.
Story_ID: 650292
Speaker 1: Now, when did you run for the--?
Speaker 2: Florida House [Florida House of Representatives]?
Speaker 1: Yeah. That's 2004, right?
Speaker 2: I think that's 2004.
Speaker 1: Yeah. I want to ask you about something that happened before that, though, and just as a--just from your perspective. I know you weren't involved directly in it, but the 2004 presidential election [sic.] where we had the country deadlocked, you know.
Speaker 2: With the chads, with the hanging chads (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, the hanging chads, right.
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: Right. What was your--what's your insider's view? You weren't all the way on the side of it, but you were here in Florida. Do you have any thoughts about that?
Speaker 2: I think it was rather embarrassing, you know, to see our commissioners on TV, holding up chads, looking at them, you know. But that was the start of, to me, when we really started looking at elections differently. Because I feel Al Gore won that election. But we were--allowed a certain party to pick somebody, and then the judges of the same party okayed it. I think that--well, they--someone--a friend of mine who's elderly, she always say, "Shenanigans." I think that we might have had the hanging chads here, but I do think that, based upon the information, you know, that Gore really won that election.
Speaker 1: Okay. So that's the first of two consecutive controversial elections. And--
Speaker 2: Exactly.
Speaker 1: --now we've got one--
Speaker 2: Exactly.
Speaker 1: --you know, now, as we sit here in 2017 (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Exactly.
Speaker 1: --the 2016 election with the involvement of the--
Speaker 2: Difference. Different sources, right.
Speaker 1: Yeah, a different kind of--
Speaker 2: Right, uh-huh.
Speaker 1: This time it's not Florida. I think in two thousand--
Speaker 2: Two thousand [2000] was Florida.
Speaker 1: Two thousand [2000] was Florida. Two thousand four [2004] was Ohio--
Speaker 2: Right (laughter), uh-huh.
Speaker 1: --with, you know, Ken Blackwell and the, you know, closing of--
Speaker 2: Yeah, the, the voting things.
Speaker 1: Yeah, the polls (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Closing it down early, right.
Speaker 1: --in the major black metropolitan areas--
Speaker 2: Exactly, exactly.
Speaker 1: --in Columbus [Ohio] and Cleveland [Ohio]--
Speaker 2: Right, right (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) and that sort of thing. So were there--so you--so you ju- so you were at the port authority [Port of Palm Beach District Commission] during all this time, right?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Story_ID: 650293
Speaker 1: You decided to run in 2004. Now, what, what prompted you to run for the Florida House [Florida House of Representatives]?
Speaker 2: Well, actually, I was--also had my insurance agency at the time and had a pretty big bu- book of business. And we had got hit by Hurricane Andrew.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And you saw the rates that, you might have insured a house here for three hundred dollars pre Andrew; and, after Andrew, that went up to about five thousand dollars. It was like a shock, and it was also a business that I was running that was definitely affected by it. So I contacted--I tried to contact my state representative at the time so that he could come up with a bill that I--something that I had thought of that would be, perhaps, help as far as with the premiums and what was going on. But I never got a return call from him, you know, so I just felt that, you know, that the failure to get a response to me trying to reach out to my elected official just wasn't acceptable. And I decided, well, you know, maybe I should run, myself.
Speaker 1: Well, who was your elected official then?
Speaker 2: He was a young man, you know, at the time. Harper [James "Hank" Harper, Jr.] was his name, you know. And, you know, so I ran.
Speaker 1: So was he a Democrat or Republican?
Speaker 2: Democrat.
Speaker 1: A Democrat?
Speaker 2: Uh-huh, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I ran and I won. And after getting there, you know, it was kind of rewarding to be there, you know. And I did fight for that bill. I introduced it, what I wanted to, about trying to create a wind pool for Florida, you know, which is what I wanted to talk to him about. But while there, you know, there are a lot of legislations and things that were happening because the--again, the Democrats were not in, you know, we didn't lead anything. We were there, but the Republicans had the--had the numbers to get things through. But I've always sort of valued myself to be where I can work both. You know, I'm sort of moderate, so I can work both sides. I had some successes and things there. But I think--and I know you--I think you're going to ask me about the Trayvon Martin situation. Because those are the--
Speaker 1: Later on, yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) when--I was there when that legislation was passed. Matter of fact, I actually debated on that legislation. But, but I did go to Tallahassee [Florida] as a Democrat and served as a minority whip while I was there was a--actually the ranking (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now, that's the leader of the--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --legislature--
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: --of the Democratic side of the legislature (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, uh-huh. Yes.
Speaker 1: So you're the person that can get the--and so you come in at--now, had you had any experience in Democratic politics in the state before you--I mean, other than being in the port authority [Port of Palm Beach District Commission]. I mean--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: Unh-uh.
Speaker 1: So you come in like--you're cracking the whip after a while (laughter).
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: I mean, you're the (unclear).
Speaker 2: Well, you know, life is a politics, so.
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 2: You know, when--if you can apply those life principles that you have then (simultaneous)--
Story_ID: 650294
Speaker 1: What other African Americans were in the state legislature [Florida House of Representatives] then?
Speaker 2: Arthenia Joyner, who was really someone that I thought a lot of; and she was one of the ones who marched and that really got arrested during this, you know, the times in the sit ins and things like that.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: Al Lawson, who's now in the--in Tallashas- I mean, in Washington [D.C.]. He won last time as a state--as a representative, you know. We, you know, had quite a few people, but we didn't have the numbers, you know--
Speaker 1: Well, how big is the state legislature?
Speaker 2: You have 120 representatives, and--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And out of 120 we probably had forty Repub- forty Democrats, forty-two. You know, we, we could filibuster, but we couldn't--we didn't have enough--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --numbers to get anything through.
Speaker 1: Forty Democrats. And out of that number of forty Democrats, how many were African American, you think? Or what--
Speaker 2: Well, in my class--because, you know, you have your little classes.
Speaker 1: Uh-huh, yeah.
Speaker 2: I think I was the only one in that class in 2004. There was only three of us (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Oh, the class that came in?
Speaker 2: Yeah, that came in together.
Speaker 1: But after you got there, I mean, how many were--out of the forty--
Speaker 2: Maybe--
Speaker 1: I mean, in the whole--
Speaker 2: I would think maybe about twelve, maybe.
Speaker 1: Twelve in the legislature? Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, during that--that time, yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Twelve African Americans?
Speaker 2: I think it might be more now. I think. I'm not sure.
Speaker 1: All right. And there--I would imagine they're mostly from Miami [Florida], Tallahassee [Florida]--
Speaker 2: You're absolutely correct.
Speaker 1: --and Orlando [Florida], I guess.
Speaker 2: Exactly.
Speaker 1: That's what I would think.
Speaker 2: Uh-huh, yeah. Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: Okay. Okay. Yeah.
Speaker 2: And Fort Lauderdale [Florida]. Because Chris Smith--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --Chris Smith, who's out of Fort Lauderdale, he was, he was there. And I think he was the minority leader of the black caucus [Democratic Black Caucus of Florida] or something like that. And it had Tony Hill [Anthony C. "Tony" Hill] from Jacksonville [Florida].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, and Tony was over the black caucus for a while.
Speaker 1: But you become the whip. That is something. So you were recognized by your colleagues as being a person that can--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --get everybody together--
Speaker 2: Right, um-hm (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) you know. And--but you had an overwhelming--you had like, you know, overwhelming odds to overcome.
Speaker 2: It was. But as far as the Democrats, you know, we, you know, but like I said, I was, you know, our speaker at the time was Bense. And he was, you know, he was a Republican, but he was a fair person, so, you know.
Speaker 1: This is who? What's his name?
Speaker 2: Bense, B-E-N-T-Z [sic].
Speaker 1: Okay. B--
Speaker 2: Allan Bense. He was the speaker when I came in, and he was--I felt he was rather fair, you know.
Speaker 1: Yeah, now, Florida had, I remember, Claude Pepper--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --being way--from way back. He was considered--he was a--was he a Republican or a Democrat?
Speaker 2: I think he was a Democrat (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay. Maybe it--okay.
Speaker 2: I think. I'm not sure, but I remember Claude Pepper.
Speaker 1: I know he served longer than anybody else, I think, in the--
Speaker 2: He did. Yeah, he did, yeah.
Speaker 1: --legislature.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: And of the old--well, were the old guard Republicans the moderate type--
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: --mostly here? Yeah.
Speaker 2: Well, I think some--I mean, obviously, we have some who are diehard Republicans and could care less. But I think some of them are moderate. And I won't even say Bense was moderate, but I could say that I thought he was fair.
Speaker 1: He was fair, at least?
Speaker 2: Uh-huh, yeah.
Speaker 1: And, you know, Florida is a state with a lot of development--
Speaker 2: Exactly (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) you know, going on all the time, then and now. And it's been like that for a long--since the '20s [1920s], I guess--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --when it just started, like--
Speaker 2: Exactly.
Speaker 1: --booming.
Speaker 2: Exactly.
Speaker 1: So--
Story_ID: 650295
Speaker 1: Well, here's a variety of issues here that they're--that, that are on our outline. You were, you were on the House committee on insurance, business, financial affairs policy committee [Florida House Insurance, Business and Financial Affairs Policy Committee]; the Roads, Bridges and Ports Policy Committee [Florida House Roads, Bridges and Ports Policy Committee]; the Criminal and Civil Justice Appropriations Committee [Florida House Criminal and Civil Justice Appropriations Committee]; the policy council [Florida House Criminal and Civil Justice Policy Council]; and general governmental policy council [Florida House General Government Policy Council]; the Full Appropriations Council on General Government and Health Care [Florida House Full Appropriations Council on General Government and Health Care]; the Select Policy Council and the Strategic and Economic Planning Committee [sic. Florida House Select Policy Council on Strategic and Economic Planning]. So these are all the things that you kind of focused on. It was a pretty broad--
Speaker 2: It was broad--
Speaker 1: --set of--
Speaker 2: Right. Exactly.
Speaker 1: --issues.
Speaker 2: A lot of it are things that I, you know, were familiar with and touched on. But certain areas, though, that really gave me a little different look and feel, you know, because criminal justice was really one that I really then began focusing on. There are certain areas that I was sort of introduced to before that I didn't--I mean, there that I didn't--really wasn't aware--I mean, you know, you hear about burglaries and things. But that was when I was sort of introduced to the Innocence Project, and that was, you know, we had a few people who came through. I had never heard of the Innocence Project, and, I guess, we never think about people just going to--we, you know, being incarcerated for twenty or thirty years for things that they did not do. And I had a claims bill that I was working on, and the gentleman's name was Alan [ph.]; and he was from the Tampa [Florida], St. Pete area [St. Petersburg, Florida].  And we were trying to get him his money. Because after being in prison for twenty something years, it was determined that he did not commit the crime. And then I was introduced because the Innocence Project was really working to, you know, with him. And those, type things sort of, you know, kind of affected me a little bit to think of the injustices that people face. And, now, I did have a claims bill where there was a white gentleman whose name was Wilton Dedge who had been incarcerated wrongfully, and he got out. And I think they ended up giving him like $2 million, you know. But when Alan came along, who was black, it was--we couldn't get his money, you know. And it--
Speaker 1: So the state legislature [Florida House of Representatives] has to approve that the (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) We have to--yeah, you have sovereign immunity in, you know, in Florida. And you can only--local government can give up to two hundred thousand. After then it's a claims bill if it's a government agency, hospital or anything like that. And then it has to be approved by the state legislature. And so I was sort of working with one of the attorneys with the Innocence Project, and it was like both of us, he and I both, we could not believe that--what we were going through to get this money for this man who had been wrongfully incarcerated. And for me, I was looking at it even beyond that, in that we had just prior--previously approved all this money for this other guy, you know, who so happened to be white. And then you see the injustices that, you know, even though you know injustices exist, but this was front and center in a body that could have, to me, done the right thing. And so, you know, but I've signed up for the Innocence Project. I think, if I was an attorney, I would work for them, because I believe in what they do because there's just too many people wrongfully incarcerated.
Speaker 1: Now, tell us who's the--who are the leaders of the Innocence Project and--
Speaker 2: Well, actually, you know, they're attorneys who are the leaders, and I can't give you the exact names. I remember the guy name Scheck [Barry Scheck] who, actually, I think--I don't know if he was on O.J. Simpson's team, but he was--his last name was Scheck, and I know he's involved in the Innocence Project. I don't know if he was the founder or whatever, but, you know, it is--it is, you know, one that I began looking online and kind of keeping up with. Matter of fact, I signed up to get updates and things from them because they are doing something that's really beneficial, you know. Because, you know when your loved one or someone is locked up--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --for something they didn't do and you don't have the money and you file every way you can to get them out, then you get them out; and then they're still being wrongfully, you know, it's just mindboggling to me.
Speaker 1: So they basically lobby the state legislature to work with--
Speaker 2: They actually investigate--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --the crime. You know, they go through the DNA, and they go through a lot of things that, you know, find out that evidence was withheld or evidence wasn't used that should have been used or they didn't talk to this per- you know, they just--they investigated. And a lot of it is volunteer, you know. So, you know, but it's, it's an organization that I think deserves, you know, to be supported.
Story_ID: 650296
Speaker 1: I should know this, but I know that there was, I think, the same--this is in the--I guess in the '90s [1990s] they sta- in the mid-'90s [1990s] they--in Ch- in Illinois, they found that--using DNA evidence found, like, fifteen men on death row (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: --didn't do it.
Speaker 2: And this guy's Barry Scheck. He was--
Speaker 1: Barry Scheck, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, Barry Scheck. But, yeah. And then a lot of the, you know, places who arrest them, they still don't want to let them go, you know.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Even after they have been proven innocent, you know, because they don't want to face the fact that they made a mistake or whatever. But, but that was in the legislature [Florida House of Representatives], and that sort of, you know, you didn't use--when things like that happen, you start watching, you know, these things. And then you start wondering, you know, about fairness in our system, our governmental injust- you know, criminal justice system, so (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, we--I think the public is woefully uninformed about the proportions in--
Speaker 2: Exactly.
Speaker 1: --incarcerated.
Speaker 2: Exactly (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And, overwhelmingly, I know it's here--certainly here in Florida, too. I don't know what the numbers are, but there're--
Speaker 2: There's a lot
Speaker 1: --there's a proportionately--
Speaker 2: Right, right.
Speaker 1: --huge number of black people incarcerated--
Speaker 2: Exactly.
Speaker 1: --as opposed to--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --anybody else.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. But you get to the point, though, where even though it's people of color, you know, being of color. But, you know, there are whites, too, you know, that the same injustice applies. I mean, you know, sometimes, you know, they get caught up in the system just like we do.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: So, you know, so for me to have used my voice at that time to try to help that situation was what I was really trying to do. Because it just opened my eyes to all of the injustices that were happening all over this country and that we, you know, have to fight.
Speaker 1: Yeah. Do you recall any rich people wrongfully convicted and held for years and years in prison?
Speaker 2: It didn't (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Were there any cases like that?
Speaker 2: --come before me, you know. So that--those were things that actually came before me when I was in the legislature.
Speaker 1: Yeah. I'm asking it almost as a joke, but I don't think that happens--
Speaker 2: Oh.
Speaker 1: --to them because they seem to have--
Speaker 2: Because they can pay their way out.
Speaker 1: Yeah, right. Yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. So you're right. No, I don't know of any, unh-uh.
Speaker 1: I would imagine these white people who are--who had been convicted when they're innocent (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, they can--they--
Speaker 1: --or, probably don't have the means either.
Speaker 2: Exactly. They can pay their way out unless it's an atrocious (laughter) cou- crime, you know.
Story_ID: 650297
Speaker 1: So you're, you're cited in 2006 as one of the twenty-five most influential black women [by Success magazine], I guess, in Florida--
Speaker 2: (Nods head).
Speaker 1: --or that's--okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Florida.
Speaker 1: Yeah. And you were recognized by the A. Philip Randolph Institute [Washington, D.C.] in 2007. This is all leaning towards--okay. All right. Yeah, you were named to the National Foundation of Women Legislators [sic. National Foundation for Women Legislators] international committee in 2007. And--but we were getting ready to talk about the Trayvon Martin case.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Okay. Oh, before that, though, you were appointed to the Palm Beach County commission [Palm Beach County Board of County Commissioners]; right?
Speaker 2: No, I was--right. Be--
Speaker 1: In 2009; right?
Speaker 2: Yes, uh-huh.
Speaker 1: That was before Trayvon Martin?
Speaker 2: That was just before Trayvon Martin, uh-huh.
Speaker 1: Okay. And so what happened in the--now, you were in the state legislature [Florida House of Representatives]?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And did you lose the election, or did you not--decide not to run, or what happened?
Speaker 2: Well, actually, our governor [Charlie Crist] appointed me. They had an opening on the Palm Beach County commission, and he appointed me to come back to Palm Beach County [Florida] as a commissioner. And I took it, you know, because it was, you know, after being on the road back and forth, it was kind of nice to have some stability.
Speaker 1: You had to spend a lot of time in Tallahassee [Florida]; right?
Speaker 2: I did, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Spent a lot of--awful lot of time in Tallahassee. But while I was in the legislature, though, the stand your ground law came up, you know (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: And that was one that I debated. Because the person who actually sponsored that bill--I'll never forget--was Baxter [Baxter Troutman] who owned the funeral home. And, you know, it was like he pushed that bill, and I couldn't understand why. Because we already had the castle doctrine, you know, whereas if anybody tried to break in your house, you know, you could defend yourself. You can defend yourself if somebody is trying to do something to you. And I felt that this particular bill, truthfully, was a bill that was against our black kids. Because, you know, our kids with their dreadlocks and their, you know, being children, being kids, could be an intimidating look to some people. So I debated it, but they were able to get it through. But I came home and I--
Speaker 1: Well, just before you get to that, what are the fine points of that? What does stand your ground law mean? What does that mean (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Stand your ground law is if--basically, if you feel intimidated in any way, and--you can actually shoot the person, you know, kill them, you know.
Speaker 1: So--
Speaker 2: And they use that as a defense.
Speaker 1: Wait a minute now. So you're saying that if I show up and a person feels intimidated by me--I mean, do I--what do I have to do to intimidate them? Do I--I mean, is it--
Speaker 2: Well, see, that was--that was the (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) tone of my voice or the way I look, or what is it?
Speaker 2: Well, that was the argument that I had. My debate, which, which they had it online--people to see it--was that so you're telling me that if a young person who has the dreads and the big shirt on--and you feel intimidated by that kid that you can kill him, shoot him? And that--basically, that's what it says, you know. So then you have the Trayvon Martin incident, and that is what this guy tried to use, the stand your ground, to his defense, Zimmerman, you know.
Speaker 1: George Zimmerman, yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah. And to me, that was a test, to me, that should have shown that it was a bad bill, which I always said it was, you know. But you know the worst part about it, though, is that we do not get involved until after an issue happens, you know. This bill was out there. Attention, you know, trying to get people to talk about it.
Speaker 1: But you couldn't get public support for (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Public support--
Speaker 1: --to be against it.
Speaker 2: --needed to come out--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --to say that they were against it. And I don't think it would have passed in the form that it did. So now, once you get a bill in place, it's kind of hard to get it out, you know. And so the stand your ground law begot notoriety when Trayvon Martin was killed.
Story_ID: 650298
Speaker 1: We even have a situation here now, and I've been following it to see how it's going to turn out. When an elderly--well, he was an off duty police [Curtis Reeves] or had been police, and the guy [Chad Oulson] threw popcorn at him or something is what he said.
Speaker 2: Yeah, this is--
Speaker 1: And he pulled (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, I saw it on--
Speaker 1: Yeah, and he pulled his--
Speaker 2: --on the news.
Speaker 1: --and he killed him, and he's using the stand your ground as a defense.
Speaker 2: Now, these are all white people.
Speaker 1: Yeah, those are white people.
Speaker 2: And--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: And I saw it on the news this morning. There was an elderly white guy--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --bald head, grey hair. He's sitting maybe two or three rows behind a young white guy--
Speaker 1: And he checks his email.
Speaker 2: --and his girlfriend--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: And it's--yeah, and he's--they have an argument about him texting--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --during the movie or before the movie starts, or?
Speaker 1: Before the movie starts.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Right, right.
Speaker 2: And the--supposedly, popcorn was thrown--
Speaker 1: That's what he said.
Speaker 2: --toward--he said.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: But the video didn't seem to show that.
Speaker 1: Exactly, exactly.
Speaker 2: And the girlfriend is saying that--
Speaker 1: There was no popcorn.
Speaker 2: --you know, how can they intimidate? They would have to look back and up at him.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: And they couldn't reach him--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --you know. And yet he pulls out a weapon, and he shoots--
Speaker 1: And kills him.
Speaker 2: --and kills--
Speaker 1: Right. And he's using the stand your ground. It's a crazy law and it's a bad law. But those are things that I sort of fought against, trying to make a difference. And it just lets you know even more so that we need to have more of a say in the criminal just- what's going on, you know.
Speaker 2: Yeah. Trayvon Martin case launched, basically, you know, that and the killing of Brown in Missouri.
Speaker 1: Exactly.
Speaker 2: Michael Brown.
Speaker 1: Exactly, yeah.
Speaker 2: In Ferguson, yeah, Missouri.
Speaker 1: It just--and I don't know whether because of those cases, you know, with Trayvon that--it's hard to think that they weren't happening all the time.
Speaker 2: Oh, they--
Speaker 1: And then we just start paying attention then, you know, which is what I think it was.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I can guarantee you we just started paying attention, because (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) We just started paying attention.
Speaker 2: --because there was--
Speaker 1: Exactly.
Speaker 2: Police brutality is the deepest felt, but narrowly organized issue--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --in the black community. It happens in every black community in the country.
Speaker 1: Exactly.
Speaker 2: They, you know--
Speaker 1: Yeah. And nobody (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) John Crawford [John Crawford III] was shot outside of my hometown [Dayton, Ohio] in a Walmart for picking up a BB gun and--
Speaker 1: Right. I remember that, uh-huh.
Speaker 2: Yeah, he was gunned down, I mean, as a terrorist or something--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --you know.
Speaker 1: Right. And no one faced anything, you know, because they are judged by their peers, so they find them not guilty all the time, so.
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, grand jury, everything is--
Speaker 1: Yeah, exactly.
Speaker 2: Yeah, even the state--secretary of state investigators, "Oh, I didn't see anything wrong."
Speaker 1: Right, exactly.
Speaker 2: "The officers were acting reasonably," you know.
Speaker 1: Right, exactly. Yeah. So it's an issue, and I do, you know, that's still something that I, you know, try to watch and be involved when I can.
Speaker 2: Okay. So nothing has changed in terms of the law here--
Speaker 1: No.
Speaker 2: --in terms of that?
Speaker 1: No. They said they were bringing it back up. But, to me, they need to get rid of it. Bring it back up to get rid of it; that's what you need to do. Repeal it. But that hasn't happened.
Speaker 2: Now, the young white guy that was shot and killed, was he a Republican or a Democrat or is he--is there--how are people organizing around that?
Speaker 1: I don't know. I don't know if they're organizing around it. I don't know if people are paying atten- that's probably--they're probably not paying attention. You know, and then you had this one kid in Jacksonville [Florida] who was--said he was playing his music too loud. I don't know if you remember that. Recently. It was last year. They found the guy guilty, but he tried to use the stand your ground. He says, "Well, they took--I saw a gun," you know, and they determined that there was no gun. These were good kids. They're just in a car, went to get something from the store, and this guy--he said he was going to get off from it, but he didn't. And I'm thankful that he didn't. But he used stand your ground as a defense.
Speaker 2: Okay. So he shot somebody who was playing their music too loud (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Shot--he shot in the car.
Speaker 2: --in their--into their car?
Speaker 1: Into the car and killed the kid, uh-huh. Yep. Yeah.
Speaker 2: So they're testing the limits of this law--
Speaker 1: Exactly.
Speaker 2: --all the time (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) They're testing it, and they're trying to use it. But I was thankful that the judge did not go along with it.
Speaker 2: Okay. All right. So now--so in 2009--so this bill pass- passes when, in--?
Speaker 1: It passed, I think, in '7 [2007] maybe, or '8 [2008].
Speaker 2: Two thousand seven [2007], okay.
Speaker 1: Seven [2007] or '8 [2008]--
Speaker 2: All right.
Speaker 1: Right.
Story_ID: 650299
Speaker 1: Well, 2008, the election of B- Barack Obama [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama] as president.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Did he carry Florida, Florida?
Speaker 2: I think he did. I remember meeting him. He came to Tallahassee [Florida]. Matter of fact, I was in Tallahassee when he was running, and I remember him coming to the capitol [Florida State Capitol] and us meeting him.
Speaker 1: Okay. So what did you think when he initially decided to run for president? Did you think he had a chance?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, it was interesting because Hillary [Hillary Rodham Clinton] had built up relationships with everybody, (laughter) probably most women, you know. And, no, I didn't, truthfully, think he had a chance probably. And then I had also spoken to some of the people and the legislators in Chicago [Illinois] who knew him, and they didn't seem like they thought so either. So, you know, and you sort of follow behind them. But, I mean, once he won, he was in it, you know, was all in for him, so you know.
Speaker 1: Now, is there a certain point during the campaign that you decided you would, you know, you were for him?
Speaker 2: Well, really, it was after the primary.
Speaker 1: Okay. After he won the--
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: Okay. The nomination?
Speaker 2: Right, right.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: All right. So--well, okay. So what were you assess- what's your assessment now? He served his eight years as president.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: The second term, did you think he was going to win the second time?
Speaker 2: I did.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I did, uh-huh. I mean, he did a, you know, I just think he served us proud, you know, considering he had a Republican majority who was fighting everything that he did; and one [Mitch McConnell] who comes out and says that we gonna fight everything he tried to do. So, you know, so I think he--to me, he served us well based upon what he was dealing with.
Speaker 1: And how did--how did his presidency effect, you know, you locally here, in--
Speaker 2: Well, you guys predominantly--
Speaker 1: --Palm Beach.
Speaker 2: --Democrat. You know, Dem- Palm Beach County [Florida] is a Democrat area here. And everybody loved Barack Obama, you know. And, I mean, we certainly supported the Affordable Care Act [Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act of 2010], you know. Being in the insurance industry, I mean I was aware of how people use the emergency room for healthcare, which causes the rates to just skyrocket. So, you know, and--I was just, I wish he had done a little more in the criminal justice end earlier, to me. You know, but I know he has to be everybody's president when you're president. But I, you know, I thought he did a good job.
Story_ID: 650300
Speaker 1: Were you active in the campaign the second time, in 2012 (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: All right. All right. By this time, in 2012, you're in--you're a, you're a county co- commissioner [Palm Beach County Board of County Commissioners], right?
Speaker 2: I became a county commissioner in '09 [2009]--
Speaker 1: Okay. Right, right (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) when the governor appointed me to come back here. It's just that I ran--actually, I ran in a year after I got back, in '10 [2010], and then I ran in '12 [2012] on my own, you know, because I completed someone else's [Addie Greene] term.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And--so, yes, I was--
Speaker 1: Okay. So 2009. Now, tell us about your appointment in 2009 to the Palm Beach County commission. The governor was Charlie Crist--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --who is actually--he's a Republican; right?
Speaker 2: He was then.
Speaker 1: Who was--yeah. Who's somebody that Barack Obama [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama] was trying to get involved in his administration--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --in 2008. So what is Charlie Crist like, and how did you end up becoming appointed?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, as I said, we all, you know, worked together in the legislature [Florida House of Representatives]. And I, you know, as I said, I also was a moderate, you know. I mean, I, I saw, you know, things for what they were and not trying to make it for what I wanted it to be, you know. So I think that some of the people there, which the governor was one, saw me as, you know, someone who would, you know, not going to be such a staunch one way or the other. To try to be middle of the road, moderate, try to work and help everybody, you know, which is what I do. So, you know, there were quite a few people who tried to, you know, put in for that appointment; and I got it. And once I got here, you know, I hit the ground running from--the first meeting I attended was on budget. I'll never forget that. And you know, so I continue to, you know, try to be a part of that body, commission; and to fight for the people who needed to be fought for.
Story_ID: 650301
Speaker 1: Tell us about the commission [Palm Beach County Board of County Commissioners]. Who's--what--who does it consist of; and what are the powers that you have?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, it's seven of us. And the thing about the Palm Beach County [Florida], is that it used to be where we did not have a black on that commission. The first person, the black, was Maude Ford Lee. And, you know, it took a lot of standing up, trying to get a minority. We had to actually create a different district. When you start--that's when we had the single member districting to try to assure that we had a black at all times on that commission. So, you know, but Maude was before me. And then, after Maude, Addie Greene came, and then I fulfilled Addie Greene's term. But, you know, we had Weisman [Robert Weisman], who was the administrator at the time. Because, you know, when your--the commission, you know, it's seven of you, and it takes, you know, a majority to get anything done. Your county administrator has a lot of power. He retired, and then I'm proud to say, then we have black woman who is county commissioner [sic. county administrator] now [Verdenia Baker]. First time we've ever had a black, period, as county commissioner, as well as female. But, you know, we're a very diverse community. And what I found when I got there was that there wasn't enough being done, paid to--there were just pockets of areas where I was concerned about. And so I started kind of fighting, you know, for those pockets to--those barriers to be taken down. You know, one of the areas that I really--and something that I still, you know, try to work on is poverty, you know, with the homelessness. I feel that, you know, here, in Flor- in the United States of America, we should not have the homeless population that we have, you know; that we need to do something to try to reach them. I started organizations, you know. I started the Mayor's Ball and things here to try to come up with funds to help the homelessness.
Speaker 1: Give us an idea now how big a problem this is, homelessness in Palm Beach County.
Speaker 2: Well, it's a, it's a big issue. Actually, it was such an issue that when I was in the legislature [Florida House of Representatives] I had received a call, because it was within my district [Florida State House of Representatives District 84], regarding some of the issues. You know, we had this church who took it upon themselves to try to house homeless people, you know, to take some of them off the street. And I can remember flying home just specifically to meet with the people there at the church. And I can remember this veteran who stood up and--because I was just letting everybody, you know, talk, tell me, you know, what--about what you think and everything. And he said something that really stuck to me, with me. He says, you know, he says, "We can send a man to the moon, but we can't take care of our homeless people, population," you know. And that--and you think about that. That's true. You know, we put all of this money and send up a rocket, which might explode, might not explode. You're sending money all over the world, but you have people here, domestically, who needs help; and we're not focusing our energies there. But since then, you know, we've tried to focus on affordable housing here, in Palm Beach County, and other areas to try to help. And like I said, the Mayor's Ball, which the first year I did it, I think we came out with about five hundred thousand [dollars] profit, so we could use that money to try to help, you know.
Story_ID: 650302
Speaker 1: There are just so many issues. I think, when I see any kind of injustice, it just spurs me to want to react, you know. With our young people, you know, with the killings going on, even though some of that, initially, was black on black crime, I came back here and, you know, you always have an organization you try to work with to try to direct things. But we started the Peace in the Hood to try to go into those areas where there were actually these shootings and things going on to try to focus on the how can we address the issue, you know, with what's going on. And I brought people from all over the country--matter of fact, we had, you know, met people when I was in the legislature [Florida House of Representatives] and, also, people when I was active with the Negro Business and Professional Women [National Association of Negro Business and Professional Women's Clubs, Inc.], because that was out of Washington [D.C.]--to come in and share with us ideas. Because, you know, like we were talking about some of the thing being done in Chicago [Illinois]. Certainly, some of those things could be done here, in Palm Beach County [Florida]. But one thing that I did do which was patterned after Chicago, Cook County [Illinois], was that my aide at the time, Willie Miller, he had been with me for a long time. And so what we would do was do a lot of research. And one of the reasons that feel that a lot of times things do not succeed, especially in the minority community, is that we get so territorial. You know, you have an organization. I have an organization. Somebody else have an--and we're all doing the same thing. But there's just so much money out here, so we need to stop being so territorial and learn how to work together to get things done. So what I was able to do, which, patterned it after Cook County, was to convince our administrator, county administrators to start a youth department, period, with the county. And that youth department was an umbrella for all the organizations that could come under that umbrella so that we can try to reach these young people and be preventive and to help them to be successful. It is still going on. And that was, you know, My Brother's Keepers [sic. My Brother's Keeper] was one of the organ- things that came through there, which did fantastic, you know. And you talk to young people and you realize that, you know, things like that is needed, you know. We say family--you have family, they should--but, no. We've got to be bigger than that, and we've got to get involved to help our kids.
Story_ID: 650303
Speaker 1: What's the major economy, or what was it here?
Speaker 2: Well, actually--
Speaker 1: Was it--
Speaker 2: --tourism is one of our big ones. Under my leadership while at the county [Palm Beach County Board of County Commissioners], I was instru- instrumental in getting the Ballpark of the Palm Beaches [Fitteam Ballpark of the Palm Beaches, West Palm Beach, Florida] where we have the Astros [Houston Astros] and the Nationals teams here.
Speaker 1: Oh, they do their--
Speaker 2: Spring training (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) spring training, okay.
Speaker 2: We actually built a facility out in--in a minority community. I was able to, you know, identify (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Well, what's the name of the park?
Speaker 2: Ballpark of the Palm Beaches. Just opened--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --about two weeks, and it's doing fantastic. And it's, it's in a minority area, and I just feel that it's going to bring some changes to that area that's greatly needed.
Speaker 1: So we have the Astros there and--
Speaker 2: Astros and the Washington Nationals.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Uh-huh, yeah. You know, because that economic development, those are jobs, you know, because, you know, that's what we need. And I was also instrumental as far as the reentry, you know, because so many of our young people go into prison and get out and can't find jobs. So, actually, when I came back here to Palm Beach County [Florida] from Tallahassee [Florida], I started working on the reentry program [Criminal Justice Commission Reentry Program]. And, you know, these are things, ideas that I bring. But, obviously, for it to be successful, other people have to get involved. But we did start a reentry program to start with training to help these men when they--or women, when they get close to getting out, that they have what they need to try to get them jobs and things to help, you know. I still felt that we need the business community to be a little more involved because they have the jobs. But we still, you know, it is still working; and it's good. And, also, the ban the box, you know, and--I'm sure you're familiar with that. But, you know, the ban the box, even though it doesn't stop anything, but it does give people who have a history of maybe some crime in their lives to have a chance, you know, that they don't--that box on an application, that they don't just go to that first and say, "Well, you did this, so you cannot--I won't even interview you." That ban the box actually--
Speaker 1: Okay. So that (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) took that off.
Speaker 1: --that's taken the box on an application, have you even been--
Speaker 2: Take it off.
Speaker 1: --convicted of a crime--
Speaker 2: Yeah, take it off.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And you can ask them later, but not initially, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So I was successful in getting the county to embrace that, as well, yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah, that's almost having a string attached to it--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: File 13.
Speaker 2: Exactly. Yeah, right.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Let's take it (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Exactly, exactly, exactly.
Speaker 1: Yeah, who's going to go any further after they see that?
Speaker 2: Exactly, exactly. Right, right, right.
Speaker 1: Yeah. So this is a lot. You're doing a lot.
Speaker 2: Well, I'm no longer on the county now, but, you know, there was a lot of things in the community that needed to be addressed. And, and I sort of like--when I see them, I want to try to make the change.
Story_ID: 650304
Speaker 1: Explain the crisis in Belle, Belle Glade [Florida].
Speaker 2: Well, right now, you know, the glades area, which is about fifty, fifty-five miles west of here [West Palm Beach, Florida] but, you know, it goes--it has a history. It was created by legislation back in the '20s [1920s]. It has the muck which allows for the growth of the farming over there. And so what the--this group wants to do--which is being led by Joe Negron who's the president of the senate [Florida State Senate]--is they want to purchase sixty thousand more acres of the farm land, which would actually close down two plants, which is responsible for about one thousand or two thousand jobs. Because, you know, it has an effect that, if you close down the plant, then the people won't have money to buy groceries, they won't have money to bank and everything else. So it's a bad move. It's going to be $4.3 billion of taxpayers' money. And, also, you're going to have--where the--and what caused it--and, you know, there's a history behind it. You know, you had the--here in Florida, in the Stuart area, you had the algae, the green algae that was in the water. And we have the big lake, Okeechobee [Lake Okeechobee], which is one of the largest lakes here in--probably, I think, in the country, certainly Florida.
Speaker 1: Now, is that a natural lake?
Speaker 2: Yes, uh-huh.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And so they are trying to say that the--that they want to buy land south of that lake to take it out of development, which is a bad move. It's not going to stop it. The problem is south--north of the lake, not south of the lake. But I think it's a push. It's a land grab, and we don't know why, you know. Because the United States Congress, federal government, passed, in 2000, a bill called CERP, which is Comprehensive Everglades Restoration Project [sic. Comprehensive Everglades Restoration Plan]. They put billions of dollars in it. It was sixty-eight actual projects that would address the issue of the water. Only six of those projects have been done. So, to me, the wise thing would be to complete the CERP projects before you start trying to buy more land. So that is the big thing that's going on now in the Glades area.
Speaker 1: The Glades are--they're like having (unclear), are 50 percent African American?
Speaker 2: It is. And their unemployment rate was 30 something percent. so that gives you the idea that if you take more land and put another mil [million] out of devel- you know, work, then those poor people will go from 30 something percent to probably 60 percent unemployment. It's a bad bill.
Speaker 1: Okay. All right. That's still--it's still (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Still brewing.
Speaker 1: --they're still contending with it?
Speaker 2: Yeah, because session is going on now.
Speaker 1: Okay. All right. So, hm, well, seems like a lot of issues. Now, in--so all the--you were fighting with all these issues up through, I guess, two--?
Speaker 2: Last year.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Story_ID: 650305
Speaker 1: Twenty fourteen [2014] you were, you were the mayor of Palm Beach County [Florida], which means that you served for a year as the chairman of the council [Palm Beach County Board of County Commissioners], is that what (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right, um-hm.
Speaker 1: --it means? Okay. All right. And is it like a--so it's not like the mayor has a lot of power as you were talking off camera (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, it is not. You don't have, truthfully, any power.  You're a commissioner. Ceremonial position.
Speaker 1: Okay. Palm Beach County is 30 something percent black--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --right now? Okay. And you were succeeded by Shelley Vana; correct?
Speaker 2: As the mayor, right. Because, you know, we pick another mayor after the first year in the reorganization.
Speaker 1: Okay. Now, at some point, now, you decided to run for--
Speaker 2: [U.S.] Congress.
Speaker 1: --Congress, right, in 2015, I guess. Yeah, in 2015, the Florida Supreme Court rules that the state's congressional district map is unconstitutional.
Speaker 2: Correct.
Speaker 1: How did that affect your decision?
Speaker 2: Well, the way we looked at it, at that time, it seemed like we had, it, the numbers got closer, that it was closer to being a balance with Democrats and Republicans. And that's--and maybe even a point more for Democrats was what we saw at that time, but my consultants obviously read the map wrong (laughter). But, either way, it became a very difficult race because, as you know, money is what drives races. I was trying to raise money, was--I found it very difficult, and then we had a very rich gentleman who jumped in the race. I felt that it if I could have gone to Washington [D.C.] that I would fight for those things that we talked about earlier, the criminal justice and all of those other things. But, you know, when he jumped in the race--and I think he put down $2 million immediately, and I was having trouble raising, I think, five hundred thousand (laughter). So I just felt that, you know, it just wasn't going to happen because you needed money to run these races.
Speaker 1: Okay. Now, this is--now, you ran against Patrick Murphy?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: No.
Speaker 2: Patrick--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That was Patrick's seat.
Speaker 1: Oh, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, Patrick ran for [U.S.] Senate. He got in Marco [Marco Rubio]--
Speaker 1: Oh, okay. So he vacated the--
Speaker 2: --Marco's seat, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay. All right. And in the seat--Murphy defeated Allen West in 2012, is that (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) He did, uh-huh.
Speaker 1: Yeah. And Allen West was a--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: He's an African American Republican that--
Speaker 2: Yes, he is. You don't hear much from Allen now.
Speaker 1: --was--no. But he was--
Speaker 2: (Unclear).
Speaker 1: I mean, it was just hard to--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --even--I had never seen an African American--well, I had seen some, but not in--
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Not as--not as--
Speaker 1: --not in public office.
Speaker 2: Exactly. Yeah, he was--I don't know what was wrong with him (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So do you have any thoughts about (laughter)--
Speaker 2: Well, you know, I had--
Speaker 1: --Allen West?
Speaker 2: --I had met Allen around here. Matter of fact, he and I had been on a couple of programs for Veteran's Day or Memorial Day or something. And, and he seemed okay. I mean, I met his wife [Angela Graham West], you know, and things, but, but I think when it came to being out with the public, you know, his--he was a different person (laughter), so, you know.
Speaker 1: Yeah, he's--well, one of the remarks he made that made national news is that he said--he called all Democrats Communists, basically.
Speaker 2: I know.
Speaker 1: Which is--
Speaker 2: And about shooting somebody and all this crazy stuff.
Speaker 1: Yeah, he said that--he said that social security was akin to slavery.
Speaker 2: Yeah, right.
Speaker 1: And--
Speaker 2: There's a lot of people on social security and not black, so that--(makes sounds) I don't know who that--was for.
Speaker 1: Has he been considered for a position in the Trump administration [President Donald John Trump] so far, do you know?
Speaker 2: I don't know. Who knows? I mean, you know, he's trying to fill all these positions, so who knows.
Speaker 1: Yeah, it seemed like he would be the type of candidate that--
Speaker 2: Yeah, he might be a little bit too much, though.
Speaker 1: Yeah, he's a super conservative--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --by any standard. So (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, he is.
Story_ID: 650306
Speaker 1: So you withdrew from the race [for U.S. Congress]. You just couldn't raise enough mo- money (unclear)?
Speaker 2: I felt that that was a barrier that it was--but even though some people, when I withdrew, came out and says, "Well, we would have supported you." But, you know, you need to see the money in the bank. You can't go on that, you know. Because I knew I had to get my message out. And even though I felt that I was well known, you don't really realize how you're not well known until you're out here trying to run for office. And so I just withdrew and got back in--put my name back in for my commission seat [on the Palm Beach County Board of County Commissioners].
Speaker 1: Okay. And it was a tight race with three--
Speaker 2: Well, you had (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) people running.
Speaker 2: There were three people that had got in when I was out of the race. And they are saying that, you know, they got in when I was out, you know, and they don't want to get out, you know. And so that was it, um-hm.
Speaker 1: So the person that ended up being elected was Mack Bernard--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --of Haitian extraction, who was--he's now in an absentee ballot crisis, right--
Speaker 2: Yes (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) in the news--
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: --as we speak?
Speaker 2: Correct.
Speaker 1: And they're still investigating--
Speaker 2: Correct.
Speaker 1: --whether he misused the absentee ballot feature--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --to get elected.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: All right. So who was second in that race? Were you second, or?
Speaker 2: Me.
Speaker 1: Okay. All right.
Speaker 2: He only won by absentee, you know, and that's where his issue is, you know. He won by seven hundred, I think, votes. And he had--they said there was more absentee ballots in his race than even for the presidential race, so it was like, you know, a big, humongous number. And they were, you know, some of the things they were doing is questionable, at best, you know, so we'll see what happens. I don't know.
Speaker 1: Okay. So that's still--
Speaker 2: It's still pending, um-hm.
Speaker 1: --pending now?
Speaker 2: But they haven't--they--The Palm Beach Post did a big article that came out yesterday on it.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Investigative report.
Speaker 1: All right. So do you see yourself running for any other office if this doesn't--I mean, if you--if he has to withdraw, that means--would that mean that you would be the--
Speaker 2: I--
Speaker 1: --elected official?
Speaker 2: I doubt it. I've sort of moved on. And even if they make him withdraw, I think the governor [Rick Scott] would appoint someone. And, you know, as far as running, I've been asked to run for--people contacted me, you know, and I'm not sure what I want to do.
Speaker 1: Okay. And right now you're doing some consulting, political consulting (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, I'm doing a little consulting, you know--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --to take a break. I was in politics for over eighteen years, so, you know, just sit back for a minute.
Story_ID: 650307
Speaker 1: We always ask this question, and, as someone who tried to make a lot of change, what are some of your hopes and concerns for the African American community today?
Speaker 2: You know, a lot of the things that this new administration is doing, to me, is going to have direct implications against people of color and poor people, you know. First, we have the--Jeff Sessions, to me, is going to be an issue, you know. Some of the things that--I certainly believe in right and wrong in the crim- and if somebody's doing something wrong, they have to be dealt with. But we know, when Clinton [President William Jefferson "Bill" Clinton] was president, they passed this bad bill. How they did it, I don't know. But the people who suffered most behind it have been people of color. And, you know, and this is a bill that is in place that--how do we get someone to focus on changing it. You know, when, when the race was happening, Hillary Clinton [Hillary Rodham Clinton] did say she would work on it, but now we know that it will probably never happen. So what we have to do now is try to educate our people to not take it lightly, what's going on, you know, with the people that he's putting in office. Because a lot of these people that he's putting in office, to me, are people that could possibly be detrimental to people of color. Jeff Sessions is the biggest, you know, because his position being what it is. And the healthcare, to me, is an issue. I don't--I mean, you know, I don't know why that--they keep saying Obamacare [Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act of 2010] and why it's such an issue, that why can't you fix this instead of coming up with this American Act [American Health Care Act of 2017], which I think is going to hurt more people. And when you hurt people who are down, you know, the level there, it's mostly minorities who are going to be affected by that. And then you're talking about getting rid of the Medicaid expansion, so where are these people going to get healthcare? You know, you're cutting out Planned Parenthood [Planned Parenthood Federation of America], so where are the people going to go and get it? They're not going to be able to get health--and then what happens? You know, if you can't get the mammogram tests to see about breast cancer, then what do you do? You have cancer and you die. You're pushing us back is what you're doing; and that, to me, should not be acceptable. This is not just a country for rich people. There's more people who are not rich, you know, and we seem to be forgetting about them, you know. And I try to look at Trump [President Donald John Trump] with fairness, you know. I, you know, because I'm just like anybody else. I want to see the stock market do good because I want to see my money grow. But there are a lot of social issues that we can't just push under the rug, and I want us to not lose sight of that. And I know we have some good people up there, like [HistoryMaker] Maxine Waters, and, you know, people f- you know, but they can't do it all. And we know that we don't have enough Democrats to make any changes; so it's going to be up to the people to let their voices to be heard.
Story_ID: 650308
Speaker 1: Serving as a professional politician for eighteen years, what's your political philosophy?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, my thing is--has always been this: that it's not enough to know what's right. You've got to do it, you know. And anything that I have done politically, you know, and which, you know, sort of was a little disturbing by some politicians that you notice; that they'll do things just to satisfy somebody over there. Even if it kills somebody else to do it, they're going to do it to satisfy one person or something to--
Speaker 1: Or what they consider (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) and, to me, that's not right.
Speaker 1: --the key constituency.
Speaker 2: Exactly. And it's not right. I just feel that you have to be fair, you have to have empathy. Because, you know, anything can happen to any of us, you know, so you have to be able to live with yourself. And I've always, as--eighteen years in politics, felt that it's incumbent upon us in these offices to try to help others, and to make this place better before we leave.
Story_ID: 650309
Speaker 1: Now, when you look back on everything you've done to this point, is there anything major that you would do differently if you could go back and change the course of your life?
Speaker 2: (Pause) No, not really. I don't think. I mean, you know, I might not run for [U.S.] Congress at that time, you know, because that might not have been the wisest decision. But, you know, I've had--been successful, you know, in a lot of things I've done, most things I've done, so I--I really feel good about myself and where I've been and what I've done.
Speaker 1: Okay. On that note, like, what today would you consider to be your legacy?
Speaker 2: I think standing up for those unfortunate--that can't stand for themselves. I mean, you know, and that's a big word to use, but I do feel that I stand in the gaps. And when I can stand up and let the voices be heard for those without a voice, then my legacy is for that change.
Story_ID: 650310
Speaker 1: Tell us something about your family. Now, your, your--you said your parents [Mary Taylor Bacon and Willie Johnson (ph.)] have passed?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: But, you have brothers and sisters and children?
Speaker 2: Um-hm. I have two.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Son [Sean Chavis] and a daughter [Vita Chavis]. My son is in Atlanta [Georgia], and my daughter is here [West Palm Beach, Florida]. My daughter actually works in the healthcare industry, and my son is in the entertainment industry, you know. And, you know, I do have, you know, we have a pretty strong support system for our family, you know. My family is rather quiet, you know. They're--I'm probably the loudest one (laughter), you know, out of all of them. But they're, you know, they're good people, and we all, you know, try to work for the same common goal, to try to help make things better.
Speaker 1: Okay. Did your [maternal] grandmother [Iretha Minus Taylor] or your mother get a chance to see you elected?
Speaker 2: My, my grandfather [Charles Taylor, Sr.] did.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But grandmother didn't. She died m- she died the day I became an insurance agent, in '81 [1981], um-hm, yeah. But we were close, yeah.
Story_ID: 650311
Speaker 1: Now, is there anything I haven't talked about that we need to discuss before I ask my last question?
Speaker 2: I think you hit on everything.
Speaker 1: Okay. Well, that's--probably tomorrow you'll probably think, ah--
Speaker 2: I don't know.
Speaker 1: --he didn't ask me this. But, well, the last question is similar to legacy but a little bit different.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Ma'am, how would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: Probably as someone who, you know, we can--I think you can cast it as this: you know, sometimes we get in positions that, you know, and you might have this, where you know a lot of people who get in these positions; and they see themselves in these positions and, you know, not so much as being able to see themselves in other roles. I have empathy for everybody, and I feel that because of how I carry myself that, you know, when I was a county commissioner [on the Palm Beach County Board of County Commissioners], I would talk to the homeless people. I would actually make it a point to go talk to the homeless people and find out, you know, what's going on, how they were thinking. Give them my card. Call me if you need me. I think that my role--I see myself as someone who just--I care about people. And even though I, I see myself in a role where--that I can make a difference, and I try to use my abilities to make a difference. Do you understand what I'm saying?  Okay.
Speaker 1: Okay. All right. Well, thank you very much.
Speaker 2: Thank you.
