Story_ID: 260493
Speaker 1: This [The] HistoryMakers interview is being conducted with [HistoryMaker] The Honorable Charles "Chuck" Turner, a member of the Boston City Council in Boston, Massachusetts.  Chuck Turner is also a long-time community organizer.  The interview is being conducted at the Dudley branch library in Roxbury [Boston, Massachusetts], the neighborhood that Chuck represents on the city council.  The date is March 25th, 2005.  The interviewer is [HistoryMaker] Robert C. Hayden and the videographer is Matthew Hickey.  Mr. Counselor would you give me your full name and spell your name for me?
Speaker 2: Charles Henry Turner, Charles is C-H-A-R-L-E-S, Henry, H-E-N-R-Y, Turner, T-U-R-N-E-R.
Speaker 1: And you like to be called Chuck, everybody calls you Chuck?
Speaker 2: Yeah,
Speaker 1: So we'll call you, I'll call you Chuck as we have this conversation this morning.
Speaker 2: Sure.
Speaker 1: Counselor Turner, what year were you born and where were you born?
Speaker 2: Born in 1940 in Cincinnati, Ohio.
Story_ID: 260494
Speaker 1: You, of course, are an elected official in the City of Boston [Massachusetts], serving on the city council (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, I am. Yes.
Speaker 1: So you're an elected politician.  But how do you describe or label or think about your occupation today?  I mean beyond that, what are you?
Speaker 2: Interesting question.  I, I'm hesitating around the word 'cause it's a loaded word, but I think I'm a revolutionary.  That is in the, trying to carry on a tradition because I think we as people of African descent in this country obviously have been engaged in a struggle for liberation that, you know, has been going on for three hundred plus years, and during much of that time, the focus was on integrating into the, the society.  In the '60s [1960s] there was a major thrust to throw off the '50s [1950s] and '60s [1960s], a kind of fight that had been going on for decades, culminated in these street demonstrations throughout the South that led to the passage of the Voting Rights Act [of 1965], led to the passage of the Civil, Civil Rights Act [of 1964].  But then, you know, if you look at the history, a very interesting thing happened and that is that [Reverend] Dr. Martin Luther King [Jr.] at that point had a Nobel Peace, [Nobel] Peace Prize.  He had played a major part in passing two pieces of legislation and yet he made a very courageous decision, that is rather than going back home to the South becoming a minister of a large church, or perhaps running for office, he chose to stay in the streets and he came north, and then in '67 [1967], he decided to move out of the role of a Negro leader, and became, I think, a human rights leader and a revolutionary because in 1967 he said we have to go to Washington [D.C.].  The "we" is not just people of African descent, but he called on people of all races of this country to go to Washington to confront the government around the issues of what he called the three evils of militarism, economic exploitation and racism.  The, the trip to Memphis [Tennessee] was a side trip.  He was headed to [Washington] D.C. to take the leadership of the Poor People's Campaign, a campaign that wasn't going to be a one-day march.  They were gonna put Washington under siege, nonviolent siege.  He said we'll stay in D.C. until the promissory note is paid.  And so I think at that moment, he, he moved to another level of understanding that is the understanding of a vision that he had couldn't be accomplished within the framework of the policies of the government and so he was leading people to Washington not to overthrow the government, but to overthrow the policies that from his prospective and the prospective of others, preventing everyone, regardless of race from his prospective, to have the opportunity to grow and develop in a nurturing country and so essentially what I see myself doing is trying to continue that struggle.  I am elected official, but as an elected official I can see as clearly, maybe even more clearly than he, the hypocrisy, the, the fact that this governmental system doesn't work.  Obviously, doesn't work for people of African descent, but what I also see is it isn't working for people of Latino, Asian or European descent and so what I'm devoting my time and effort to is, on the one hand, serving my constituents in terms of their day-to-day issues and concerns, but equally if not more importantly, trying to use the office to organize people to basically challenge the government.  I would hope that in a year or two we could have people massed in Washington the way he envisioned challenging the government, saying that we will not allow you to misuse the resources of this country.  We're started organizing a drive here in Boston to lay the foundation so we can bring people into the streets of Boston to encourage people in Hartford [Connecticut], Springfield [Illinois], Providence [Rhode Island], New York [New York], the cities of this region and of this country to, in fact, do what any people who are oppressed have done historically and are doing today in different parts of the world, and that is when government no longer functions in a way that meets your needs, people have always taken the responsibility of going into the streets to change government and so that ultimately, that's where I see my life and work headed.
Speaker 1: Well I think our discussion this morning will clearly illustrate that you have been absolutely committed and steadfastly committed to all of this for a long period of time, at least from the mid-'60s [1960s] on, and I think as King was concerned about the domination by power institutions, you are looking at the power of institutions and how they're controlling people.
Story_ID: 260495
Speaker 1: Before we go on with the interview, we have a few kind we call light-up questions (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Sure.
Speaker 1: --questions to simply warm up, and also to give the viewers of this interview over time, a different sense of your personality--
Speaker 2: Sure.
Speaker 1: --of who you are.  They're People magazine type questions, okay?
Speaker 2: All right.
Speaker 1: What's your favorite food, [HistoryMaker Charles] "Chuck" [Turner]?
Speaker 2: That's, that's, I love so, so many foods, but I guess fried chicken.  I have to say it's, no actually, my favorite food is watermelon.  There's nothing as delicious as watermelon, love it.
Speaker 1: Good.  Your favorite time of year?
Speaker 2: Probably spring, although it's, we have so little here in Boston [Massachusetts], it's more of a memory of Cincinnati [Ohio], rather than an experience here.
Speaker 1: Your favorite color?
Speaker 2: My favorite color is red.
Speaker 1: Uh-huh.  Do you have a saying or a phrase that you use from time to time that kind of illustrates your day-to-day philosophy, how you live your life or how you live with other people, something that you like to say often?
Speaker 2: Not particularly.  No, I don't think, I don't think I really do.
Story_ID: 260496
Speaker 1: We like to start by looking at your family history--
Speaker 2: Sure.
Speaker 1: --and your growing up years so that that will be the context in which we can then look at your adult life and things that you've been doing, into this community organizing and politics and so on.  And I'd like to start with your mother.  Could you tell me your mother's name, when she born and where she was born?
Speaker 2: My mother's name is Laura Troy. That's her maiden name, Knight.  She was born in Cincinnati, Ohio, I think around 19, 1910, and she was very, you know very smart, and so she was able to graduate from high school at fifteen and then went to the University of Cincinnati [Cincinnati, Ohio] and graduated at eighteen and became the, the youngest graduate there and then became a, became a teacher, and then married my father [Darwin Turner] and got moved to Chicago [Illinois].
Speaker 1: Uh-huh.  Where did she teach first?  Where was her first teaching--
Speaker 2: Cincinnati.
Speaker 1: In Cincinnati.  Was she elementary, high school?
Speaker 2: Oh elementary.  She was an elementary school teacher in Cincinnati.
Speaker 1: Okay.  What else do you know about her background, her growing up years?  Did she share stories with you about her growing up years as a child in Cincinnati?
Speaker 2: No, she became ill when I was four and was essentially hospitalized for the rest of, for the rest of her life.  So, you know, we would, you know, I would visit her every, you know, week, until I left Cincinnati when I was eighteen.  But, you know, didn't, different situation with you know, her, her illness and such and so, didn't really get the opportunity to kind of share--
Speaker 1: I understand.
Speaker 2: --share those stories--
Story_ID: 260497
Speaker 1: So (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Tell me about her [Turner's mother, Laura Knight Turner] parents, your grandmother and your grandfather.  Did you know them and their names?
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, I grew, in fact I grew up with her mother, my grandmother.
Speaker 2: All right.  What was her name?
Speaker 1: Laura (laughter).  Laura [Troy] Knight.  You know married to James, James Knight [ph.].  She was a mom more.  I called her mom, was very, very powerful woman, meaning she had very clear ideas on what she wanted and a lot of energy and will to achieve, achieve those, you know, those ideas.
Speaker 2: Where was she born and when?
Speaker 1: She was born in Cincinnati [Ohio].
Speaker 2: She was?
Speaker 1: Yeah, a family of, I think there were probably four sisters and six brothers, who, all of whom were, lived in and grew up in Cincinnati, and--
Speaker 2: How did she get to Cincinnati?  Did the family get there, the Knight family?
Speaker 1: The story is that the, our, your know, my great-grandfather, Samuel Troy was able to buy himself out of, he and his family out of slavery and came, came to Cincinnati in the, from Virginia, came there in the, I guess the 18, probably the 1840s, and then the family just put its roots down there and--
Speaker 2: Did your grandmother ever share with you things about her growing up years and her life, hand any stories on to you or songs that you remember?
Speaker 1: Well, you know, the, there was, didn't talk a lot about her, her family in the way that, you know, that I remember, but more stories about going down to the other river, the docks in Cincinnati as the riverboats would come in bringing people of African descent into Cincinnati and you know how people would go down and welcome them, bring them into the community, help orient them, get them, you know, settled and so.  Just a, a strong focus on community.  She was active in the church, active in a organization, called, I think, Mrs. Stewart's [ph.], place called Mrs. Stewart.  Mrs. Stewart ran a, a boarding house for young black women and she was very active in terms of supporting that, you know that organization so, you know, had more a, and more of a sense of her involvement in the community and kind of worked in participation as a teacher and, activist in her own way in the community.  Her, by the time I, I had arrived many, most of the family had actually moved to California and settled out, you know, settled out there and were doing different kinds of things.  So we used to get a copy of the member Uncle, I think Fee [ph.] used to send us a copy of the, I think it's the Los Angeles Times, every New Year so that they would, you know, we'd see the picture of the Rose Bowl parade and such, and so I had, it was some fleeting connections with the California side of the family, but didn't really have a very clear, deep understanding, kind of what they were doing, or who they, who they were.  She had a sister [Florence Troy Surlock Taylor] who stayed in, you know, in the area and she lived in a college town called Oxford, Ohio, where Miami University is located, so we used to go up there to visit, you know, visit her sister and then she, her sister had children and moved to Cleveland [Ohio], so there's some family in Ohio, but everybody else actually was out in, you know, out in California (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I understand.
Story_ID: 260498
Speaker 1: Tell me about your mother's [Laura Knight Turner] father, his name and where he came from, where he was born.
Speaker 2: James Knight [ph.].  He also grew up in, in Cincinnati [Ohio].  He worked as a, I guess what they call a heating engineer in Miami.  The job work on the heating system that they, that ran the, supplied the heat for the Miami University [Oxford, Ohio].  I would imagine lived with Aunt Florence [Troy Surlock Taylor] who was, who was up in Oxford [Ohio] at that time.  As a, he died before, before I was born so I don't have a really sense of who he was but seemed like a very hard-working stable person who, who had a wife who was very, just a driving force story that they built a house in downtown Cincinnati that my grandmother [Laura Troy Knight] had inherited from, from her family, but she, it was kind of part of, like Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], with the brick row houses and so she wanted a place with some land around it 'cause she liked to grow flowers and such, and so the story was that she, while he was working up in Oxford, she would be teaching and eventually principal of the school [Jackson Colony School, Cincinnati, Ohio], but they spent time looking for this place and so she found a place in a part of the city called Price Hill [Cincinnati, Ohio] and as the story goes, let her husband James know about the place that she thought they out to move and the irony was that his family had been caretakers on a kind of estate that was two, two plots of land over, you know, so just a sense of how she kind of was the manager and the mover in the family.  She, she didn't get married until she was, I think, thirty, and as the story goes she, she wanted to make sure that when, when they married they had the funds necessary to support the family and so just held off until--felt that she and James were in a position to take the responsibility for raising a family.
Story_ID: 260499
Speaker 1: Tell me about your father, his name and where he was born and the year he was born and I do know that he was a pharmacist, so I'd like you to tell us a little bit about his training as a pharmacist and what he was like as a father, how you, how you remember him.
Speaker 2: Well, his name is Darwin Romanes Turner.
Speaker 1: Could you spell Romanes for us?
Speaker 2: R-O-M-A-N-E-S.  He was, his father, Charles Henry Turner, was a scientist and so I think Romanes is the name of a French [sic. Canadian] scientist [George Romanes] and [Charles] Darwin, you know, is the name of one of the evolutionist and so he got tagged with those two names.  He grew up in Atlanta [Georgia], born in Atlanta, had a brother, a younger brother and a younger sister older than me.  I didn't, you know, actually didn't, didn't really have any clear memories until I was about nine years old because they, my mother [Laura Knight Turner] and father, you know, divorced in just about a year or so after I was born, and she had left, had left Chicago [Illinois], didn't really like living in Chicago and was living in Cincinnati [Ohio], and then they saw each other regularly, but then after I was born they, they divorced and then, I think, it wasn't until I was about nine that, you know, I went to Chicago to visit him and then--
Speaker 1: He was born in Atlanta you say?
Speaker 2: He was born in Atlanta and then went with his father and his brother [Henry Owen Turner] and sister [Louisa Mae Turner] to St. Louis [Missouri].  His mother [Leontine Troy Turner] died when they were, when he was probably, I think, four or five, and so Charles kept the family together and got them to St. Louis and so he grew up in St. Louis and then went to Cincinnati to go to school at the university and that's where he met my mother.  So and then, you know, after, after they got married he went back to Chicago 'cause that was the place he really loved.  He started a business, he was a pharmacist and--
Speaker 1: Where did he study pharmacy?
Speaker 2: It was in Chicago.  I don't, I don't know if it was at the University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois], but it was at one of the schools in Chicago and he said that it was really hard at that time.  Pharmacy school was two years and you, you know, you either made it or you didn't so it was a very rigorous kind of--
Speaker 1: You said your mother was born in 1910.  Your father was born--
Speaker 2: In 1895 (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Eighteen ninety-five [1895].
Speaker 2: He was about fifteen--
Speaker 1: Years, older.  Okay thanks.
Speaker 2: --fifteen years older than she was.
Story_ID: 260500
Speaker 1: I remember him [Turner's father, Darwin Turner] saying that the education for a pharmacist was very rigorous and so they had, you know, a two-year program and he was able to get his pharmacy degree [from the University of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois], but the interesting thing is he had talked when I was visiting Chicago [Illinois], he had talked about other pharmacists that he would sometimes see and just others he knew who had bought their licenses from the establishment in the City of Chicago.  You know, a white pharmacist that he was talking, talking about, so it was just, to me, just that whole, kind of aware, the beginning of an awareness in how the system works, and that it isn't a question of how hard you do the work, it's that often leads people, particularly white people to positions of success and prominence.  It's a political system that, you know, interestingly enough, that's one of the, I think one of the memories that really started one of the influence of my thinking that came from him, just how the system works.  He talked about, I remember we were driving past Walgreens, you know, one day and he said, "Yeah, Sam [ph.] and I went to school," and, he wasn't a, he was a very humble man, but he said, "You know, you know the difference between Sam and me?"  I said, "No."  He said, "Armour & Company [Chicago, Illinois]."
Speaker 2: He said what?
Speaker 1: Armour & Company, and I said what do you mean?  He said well, both of us came out pharmacy school around the same time and both of us, you know, wanted to be businessmen and I got a store, then got another store, and got a third one.  Sam was building his store, you know was building his network of stores and then Armour bankrolled him so that he was able to expand the network of stores and he said that what he saw was that as a small businessman without capital, that by the time he got a third store, he felt he was working for his employees because you weren't, he wasn't really able to really it in a way that profits went up and so he basically just sold off the other two and then--
Speaker 2: You know I was going to ask you if your father owned drug stores.  The reason I was going to ask you is that my great-grandfather, Robert [H.] Carter was the first black pharmacist in Massachusetts, and he owned three drug stores in New Bedford [Massachusetts] and two in Boston [Massachusetts], and so he actually owned five drug stores during his lifetime.
Speaker 1: That's fantastic.
Speaker 2: Yeah, so I was very appreciate your sharing that with me.  Also did you know or ever hear of Dr. Thomas W. Patrick [Sr.], the black pharmacist here in Boston?
Speaker 1: No.
Speaker 2: He ran the Patrick School of Pharmacy [Boston, Massachusetts] from 1893 until 1926, and from 1920 to 1926, the Patrick School of Pharmacy was right up here near Fort Hill [Boston, Massachusetts] on Center Street.
Speaker 1: Isn't that amazing?
Speaker 2: Yeah, his daughter's still living.  You may know Charlotte Patrick [ph.].  She was up there until about a year ago.
Speaker 1: Isn't that a fantastic piece of history (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, you need to know that.
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 2: I'll tell you more about that later anyway (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) All right.
Story_ID: 260501
Speaker 1: Tell us about your father's [Darwin Turner] father, an illustrious 20th century biologist, Dr. Charles Henry Turner.  Tell us about your grandfather, the biologist.
Speaker 2: Yep.  Well he, his parents were Addie [Campbell] and Thomas, excuse me, Addie and Thomas Turner.  They, they lived in Cincinnati [Ohio].  Addie was from Kentucky and Thomas came down from Canada.  I always assumed that they had, you know, that his family had probably gone to Canada to get away from the situation here, but the, Charles was born in 1867.  His father was a custodian.  His mother, I think, did some nursing and he, he loved, loved reading, loved books.  He and the family would talk about the family library where he kind of would indulges his love of reading and his was very curious, scientific mind and so went to the University of Cincinnati [Cincinnati, Ohio] and got a, a B.A. there and then would taught for a while at, then got a master's [degree] and did some work at the university but it was very difficult, you know, because Cincinnati is a border town and the man who formed the university, [Alfred K.] Nippert, was said to be a racist and so as the stories go, it was just difficult for him to kind of become part of the faculty at Cincinnati and so he went to Chicago [Illinois] and was able to get a Ph.D. in zoology at the University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois] and then went south.  The story is that he wanted to teach at Tuskegee [Normal and Industrial Institute; Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, Alabama], but they said they didn't have the money and so he went to Clark [College; Clark Atlanta University, Atlanta, Georgia] and studied at, and taught at Clark and I think Wally [ph.] was at Clark.  You know, my grandmother, his wife, Leontine [Troy Turner] died and then he moved around with, I think, had the children stay with some family for a while and moved around different teaching positions and eventually wound up teaching at [Charles H.] Sumner High School in St. Louis [Missouri] and was there, a teacher there until 1923 when he died.  And so he had taught high school doing science, I think biology and one other subject, in the high school and then at night would do these, you know, scientific experiments that kind of became a body of work that you know, he passed on.
Story_ID: 260502
Speaker 1: Chuck [HistoryMaker Charles "Chuck" Turner], your grandfather, Dr. Charles Henry Turner, received that Ph.D. in biology in 1908--
Speaker 2: Yep.
Speaker 1: --and one thing that he was known for is to be the consummate teacher of biology at [Charles H.] Sumner High School [St. Louis, Missouri], but he was equally as well known, if not better known, as a research biologist.  Tell us a little bit about his research and his publications.
Speaker 2: Well, it's really a, I think, fantastic story that here was this man with three children and teaching high school, and without graduate students and others that could provide a base for his work and yet he was able to, you know, kind of laboratory facilities and yet he was able to just produce some, some of these scholarly papers, many of which were published in very creative scientific exploration of animal life.
Speaker 1: What was the nature of his research specifically?
Speaker 2: Well you know the, there's a person who is in the field of animal behavior, animal psychology who said they thinks he was probably one of the first behavioral scientists who, studying animal psychology, did experiments with bees and developed a concept called circling that has (unclear) the international literature and work with insects and different kinds of animals and--
Speaker 1: I think, I think ants were particularly interesting, the behavior of ants.
Speaker 2: Ants were particular, you know look at the colonies of ants and how they, you know, how they interact and their, and the nature of their life, but this person who has been doing some research, a guy named [Charles I. Abramson], he had said that as he looked at his work, he really thought he was writing about animal behavior, animal psychology at a time when others really weren't invested in that area, and that the only conclusion he can come to in terms of why he didn't get the recognition was that he was black and that the field just wasn't willing to accept him, even though at the end of his life, when he was fifty-five and died in St. Louis [Missouri], the, I think the St. Louis Scientific Society [sic. Academy of Science of St. Louis, St. Louis, Missouri] honored him and had a, wrote up a piece on his life and work.  But it was just another example of a black man (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah that St. Louis Academy of Science publication was very useful for me.  Your brother [Darwin T. Turner] had sent it to me and it was very useful to me.  I think the quality of his work is measured by the fact that so much of his research was published by The Biological Bulletin which was the official research journal for the Woods Hole biological laboratories [Marine Biological Laboratory] in Woods Hole, Massachusetts, and if you get published there, then your stuff's got to be good.
Speaker 2: I hear you.
Story_ID: 260503
Speaker 1: How far back can you remember?  What's the earliest memory you have of growing up in Cincinnati [Ohio], your earliest childhood memory?
Speaker 2: Interesting, interesting question.  I have a memory, the earliest memory probably is just one of being, was actually an argument between my mother [Laura Knight Turner] and my grandmother [Laura Troy Knight] and, you know, I was about four I guess.  Ironically, that's my earliest, my earliest memory.
Speaker 1: Did it get resolved do you remember?
Speaker 2: Nah.  It went on.
Speaker 1: Would you share with me some of your other early memories of growing up as age five, six and seven?  What was life like for you as a child in Cincinnati?
Speaker 2: Peculiar.  It was really weird.  That is that, like I said, when I was about four my mother was hospitalized.  Again, my father [Darwin Turner] was, you know, in a different city, grew up on nice, you know, really nice piece of land thereabout.  It was in the, within the city confines but we had about two and a half acres and, you know, the main house where my grandmother and I and my aunt lived on the first floor. They rented it out to a, you know, space on the second floor to two different families, and then there was a carriage house that my mother had converted into a, converted the kind of the upper floor, I guess where they had the hay, to, you know, to a home so we really grew up in this apartment that was reconverted carriage house that was knotty pined.  She put stained glass windows there and walk-in closets and we had almost a picture window in the front, just, you know my uncle who was a tradesman, did the work and she did the design, so it was really just a beautiful place, so there, you know a lot of kind of very positive memories just about kinda playing in the yard and, you know, the beauty.  You know my grandmother liked to grow flowers so it was a very, there was always a lot of beauty, peach tree, cherry tree, apple trees where you could eat fruit.  It was, from that standpoint, the physical situation, it was something that every kid would have loved to have and a set of swings.  I had a set of swings there and so didn't have to go down to the park to, you know, to recreate.  But the problem was that this, with my mother gone and my father, you know, gone, and you know, living with my grandmother who was, probably had just retired from being a principal, so she's about seventy-two.  And my, you know, aunt was there, but involved in her, kind of her own life.  It was, yeah, it was just kind of confusing and, you know, tense.  Maybe not tense, but just confusing life situation.  Outside the compound, so to speak, were all these white families 'cause my grandmother bought a house in a neighborhood [Price Hill, Cincinnati, Ohio] that was in a kind of the western, southwestern part of the city right above the [Ohio] River and it was sort of a mixture of Germans, because it was a very Germanic town, and people from the South so growing up in kind of a border town in the middle of a white neighborhood was confusing, challenging and sometimes didn't feel that good.
Story_ID: 260504
Speaker 1: Did you have any siblings as a youngster growing up?
Speaker 2: Well, I one time wrote that my life, my early life to me really is probably related to the book, 'My Brother Was an only Child,' [Jack Douglas] that is that my brother, Darwin [T. Turner] was a child prodigy and so he went through school at an amazing speed and so he graduated from, my mother [Laura Knight Turner] graduated from high school when she was fifteen.  He graduated from high school when he was thirteen and had his master's [degree], had a B.A. at sixteen and had his master's, they said you had to take two years 'cause they wouldn't give a master's, the university [University of Cincinnati, Cincinnati, Ohio] wouldn't give a master's to him at seventeen.  So there's a nine-year difference between his age and my age so when I was, when he graduated from college at sixteen, I was what, seven, then when he left Cincinnati [Ohio] to begin to teach, actually at Clark University [sic. Clark College; Clark Atlanta University, Atlanta, Georgia] where my grandfather [Dr. Charles Henry Turner] had been, I was nine.  So he was kind of a phantom.  You know he was around, but he, he was a young kid trying to figure out what to do when you're, you're that smart and working, you know, and kind of interacting with people who were older than he was because of the whole age, age difference, so he was caught up in his life, so really didn't have much of a, of a relationship until after, you know, after he left Cincinnati and I used to go, you know, go visit him.  So it was, I was lead a very, kind of isolated, spent most of my time, a lot of time alone, was active, became active in the church and active in school.  But in terms of life in my neighborhood [Price Hill, Cincinnati, Ohio], I hung out, you know, hung out and played, played baseball and did other things that kids, kids do, and it wasn't a lot of racial, you know racial taunting, but, you know, by the time I was ten, eleven, it became clear, my grandmother [Laura Troy Knight] kind of gave me the life lessons that you need to have if you're black growing up in a white neighborhood, and it began to be clear that as I became older, you know, that the socializing in the socializing mood more inside than outside that, you know, it wasn't really my community or you know, my social situation (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I understand--
Story_ID: 260505
Speaker 1: What elementary school did you attend?
Speaker 2: A place called Whittier, Whittier Elementary School [Cincinnati, Ohio].
Speaker 1: How long were you there?  How many years?
Speaker 2: Went there in '46 [1946] and I grew up, no finished kindergarten.  I started in '45 [1945] and then went to [Walnut Hills] High School [Cincinnati, Ohio] in '52 [1952], so I was there for six years.  Well kindergarten through, so it's seven years at the--
Speaker 1: Any special memories or individuals that you think about as you move through the elementary or high school years?  What was that experience like for you?  Are there people that influenced you in any way?
Speaker 2: No.  No, it, I mean there, I remember Mr., Mr. Winfro [ph.] was the principal and his wife taught Latin in the high school I eventually went to, so it was maybe one of the reasons that I remember him.  I mean he used to do art appreciation classes and it was a year I can remember, remember that his working with the young people in the school and you know doing one of the art projects.  They set up a kind of play time, they would bring out the dominoes and so kids would be out in the halls of school playing dominoes and it's always some memories of kind of the recreational, recreational life in the schools, going out and playing kick ball--
Speaker 1: Did you like school, elementary school, as you are talking about it, did you like it or were you neutral?
Speaker 2: I didn't read as much as people, as people might assume given all the books that were around and kind of family tradition in education.  But yeah, I enjoyed school.  I enjoyed learning about things and remember the abacus, and you know learning about the fourth grade and learning how to work the abacus and learning about the [Great] Wall in China.  In the fourth grade, I can't remember who the teacher, but I, was, but I can remember a lot of things we did in the fourth grade, so that was a very positive piece, but it was, again, it was, it was being at a sense of isolation 'cause my grandmother [Laura Troy Knight] was, as I said, about seventy, seventy-two, was about seventy-two, when I started to go to school and she, I think the day before she said she didn't think she could make the walk, and the school was about maybe fifteen, twenty blocks away from the house and so the memory, a lot of the memories are just walking to school and walking back and not fighting.  I talked to some, some kids, they had to fight their way to school, fight their way home.  Didn't have that kind of situation, but it was just, just a sense of, kind of not being part of a, you know, a community, going to school, you know, interacting with the, you know, the kids at school, but not, just, you know, the difference was always there.
Story_ID: 260506
Speaker 1: --What high school did you attend?
Speaker 2: Walnut Hills High School [Cincinnati, Ohio] which is a, Walnut Hills High School which is a (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Walnut Hill?
Speaker 2: Walnut Hills High School, which is a college prep public school similar to Boston Latin [School] in Boston [Massachusetts], and maybe the Lab School at the University of Chicago [University of Chicago Laboratory Schools, Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 1: So academically you were a strong student?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.  I always, was always able to do well and never, and never saw studying as difficult.  Some subjects I didn't do well in, but didn't feel, feel there was a burden, didn't feel it was something negative.  Had trouble with, with math.
Speaker 1: Me too.
Speaker 2: But, you know, in general, I enjoyed--
Speaker 1: I loved biology, majored in biology.  I'm a long ways from it today.  But what was your favorite subject?  Did you have something that you really rallied around?
Speaker 2: No, I enjoyed English and enjoyed the work and just reading and, you know, enjoyed chemistry.  Probably history, maybe history.  It was, 'cause I think that stayed, stayed with me, so I think probably history was the most interesting subject.
Speaker 1: When you got to high school, were there more black students now for you to get to know, or not?
Speaker 2: About six or eight.
Speaker 1: Still small.
Speaker 2: There was a hand full.  I mean each class, in each class there, there were six, six grade levels, but again it was not, there weren't, weren't many of us.  Probably had a little, the relationships were stronger in school, although again, outside of school had no relationship with the white kids.  But in school I played football, played in the band, participated in school productions and so was very comfortable in the life at school and race, you know, race wasn't a big, I think in high school, wasn't a challenging issue, but my social life really evolved around the church and being part of the cub scouts and the Boy Scouts [of America] for a while in the black community, and so, it was, those two different windows.  The world of school where there're all these white people, and then, you know, you come out of that and then go to, and then come into the neighborhood where there're all these white people (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What church--
Story_ID: 260507
Speaker 1: What church did you go--
Speaker 2: Went to a church called St. Andrew's, St. Andrew's Episcopal Church which was in downtown Cincinnati [Ohio].  We had a minister named Reverend [Edmund H.] Oxley who was from Trinidad and used to talk about the asphalt lake [Pitch Lake, La Brea, Trindad] and kind of the glories and wonders of Trinidad, so that was a kind of a nice addition to my education, and then it was a, an Episcopal church that was what they called kind of a high church, that is, they used a lot of rituals in terms and incense and candles and bells and had young men and women, primarily actually young men at that time assisting the minister in the service and so starting about, when I was about nine, used to go to church every Sunday morning and would, would work with, became a server, so would assist the minister with the communion and I loved it.  I loved in, I developed a love of rituals and it was a very, it was very satisfying just emotionally, and then probably when I think about, it's interesting when I think about all the different worlds in which I was participating, the one where I felt secure and without any stress, was the church.  That really was a very important for me, had a, had a religious belief, you know it wasn't just, you know, wasn't just a belief, it was, it was a, it was a sense of a community that I really felt part of and I was playing an important role in it, and so it really was a kind of a grounding to me as a human being.
Story_ID: 260508
Speaker 1: You graduated from [Walnut Hills] High School [Cincinnati, Ohio] in what year?
Speaker 2: Nineteen fifty-eight [1958].
Speaker 1: And then where'd you go?  What happened next?
Speaker 2: I had a teacher, Mrs., I think her name was Mrs. Corn [ph.] and she had come to Cincinnati [Ohio] from the east.  I think she had gone to Radcliffe [College, Cambridge, Massachusetts] and so I remember one day, it was probably my junior year, yeah junior year, sitting outside on the steps and she was walking by, and we were talking about applying to college because it was a college prep school so everybody looks, at that time, looks at where they're gonna go to school, and you know, we were, we had gotten into the discussion I think about eastern schools.  I said I think I'm going to apply to the school at next door where you went to school, Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts], and she looked and she said yeah, you should do that.  I think you can get in.  And so I'd been kind of joking when I said it, but applied to a number of schools, actually Tufts [University, Medford, Massachusetts] because I was interested in the whole idea of the Foreign Service and they had a Woodrow Wilson graduate school [sic. The Fletcher School of Law and Diplomacy] there, so I applied to Tufts, and applied to I think Bradley [University, Peoria, Illinois] out in the Midwest had kind of a school in international studies and applied to Princeton [University, Princeton, New Jersey] and Harvard and then I got into all of them and decided to go to, you know, decided to go to Harvard.
Story_ID: 260509
Speaker 1: Over that summer you come to Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts], did you have a notion or an idea of really what you wanted to prepare to do with your life?  Did you know what career you professionally wanted to be in?  Any notions at that point?
Speaker 2: No, actually, I, can't really remember. Let me go back a little bit to when I was a sophomore [at Walnut Hills High School, Cincinnati, Ohio].  Somehow I heard about this riverboat that went from Cincinnati [Ohio] down to a place called Reelfoot Lake, Tennessee, down the Ohio River into the Tennessee and back during the summers and the fall and spring would go to New Orleans [Louisiana], and I, I think my grandmother [Laura Troy Knight] had, you know, had died.  I think my grandmother had died at that point, or I was basically living with, under my aunt's care, and I was interested in getting a job on the boat and I was underage and didn't have the papers, so the next year, I spent the summer from June until September riding this riverboat with, again with all the black people downstairs serving all the white people who were paying their money to, have a kind of an experience of probably the Old South and then the next year I kept threatening to, to ride the boat.  That is how I was accepted to school, but I said I'm just gonna take a year off and go down with them to New Orleans and when the ice comes, they don't go out.  I said in February I'll go with them down, just experience life and my family pushed back against it.  But it's just to say that when I was seventeen, eighteen I was just out there trying to enjoy myself and find out what life was about so didn't, didn't have any idea of what I might--
Story_ID: 260510
Speaker 1: I've known you as a leader for many, many decades.  I don't know whether you had leadership positions at Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts], but in high school [Walnut Hills High School, Cincinnati, Ohio], you told me a little bit about the things you did extracurricular.  Did you have any leadership positions at the high school?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I've always been, I've always been in ascension situations, you know that, you know that of leadership as an acolyte being, you know being a server which was kind of having some responsibility dealing with the other young men, the you know, ran for, ran for office, you know, when I was in high school and got elected.  A couple of years got elected to positions on the student, the school, the student council and I think I was class treasurer, class secretary you know, one year, so it's--that's always been, always been part of, part of my life.
Story_ID: 260511
Speaker 1: All right.  You come to Harvard University [Cambridge, Massachusetts], tell us about, was it four years at Harvard?  What was that experience like?  You arrive there in September of '58 [1958] (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Cold, cold.  These are some cold people up here.  I didn't, it's, I'll be frank, it's about frankness see, the women, women up here were thin, emaciated.  I mean that was a very, I said my they must be, they all must be sick, because in Cincinnati [Ohio] it's a, you know, it's a river town, very abundant people, robust and open and friendly.  My wife [Terri Small-Turner] went to Cincinnati a few years ago and said, Chuck [HistoryMaker Charles "Chuck" Turner], everybody talks to you on the street, the white people talk to you, the black people talk to you, what's going on? (Simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Not up here. Wasn't that way up here was it?
Speaker 2: Well she had grown up here in Boston [Massachusetts] and what she had spent her early years in Norfolk, Virginia, but then spent, you know, from six on in Boston and she said this is really, this is really strange.  Everybody is so friendly to each other.  You walk in the stores and people would, they would really greet you and so coming to Boston was really a culture shock.  Not that I didn't know about racism.  I was refused service at a, you know, a diner when I was twelve in Cincinnati and there were all kinds, there was issues there about race but there was just a coldness here in Boston, then over at the university everybody thought they were so, you know, there was just so much arrogance and it was, it was a hard, another hard experience just trying to emotionally adjust to be with these, you know, with these people.  I said if, I remember saying one time, damn, if this is the best they got, they're in trouble because this is, this is not, you know, just wasn't many, it's hard to put into words but it was very alienating and very, very cold.  You know academically it wasn't tough, I mean that the dilemma was to pull myself out of the periodic depression and being, you know, being in this environment and so as long as I was focused, could do the work, but sometimes it was just, just didn't--it seemed, it was just weird and bizarre, didn't seem to make any sense.
Story_ID: 258780
Speaker 1: Chuck [HistoryMaker Charles "Chuck" Turner] tell me about your academic experience at Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts]?  What did you major in and what were the four years like academically for you?
Speaker 2: The four years were, they were interesting.  My, my main focus was the field of, of government, enjoyed, enjoyed the study.  About, around 1960, I decided to, thought about going over to the Middle East.  I didn't know whether I'd go as a part of the American government, but really, I think it was, made my way as kind, thinking about a way to get, get the hell out of here, and so I took, I began to, I took Arabic, tried to take Arabic for a couple of years and studying Middle Eastern history and so it, it was kind of government with a minor in kind of Middle Eastern, Middle Eastern affairs.
Speaker 1: I've always enjoyed listening to William E.B. Du Bois [W.E.B. Du Bois] talk about his Harvard student days, his coming over into Boston [Massachusetts].  As a Harvard undergraduate, did you come in to the City of Boston for any occasion?  If so, what for?
Speaker 2: Well, I joined in the, bout '59 [1959], '60 [1960], joined the Alphas [Alpha Phi Alpha Fraternity], and as a way of kind of reconnecting with, you know, with the black community, 'cause I wasn't, wasn't involved in a church in Roxbury [Boston, Massachusetts] in the black community, but, you know, I had developed a social life around the Alphas and didn't have a, focused on, on school work and--
Speaker 1: Did you have a job as you worked through Harvard?  Did you work at that time?
Speaker 2: Oh, I had the greatest job in the world.  I was the guy was kind of monitor in my dorm when I was a freshman, was supervisor of the Harvard billiard room, so throughout college I, I start out as attendant and then managed, managed the pool hall at Harvard for about three years.  So that was, it was a great, great job because you got a chance to play pool and, no heavy lifting.
Story_ID: 258781
Speaker 1: That was good (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) When you were at Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] and you were in Alpha Phi Alpha Fraternity here, were you conscious or knowledgeable or paying any attention to any of the racial problems in Boston [Massachusetts], or any of the politics?  Did any of that come to your conscious at all?
Speaker 1: Well, you know, very, you know, very, very conscious but not involved.  That is, that I was, during the summers I would find different places to work 'cause on the riverboat, when I was working on the riverboat, when I was still in high school [Walnut Hills High School, Cincinnati, Ohio], I began to wait tables and so got a job, each summer I usually got a job waiting tables in some different city, and I remember being at a place called Music Inn [ph.], in I think, 1959, and seeing this New York, this Time magazine article on the Nation of Islam and just, you know, became fascinated with, with their concept, with Malcom [X], with Elijah [Muhammad] and so because there was, you know, would go to heard Malcolm speak at the, at Harvard and a friend of mine had a seminar with Malcolm, that Malcolm participated in back in the late '50s [1950s], and so became very, didn't become a Muslim but just did a lot of thinking and looking at the whole question about being a people in an alien land.
Speaker 2: And strategy and approach.
Speaker 1: And strategy and how they were, how they were approaching the issue of how would you get out of this situation we were in.  Just as I was, you know, leaving school, there was some initial work being done around boycotting Woolworth's [F.W. Woolworth Company] here as part of the national work, but really didn't, you know, deeply involved--
Speaker 2: at that point.
Speaker 1: --with the work at that time, but was very conscious of the dilemma that we were in and particularly because I had taken a bus from Cincinnati [Ohio] to, to Cambridge [Massachusetts], you know, when I would be going back and forth, and we always went through Harlem [New York, New York] and the experience of going through Harlem and seeing all the men just out on the corners and the whole sense of joblessness and unemployment which, which was different in Cincinnati, 'cause we were a milling town and had a good economic base, and so just didn't have the sense of, you know, the unemployment the way, the way you could see it, particularly, particularly New York [New York].  So I was, I was conscious of it and especially in a school that is training the, the white elite to go off and run the world and teachers who, you know, proclaimed kind of the right of the intelligentsia to run the world, it was no question of kind of where, you know, where would I fit, where would I go was a very challenging (unclear).
Speaker 2: Were you on a scholarship at Harvard?
Speaker 1: Yeah, I had a full scholarship.
Story_ID: 258782
Speaker 1: Why did you select Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts]?  I know you applied to Tufts [University, Medford, Massachusetts] and Princeton [University, Princeton, New Jersey] and Bradley [University, Peoria, Illinois], but why did you zero in on Harvard?
Speaker 2: Probably because I--you know I had heard that Princeton was, the whole issue of the elitism was something I looked at, but you know, what probably really decided was the people who were alumni that you have, you know, that you have contact with, that I had contact with in Cincinnati [Ohio] that kind of helped in the recruiting process, were friendlier and more open and more, you know, gave me a sense that they were interested in my coming in a way that, that people in Cincinnati who were from Princeton didn't, and so it's probably their, just the fact that they seemed like they were real people that, I said well let me go here.
Story_ID: 258783
Speaker 1: You graduated from Harvard University [Cambridge, Massachusetts] in what year?
Speaker 2: Nineteen sixty-three [1963].
Speaker 1: And what was next in your life?
Speaker 2: Got a job on a, well I went down to [Washington] D.C. and--without a job, but was just interested in that state government and so decided to go down to see what I could do down there, and got there, I think, the day, the day before the March on Washington.  So there, at the March on Washington and the--weird experience because there were all these people that are what, they say, probably three [hundred thousand], they say 200,000, but probably more than that, but then by about 4:30, 5:00 o'clock, everybody was gone.  You know, I mean literally, everybody, wasn't a soul, I mean downtown D.C. and not a soul around, and so it was just this phenomenon to just hit town and then just disappeared.
Speaker 1: I remember Ralph Abernathy said that he went back that evening and he was--said, I was out there all by myself.  And he said I could hear the leaves rustling on the ground--
Speaker 2: He's right.
Speaker 1: --and the papers just kind of floating in the wind.  I was out there and he said it was so peaceful.
Speaker 2: I mean that's, it was just nobody, I mean it was just nobody was around.
Story_ID: 258784
Speaker 1: So I was there in [Washington] D.C. and had, may have read an article by [HistoryMaker] Chuck Stone, I think, who had just taken over as the editor of the Washington Afro-American [Afro-American Newspapers] and didn't have any money.  Actually, I was sleeping in the park for, it was summer so I was sleeping out in the park 'cause I didn't, just had a little bit of money and was trying to conserve that and really was very lucky that they had a spot on the paper so I got a job with the Washington Afro-American, which was great, 'cause we'd go to congressional hearings and remember being in a hearing with, or being in a press conference that [HistoryMaker John] Conyers [Jr.] was having, and covered an event where I think Katzenberg [sic. Nicholas Katzenbach] who was the U.S., assistant U.S. attorney general got an award from the AKAs [Alpha Kappa Alpha Fraternity] and Stokely [Carmichael; Kwame Ture] was there to get an award from, also from them on behalf of the SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee], and so covered football, covered pro football games because you were a staff of four so everybody did everything and that was great experience.  What happened though that kind of changed direction was that I covered the SNCC conference and the Fannie Lou [Hamer] and somebody said you ought, you ought to go and do a story on the Fannie Lou Hamer 'cause she's really a, just amazing woman.  So, you know, I talked to Fannie Lou about, you know, her struggle on the plantation and getting involved with SNCC--
Speaker 2: Was she in Washington [D.C.] or Mississippi?
Speaker 1: She, no, she came to, SNCC had it's convention--
Speaker 2: Oh, she was at the convention.
Speaker 1: --in D.C. and she had come up as part of the Mississippi delegation, and so did an interview with her--
Story_ID: 258785
Speaker 1: Ran into a guy named Bill Strickland [William L. Strickland], who had been at Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts].  I knew him through the Alphas [Alpha Phi Alpha Fraternity] at Harvard and he was heading an organization called the Northern Student Movement which had branches in Philly [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], Boston [Massachusetts], New York [New York], Hartford [Connecticut], I think one other city, and asked me if I wanted to come and work in their national office editing their, you know their newsletter, and you know, it seemed--you know, I loved writing, I loved doing the stories but I was really at a point where I wanted to do more myself terms of getting involved and so went to, took a job with the Northern Student Movement, worked out of their central office in Morningside Drive [New York, New York] right at, kind of right above, kind of a border between Harlem [New York, New York] and that Columbia [University, New York, New York] campus.  And, Mel [Miller], Mel actually was in New York and I don't know whether he was in school.  Mel Miller, Mel Miller was there, so used to it and Mel and Bill were friends so used to, you know, bump into young to Mel and there was an organizing project that we were working on, the Northern Student Movement was working on New York with Jesse Gray who was a long-time rent strike organizer in, in Harlem.   And so I became, joined that project and for the, for about a year or so I did tenant organizing in Harlem and rents strikes had just become legal and so before, there just wasn't any protection, but they now legal protection so there was a large surge of energy and so worked there for, maybe six, nine months and then went to Hartford to direct the Hartford project.
Speaker 2: That was the Northern Student?
Speaker 1: That was the Northern Student Movement.
Speaker 2: And you were the director?
Speaker 1: Yep, yep.  The guy who had been directing it, actually was white, decided it wasn't appropriate for him to be the director and so he stayed on for a while.
Speaker 2: Was that what mid-'60s [1960s], '65 [1965], '65 [1965], '66 [1966]?
Speaker 1: This was '64 [1964], about 1964 I went to, went to Hartford and we, we did all kinds of things there.  Did job--I worked around job discrimination, did some work around education, housing issues.  Did that for a couple of years--
Story_ID: 258786
Speaker 1: In '65 [1965] we were, participated in a, or actually organized a march and rally that led to a major confrontation with the police and a number of us were arrested and charged with old (unclear) laws, sedition, anarchy, and whatever, and the, the organization, the national organization suggested that those of us who weren't from Hartford [Connecticut], should try to find other places to go and let things cool off because it was very, got very tense.  So I came back to Boston [Massachusetts] since I'd been, I came back to Boston and I had, through the Northern Student Movement [NSM] had met [HistoryMaker] Sarah-Ann Shaw who was working as an organizer with NSM.
Speaker 2: Here in Boston?
Speaker 1: Here in Boston, and as they say, the rest is history.  The, went back to, went back for the trial and they, I think gave us suspended sentences and we were on probation but they just transferred that to, to Boston, so I came, came back to Boston, got a job working as a organizer for the South End Neighborhood Action Projects [sic. South End Neighborhood Action Project (SNAP), Boston, Massachusetts], not at the point where the urban renewal project was, was moving forward.
Speaker 2: And SNAP was part of what larger organization?
Speaker 1: ABCD, the Association for Boston Community Development [sic. Action for Boston Community Development, Boston, Massachusetts], but was headed by Bob Coard [Robert M. Coard] in 1965, and is headed by Bob Coard today in the year 2005 (laughter) (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, I think both of you have been steadfast.  He's still in the, doing the same thing and you're still doing the same thing in a different seat.
Speaker 1: Yep.
Story_ID: 258787
Speaker 1: What were some of the challenges and major projects that you immediately were immersed in as you worked with SNAP [South End Neighborhood Action Project, Boston, Massachusetts]?  What issues were the community facing that you were grappling with?
Speaker 2: Well, the big issue was how to, you know, protect the, you know, the interest of the black community because there had been a strong black community there but now it's being, there's all these BRA [Boston Redevelopment Authority] plans about moving people from the South End [Boston, Massachusetts] into Lower Roxbury [Boston, Massachusetts]--
Speaker 1: BRA is what?
Speaker 2: Boston Renewal, the Boston Redevelopment Authority.  It was the agency in Boston [Massachusetts] that took the federal funds and used the federal funds to buy land and then use that land to reconvert, and so they had an urban renewal plan for the South End and were essentially moving people from the, the South End above Mass Avenue [Massachusetts Avenue] to the, to Lower Roxbury which was the black, always kind of another part of the black community.
Speaker 1: Now the South End of Roxbury was two of Boston's neighborhoods--
Speaker 2: Yep, two of Boston's neighborhoods, the South End being an integrated neighborhood and Lower Roxbury being more of a, more a black neighborhood.
Speaker 1: Probably 80 percent of black people in Boston at that time were in those two neighborhoods would you say, roughly?
Speaker 2: In the late '60s [1960s], yeah, yeah, they were--
Speaker 1: In those two neighborhoods?
Speaker 2: That's where we were.  We weren't out in (unclear) and Dorchester [Boston, Massachusetts].  That came in the '70s [1970s] and there were, actually there were a number of us living in Roxbury and various places, but the, you know the bulk of, like you said, 80 percent of the community lived in the South End and Lower Roxbury.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: In the (unclear) no project was really very consciously designed to try to upscale the South End and a lot of moving around of people and became very frustrated with the, or feeling I was just in a situation where I was kind of helping to facilitate the, kind of the movement of black people out of the South End into other parts and so it's not necessarily comfortable with it but--
Story_ID: 258788
Speaker 1: We focused on a number of--kind of community-based issues, tried to help people organize.  There was a lot of trash that was being dumped out in an area called Madison Park [Boston, Massachusetts] and right next to a big piece of land where Camfield Gardens [Boston, Massachusetts] now is located next to the public housing project.
Speaker 2: What neighborhood was--
Speaker 1: This was Lower Roxbury [Boston, Massachusetts].
Speaker 2: --the trash was Madison Park and--
Speaker 1: Madison Park is in Lower Roxbury.  And it was a park, but they, people just came and dumped stuff and there was this big open piece of land next to this public housing development, and it was filled with trash, and so we had tried, we had formed a little community group and we had gone down and met, met with city officials.  You know, kind of doing it the right way, and just nothing.
Speaker 2: Negotiation.
Speaker 1: Yeah, negotiation.  Tried to be, you know, use the civic process.  Nothing happened so we came back and said, you know, the only way to get rid of this trash, we need to burn it, and so, you know, a group of us kind of worked and kind of piled the trash up and then passed out leaflets and said we're going to burn the trash this evening, and, you know, the, there were people from the community there, there were the firemen there.  There were the police that were there and we lit the fire and the police came in, the fire people came.
Speaker 2: Did you warn them ahead of time that you were going to do this?
Speaker 1: No, no, they just, you know, they just, you know, small town in the word they, the director of the project might even, might have even called, but Reggie, Reggie Eaves [A. Reginald Eaves] was the director of the project, that he--
Speaker 2: The South End Neighborhood Action [Project (SNAP)]?
Speaker 1: Yeah.  And he was, he was tall, (unclear), a kind of radicalism and so we burned, tried to burn the trash but then the fire, the firemen came and there's a great picture on the, in the front page of the [Boston] Herald or The [Boston] Globe of [HistoryMaker] Byron Rushing, our state representative, and his girlfriend, Sue Starzinki [ph.] with the firemen, with the, pointing of their hose at the fireman.  Sue and Byron tried to pull the hose out of, out of fire people's hands, but we, they kind of put out the fire and they said we're going to burn the trash, so we went back the next night and didn't, fortunately, didn't have a major, it was, I've never seen as many police cars as I saw, saw them lined up and down Tremont Street.  But it was interesting because we got out of it without any scrimmage between the police and the community.  We didn't get to burn the trash, but it was such a volatile time that two things happened that were fascinating.  One was that, one was that the Michael [E.] Haynes and [Frank] Holgate were the state reps and there was another, oh, and Boeing [ph.] were the state reps.  They had been trying to get a bill through that would build the, you know, would build Washington Park [Boston, Massachusetts].  We put the swimming pool in and the skating rink.  They said, there should be an article around maybe September 1966, because they said, hey look, you know, there it is, people burn things down if you don't, if you don't give us this, there's going to be even more trouble and so they parlayed it into getting the, getting the swimming pool and the skating rink down there and then the city just of its own accord because it was such tension, they didn't know, and they didn't' know what, what we would do, they sent in, there must have been twenty-five, thirty workers down there a couple of days later and they cleaned it up.  They cleaned it up, they put the posts in and that's, that kind of set the stage for then organizing going on around the question of the campus type high school that led to, that is that the BRA [Boston Redevelopment Authority], they cleaned it up, but from their minds, they were just preparing it for the BRA plan to take the whole area for a campus, sixty-acre campus high school.
Speaker 2: Yeah, that covered was almost fifteen acres wasn't it, it was some fifteen to twenty acres, the Madison Park.
Speaker 1: Oh, yeah, the park itself.
Speaker 2: The landscape--
Speaker 1: The landscape, yep.
Speaker 2: --was fifteen to.
Speaker 1: The park itself had that and then there was a larger area where they wanted to build this campus type high school and the community fought back because that had been the--and Lower Roxbury was the base of the black community.  Bennie Haynes [sic. Roy Haynes] lived there and a whole lot of, you know, people who were really kind of leaders in the community, and so Byron, and I were working.  This is after SNAP--
Story_ID: 258789
Speaker 1: Yeah, you left SNAP [South End Neighborhood Action Project, Boston, Massachusetts] after what, six months, or eight months or something like that?
Speaker 2: Well, we had a sit in down in [Boston] City Hall [Boston, Massachusetts] around, because the other issue, there were some housing issues and we couldn't get the city to respond, and so we took the families that were in bad housing conditions and we took 'em down to city hall.
Speaker 1: Under the SNAP (unclear).
Speaker 2: When I was at SNAP which was being, was kind of a clause on city agency, and I remember Reggie [A. Reginald Eaves] coming and saying, you got to get out of here.  You can't have these people here and we just said--
Speaker 1: Who was Reggie?  He was what?
Speaker 2: Reggie Eaves was the director.  Reggie Eaves was the director of the South End--
Speaker 1: Of the South End Neighborhood Action?
Speaker 2: --Neighborhood Act Project.  He later became police [sic. public safety] commissioner down in Atlanta [Georgia].  A very, very good guy, positive guy, powerful guy.
Speaker 1: So then you moved from SNAP.  You had your sit-in at city hall and then you left SNAP.
Speaker 2: And Reggie said it would be just as well if I moved on, so I joined with [HistoryMaker] Byron [Rushing] and a woman named Andrea Ballard [sic. Andrea Benton], then she later married Byron Rushing and we started a group called the Roxbury Associates which was just an organizing group that was funded by the Mass [Massachusetts] Council of Churches [Boston, Massachusetts].  Jim Wheden [ph.], Reverend Jim Wheden was, you know, was our supervisor of the Mass Council, and we worked on different projects and one of the projects was organizing people in Lower Roxbury [Boston, Massachusetts] around the campus, fighting back against the campus high school, and we got some architects and the plan was developed to develop housing and eventually, compromise where the school was built but on much smaller piece of land and then the Madison Park Village [Roxbury, Boston, Massachusetts] which is there today, came--
Speaker 1: But a lot of individuals, a lot of families were displaced as a result of the Madison Park High School [Madison Park Technical Vocational High School, Boston, Massachusetts] campus.
Speaker 2: It was, it was part of their renewal process but, and so a lot of people were displaced, but their, their intention was to displace everybody.  They would take the South [End, Boston, Massachusetts] and move some of us into housing in kind of in Lower Roxbury, but then create this swath of land some sixty acres, where there would just be this high school and trees around it, so they were really working to remake the community--
Story_ID: 258790
Speaker 1: They were gonna come in with a highway and we organized against the highway couple of years later, but they had a whole plan just to re- kind of reconfigure the, the community, but weren't ultimately successful because people kept organizing and pushing back.
Speaker 2: You said they were coming with a highway.  Who were they and what was this highway?
Speaker 1: Well, there had been a plan to build a, to complete I-95 through Boston [Massachusetts].  I-95 was the, kind of federal highway that was justified as a, security highway where you could move troops from Florida to, Florida to Maine, and there was a highway trust fund that provide money for the building of highways.  Every gallon of gas you, you bought you paid some money and it went into a trust fund, and so everybody assumed that it was going to be built, they were going to building a sixteen lap lane highway.  It was like the Dan Ryan [Expressway] in Chicago [Illinois] where you got the, about six lanes, four lanes of traffic on each side, parking lanes and then the railroad running down the center.  That's what they intended to have run through Hyde Park [Boston, Massachusetts] and Jamaica Plain [Boston, Massachusetts] and into Roxbury [Boston, Massachusetts] and then downtown Boston.
Speaker 2: So you're saying this highway, super highway would have cut through four of Boston's neighborhoods--
Speaker 1: Oh yeah.
Speaker 2: --and particularly Roxbury on the South End [Boston, Massachusetts] that was predominately black and Spanish speaking peoples.
Speaker 1: Yep.  And then there would be an interbelt coming from Cambridge [Massachusetts] that would meet at Ruggles [Street] and Columbus [Avenue] and so you'd have this interchange, these, this about six level interchange right between Whittier Street and the Mission Hill [Boston, Massachusetts] housing developments.  And so we, you know, just a, I had helped from that point from a group called the Boston Black United Front that kind of came out some thinking that Stokely Carmichael [Kwame Ture] and others had about the need to form alliances between middle class blacks and working class, low income blacks to kind of fortify themselves against the attack that we thought that was going to come against those of us who re more radical.  And so formed the United Front and then one of the first projects we focused on was the highway and it became part of a regional highway fight which fortunately we won and then the plans were, you know, were changed around.  We actually wound up developing our own plan for how the land would be used while the struggle is going and then once the struggle is ended, our plan that had the RCC [Roxbury Community College, Roxbury Crossing, Massachusetts] where it is now, and Marvin Gilmore is development, industrial development that he had conceived, was part of our plan, and what's interesting is the state spent probably millions of dollars designing, making this elaborate design of a plan that we had developed with $30,000 from Model Cities [Program] (laughter).
Story_ID: 260512
Speaker 1: So you and [HistoryMaker] Byron Rushing and Gloria Fox, who's now a state representative, and a number of other people who were very effective in stopping the coming of this I-93 [sic. I-95] super highway in communities of color, City of Boston [Massachusetts].  That was a major achievement.  You moved on to, from the [Boston] Black United Front and what was your next organization?
Speaker 2: After I left the, well I didn't leave the front, but I got a job after the Roxbury Associates because part of my, when I was working at Roxbury Associates, I was able to put time into organizing the front, but in 1969 I took a job with Northeastern University [Boston, Massachusetts], being the first director of their African American institute which is now the John D., which is now the John D. O'Bryant [African-American Institute], you know, institute.  The students had, the black students, had really done a fantastic organizing job and conceived of this center that would be the base of activities for black students and got the university to agree and so they invited me in to be the director and so while I continued to serve as co-chair of the front, I also became full director, full time director.   As a volunteer with the front, I became full-time paid director with the African American Institute, and our objective there was to build a center that could be of strength and support to the students, the black students at Northeastern.  We started a black studies program ourselves and it was headed by Cliff Janey [Clifford B. Janey] who had just graduated from Northeastern and had been part of the organizing process and so we hired him to head up the black studies program and did a fantastic job of it.  We developed a center in the community where students--
Speaker 1: If my memory is correct, some of those early African and African American studies programs were conducted off-site.  They were not on the campus, but they were up in the community.
Speaker 2: We had ours located in a place called the Norfolk House [Roxbury, Massachusetts].  We got space on the third--
Speaker 1: In Roxbury [Boston, Massachusetts]?
Speaker 2: In Roxbury, about a twenty minute ride from the, from the campus, but we thought it would be appropriate to have it in the community and there would be an opportunity for students to come back into the community and interact with other people around this--
Speaker 1: It was particularly important because Northeastern abutted both the South End [Boston, Massachusetts] and the Roxbury neighborhoods.
Speaker 2: Yes it did.  It really was kind of a bridge, you know, we saw the black studies program kind of being a bridge between Northeastern and its campus and the students on the campus and the community and it worked out very well and Cliff, you know, was very effective, even though he'd just graduated from college but he was very skilled and now actually a superintendent of schools down in [Washington] D.C.  So that's a, from his humble beginnings, you know, third floor of the Norfolk House, he has forged an educational career.
Speaker 1: I don't think most people in Boston [Massachusetts] know that.
Speaker 2: I don't think so either.
Speaker 1: They should.
Speaker 2: Yep.
Speaker 1: Go ahead.
Speaker 2: So I was there for a couple of, worked there for a two-year, you know, period, felt you know, after a couple of years, felt we had a base that was, was developed, but also there were you know some tensions with the university and such and so I resigned as director of the institute.
Story_ID: 260513
Speaker 1: Looked around and took a job as the director of a city--a community development corporation, the Circle Inc. [Boston, Massachusetts] that had been started by [HistoryMaker] Willard Johnson who was a professor over at MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts].  I was taking a year sabbatical to, to start Circle Inc. so I came in as the director.  We had some funds out of Washington [D.C.] from the Office of Economic Opportunity and so we developed, Starts and Business Projects [ph.], a demolition company that was black owned.  We had half interest in that.  Unfortunately, they had a tragic accident just as they were starting and it just destroyed the finances.  We started a laundromat on Warren Street [Boston, Massachusetts], (unclear) and, you know, a small business in the South End [Boston, Massachusetts] area, put financing into a pillow company, so did a number of economic development projects in the community, some of which succeeded, others didn't.  We tried to get a drug store started up in the Highland Park area with Roxbury Action Program [Roxbury, Boston, Massachusetts], but ran into a variety of problems with that, but it was focused on trying to stimulate community-based economic development.  And, so again, my, there was like every two years it would be time to move on, so I was there at Circle for a couple of years--
Story_ID: 260514
Speaker 1: Got involved with negotiations around construction, the issue of construction jobs in the community, and, as, it was an attempt to work out an agreement between the unions and the community in terms of how integration would, you know, the unions would go on, and the city, the unions, the community were part of that negotiating structure.  We figured that it wasn't gonna work, that as we figured that at some point, you know, either the contractors or the unions were gonna back away and so we developed a concept of having a community-based clearinghouse, an organization that would be able to have the funds to place construction workers of color and we brought together the black Latino, Asian and Native American communities in Boston [Massachusetts] form it and called it the Third World Jobs Clearinghouse [Boston, Massachusetts].  And then when the negotiations broke down, we had already developed this concept that they said, they thought made sense as long as it was a part of their plan and we went to the city and asked them to finance it and so we were able to hire a Black, Asian, Latino staff to work with construction workers placing construction workers.  And we ran into a problem because the, the company, the unions and the companies just decided to boycott us, that is, that they wouldn't come to us for the workers and so we organized a group of workers called the Third World Workers Association and they went into the streets to demonstrate and it led, we had a number of demonstrations at different places.  One where a person now is city council with Jim Kelley [James M. Kelly], at that time was a sheet metal worker, came into this negotiating session that we were having with a developer when they were building the, the power plant down near the Southeast Expressway.  And remember Jimmy throwing a few, and some other people throwing a few before the police kind of came in and broke us up, but the next day the unions called a general strike that is, that they called on their workers to march to [Boston] City Hall [Boston, Massachusetts] to demand the defunding of the clearinghouse and the mayor for a while, Kevin White was mayor then, said he wouldn't, he wouldn't defund us but then, then he went ahead during, I think, December of that year, and defunded us.  A Latino guy who was head of the labor, the regional director of labor department, came in and said, if you defund them, we'll take all your job money away from you, and so it gave us, it kind of gave us some continued life, but we realized we were in a difficult situation given the attitude of the unions and so we, it was fascinating strategy--
Story_ID: 260515
Speaker 1: There was some state money that was available to start community-based projects, and we went to the state and said can we start, can we get some of that money to open offices in Cambridge [Massachusetts], Springfield [Massachusetts], Worcester [Massachusetts], and they said yeah, as long as you can get the mayor to sign off on it and the mayor of those towns said sign off and they felt, I think they just thought we'd never be able to do that, given the kind of the radical nature that, you now, the reputation we had here.  But they didn't know we had people in those towns who were in very good relationships with the mayors and so we started duplicates, with black and Latin workers then came together in Springfield, Worcester and in, and in Cambridge, so it, you know, by about '78 [1978] we had an operation that had offices in four, four cities, so, and for a while it was really very exciting but then [President Ronald Wilson] Reagan came along and pulled the, you know, and pulled back the amount of funding areas and we just couldn't sustain it.  But during the, from about '76 [1976] to '80 [1980], there was, '76 [1976] to maybe '78 [1978] there was a Boston [Massachusetts] operation and then we added the three other operations to it from '78 [1978] to '80 [1980], but again, the ones in Worcester and Springfield, and Cambridge actually went on, and in Boston, went on for a while, but it didn't have the cohesion, because they didn't have the resources to really keep it united the way it had been. During that period, I started the, you know, the housing, we thought we take, you know, HUD [U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development] had housing that nobody wanted, and so we went and go six houses from HUD, got some money from the Episcopal church and started a construction company and got a guy who's a contractor to manage the construction company.  So we were hiring our own workers from the, we hiring workers from the [Third World Jobs] Clearinghouse [Boston, Massachusetts] to work on these houses and we got, they were duplexes and so we rezoned them so each of them was a house unto itself and rehabbed and sold them to people in the, in the community.  But around that time, you know, around, I guess around 1980, construction is a very combative field and there just, a lot of fights developed internally around what was going on and so the whole, the clearinghouse, you know, kept going but our construction operation really ran into a lot of problems, and so essentially, there wasn't financial, you know that financial base for me to continue there.  And my marriage broke up around that same time because it was, a lot of different reasons, but I think just the pressure of what we were going through.
Story_ID: 260516
Speaker 1: So I was looking around for a job just to support myself and saw that there was a group, known as the Industrial Cooperative Association [Boston, Massachusetts] that was working with workers in different parts of the country to help them establish businesses that they owned cooperatively, and so I took a job as education director and would basically travel around the country to work with workers in different places who wanted to own their own businesses but on a, on a cooperative basis where there'd be, where the workers would elect the board of directors and, you know, get share of the profits on a, on a equal basis.  And beside we worked, worked down in Puerto Rico with a furniture company that we worked to convert to worker ownership, did some work up in Burlington, Mass [Burlington, Massachusetts], with, with actually cooperatively-owned construction company up in Burlington, did work out in California with a garment manufacturing company that was owned by this black, Mexican, Filipino women that was, you know, exciting project so just got a chance to travel around the country and do a different kind of organizing and learn a lot about business.
Story_ID: 260517
Speaker 1: You were constantly embattled.  It was a tremendous struggle.  You were really out there many times on your own, but you had support.  You have been labeled as "one of the city's [Boston, Massachusetts] best known agitators" and you had to be that in order do the things that you did in terms of housing, economic development and so on.  Where did you get the spiritual energy from to keep you moving year after year after year?  Where did your spiritual energy come from?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, the, as I said when I was young, nine, ten, just the whole grounding being in the church and kind of being grounded was, kind of laid a foundation and then in the '60s [1960s] the whole concept that Elijah [Muhammad] put out and that is that we had to understand that, that life on earth is part of a larger process and that we as black people have a mission here in, in this country to transform ourselves and transform the country and so there was a, you know, kind of the church, the church experience, the Christian church just gave me a sense of, you know, just kind of a faith in another reality and then Elijah's teachings gave me kind of a beginning of a cosmology beginning of concept about how there's a plan that is, that we are a part of.  And then it's interesting, down at Dudley [Square] Station [Roxbury, Boston, Massachusetts], a guy, a black guy with MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts] gave me two books in 1973.  One was called 'The Rosicrucian Cosmo-Conception' [Max Heindel] and the other was 'The Mystical Qabalah' by Dion Fortune and my wife at that time gave me a book called the 'Initiation' by Elisabeth Haich.  And each of them kind of talked about a conception of the world that is, that the Masons teach, that kind of, the orders get into but we that don't, you know, the society, the religion doesn't, you know, kind of orthodox religion doesn't talk about in terms of how the nature of the universe and our role as human beings and our relationship to the other forms of life.  So it began to develop a, a model of how, model of evolution, that is, how we have evolved and the principles of evolution and that plus Elijah's teachings because in a sense it just reinforced Elijah's teaching because it gave a whole framework, enabled me to understand more clearly what Elijah was trying to teach.  And so we are just began to realize that, that there was, that, that we are involved in a process of evolving our consciousness and that we as people of African descent are here to help restore sanity to a people who have a lot of power but don't have much real understanding of the nature of life and what, what's happening, and so while it was chaotic there was a, you know, the framework of thought that I, that I believed in, and used in various ways in my, you know, in my work and, if it wasn't for that, it would be, it would be, you know, it would be impossible for me to survive on the city council because your, your anger at the things that are said and done are really very angering and so you have to have a perspective that enables you to move your own energy level to another, another point so you can then try to work with them around where they are without getting kind of dragged into it.  So it's actually, so while people see me as a political force, then as a kind of warrior, the reality is that I'm able to do it because of my, the, what I would call, spiritual science, you know, my understanding of how the universe works and our, my perspective of my understanding of how the universe works, and our role in it, and just trying to apply those principles to the, the different things that you know come up, you know, day by day.
Story_ID: 260518
Speaker 1: After thirty plus years of intensive community organizing, you decide to run for the Boston City Council.  Why did you make that decision to run?
Speaker 2: 'Cause there wasn't enough organizing going on.  That's literally it, you know, we were, Sadiki Kambon and myself and others had back in '98 [1998] tried to get people who were in leadership positions to confront the city around different issues.  We had a sit in down at [Boston] City Hall [Boston, Massachusetts] that--
Speaker 1: Who was Sadiki Kambon?
Speaker 2: Sadiki Kambon is a activist in, black activist, in Roxbury [Boston, Massachusetts] who worked on issues for the last 20-25 years.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And so we, during '90 [1990], '97 [1997], '98 [1998] we were trying to pull people together to confront the mayor, but, because what we saw was that he was, Menino, Mayor [Thomas] Menino was, distributing money and putting money, investing money in different activities in the community, but the price was that you had to keep your mouth shut about anything you didn't like.  So, it was a, it was just a very difficult situation and we felt, because while there were something positive that was happening through that money, there were a lot of things that needed to be challenged and changed, but people were just didn't wanna, didn't wanna rock the boat and so we had tried, actually tried to have a sit-in down at city hall that was interrupted by, I think, his wife's mother got sick and so we left, but during all that turmoil, we kind of came to an agreement with the mayor about how to move forward, but people just didn't wanna, didn't wanna--knew things needed to change and had the skills of doing it, just didn't want to, didn't want to take any risks, and so when the person who had been representing my district, Gareth [R.] Saunders, came back from Africa about a month before people were supposed to take out the papers and said I don't want to run, my wife [Terri Small-Turner] and I talked about it and said why don't we see if we can use this, whether you can use the office as an organizing base, that is, if you're a councilor, then that, you know, people, that would give you certain credibility, you'd get information.  For a while they had free mailing privileges until I used them so much that they, that they put limits on how much mailing we could do.  And I got paid a salary.  I got paid more money than I had ever been paid in my, ever imagined being paid.
Speaker 1: You mean as a councilor?
Speaker 2: As a councilor.  It was--I almost doubled my salary the first year, and then when they gave us the raise, you know, just surpassed anything I'd ever earned before.
Story_ID: 260519
Speaker 1: --You've been in office on the Boston City Council from 1999 to the present?
Speaker 2: Two thousand [2000].
Speaker 1: Two thousand [2000], sorry March of 2005, where we are now.  Are you glad you made that decision?  And secondly, tell me some of the major issues of things that you've been tackling as city councilman, and what do you think you've accomplished in five years.
Speaker 2: One, the, the first thing we want to do is re-establish faith that, you know, politicians could really earn, kind of ground the faith that politicians can work in the interest of community 'cause for a variety of reasons, that kind of relationship to the city council office and kind of weakened during the period of the '90s [1990s], and so we opened an office in Roxbury [Boston, Massachusetts] so people wouldn't have to go downtown and a way to kind of better serve.  We held monthly meetings that we started in March of 2000 and we had our last one in March of 2005, so for five years we've had these monthly meetings where we discuss issues and people then have a lunch after the Saturday session to socialize.  So we really, I think we really done a, a good job of trying to strengthen people's belief that there could be a working relationship between people on the, you know, on the city council, and the community.  I think our monthly meetings have helped to strengthen organizing in our community and other communities.  In terms of issues, we've worked around the housing issue, but unfortunately, we never, haven't been able to get legislation that would bring some stability through the council given its conservatism, so we haven't been successful there.  I think we've been successful in education, just continually pushing the parameters.  When I came into office the superintendent wouldn't even acknowledge, essentially wouldn't even acknowledge the achievement gap needing special program.  Last year and last May in the Dudley [Square] Station [Roxbury, Boston, Massachusetts], he laid out a ten-point program for the, for eliminating the achievement gap and I think that's because of the work that I and others did.
Story_ID: 260520
Speaker 1: (Unclear) (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) What committees have you chaired [on the Boston City Council]?  You chaired one important committee which was--?
Speaker 1: Education.  Education and now I chair the human rights, you know, committee and those are, those are probably the two main committees that I chaired, but we worked on the CORIS [Criminal Offender Record Information (CORI)] issue.  We
Speaker 2: CORIS, what is that?
Speaker 1: Criminal Offenders Record Information System, where, because what we were finding was that people were not being, being discriminated against by employers because they had a record.  They couldn't get housing because of federal law if they had a felony in public housing, they couldn't get money for education until five years after they had been out of jail, and nobody would talk about it, you know, the state was even moving to put these regulations in and everybody was just staying silent again, and so a group of us had a sit-in down at the department of public health, to make it a major issue, which, which worked, that is, that once, there's something magical about the power of people engaging in civil disobedience and magical in that it really kind of just triggers interest and so we were able to use that phenomena to put a spotlight and continue to work on now.  What, the main thing I'm working on now are two things.  One is, both of them are national.  One is that we have to end the war on drugs.  We have to legalize drugs.  Prohibition, alcohol was made illegal from 1919 [sic. 1920] to 1933.  In 1933 violent crime in the streets was rampaging, police corruption had reached an all-time high, people were killing themselves with what they were drinking and [U.S.] Congress said we can't afford to have alcohol be illegal.  And it's the same situation, with drugs.  Right now the United States government is overseeing the shipments of heroin out of Afghanistan into this country.  The head of the drug unit, said at a hearing held last year that to evaluate the war on drugs, that he had to admit they couldn't stop the flow, the flow of drugs so they arrest people all the time, but they can't stop the flow of drugs.  And in the community with the kind of poverty we have, then the reality is there's always a new supply of dealers and so my, my prospective is that when you look at the fact there were 500,000 people of all races in jail in 1973 and today there are two million and a million of them are black, black men and women.  Eighty-three percent of the people in jail are there for drug related crimes.  It's clear that this is, we've gotta, we've gotta be rational, we don't have money for, we don't have money for recovery, you know to deal with the problem itself.  We're number one in Boston [Massachusetts] in heroin, two in cocaine, nationally.  One in heroin, two in cocaine, one in OxyContin.  So, essentially, I've got a bill now that I'm filing next week that would take half of the money now that the DA's office and police get from forfeiture of monies from drug dealers and give it to the Boston [Public] Health Commission.  As the beginning of a campaign to eventually legalize, legalize drugs.
Story_ID: 260521
Speaker 1: So you and your wife, and I don't think we got your wife's name.  Your wife's name?
Speaker 2: Terri, Terri Small-Turner.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you and Terri, you think at this point, it was the right decision for you to run for [Boston] City Council?
Speaker 2: Yeah, we're both, we both realize that that was the right move to make and fortunately she, she agrees with me that we need to devote our lives to completing [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther] King [Jr.]'s, Dr. King's mission.  His mission was to transform the practice of this country in order to bring health to this country, as well as health to the world.  He was killed by the, by the government in order to stop that from, from happening, and so what we're doing is trying to, one bring back, one just get people to focus on where he was at the end of his life, because at the end of his life he was a revolutionary preparing to lead the siege of Washington [D.C.] that he called the Poor People's Campaign.  But so we want more people just to recognize where he was, but then secondly recognize that the only way we can solve, the fact that we have a government that is not functioning in the interest of the people of this country, is to go into the streets to disrupt the flow of their action and reconstitute, we just, we have to reconstitute the way this country functions.  You see we've been underclass for four hundred years and while the, what really is galling is that they have, you know, we're in the classic dilemma that is there is a number of us who are middle class and are doing very well, doing better than our fore-parent could ever imagine, but the reality is that most of us are doing worse and we're doing worse in a structural way.  It's not just us being lazy or shiftless, but there, there's structural unemployment for white people as well as people of color.  And, you know, black middle class has essentially sold out for the materialism that the system is able to offer and so what, you know, what I think King realized, I think King could see that and so he said this is the way, this is the moment to kind of breakthrough that mindset that says it's just about helping a certain people go ahead and they killed him and when you look at where we are, we don't have a national leadership that is saying, [HistoryMaker Minister Louis] Farrakhan is trying to, as best he can, keep a light.  But even [HistoryMaker Reverend] Jesse [L. Jackson], Jesse focuses on issues but Jesse doesn't confront the basic contradictions.  Why?  Because he's involved with the businesses, and that's not to fault Jesse, but some of these guys go to the next level.
Speaker 1: Have you had any discussion with Minister Farrakhan in recent months or years?
Speaker 2: No, I've, I'm the small-town boy working in my hometown trying to do what makes sense, and they are the luminaries.
Story_ID: 260522
Speaker 1: Let me ask you, getting back to your wife [Terri Small-Turner], I think it's important.  How has your wife supported you particularly in the last five years once you moved to the [Boston] City Council?  How has she helped you?
Speaker 2: Well, we had made it, ironically, we had made a decision just about a year before I decided to run that it didn't make sense for her to go out and work and we had a, you know, a son who was in his second year of college and kind of struggled with that experience and a daughter who was fifteen, and responsibilities in my hometown in Cincinnati [Ohio] and so we said that it would be better for us, for her to be at home and kind of working on our, just our business, and then I'd be out and trying to earn money to keep the thing balanced.  And then when I was elected, she became my campaign treasurer and so she's played that role.  My aunt died and we had to probate the property in Cincinnati so she spent about three years kind of working on all the details of that so she, she basically, what she's done is to take all of the, take the weight for doing a kind of management, you know, and planning and work around our life so I could devote my, you know, she's enabled me to devote fourteen hours a day, you know, five, six, seven days a week, to a mission to bring about change, and so I you know, say to her all the time and other people, I couldn't do my work if it wasn't for her giving me that space to focus.
Story_ID: 260523
Speaker 1: There are at least two fairly new initiatives that you've been one of the prime instigators behind.  Would you share with me just a little bit about, about the New Majority [Coalition] in Boston [Massachusetts]?  What that's about?
Speaker 2: Yeah, Felix Arroyo, Jr. [sic. Felix G. Arroyo]--
Speaker 1: And who is he?
Speaker 2: He's the son of the present Councilor, Felix [D.] Arroyo and he was about twenty and I had hired him when I came in office.  I liked his energy.  He was really very, a lot of energy, a lot of creativity, a lot of good skills and so I said, you know, he'd be a great link between our office and the Latino community.  And after we were, I was head of the redistricting committee for one year.  The, that is the committee that takes the census data and try to redraw the districts in a way that keeps them balanced and, you know, he came in and said, you know Chuck [HistoryMaker Charles "Chuck" Turner], yeah, we're the majority as people of color, but we don't work together, you know, there's no operational unity.  And so, you know, he said it would be good if we could figure out some way to really strengthen our ability to really be cohesive and so that lead, kind of sat on the back burner for a year or so, but then in 2003 I said why don't we go over the U of Mass [University of Massachusetts Boston, Boston, Massachusetts] and we persuaded the leadership of the travel institute, the Gastonian Institute [Mauricio Gaston Institute for Latino Community Development and Public Policy] and the Asian American institute [Institute for Asian American Studies] to work with us in developing a conference that would bring activists of color together and the conference happened in October of 2003, and we had pulled together a steering committee about this, to work with the institutes so that there'd be a leadership group when the conference was held.  And that leadership group continued to do the work through 2004 and then elected at the end of 2004 a, you know, a permanent body and so it's off and often and running focused on electoral work.  It's still struggling but I think what's important is that there is a vehicle that's bringing together people of color who are focused on change on a regular basis to strategize and plan.  I think their, I think their existence was helpful and Felix winning such an overwhelming, having such an overwhelming, Felix Arroyo, Sr., having such an overwhelming victory where he went from fifth in the primary two years ago, for at-large seat to coming in second just a few, I think a thousand votes behind a person who had probably spent five times more on his campaign than he spent, so we're very proud of what they've, what they've accomplished.
Speaker 1: You tell Felix Jr. he needs to come back to UMass, Boston and finish his course with me and get his degree.
Speaker 2: I, I've been telling him that for a year.
Speaker 1: When he showed up in class he made great contributions.
Story_ID: 260524
Speaker 1: Another effort which I understand and I think it's fairly new, I think you're the founder of Fund the Dream?  What is that?
Speaker 2: Well, it's, you know for a couple of  years at our round tables, we, we looked at the question of [U.S.] military spending and the fact that, you know, military spending is taking the majority, actually the majority of the discretionary money that [U.S.] Congress spends each year goes into defense quote unquote, essentially military spending and it was clear that if we kept going that was what [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther] King [Jr.] was talking about, that if he kept going in that kind of path, we're not gonna have the money to deal with the needs of the people.  And so we've been trying to educate people about this, and then two years ago, it even became more pronounced and so, that is, the [President George Walker] Bush administration as it went into Afghanistan, not only had the military budget, but now we're paying for the war in Afghanistan and then there was the Iraq incursion and so we began to think about how could we, we really make this more sharply focused.  How could we get people to really look at it, and I'm not even sure how the thoughts came together, but we began to have discussions in the advisory committee about the fact that King at the end in 1967, when he was denouncing the Vietnam War, also said that there had been triplets of evil, militarism, racism and economic exploitation.  And so, and at that he was going to Washington [D.C.] within the framework of that thinking, then saying we've got to get the government to change its policies.  And so we said, that's our situation.  He defined four years ago the exact dilemma that we have and so why don't we just take his concept and say it's time to fund his dream.  He was going to [Washington] D.C. to get the dream funded, and, and it's just caught on.  People really liked the concept and so we just kept building on it and spreading it although we're now at the stage where it's a question of what kind of action steps to take beyond just talking about it.
Speaker 1: Who was the "we" again?  Maybe I missed it.
Speaker 2: I, I formed in 1999, what I called the District 7 advisory committee to help me organize the round tables in terms of the issues we'd focus on and so we got a group of about eight or nine people who meet once a month to plan the round tables and then they, you know, carry them out and it's this group that worked with me to evolve the concept of Fund the Dream and last year during the [2004] Democratic [National] Convention [Boston, Massachusetts], allow the local groups who didn't like the concepts so they began to put out the idea from a dream and then we were trying to get a meeting in D.C. with activists in D.C. to see whether we could have, they would agree to build a base with, in conjunction with us, so we could begin to have major demonstrations in D.C. around, you know, the repetition of, you know, King's other recreation of King's Poor People's Campaign.  And they, this was, we had the meeting last month and they were much caught up in building a political base so they acknowledged that we're in a horrible situation but they see politics narrowly defined as a way out.  And so we came back and said well what we have to do is build a base in Boston [Massachusetts] of people in the streets and so we're now trying to lay the foundation and our hope is that we could reach a point sometime this year where we could begin to have daily demonstrations in front of the [John F. Kennedy] Federal Building [Boston, Massachusetts], marches in Boston focusing on the fact that, you know, that the government's gotta, gotta change and to try to use that to catalyze other city, people and activists in other cities to do the same with the thought that once we can get a, once we can get a base of people moving around the country, then the people of D.C. would be more likely to be responsive because it is not just an idea that people are in motion, and so that's where we're, where we're going.
Speaker 1: Before we have some wrap up questions, tell me about any personal time that [HistoryMaker Charles] Chuck Turner had with Martin Luther King, Jr. if you did.  Did you two have any personal?
Speaker 2: None.
Speaker 1: You didn't?
Speaker 2: None.  Probably the closest I was to him was the March on Washington when he was up there at the podium and I was out on the grass saying, wow, that brother can rap (laughter).
Story_ID: 260525
Speaker 1: Is there anything else that you'd like to add to this [The] HistoryMakers interview that I haven't asked you?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, it's that, it's very appropriate, it's tremendously appropriate that you and others are doing this project, because people of African descent are here in this country, we, our four hundred year journey has been heroic beyond, beyond anything that any people have experienced and done in history.  The, the black caste in India have suffered but they haven't played the role of, in their suffering, also leading the society in so many different ways and so we are truly unique people.  All people are unique, but our, our maintenance of ourselves and the development of creativity in, in this situation has, has really been a phenomena of human history that needs to be recorded, but what's really important is for us, for us to understand that our role is not to become participants in an evil and corrupt system that enslaved us, that lynched us, that took away our rights to vote.  We are here to change and cleanse the soul of America.  That's out responsibility.  It's, our heroes has been focused on that and while we had to go through the experience of materialism as we have, had gone through it, we, we all have to recognize that, that we aren't here to be part of their system, we are here to, remake with them a system that is humane and just and can be a foundation for the appropriate evolution of the world, and so I just, what ya'll are doing to record where, kinds of perspectives of people who are in a number of different positions at this time, where I think we're getting ready to launch the, the next stage of the third American Revolution.  The first one was the 1700s, the second one was 1800s.  Actually the third one was the, our emergence in the '60s [1960s], and we're getting ready to launch the next one, and this next one will hopefully make America, make America suitable for human beings.
Story_ID: 260526
Speaker 1: In 2004 you and [HistoryMaker] Byron Rushing, Mel King [HistoryMaker Melvin King], Paul Parks, Milton Benjamin and others met for about six months at Northeastern University [Boston, Massachusetts], with a younger generation of black men and women, around nurturing and talking to people about how they become leaders in the community.  I don't want to talk about that activity, but where do we have to go at this point to grow and to nurture and support our younger people to become leaders in the neighborhood communities.  What, what's your prescription or lesson?  What do you want to say about that?  Where should we be going for that?
Speaker 2: I think we need to be going into the schools, particularly black men, that is, my experience with Boston [Massachusetts] by here, the urban education schools across the country are really struggling, different levels of struggle, but there is no, not one city that seems to have kind of carved a model that is leading the rest of us, and when I, when I look at, at my experience trying to deal with education here, so it's not just the work of doing, it's not just the question of us kind of forming the organization where children can come on weekends, or doing more things in the family, I think we have to go into the schools themselves, you know, that, I've been trying to see if I can persuade a couple of black men's group to do what, what some ministers are doing a really good job in terms of going into the schools.  The brother who was a chancellor at UMass [University of Massachusetts Boston, Boston, Massachusetts] has been going into the schools for years and so there are brothers and sisters who are doing it, but I think it has to be seen as a major responsibility, particularly because, Bob, [HistoryMaker Robert C. Hayden] our generation was a very, very creative generation, you know, we were in a sense the beginning of the new experience where we went into the society, so we broke into the society.  We brought our children out of the neighborhoods and kind of put them into, into a new situation, and they're lost.  They're lost, they're confused, particularly the men, young men, they are angry and the teachers, the teachers and the principals in the, you know, can't do it alone.  They need to be adults of color, you know, adults of African descent with them, so I think, I think we just need to figure out creative ways to work with the school administrations and individual schools so that we are present.  I think, with that, you can do an (unclear) to death, you can put more money in there.  I think there just need to be some people who love the children, who are there with them, and that would give them a sense of value and pride and that's what makes somebody, you know, want to learn.  If you feel good about yourself, you learn.  When I was depressed, I couldn't even think, right?  When I felt good, I could think and do well, so I think we need to keep that in mind and understand that nobody can give our children what they need emotionally, but us.
Speaker 1: About six or eight of us, about six or eight of us on Martha's Vineyard [Massachusetts] had been going to Martha's Vineyard Regional High School [Oak Bluffs, Massachusetts]--
Speaker 2: That's beautiful.
Speaker 1: --and the principal has allowed the twenty-seven young black men to come together from eleven to one, with a catered lunch.  There's one black teacher who brings it to his classroom.  So we've been going in and working with these young people, and I started an African American essay contest, and so we're trying to get the youngsters to research, to write, and that's what we're trying to do, at least on Martha's Vineyard.
Story_ID: 260527
Speaker 1: How do you feel about the way you've led your life?
Speaker 2: I love it.  You know that, it's no regret at all.  I've had a lot of sadness, I've, you know, I've cried and screamed.  I've been enraged but I look back and see it all had a purpose.  And I see I think that's what we need to, we pamper our children in some ways, particularly black middle class.  We don't, see life isn't, life isn't meant to be, life is an experience of evolution.  We aren't here on the earth just to have fancy clothes and nice cars.  We're here to grow, learn and grow, and learning and growing means you go through struggle with yourself and with, with, and with others.  And so we don't educate our children to understand that that pain and confusion that they're going through is part of the process.  Yeah, it hurts like hell.  You wish it wasn't there, but it's the way you get through it that determines where you are at the end of your life, and so I think that's what, that, that I wouldn't want to, I say, I wouldn't want to relive a day of my life right?  But I'm so glad I went through it because I wouldn't be who I am if I hadn't been challenged by, by all the tough stuff, because it was the tough stuff.  No pain, no gain, and that's, for me, that's true.  I've learned, you know, when the marriage is broken up, when the organization is falling apart, when people are saying I'm a fool, that's when I've learned (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 260528
Speaker 1: What would you like to do that you have not yet done?
Speaker 2: Actually (laughter), I'd like to fly a plane.  I've jumped out of a plane.  I was thinking the other day, you think you'll be able to fly a plane before you die, [HistoryMaker Charles] Chuck [Turner]?  It's just, you know, just the freedom of the idea of being in the air, and, you know, so in terms of things I occasionally say, yeah, I'd like to do that before I go.  That's, that's the, that's the most tangible one.  You know, I mean there's visions of, you know, us as a people saying hallelujah, we've arrived, but you know, concrete tangible things, fly a plane.
Story_ID: 260529
Speaker 1: How do you want to be remembered?
Speaker 2: I don't care.  I don't care.  It don't--it doesn't really matter.  I'm here to do a job and I wanna feel, you know, what's, what matters is for me to feel that I've done my best, and right now, I feel I've done my best.  I hope at that last breath, it's said you've done the best you could.  How people want to see it, that's them.
Story_ID: 260530
Speaker 1: That was a picture that was taken when I was, I think four years old.  My brother and I have a picture together and that was just an individual.  I always liked that sailor suit.
Speaker 2: That's my brother Darwin [T. Turner] and I and I'm in my sailor suit.
Speaker 1: And how old were you there?
Speaker 2: I think, I think about four.
Speaker 1: And your brother?
Speaker 2: He was thirteen.  He had just graduated from high school.
Speaker 1: I would say that was my Little Lord Fauntleroy picture.  Looks like a little dandy, but it's a beautiful, beautiful picture.
Speaker 2: And who is this?
Speaker 1: That's my brother Darwin, when he was about four.
Speaker 2: That's Charles Henry Turner, my grandfather, the scientist, actually the person that I was named for.
Speaker 1: Charles Henry Turner?
Speaker 2: Charles Henry Turner, the First and I'm Charles Henry Turner, the Second.
Speaker 1: I think that's actually, yeah, I think that's a picture where he graduated from college [University of Cincinnati, Cincinnati, Ohio], so I think he's sixteen there and I'm seven, and that's mom [Laura Knight Turner] on right and my Aunt Mamie [Faulkner] on the left.
Speaker 2: He is your brother?
Speaker 1: He's my brother.  This would be about 1947.
Speaker 2: That's my grandmother on my father's [Darwin Turner] side, Leontine [Troy Turner], who married Charles Henry Turner and who unfortunately died I think when she was about twenty-five, twenty-six.
Speaker 1: Yeah, that's a family clan gathering up in Oxford, Ohio.   I'm over on the right of and the woman holding the bouquet is my grandmother's sister, Florence [Troy Surlock Taylor], the man next to her is the man who had been a roomer for years and then they got married (unclear), and next to her is my grandmother and then my aunt is a couple of persons over.  My Aunt Mamie is a couple people over from there.
Speaker 2: I'm over on the left and then my Aunt Mamie is next to me.  Next to Aunt Mamie is Pam [Turner Welch], who is my, my niece and Darwin's daughter.  And next to her is her son, Reggie [Reginald Welch].
Speaker 1: Yeah, this is a very memorable picture.  It was taken at the YMCA [Young Men's Christian Association] and I think the year is 1967.  The guy who is standing up is, at that time, was known as Stokely Carmichael [Kwame Ture], and I'm a couple of persons over.  He had just come back from the Far East and was urging, you know, those of us who were more radical to form united fronts and in order to protect us against government action.
Speaker 2: That was a friendly area of Boston [Massachusetts].  They have a Taste of the Friendly Festival [ph.] each year just there talking to people about what's going on.
Speaker 1: That's a shot that you will not, two people you will not see in photographs in many places.  In fact, this might be one or the few.  That's the mayor on the left, and myself on the right.  The Caribbean Festival [Caribbean Carnival], you know, an annual event in the, life of Roxbury [Boston, Massachusetts] was about ready to happen and he was there and so we took a picture together.
Speaker 2: He is the current mayor?
Speaker 1: He is Mayor Menino, Thomas Menino is the current mayor of Boston.  He is getting ready to run for his fourth term.
Speaker 2: And that's LeVar's [LeVar Small] graduation.  The young many with the cap and gown is in the back is Levar, Terri's [Terri Small-Turner] son, my stepson.  In front of him to the right is Alana [Small], my stepdaughter, Terri's daughter.  To her right is her mother, and then to the left is LeVar's partner and then I'm over on the left.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And that's, to my right is Terri, my wife.  To the left in the black jacket, is my daughter, Stephanie [ph.].  Above me is Alana and to the left is LeVar.
Speaker 2: And that's a campaign shot with [Francis] Mickey Roache, a counselor standing behind me and a couple of other supporters.
Story_ID: 258810
Speaker 1: That's the, a book that was written for children about my grandfather's [Charles Henry Turner] work.  It's called 'Bug Watching with Charles Henry Turner' [Michael Elsohn Ross].
Speaker 2: And that's a book that's been written recently by Charles [I.] Abramson, a professor out at Oklahoma State University [Stillwater, Oklahoma], that really puts together a number of his papers and reflections on him and I put together a short piece on the family history that kind of put his situation in context.
