Story_ID: 187580
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe.  And, I am interviewer today for The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Scott Stearns.  Ma'am could you please state your name and spell it for us please?
Speaker 2: I am Carole Henderson Tyson.  And, my name is spelled C-A-R-O-L-E, Henderson H-E-N-D-E-R-S-O-N, Tyson T-Y-S-O-N.
Speaker 1: And, what is your date of birth, and place of birth?
Speaker 2: Date of birth is August 29, 1942, and I was born in Atlanta, Georgia.
Speaker 1: All right.  And, ma'am what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: I have been trying to figure that out for a long time, and I simply cannot tell you what my occupation is.
Speaker 1: Well, you have--you've held a number of positions and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: I have been (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --(Simultaneous) they're impressive sounding positions anyway.
Speaker 2: For the longest period of time, twenty years, I've put diplomat, because I was with [U.S.] State Department working in economic development assistance overseas.  But, I don't know what I am.  Maybe after this interview, you'll know what I am (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay, now, you're teaching now too at Howard University [Washington, D.C.]?
Speaker 2: No.  I am actually running a program that's funded by Congressman Charles Rangel [HM the Honorable Charles B. Rangel].  And, this is a program to get more minorities into the Foreign Service.  So, I am a manager at this point.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Program manager.
Speaker 1: All right.  And, that program is based at Howard?
Speaker 2: It's based at Howard.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: And, I am president of a company that I just founded; Henderson's Global Voices [Washington, D.C.].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That maybe I can tell you about later.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  And now, what is today's date?
Speaker 2: Today's date is November 14, November 14, 2003.
Speaker 1: That's right.  And, where are we at the present time?  And you don't have to give your exact address (laughter).
Speaker 2: We're in Washington, D.C.
Speaker 1: In your home.
Speaker 2: In my home.  In my home in Washington, D.C.
Speaker 1: Northwest D.C.
Speaker 2: Northwest.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Good, (laughter) all right.  All right.
Story_ID: 187581
Speaker 1: Now before we go into depth, there are five lightweight People magazine-ish type questions that I am compelled to ask you.  And, they only require a short answer.  Now, the first question is, ma'am, what is your favorite food?
Speaker 2: Champagne (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you have--
Speaker 2: It's not a food, but (laughter).
Speaker 1: (Laughter).  I think I know the answer to this one but, do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: My favorite color is red (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you have a favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: My favorite time of the year is summer.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you have a favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: South of the border.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And let--
Speaker 2: Caribbean or Africa.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: I am motivated, I am motivated by anything that speaks to the spirit and reaching one's destiny.
Story_ID: 187582
Speaker 1: I'd like to ask you some questions about your family.  And, I know you have a lot of information about your family.  So, I'm gonna ask you about your mother's side and your father's [Jacob Henderson] side.  We'll start with your mother's side of the family.  Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: My mother's full name is Freddye Elmer Scarborough Henderson.  And, that is spelled F-R-E-D-D-Y-E, Elmer is E-L-M-E-R, the next family name is Scarborough and that is S-C-A-R-B-O-R-O-U-G-H, Henderson H-E-N-D-E-R-S-O-N.
Speaker 1: Now, is there a significance to--well, you mother has two names that are usually male names; Freddye and Elmer.
Speaker 2: Well, I--we have asked my mother about this because all of her female siblings also had male names.  So, her siblings were Lee, Dean, and Johnnie, and I don't know why that happened.  But, they all do have, have names that could be both, that are both male and female.
Speaker 1: Elmer is kind of one that's usually male (laughter), but that's--okay.  There's no--she doesn't know or why?
Speaker 2: No.  No, I don't, I don't know actually exactly where that name came from, but I do know that she has chosen to pass it on.  In that my middle name is Elfreda.  So, she took the El from Elmer and F-R-E-D from, from Freddye and made my middle name, Elfreda.
Speaker 1: Elfreda with an "E"?
Speaker 2: With an "A".
Speaker 1: "A".  Okay.
Speaker 2: E-L-F-R-E-D-A.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  Now--
Speaker 2: Even though when you asked me my name, I did not mention that, because (laughter)--
Speaker 1: (Laughter) you're being difficult.
Speaker 2: (Laughter) you know, there's only so much you could mention in a single name (laughter).  But, it is actually Carole Elfreda Henderson Tyson.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, you don't have any nicknames or anything, do you?
Speaker 2: No.  Well, yes, I mean, I have lots of nicknames but (laughter).  I have lots of nicknames that, that come from the family.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So--
Speaker 2: All of us in the family, you know, have our little pet names and so forth.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, you don't wanna share 'em with us?
Speaker 2: Well, I'll share one with you, and that's Callie (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  Now, why Callie?
Speaker 2: It's a, I guess it's a diminutive nice form of Carole.
Story_ID: 187583
Speaker 1: Now Scarborough is your mother's [Freddye Scarborough Henderson] maiden name?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Is--okay.  Is she related at all to William [Sanders] Scarborough who was the president of Wilberforce [University, Wilberforce, Ohio], I think, way back in the 1890s [sic, 1908-1920]?
Speaker 2: She is not, not to my knowledge.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Not to my knowledge.  No.
Speaker 1: Well, I thought I'd ask 'cause so few of them, you know, a few Scarborough--
Speaker 2: No.  Not that we know of.  Not that we know of.  No.  No.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  Okay.  Now, what's your mother's date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: Now, she was born February 18, 1917.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And, where was she born?
Speaker 2: And, she was born in Franklinton, Louisiana.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Franklinton.  That's just the way it's spelled, basically?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: T-T-O-N?
Speaker 2: T-O-N.  F-R-A-N-K-L-I-N-T-O-N.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 187584
Speaker 1: What can you tell us about her [Tyson's mother, Freddye Scarborough Henderson] side of the family?  How far back can you trace them?
Speaker 2: We can trace the family pretty far back.  Because, we have tried to do that.  We have, we have as a family tried to go back as far as we can.  And, in fact, we can, we can trace things back several, several generations.  And, for example--shall I relate a little bit about the events that happened in her family and so forth, or?
Speaker 1: Well, yeah.  First, if you can tell us maybe how far back you can go and then we'll start talking about the stories of those times and of those individuals.
Speaker 2: Okay.  All right.  Okay.  All right.  Well, her--we can, we can trace it back of course to her mother [Ophelia Scarborough], her mother and father [J. A. Scarborough].  Her father was a minister and was a songwriter, was a hymn writer as well.
Speaker 1: Okay.  You don't know anything about his, his background?  I mean, his parents or anything?
Speaker 2: He was very educated.  He was a very educated man.  And, in fact, we still have a lot of his, a lot of his books in our home.  A lot of his encyclopedias and so forth.
Speaker 1: Just as a check point--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: I--Do you know anything about his parents and where he came up?
Speaker 2: We do know some things about his, his side of the family but, we know more about my mother's side of the family, you see.
Speaker 1: No.  I mean, your, your mother's father.
Speaker 2: Yes.  I'm saying, we know, we know some things about his side, but we don't know very much.  I don't know very much about his.  But, I do know a fair amount about my mothers' mother's side.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: You see.  I should have said, my, my maternal grandmother's side (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.  That's my last interruption.  Go ahead (laughter), go ahead.
Speaker 2: (Laughter) yes.  And, her, her father, her father--she was Ophelia Scarborough, her--she was Ophelia, Ophelia Scarborough.  Her father was John--her father was a Wilson.  Her father's name was, was Isome Wilson.  And, he was a, he was a farmer.  He was a land owner.  And, he had come as a child to that area with his father, with his father.  His father had been a slave in Virginia.  And, at a certain point in time in Virginia, it became--there was a drought, there was a drought and they had to leave that area.  So, that particular slave owner decided to take two slaves with him, and he took Isome Wilson's, Isome Wilson's father and his mother.  And, Isome Wilson was a child at that time.  And, Isome Wilson's father was in fact, it appears that he came directly from Africa.  He was a gentleman who was, who was called stubborn.  He was called by those who knew him, particularly the slave owner, as someone who was stubborn and would not cooperate.  He did not want to leave Virginia and go to Louisiana.  He didn't know what was in Louisiana.  He didn't know what to expect.  He didn't want to go.  At one point, he was accused of not having done anything, at which point he was, he was sort of strung up and with his legs apart, with his arms up.  He was beat.  And, he, he was left there with one, with one arm however that did not--that was not hung, that was not, you know, stretched out.  He stayed there overnight.  He was brought some food.  He was brought some water in a blue jug.  He was left there overnight.  When he woke up the morning, when they woke up the next morning, the blue jug was broken into small pieces.  He was beat again.  And, then because of his seeming intransigence, continued intransigence, he was forced to walk behind the buggy, going toward Louisiana.  They put a chain around his neck, a collar around his neck and they chained him to the, to the buggy.  So, he walked for a while.  Clearly, after a while, he could not continue his journey.  And, he fell.  He was, he was dragged just a bit of the way, and after that he was put in the wagon and he died.  Turns out that he died because he had drunk what was a poison.  And, that is, he had drunk the glass that was, that was in that blue jug.  And, his intent was in fact to kill himself.  So, after that, after that happened, Isome Wilson's mother and the young boy continued on to Louisiana.  When the slave owner died, they were given land.  And, on that, on the basis of that land, they were then able to, to have their family, grow their family, feed their family, and have a decent life.  And, in fact, a pretty good life given what was going on in that, in the situation in the, in the social and political and racial context of the time.
Story_ID: 187585
Speaker 1: Isome, Isome Wilson, as I said, grew up and in fact was able to maintain his family and live quite, quite well on the fruit of the land, shall I say.  His, his son then--he had children, and I'm quite sure how many children he had.  But in any case, one of his son's was, was John Wilson.  One of his, yes, one of his, I don't know whether in fact it was an older son or a younger son, but in any case, one of his son's was John Wilson.  And, John Wilson had significate amount of land himself.  They could, they could feed themselves off of their land.  And, in fact, shortly before his--the tragedy struck his family, he was preparing to--he had just purchased something like 142, 152 acres of land for his son so that they then could have some, some land on which to, on which to raise their families as well.
Speaker 2: Now, just for clarity.  Isome Wilson's was your mother's--
Speaker 1: Mothers' mother's--was my mothers' mother's father.
Speaker 2: Okay.  So, her grandfather.
Speaker 1: Yes.  Yes.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Once upon a time, Isome Wilson [sic, John Wilson] had gone into town to pick up a few things.  He left the family on the front porch of his house.  There was a white ranger from, from the town, Franklinton [Louisiana], who came and approached the family and said that there was mule there and they really needed to dip that mule.  The family said that the mule had already been dipped, so that he didn't needed to be dipped again.
Speaker 2: Now, what does it mean when you dip a mule?
Speaker 1: It means you have to submerge the animal in a liquid that is going to disinfect it and keep parasites and so forth off that animal.  And, you don't want the parasites on that animal because in fact, it could spread disease and illness amongst the other animals in the area.  So, an argument ensued and the white man left.  But, he left in anger.  When he came back, he came back with a deputy sheriff and he came back with a couple of other men.  They approached the family and said they wanted to dip the mule again.  They family said, there was no need to dip the, dip the mule.  An argument really did ensue at that point and the whites who had come with guns, in fact took the guns out and they shot at the, at the family.  They shot one of the sons in the stomach, severely wounding him.  They shot another, they shot Jerome Wilson, another one of the son's as well.  One of the daughter's ran away and hurt her leg severely in trying to cross a fence.  But, they ended up, in fact, taking just about everybody to the jailhouse.  So, they took the son who was shot in the stomach to the jailhouse.  They took the one who had been shot someplace else in his body, on the shoulder I think, to the jailhouse.  They took the mother to the jailhouse.  And, they took one of her daughter's to the jail.  And, of course, this was, this was--well, let me just stop and say shortly after they were taken to the jail, John Wilson then returned and saw all that was going on.  But, he was away during the time that all of this was taking place.
Speaker 2: Was they really coming after him, or?
Speaker 1: They were not coming after anyone--
Speaker 2: In particular--
Speaker 1: Except the boys who had refused to allow the mule to be tipped--dipped, you see.
Speaker 2: Dipped.  And, those were the ones that were shot, or?
Speaker 1: And, those were the ones that were shot.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Those were the ones that was shot.
Speaker 2: Now, what year are we talking about here, do you think?
Speaker 1: This took place in 1934.  This took place in July of 1934.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: The son who was shot in the stomach, died in the, within the next two day period.  He was in the jail.  He was not allowed to have any medical care, and he died in the jail.  The other son was tried and he was convicted.  They took his case to the Supreme Court of Louisiana.  And, he was about to be sentenced when several nights before his sentencing, a mob of people from the town came, drug him--no, they came, they went into his jail cell, they took a hammer and they virtually knocked his head in with the hammer.  Then, they dragged him by his feet out of the jailhouse and they went and threw him on the, on the edge and by the side of the road.  He was dead at that point.  The mother, as a result of all of this, had a nervous breakdown.  Her daughter was with her and her daughter did a lot to take care of the mother as well, as best she could.  In fact, as I said, both of them had been in the jail at one point--
Story_ID: 187586
Speaker 1: This is a story of a family [Tyson's relatives, the Wilson Family] that lived in a rather integrated way within the community.  Because, as it happens, the blacks and the whites within that community for the times, lived relatively close with one another.  In fact, they were all relatively related to one another.  Because, whites and the blacks were, were, they were, needless-to-say they were not intermarried.  But, there was miscegenation going on within just about every one of the generations that I mentioned.  And, the family and the coloreds and the whites, the blacks and whites in that community virtually all had the same names.  Magee, the Magees were black and white.  The Wilsons were black and whites.  There were several others who were blacks and whites.  So, they were all, they all had the same name.  They had the same blood.  They were interrelated.  This is a story of a black family within this community that was living relatively well that was destroyed, destroyed by they racism, the capriciousness of racism that happened to their family on one particular day.  After that day, the family was completely dissolved.  Members of the family were, were severely injured or died shortly thereafter.  The family was scattered more or less, with the mother and some of the children going to Chicago [Illinois].  And, the father [John Wilson] staying where he was attempting to sort of rebuild what he had, but never being able to do so.  So, the family was destroyed almost on the spot there.  My mother [Freddye Scarborough Henderson], at that time, was in, was in New Orleans [Louisiana].  She was in New Orleans.  Some of the family, in fact, had come to stay with her and her mother [Ophelia Scarborough] to sorta get away from the situation.  But, my mother, of course, remembers so much of what went on at that time.  She was not there.  She was not present, she was not present.  But, this story is infused in her.  This story is--remains a part of her life.  When we were growing up, we didn't know anything at all about this story.  We didn't--she never told us anything that happened within this family.  But, when we were adults, we then learned because perhaps she thought that then was the time to tell us of what had, what had gone on in the family.
Story_ID: 187587
Speaker 1: Shall I continue on talking about her [Tyson's mother, Freddye Scarborough Henderson] or (laughter)?
Speaker 2: Well, about her, yeah, and her, yeah, well, yes.  Now, her, your, both of your mother's parents, there's a lot of information written about them as I can see in (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: There is, there is information written about them.  And, there is a book that is entitled 'The Star Creek Papers' [by Horace Mann Bond and Julia W. Bond] that was published recently by the University of Georgia Press [Athens, Georgia].  It was edited by Adam Fairclough, and it was based on the Papers of Horace Mann Bond, Dr. Horace Mann Bond and his wife [Julia W. Bond].  It just so happens that, that during the time of this lynching, Horace Mann Bond just happened to have been in that area, studying one the Rosenwald Schools.  And, that was a school that had been funded by the Rosenwald Fund for colored children.  So, he was there accessing and reviewing that school and how it was proceeding with the education of the colored people in that area.  Because the lynching was taking place at the same time that he was there, he took that opportunity to really write down the events that had taken place.  And, it is because he wrote down all the events and was able to get the, the perspectives and the experiences and the views of others who were in the community, and who were involved as well, that we are able now to have a very, very, excellent accounting of what took place with regard to this particular lynching.  But, that book not only speaks of what, not only speaks of the lynching, but in fact, it puts it in the sociological context of what was going on in the day as well.  So, that you see as I was mentioning the interrelatedness of the families.  You see what--how people were gaining their livelihoods.  You see the effect of certain people who had power who were white and those people who did not have power, who were black or white.  You saw the effect of being promised 40 acres and a mule and being hopeful about that, and never getting those 40 acres and a mule.  So, again, he was able to put, he was able to recount this; this very important event.  And, he was able to put it within a context that really allows one to see it in greater, in greater depth.  So, we're pleased to have this book that's--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: That's entitled 'The Star Creek Papers'.
Speaker 2: And, Horace Mann Bond, was the father of [HM the Honorable] Julian Bond who was a, who was a congressman and well known--
Speaker 1: That's right.
Speaker 2: Activist.
Speaker 1: That's right.  Horace Mann Bond was the father of Julian Bond, and Julia Bond was the mother of Julian Bond.  And, they both are really, I would say, both of them participated in the writing of this, of this book.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: It was the experiences of both of them.  So, I want to give her the credit as much as--
Speaker 2: Sure.
Speaker 1: --as him for doing, for doing much of the writing.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Or, providing her experiences and her viewpoints as well.
Story_ID: 187588
Speaker 1: Your mother [Freddye Scarborough Henderson] was a Scarborough, right?  She, yeah, and her father [J.A. Scarborough] was a minister, right?
Speaker 2: Yes.  Her father, her father was a minister.  And, he was a very, he was a well-respected minister and educator, and educator.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And, they--she grew up in
Speaker 2: In--
Speaker 1: In Louisiana, but what?
Speaker 2: In Franklinton, Louisiana.
Speaker 1: Right.  Yeah.
Speaker 2: In Franklinton, Louisiana.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And, Bogalusa [Louisiana].  I mean, they spent a fair amount of time in the close-by town of Bogalusa as well.  And, in fact, my mother also went to, to Southern University [Southern University and Agricultural & Mechanical College, Baton Rouge, Louisiana] which was, which was right there in--well, the closest black university she could have attended.
Speaker 1: In Baton Rouge [Louisiana].
Speaker 2: In Baton Rouge.
Speaker 1: And, she went there when she was sixteen and graduated about four years later.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Her life has been a very interesting one as well.  Because, when I have asked her about racism in that community that she grew up in, she says that she didn't feel too much racism.  And in fact, she didn't feel too much racism because they lived within a very close knit and smaller community.  So, I suppose her family tried to protect her from much of the racism that was, that was in that community.  But, I think she was shielded from a fair amount of it.  Because they produced all their food.  They had animals.  They had plants and so forth.  So, it was a sort of enclosed community.  It was a more or less enclosed community.  And, I think that she has lived her life without thinking that there are barriers.  Without thinking that there are racial barriers and any other kind of barrier.  She just never saw barriers and she was never, she never confronted a barrier that she could not get over (laughter).  So, some sort of way, even coming through that lynching experience, and coming through the racism of that town, she did not come out with the notion that she personally was circumscribed by artificial boundaries.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And, I think she--it's clear that she sort of passed that on to her children.  And, even later on when she was in business, she--her name was Freddye, was Freddye Henderson, Freddy Scarborough Henderson.  And sometimes she would in fact go by Freddye Scarborough.  So, when it came to opening doors to white people, if they did not know who she was, she was able to open doors because people thought that there was a white male who's coming in to meet them, you see.  Because, the name was Freddye and Scarborough was a very, very, British name.  Once she was in there presence however, (laughter) she then took advantage of the opportunity.  But, she did use her name to allow her to break any, any--to go across barriers that would normally have been there--that were there, that were there.
Story_ID: 187589
Speaker 1: What is your father's full name and can you spell that for us?
Speaker 2: My father's full name is Jacob Robert Henderson.  J-A-C-O-B, Robert R-O-B-E-R-T, Henderson H-E-N-D-E-R-S-O-N.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And, what is his date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: My father was born June 27, 1911.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And, where was he born?
Speaker 2: And, he was born in Hartsville H-A-R-T-S ville, South Carolina.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Tell us, what do you know about his side of the family?
Speaker 2: My fathers' mother's name was Margaret Butler Henderson [ph.].  And, his father was Jacob Henderson.  In fact, his father worked in a hotel in the town.  And, as far as I know, I know of nothing else that he did other than work in that hotel.  I am sure there's some other things that he did, but he worked in a local hotel there in the small town, the relatively small town of Hartsville, South Carolina.
Story_ID: 187590
Speaker 1: Now, are there any stories about whether they [Tyson's paternal ancestors] were slaves or free or what, you know, back in the 19th century?  Are there any stories like that?
Speaker 2: My grandmother was born in 1890 something.  That is Margaret Butler Henderson [ph.].  She was born in 1890 and her parents were slaves.  She told me that.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Clearly she was not.  I gathered that her husband [Tyson's grandfather, Jacob Henderson] was a good bit older than she was.  He died very, he died when we were, when we were young, young children.  And, our grandmother lived up until about twenty years ago.
Speaker 1: So, she lived a long time.
Speaker 2: She lived, she lived a long time.  Yes, yes she did.  She was a school teacher.  In fact, she helped to, to found one of the schools there for, in the city, for colored children.  She was very, very, active in the church.  She was active in the community.  She was a strong, strong, leader.
Speaker 1: Now, do you know where she went to school, or where she got training to be a school teacher?
Speaker 2: Just, just in the local area.  Just in the local area.  I don't--in fact, I am not certain of what city she was actually born in.  But, I know that she lived her married life in Hartsville [South Carolina].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And, that she played a significant part in the education of young people.  And, she was, and she was a spiritual leader.  She was a strong, she was a strong leader.  She was a strong, strong believer in God; just strong.  I mean, she tells stories of, for example, being on the main street once, and there were horses coming by and the horses were--there were some commotion.  The horses reared up and were about to, about to come back down on one of her children.  And, for her, it was just by the grace of God that she saw all of this going on.  And, she was able really to pull her child from under the hoofs of these, of these horses.  As long as I live, I will never forget her, her strength and her prayers.  Whenever we came into her home, whenever we left, we all had to get down on our knees and be led in prayer by her.  And, when she--whenever she prayed, first of all, we knew that we were gonna be for a pretty long time (laughter).  And, number two, we knew that she would go deep into herself.  And, in fact, she would be weeping, you know, during the time that she was, that she was saying her prayers, other prayers, the prayers for us.  She was a pianist as well, and she played by ear.  So, anything she heard, she could just play it by ear.  And, she played in the church and she prayed--she played for us and very often the family just had fun times with her as we, as we sang together and prayed together, and ate together.  She made the best biscuits in the world.  So, that much I do know about her.  And, clearly I know much more about her than I do about, about by grandfather.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And, we do have some knowledge of our forbearers on that side as well.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And, we can, we can trace it, we can trace it pretty far, far back or not that far back to certain other white people who were in that area.  And, we have those records.  We have those records.  I don't personally have those records, but we do have those records that go back.  Some members of the family have those records that go back on my, on my father's [Jacob Henderson] side.
Speaker 1: How far do they go, you think they go-
Speaker 2: I would say they go-
Speaker 1: Like beyond the 19th century-
Speaker 2: Oh, yes.
Speaker 1: To the 1700s, or?
Speaker 2: I would--I know they go in to the middle-beginning of the 1800s.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But, I don't know beyond that.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I don't know beyond that.  But, people on my father's side of the family have set out in order to, have set out to be able to determine who our ancestors are on the paternal side.
Story_ID: 187591
Speaker 1: Now, can you tell us something about your father [Jacob Henderson]?  What was he like, and what did he do?
Speaker 2: My father, my father was a quietly strong, honest, competent leader.  He was a absolutely devoted family, family man.  He took us to church every Sunday.  He took us to Sunday school every Sunday.  He was a superintendent of the Sunday school.
Speaker 1: What church did you all attend?
Speaker 2: We attended the First Congregational Church in Atlanta [Georgia].  He cooked our breakfast for us in the morning.  He did that because my mother [Freddye Scarborough Henderson] had, from time to time, severe hay fever.  And, she really, she just couldn't get out of bed.  I mean, her breathing was so labored, she really couldn't do anything.  And, so my father just took to cooking for breakfast, cooking breakfast for us, and it just, it just continued.  Maybe we, maybe we just started enjoying his breakfast so much, he just, he just he just decided to continue.  He just continued.  That is just to show you his devotion really to his, to his family, to his children.  He was, he was in management and economic development.  He, he went to South Carolina State [University, Orangeburg, South Carolina].  He got a bachelor's in business at South Carolina State.  And, then he went to Atlanta University [later, Clark Atlanta University, Atlanta, Georgia] and got--and studied business, got a master's in business administration from Atlanta University.  From there he, he went and worked with the city [of Atlanta, Georgia] and he became a manager of the housing, of housing projects.  And, I would say that my father managed every single black housing project in Atlanta, every single black housing project in Atlanta.  He had some good experiences there and he had some tragic experience there.  For example, he was managing the very largest one, once upon a time.  This was in the 50s [1950s], this was in the 50s [1950s].  There was a commotion outside the door, he went out to see what was going on and saw a lot of the tenants there standing around with some white policemen.  All the policemen at that time were white in the city of Atlanta, if I recall correctly.  Certainly were for this particular area.  And, as my father approached, he went to the policemen, he went directly through the crowd and went to the policemen and asked them what was, what was going on.  And, the policemen spoke rudely to my father.  There was another man who came out of the crowed and said, "Don't speak to our manager this way."  And, the policeman pulled out a gun and shot the man dead right there, on the spot.  That was a, that was a tragedy.  That was a tragedy in the housing project.  It was a tragedy for my father.  And, my father did help to support those children; the education of the children of the man who was killed.  But, that again just shows you of the, shows you the capricious violence that--that took place, well, doing the days of segregation.  He also worked for the [U.S.] Economic Development Administration of the, of the federal government.  And, perhaps most important of all, he handled all the finances for Henderson's Travel Service [Atlanta, Georgia].  All the financial, all the financial arrangements and all the accounting, bookkeeping, everything, he did.  And, all the planning for it, planning, financial, he did all of that for Henderson Travel Service--
Story_ID: 187592
Speaker 1: When did he [Tyson's father, Jacob Henderson] found Henderson Travel [Service, Atlanta, Georgia]?
Speaker 2: Now, he and my mother [Freddye Scarborough Henderson] founded Henderson Travel Service in 1955.  And, there's a story to that as well.  My mother was, my mother left Southern University [Southern University and Agricultural & Mechanical College, Baton Rouge, Louisiana].  After she got married, she decided that she really needed to go and study more about marketing because she was a seamstress and wanted to go more into that area.  And, she was a fashion designer, a clothes designer at the same time.  So, she went to get a master's degree from NYU [New York University, New York, New York], which she did.  She came back and she then got involved with much more deeply with the fashion industry, with the black fashion industry in America.  She became president of the National Association of Fashion and Accessory Designers [NAFAD].  And, at the same time, she was a syndicated columnist in 126 different newspapers in the U.S. and in Africa, speaking about a fashion and personality development and so forth.  She also taught at Spelman College [Atlanta, Georgia] (laughter).  But, in her capacity as, as president of NAFAD [National Association of Fashion and Accessory Designers] it had been suggested to her by Mary McLeod Bethune, if I'm not mistaken, that perhaps there should be a fashion show in New York City [New York].  Because, the fashion industry of black Americans was sort of made, was made to order.  It was not wholesale, it was made to order.  So, this is perhaps something, a type of fashion in fashion design, in fashion development that could be taken to the city of New York.  So, in fact, they took that suggestion and they organized a fashion show.  The first large, the first black American fashion show in New York City, in 19--either '53 [1953] or '54 [1954].  They organized this at the Waldorf Astoria [New York, New York].  And, I even wondered if they could have stayed themselves at the Waldorf Astoria.  I knew--I know that my mother stayed at--what was the, what was the, at the Theresa [Hotel Theresa, Harlem, New York, New York] and some of the others stayed at the Theresa Hotel in Harlem [New York, New York].  But, they organized this fashion show in--at the Waldorf Astoria.  To that fashion show were invited, the ambassador from France to the United States [Henri Bonnet], and his wife [Helle Zervoudaki].  They saw that the fashion show was a success.  The ambassador and his wife saw it.  They loved the fashion show.  And, my mother requested of the ambassador's wife, if in fact she could facilitate their going to the opening of some of the fashion houses in France.  So, the ambassador's wife, and the ambassador's name was Henri Bonnet, Henri Bonnet, in fact she was able to organize for a group of African American women, who were fashion designers to go to the opening of the fashion houses in Paris.  So, my mother and some friends of hers went to the opening of some fashion houses.  They went to Chanel.  I believe they went to Balenciaga.  They then went to London [England] as well.  And, they went to Hardy Amies, and he was the fashion designer for the Queen of England [Queen Elizabeth II].  They went to Italy as well to the fashion houses of--what was the name of the designers--the Fontana Sisters.  And, they were some of the principle designers in Italy at the time.  My mother was delighted with the fashions that she saw.  But, what, what grabbed her more than anything else was that the fact that this was the first time in her entire life, she had ever felt that she was completely free as individual.  She didn't have to be concerned--she could go anywhere.  She could sleep anywhere.  She could go into any restaurants, eat.  She could--she was just a free individual for the first time.  So, she was just, she was absolutely taken by this freedom that she had never, ever experienced before.  She came back to the U.S., she said, "You know, more people have--more African American's have to experience this."  More have to go and have their minds and their perspectives and so forth, opened by traveling outside of the United States.  So, she then--she and my father thought about this; had discussions and so forth, and that is when together in 1955, they founded the first African American travel agency in America.  My mother put down what she was doing completely.  Just, just dropped the fashion and opened up Henderson Travel Service in the corner of a bookstore that my father also owned.
Story_ID: 187593
Speaker 1: And (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) What was the name of this store, his [Tyson's father, Jacob Henderson] bookstore?
Speaker 1: It was called Hopkins Book Concern.  Hopkins Book Concern, and it was on Auburn Avenue in Atlanta, Georgia.  They subsequently moved to, moved to Hunter Street in Atlanta, Georgia as well.  Those are the two streets of major economic activity of blacks during the days of segregation.  So, she [Tyson's mother, Freddye Scarborough Henderson] first started, they [Tyson's parents] first started their travel, the promotion of travel to Europe, and took a number of tours to Europe.  A number of African American who were, of course, who had their eyes open as well for the first time.  Going to London [England], and Paris [France], and Naples [Italy], and Rome [Italy], they too were intrigued.  And, my mother continued to see that there was, that people were experiencing something they never, ever seen before.  Not only were they seeing places that they had never seen before, but in fact, there was a new personal experience that these people were having.  In 1957, Ghana was the first African country to gain its independence.  And, she took some people to Ghana for their, for that independence celebration.  And, from that time on they continued to foster and promote travel, now concentrating on Africa.  But, also--but still focusing on Europe, but really, really concentrating now on African.  Because, they saw that not only did people have an opportunity to be free, but they had the opportunity to connect with their roots in a new way.  And, furthermore, don't forget that there were the synergies that were going on between the Civil Rights Movement and the African Independence Movement at the same time.  They--each one was, was sort of supporting and promoting in stirring, stirring the other one alone.  So, that they were able to take through Henderson Travel Service [Atlanta, Georgia], so many of the civil rights leaders to Africa as well.  As well as ordinary, ordinary individuals, members of virtually all of the professional associations; the medical associations, the teachers, the sororities, the dental associations, et cetera.
Story_ID: 187594
Speaker 1: Just, to backtrack a minute but, in Paris [France] when she [Tyson's mother, Freddye Scarborough Henderson] was there dealing with the fashion activities, did she, did she make, I guess, acquaintance with any of the black expatriates in Paris at the time?
Speaker 2: Yes, she did.
Speaker 1: Like, Richard Wright and--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Bricktop [Ada 'Bricktop' Smith]?  And, there's so many jazz musicians and people, you know.
Speaker 2: One of the places that she would always go and take her people, was to [Leroy] Roughhouse Haynes.  Roughhouse Haynes had a restaurant there [Chez Haynes] and that was sort of the gathering place for black expatriates who were living there in Paris.
Speaker 1: I think Baldwin was over there at that time; James Baldwin, Sydney Bechet, so many people.  And, Josephine Baker, I don't know.
Speaker 2: Was, was?
Speaker 1: Yeah, she was there.
Speaker 2: In the '50s [1950s]?
Speaker 1: Yeah, she was there her whole life basically.
Speaker 2: Yes, she was.
Speaker 1: She never came back, really.  I mean, just to visit.
Speaker 2: I was just trying to figure out when she passed away.  But, that was no more than, what?  Twelve, fifteen?
Speaker 1: Yeah, she passed away in the 70s [1970s].  In '76 [1976], '77 [1977].
Speaker 2: In twenty, twenty years ago.  Yeah.  So yes, I mean, her people were the people she were bring over were able to make contact with the people there as well.  I mentioned Roughhouse Haynes' restaurant because again it was sort of the, it was the focal point of people's visits to Paris.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Roughhouse Haynes was a black American?
Speaker 2: Um-hum.  Who, who established a restaurant there and it became a very famous restaurant.
Speaker 1: Okay.  It's interesting to that, you know, Richard Wright writes his book, he goes from Paris to Ghana for the celebration.  He writes about it in a book called 'Black Power' [Black Power: Three Books from Exile: Black Power; The Color Curtain; and White Man, Listen!, by Richard Wright]
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: He goes to Ghana.
Speaker 2: Yes.  And, also there was just a lot of movement of the literary types as well, between Europe, the United States, and Africa at that time.  There was a whole French Negritude Movement that combined artists from the Caribbean, the U.S., well some the U.S., but mainly the Caribbean, Africa, and Europe.  So, all of that was taking place at the same time.  So, there was, there was just this general awakening shall I say, this general awakening of people of color from those particular areas--
Story_ID: 187595
Speaker 1: What my parents [Jacob Henderson and Freddye Scarborough Henderson] found was that they had to, in fact, assist in the development of the tourism business in Africa.  Because, at that time, there were no tour operators.  There were no, not that many hotels, well, they did have, they did have, they did have hotels but they was not--they didn't, individuals there did not have large bus companies, or large taxi companies for taking large groups of tourist around.  So, in fact, the travel office really participated in the development of the tourism industry in largely West Africa.  Because, they had to be some way to accommodate these people coming, coming there.  They were able to work very closely with the European airline companies.  When they first started Henderson Travel Service [Atlanta, Georgia], they needed to get certain kinds of appointments and in fact some of the U.S. Airlines did not work with them in partnership to support, to support this.  So in fact, my parents had to go outside of the U.S. in order to get support, in order to get the appointments that they needed within the United States.  They couldn't get these appointments obviously because they were black.  Once they were firmly and established though and had really started to do more promotion of tourism to Africa, they were wholesalers with the major European carriers.  So, they would wholesale tours, with Air France, with Sabena [Societe Anonyme Belge d'Exploitation de la Navigation Aerienne]-Belgian world airlines, with Alitalia, with Lufthansa German airlines.  So, that you would pick up a brochure that said Lufthansa travel to Africa, you know, look at these great destination.  And, in fact, it was Henderson Travel Service that had put those tours together and was doing all the organizing of those tours.
Speaker 2: Now--
Speaker 1: They had them with Air Afrique, and Pan Am [Pan American World Airways] as well.
Speaker 2: Now, was Atlanta [Georgia] becoming the air hub that it is today?  I mean, Atlanta has the largest airport in the United States right now.  But, I mean, was it approaching that kind of status then?
Speaker 1: I think it was.  And, it was in fact building on its earlier history.  Because, of the name of Atlanta, once upon a time, use to be Terminus, use to be Terminus.  And, the na--that name refers to the fact that the train, all the train routes came to Atlanta.  Atlanta was sort of the hub for the trains, and then they would inspoke fashion or reach, reach go to their other, you know, to their other places and destinations.  It was naturally the other means of transportation, such as air built on that.  And so, for a long time, Atlanta has just been a cross roads, a cross roads of transportation.  So, it--during the time that the Henderson, that Henderson Travel Service was developing, yes.  Yes, the whole city of Atlanta was growing and its capacity in air travel was growing significantly as well.
Speaker 2: Okay.  All right.
Speaker 1: And, needless-to-say, Maynard Jackson and others really participated greatly in that as well.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: [HM the Honorable] Andrew Young.  So, my mother continued to, and father continued to promote tourism to Africa and really became the key people promoting tourism to Africa.  I remember when the New York Times wanted to go to Africa, they could not find an organizer, or someone to--anyone to assist them other than Henderson Travel Service.  The same was the case with American Express.  They came to, early on when they wanted to go to Africa, they came to Henderson Travel Service for that.
Story_ID: 187596
Speaker 1: My mother [Freddye Scarborough Henderson] worked with so many of the leaders in the Civil Right Movement.  She was--the whole family was very close with [Reverend Dr.] Martin Luther King [Jr.] and in fact, my mother arranged the entire trip for Martin Luther King and his whole group to go to Oslo [Norway] to receive the Nobel Peace Prize.  So--
Speaker 2: Right.  Now, she writes about, she writes a memoire about that, right; which is interesting to read.  Can you give us a few highlights from that?
Speaker 1: Yes.  Yes.
Speaker 2: That memoire.
Speaker 1: She organized a big--being a friend of Coretta Scott King's and Martin Luther King.  She org--it was natural for them to come to her for their travel, which they did on a routine basis.  But, particularly for the travel to, to Oslo.
Speaker 2: This is '64 [1964], right?
Speaker 1: This was in 1964.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: This was in 1964.  So, there were two groups that she, that she organized travel for to Oslo, because Dr. Martin Luther King and his wife did not travel together.  They chose to travel separately in case there were any problems with, with either airline that they were on.  They thought that, well, I think you understand (laughter).
Speaker 2: Well--
Speaker 1: They chose to--if in fact there were an accident, they would not want the both members--all members of the family to die at one time.  So, they chosen to, in fact, as husband and wife to travel separately for their children.
Speaker 2: Now, that's interest and profound to hear that.  You know, for people that don't know the kind of tension that was going on in those days for a man like Dr. Martin Luther King.
Speaker 1: Yes.  Yes.  And, I think he did that clearly too obviously to protect his family.
Speaker 2: This is four years before he was assassinated.
Speaker 1: This is four years before he was assassinated.
Speaker 2: He'd been under that kind of pressure since 1957 with Montgomery [Alabama].
Speaker 1: That's right.  That's right.
Speaker 2: With all the accolades he was still under a lot of pressure.
Speaker 1: That's right.  It was clear during this trip as well.  Even though, he was going to receive a peace prize, he still had to be concern about his very person and his safety, and that of his, and that of his family as well.  So, so two trips were arranged.  And, there were a number to people on that trip.  Maybe the total group was twenty, twenty, twenty-five--
Speaker 2: It was an entourage, I guess (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Yes.  Ralph David Abernathy and his wife [Juanita Abernathy] were there.  Martin Luth--[HM the Honorable] Andrew Young was there.  There were, there were quite a few, there were quite a few who were there.  So, she, she had not really planned to go at first.  But, she felt that she had arranged this travel and she had arranged it very well.  And, she went, she was driving home with my father [Jacob Henderson] after having taken the group to the airport.  And, she said, "You know, I'm sure this group is going to be quite, you know, I think everything is gonna be fine with his group."  And, my father said, "Well, are you sure?"  She said, "Well, yes, I think everything will be quite fine."  He said, "Well, I don't know.  Do you think that maybe you should go on this particular trip, just to make sure that this trip is done ex--with more than our usual excellence?"  And, she said, "Well, there's no way I could get there in time, you know."  I have to--visa I have to have, you know, get the ticket.  I have to do everything.  These people are already on their way.  He said, "Well, why don't we try, why don't we try, to do what we can to get you there.  To make sure that you oversee their travel."  So, with the help of all of their friends and contacts, they were able to in fact get her on there--on the plane and there to Oslo before he arrived.
Story_ID: 187276
Speaker 1: So, we were talking about the trips that, we're talking about the trip to Oslo, Norway [1964, Nobel Peace Prize ceremony].
Speaker 2: Yes.  And, in fact, even though she [Tyson's mother, Freddye Scarborough Henderson] left after the Kings [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King Jr.'s family] had departed, she arrived before they did.  And, she was able to be there and greet them when they got off the plane.  They had stopped in Paris [France].  They had stopped in Paris.  She was able to meet them in Paris, because they had stopped in Paris.  It just so happened that I was in school in Dijon, France myself.  So, my mother told me they were coming through and said, you know, why don't you get the train and come up from Dijon, come to Paris and meet everybody.  So, in fact, I was able to come and meet them, you know, say hello, wish them well as they continued on to, on to Oslo.  My mother--
Speaker 1: So, what was that like for you?  I mean, you meeting--
Speaker 2: Well, you know--
Speaker 1: Did you know them before?
Speaker 2: Well, yes.  Yes, yes.  I knew [Reverend Dr.] Martin Luther King [Jr.] pretty well, pretty well.  He was, he was, he was a friend of my family's.  It's my recollection that, that the January before he was killed, he was in my home January 1st for a New Year's Eve, New Year's Day meal.  That is my recollection.  He as just a good friend of the family.  He was, he was a friend to many people and I just see him as being, again a good friend of my family's and of mine.  So, it was not that I was meeting him.  It was just that I was going to see friends and so forth.
Speaker 1: To greet him at that point.  Yeah.
Speaker 2: Yes.  So, that was pretty--
Speaker 1: What was your impression of him, you know?
Speaker 2: Of Martin Luther King?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: You know, it is very hard when you have been persecuted and, and diminished all your life.  And, violence has been perpetrated against you.  It is very hard to think that you could get over this by love.  You don't think that anything that is as soft and calm as love, would in any way be able to go against the evil forces that you have seen that have just been so, so overwhelming in many cases.  So, to see someone speak about love and, and speak about it with such force and with such conviction, I think was bringing a newness, certain to me and to so many people around me.  It is, it was hard at first to believe that our struggle could be won on the basis of love for people who had been our enemy before.  And, particularly when you had the choice of Malcolm X at the same time.  And, Stokely Carmichael [later, Kwame Ture], and all the others, who was saying something that seem, you know, real quite, quite appealing, appealing.  You know, if someone lashes out to you, well you know, you lash back out to them with greater force.  So, I was intrigued by something that just seem to be a little super, supernatural.  I was very intrigued by that.  And, I know that there was conflict within me because something says in me--I remember, I remember having to deal with this conflict that, do you lash out with what seems to be right in your mind.  Or, do you go with what appears, what is in your heart as something that maybe the solution to the problem.  So, so I went to a number of his marches, and a number of his sermons and so forth.  Just because he was here in Atlanta [Georgia] and I wanted to go.  I didn't go to the March on Washington.  In hindsight (laughter), it would've been great to be there.  But, I was there for other marches and heard him deliver speeches that were fabulous that you just don't hear anyone speaking of today.  But, they were motivating and sort of moved us as a people, I think, to quite another level.  And, not us as--when I say us, this time as a people, I mean, that moved the American people to a, to a place of better understanding, and greater love.  I do believe that.  And, I think that clearly King has transported something to the rest of the world that is, that is unique in a way in that is a profound contribution to global peace and justice.  That's what I think, and in a way, you could just feel it happening at the same time that it is was going on in Atlanta [Georgia].
Story_ID: 187277
Speaker 1: Now, at the same time, I don't wanna interrupt your flow, but at the same--around the same period of time Malcolm X traveled quite a bit.  And, did Henderson [Travel Service, Atlanta, Georgia] handle any of his travel?
Speaker 2: No.  We did not have a--handle his travel.  We did not handle his travel at all.  No.  No. (Simultaneous)
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) He went to Africa, and he went to Europe, went to Paris [France], a lot of time in Paris when he was shadowed by the CIA [Central Intelligence Agency].  And, then to North African and West African, you know, as well, so.
Speaker 2: No.  No, we did not handle his travel.  We handled the travel of, I would say, most clearly, clearly 85, 90 percent of African Americans going to Africa.  And, most of our leaders at the time.  [HM] Vernon Jordan, and Whitney Young, and just, I mean, just everybody who was going.  Principally, they went through Henderson Travel.  And, very often they were able to meet the leadership in these countries as well.  Very often, through Henderson travel, they were able to meet with the presidents.  They were able to meet with, with business and government leaders.
Speaker 1: Did [HM] Maya Angelou and her group travel through Henderson?
Speaker 2: No.  No.  I don't remember that she did.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I don't remember that she did.
Speaker 1: They were quite a few black people living in Ghana at one time.  They had a little colony of African Americans who were in Ghana--
Speaker 2: Yes.  Yes, there were quite a few.  There were quite a few (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) and, Dr. [W.E.B.] Du Bois at the center of it for a while and Maya Angelou and then the (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: [T.] Ras Makonnen.  I don't know if you, if you remember the name--
Speaker 1: Right, Ras Makonnen.  Yes.
Speaker 2: Of Ras Makonnen.
Speaker 1: Right, from Trinidad [sic, Guyana].
Speaker 2: That's right.  That's right.  He was there, and then he moved--he and my father [Jacob Henderson] were friends.  And, he subsequently moved to, at the invitation of, Mzee Jomo Kenyatta, he then moved to Kenya.  He moved to Mombasa [Kenya].  And, was giving a very nice little place in the bend of a river there.  And, in fact, when I lived in Nairobi [Kenya], years later in the mid-'70s [1970s], in the early '70s [1970s], we were able to go there, with my father, to visit Ras Makonnen.  I've got some pictures of--one lovely picture of Ras Makonnen and my father.  So, they were able to go and meet with Hoffer Vannoy [ph.], and various others.  The masonic groups would go and have--I remember a large meeting they had at the [Grand] Masonic Temple in [Monrovia] Liberia.  I think there was only one meeting.  I think, I think there was one major meeting that they had.  But, there were just various groups and again most of the leaders went through, went through Henderson Travel Service--
Story_ID: 187278
Speaker 1: Now, was there a connection at all with--there were so many activists that went through Henderson [Travel Service, Atlanta, Georgia] and to--and a lot--so many African and Caribbean countries involved, I was wondering was there a connection with the, with the old UNIA [Universal Negro Improvement Association] at all?  With--
Speaker 2: I don't know that there was a direct connection with Marcus Garvey.  I do know that, that there were Jamaicans who would come to Atlanta [Georgia] and participate with us in a number of our Civil Rights activities and so forth.  And, some of them would go on to Africa.  I know that there was a lot of emphasis on Haiti early on in the travel business as well.
Speaker 1: That's when Papa Doc [Francois Duvalier] was--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) My mother [Freddye Scarborough Henderson] in fact had to go--well she had discussions with Papa Doc, I was about to say Papa Doc and Baby Doc [Jean-Claude Duvalier], and I maybe correcting that, but certainly Papa Doc with regards to people coming and visiting and so forth.  So, there's, so the Caribbean connection was most definitely there, including travel to Brazil as well, see.  So, there was, so there was the African, the Caribbean connection.  Still, still with some focus on Europe.  Still including travel to Europe as well.  And then, later my mother started to branch out to China.  And, this started because Haile Selassie's daughter, Haile Selassie--well, Ethiopian Airlines is and has always been an excellent airline.  They at one point decided that they were going to expand their destinations to include China.  So, they had a special inaugural flight from Addis Ababa [Ethiopia] to what is now Beijing [China].  And, they invited my mother to come and visit, to come as special guest on that trip.  So--
Speaker 1: Now, what year as this?  Was this before [President Richard Milhous] Nixon's visit to China or afterwards?
Speaker 2: You know, I was just looking at those dates myself.
Speaker 1: I think Nixon went over in '72 [1972].
Speaker 2: It would have been about the same time.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It would have been about the same time.
Speaker 1: Okay, 'cause I know--
Speaker 2: In fact, I'm--it would have been even shortly before or shortly after.  Because, as I said, I was just looking at the dates myself.  But, I don't remember exactly which one.  But, I was noticing the close correlation between the two.  They were met there by Zhou Enlai, by Premier Zhou Enlai.  Premier Zhou Enlai gave them a reception in the, in the Great Hall.  And, we have pictures of my mother and Zhou Enlai, as we do with her in virtually every single, and my father, virtually every single African, African head of state at that time.
Speaker 1: Now, did the American government give her trouble, you know, for trying to go, or did they--
Speaker 2: No.  No, because these were considered more as friendship visits, you see.  And, she was working as well with the Atlanta China Friendship Association, or Group [US-China Peoples Friendship Association, USCPFA] in Atlanta [Georgia] to promote tourism, to promote travel to China as well.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But, this was just for the purpose of culture, to cultural exchanges.
Speaker 1: That would seem that would be after Nixon, but I don't, you know, I'm not sure.  Since we're not sure of the dates, but seem like it would be after Nixon, you know, went over.  'Cause, before that they really put a stigma on you for trying to go to China (laughter).
Speaker 2: Yes, they did.  But, you know, this was not really the U.S., it was not being fostered by the United States.
Speaker 1: Right.  But--
Speaker 2: So, in essences my mother was going from the U.S. to Ethiopia.
Speaker 1: Then from there to China?
Speaker 2: And, then it was Ethiopia that was taken the trips.  So, she was a guest of Ethiopia really.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: You see.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: And, she had met Haile Selassie and as I said, almost all the heads, heads of state they had communication with and had met as well.
Story_ID: 187279
Speaker 1: Now, what about the conference in, I mean, the festival in 1966, the First African Festival of the Arts that was held in Dakar, Senegal, in '66 [1966] where, you know, Langston Hughes went over and a lot of people; Fisk Jubilee Singers [Fisk University, Nashville Tennessee], and the Freedom Singers, and other groups went over.  Do you remember that trip?
Speaker 2: I do.  I do remember that.  I do remember that, and I know that they were in attendance.  And, I am inclined to say that they did the travel there as well.  But, I am, I cannot go on record for saying that they did that.  That they actually arranged the travel for that particular black arts festival.  But, I believe they did, but certainly they, certainly they were there.  There's no doubt about that.  They did arranged the, they have arranged several of the African, African American Summits that were led by Reverend Leon Sullivan.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: They were, they were--they had been very, very enterably [ph.] involved in several of those as well.
Speaker 1: Now, Reverend Sullivan is based in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], right?  And, he--
Speaker 2: He was based in Philadelphia.  Yes.  The great Reverend Sullivan was based in Philadelphia.  And, I believe that he must have had, what, at least five, five different summits.
Speaker 1: That's right.  And, he had--
Speaker 2: Taken place--
Speaker 1: Economic ventures going between Africa and the United States.
Speaker 2: That's right.  That's right, his goal was to, was to promote greater solidarity between Africa and America.  And, to generate a more business between the two and to have--to create the possibility of mutual support for each other as well.
Story_ID: 187280
Speaker 1: Did the travel agency [Henderson Travel Service, Atlanta, Georgia] basically become the major business of the Henderson family at one point?
Speaker 2: Oh, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Oh, yes.  Oh, yes.  It was, it was even more than that.  It was the business of the Henderson Travel, of the Henderson family.  I, in fact, to be even more correct, I would say that it was the principal endeavor of the Henderson family.  Because, as my brother point out to me not to long ago, our parents considered this more of a, of a not as a business, but as an activity that promoted the development of African American people.
Speaker 1: Sort of a mission.
Speaker 2: It helped to bridge--
Speaker 1: (unclear)
Speaker 2: Yes.  Help to bridge the gap between America and other, and other parts of world.  It--they were not in this to make money.  I don't ever remember profit being a motive.  It was not a motive.  The motive was to make sure that as many people as possible made the connection overseas, and was able to have that experience overseas.  That was their, that was their over--that was their goal.  And, we all grew up in this venture ourselves.  In this venture and in this adventure ourselves.  So, that when--as soon as we were able to work in the travel agency, we did.  My parents worked until they got a job done.  And, as a young person in high school, I remember with my brother, being there with my mother and father until eleven o'clock at night, twelve o'clock at night.  You know, working to print up things and, I mean, print up flyers and write tickets and help develop itineraries, leaving at eleven or twelve at night to go and drop things in the mail and so forth.  This was, this happened almost on a daily basis in the summertime.  So, we all, all of us grew up in the travel business.  All of us participated in the development of that, of that business.  And--
Speaker 1: That's interesting.  That remarkable kind of a--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Situation that, you know, using the European airlines to conduct a business that you'd probably be closed out of if you depended on U.S. carriers, you know.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  In the beginning, in the beginning one reason that European carriers were used was because, in fact, they were the principal ones that were going to Africa.  So, if you--there of course, was Air Afrique.  But, and from time to time there was Ghana Airways, there was Nigeria Airways, later, later.  But early on, those, those airlines that were going to Africa were the airlines of the former colonel countries and other European countries.  So, so many of the clients would go from the U.S. to Europe, and then from Europe to various places in Africa.  I wanna point out that Henderson Travel Service exists today.  It is based in Silver Spring [Maryland] and my sister, Gaynelle [Henderson-Bailey], is running the travel agency at the moment.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So, it is, it is still in existence, having started back in 1955.
Speaker 1: Aright.
Speaker 2: So, it's, it is almost fifty years old now.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It's almost fifty years old.  Yes.  But, European carriers did play a strong role, did play a strong role.
Speaker 1: There's a parallel one could draw between the European Press playing a role in the Civil Rights Movement too by being there to record American activities (laughter) for the rest of the world.
Speaker 2: Yes.  Yes.
Speaker 1: In a sense that kinda put the United States on the spot, you know.
Speaker 2: That's right.  That's right.  And, even today when it comes to travel to Africa, there is still not an American carrier that travels to that, in fact, travels between the U.S. and Africa other than Delta Airlines that is in partnership with South African Airways.
Speaker 1: That's something.  That's--I don't think a lot of people know that.
Speaker 2: So, we, we still do not have very much of a link, travel link with Africa other than what I just mentioned.
Speaker 1: And, that with, so many African Americans here in this country, you know.  That's really remarkable.
Speaker 2: With so, with so many African Americans here and with so many Africans now coming to the U.S. that--and there are, I understand, some charter flights that are being developed.  But, it seems to me that there is the possibility of other carriers, American carriers beginning to look at, at the market, at the African market now.
Story_ID: 187281
Speaker 1: Let me ask you some questions about your own childhood and growing up in.  You know, we've talked about the agency [Henderson Travel Service, Atlanta, Georgia] and we may pick up some of it along the way as we discuss.  But, what were some of your, what were some of the, what'd your neighborhood look like?  What did it feel like?  What did it smell like?  What was the sights and sounds and smells of growing up?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Atlanta [Georgia] was a, Atlanta was a great place.  I see Atlanta in concentric circles.  Within my closest circle, Atlanta was a great place.  It was a wonderful place, and I'll tell you why I think so.  But, beyond that first concentric circle, there was another circle.  And, that was circle that was not a very friendly circle.  That was a, that was the circle of segregation that we also had to deal with when we were, when we went beyond our own first concentric circle, if you will.  I think that one of the, one of the great blessings of Atlanta was having the benefit of four to five institutions of higher learning.  To have a girl's school, a women's school of higher education, a men's school of higher education, two co-ed schools of higher educations, a graduate school, and a theological seminary, all in one spot had to be an enormous impetus for the growth of Atlanta and Atlanta's black people.  And, there's no doubt about that.  Because, you just had this continuous production of people who were highly educated and highly trained.  Many of whom stayed right in the city of Atlanta.  So, in Atlanta you had that core, what I call a core, of educational institutions.  But, around that, you had everything else imaginable that serviced the African American community.  You had, banks, insurance companies, hospitals, hotels, clubs, restaurants, a travel agency (laughter).  It was a self-sufficient community and a relatively wealthy community as well.  You had medical doctors, you had dentists, you had everything.  I was born in a small black hospital on Hunter Street in Atlanta, Georgia.  Dr. Hackney delivered me and he delivered a lot of other people in the city of Atlanta.
Speaker 1: Was it like--
Speaker 2: Some of whom you may, you may even interview.  Dr. Richard Hackney.  I went to the--I went to Spelman Nursery School [Atlanta, Georgia].  People may not know that's--whether--that Spelman [College, Atlanta, Georgia] had a Nursery, but it did.  I went to Spelman Nursery School and I am sure that some of the other people you interviewed also went to Spelman Nursery School.  I then went to the Laboratory Elementary of Atlanta University which was called Oglethorpe [Atlanta, Georgia].  And, many of the people that you will interview from Atlanta also went to that school, Oglethorpe.  When I was about nine or ten, and this happened with all of my siblings, my mother [Freddye Scarborough Henderson] sent us all for one year to live with her people in California.  My mother and father [Jacob Henderson] sent us to live in California.  And, they did this because they wanted us to have a different experience and a freer experiences.  So, we went and had that completely different experience of, of living amongst Hispanics for the first time, adjusting to a different environment, seeing different people, just having a 100 percent different, different experience and all of us did that for one year.
Story_ID: 187282
Speaker 1: Now, what part of California did you go to?
Speaker 2: To Los--we all went to Los Angeles [California] and San Francisco [California], where, where my mother's [Freddye Scarborough Henderson] people were.  So, already they was showing, they were showing that they thought that this Atlanta [Georgia] environment was a narrow one.  And, that in fact, we would benefit by going outside this environment and having a broader, broader experiences and opening ourselves up to different possibilities.  We were nine or ten when they sent us away.  In addition to that, when we were young, my father [Jacob Henderson] would drive us, as a family, to California and he would drive us back.  And, I remember being very concerned about where we would stay at night because they were not many people--many places where African Americans could stay.  My father would plan these trips very carefully, and he would write to friends along the way to see if either, either we could stay in their homes or if there were other people in the community whose homes we could stay in as well.  At one--I remember once going into a hotel, my father pulled over to the side where the car couldn't be seen that well.  And, my mother who was, was very light, and could pass for white, went in and asked for a room.  She then came out.  She came into the car and we went around the back and went into the hotel.  That was the only way we could managed to get into that hotel.  They didn't know who we were but we managed to stay there.
Speaker 1: Where was it at?
Speaker 2: You know, I don't know where that was.
Speaker 1: In what state, I mean, was it--
Speaker 2: I don't know what state that was.
Speaker 1: In the north?
Speaker 2: Somehow, I think is was--no, no, no it was, I believe it was between here [Washington, D.C.] and Texas, you see.  Because we were--we clearly also travel to Mexico, Arizona and so forth.  But, I don't think it was that far where this happened.  So again, this is, this is the spirit within them that says, you know, reach out and broaden your horizons.  When we were in high school--well, we left, we lived a relatively comfortable live in Atlanta as did many other people within our general community.  In fact, I think by some standards, we and the community were living rich lives, in fact, for the times.  When we were fif--about fifteen, sixteen or so, our parents--I had gone to the local high school for a couple of years.
Speaker 1: What was the name of it?
Speaker 2: That was [Henry McNeal] Turner High School [Atlanta, Georgia], Turner High School.  And, Charlayne Hunter [HM Charlayne Hunter-Gault], Hamilton Holmes, Carolyn Long [Banks], who was later on the, on this Atlanta City Council [Atlanta, Georgia].  [HM the Honorable] Marvin [S.] Arrington [Sr.], who was later president of the Atlanta City Council also went to that school.  We all went there at the same time.  In the tenth grade however, my parents sent us to school in New England.  And, I like to call that my first international experience.  I call that my first international experience because it is as if I went to another country.
Speaker 1: Okay, now where did you--
Speaker 2: Everything, 100 percent was different.  This was Saint Mary's-in-the Mountains [later, White Mountain School, Bethlehem, New Hampshire] in Littleton, New Hampshire.
Speaker 1: Okay.  That must have been different.
Speaker 2: My--Yes.  Two of my sister's--I and one sister went there, another sister went to Northfield [Mount Hermon School, Gill, Massachusetts].  My brother went to New Hampton [School, New Hampton, New Hampshire].  Our friends were going to Phillips Andover [Academy, Andover, Massachusetts] and [Phillips] Exeter [Academy, Exeter, New Hampshire], and Choate [Rosemary Hall, Wallingford, Connecticut] and Saint Paul's [School, Concord, New Hampshire].  This was in the '50s [1950s].  So, I went there and saw snow for the first time (laughter).  So, had a different relationship with white people than I had ever had before.
Speaker 1: There were two black students at--
Speaker 2: There were two--
Speaker 1: --at Saint Mary's--
Speaker 2: --black student out of sixty.  The whole school was sixty.  There were sixty people in the whole school.  We were all girls.  The school was very small.  And, there were positive experiences there and there were negative, hurtful experiences as well.
Speaker 1: Now, what were some of the--well, tell, well tell us about some experiences that you remember, that stand out.
Speaker 2: Getting to know white people as friends for the first time was one thing that stood out.
Story_ID: 187283
Speaker 1: Now you're at Saint Mary's-in-the-Mountains [School, later, White Mountain School, Bethlehem, New Hampshire], you know.  Two of sixty, there's only two black students of sixty students there; small school.  What was your experience there?  Now, you were getting ready to tell us about some of the experiences in trying to reach out to white people for the first time.
Speaker 2: Well, this was my first time being in a context of equal interaction with whites, because I had never been in that situation before, other than the one year that I went to California.  So, this took a lot of getting used to.  You see, first of all, I had to get use to the weather, you know.  I mean, I remember leaving my dorm to go up to the main, the main house there, and it was nineteen degrees below zero, and I was just hoping I could make it up there (laughter).  It was, it was just so, so cold, and we used to ski all the time.  In fact, I broke my leg skiing up there.  Still bear the scares from them taking that, taking that cast off my leg, the way they did up there.  Anyway, and that's an experience I try to forget (laughter).  So, there was that, there was the, the getting to know white people in a different way.  And, I got some--I made--I have kept some friends from that time on.  There is--yes, I have kept some friends that I still see from that time on.  There were, there were examples of racism as well.  These were, these were rich, these were rich girls.  Not by Atlanta [Georgia] standards, by American standards.  So, that one very close friend of mine was a woman whose father, at the time, owned the third largest shipping company in the world, and they were Norwegian.  One of the daughters' of [William B.] Ruger, Ruger guns [Sturm, Ruger & Company, Inc., Southport, Connecticut] was there at the school.  They were just very wealthy people.  Anyway, the woman who was, who was Norwegian, young--the girl who was Norwegian and I became very good friends.  She lived in New Canaan, Connecticut.  And, I would go visit her during Thanksgiving, weekends, and so forth, because it was prohibitively expensive for me to go back and forth to Atlanta every time that we had a long weekend or something of that sort.  So, she and I got to be friends.  During our last year there, all the girls there were having debutante parties, because that is what they did.  They had debutante parties at very expensive locations.  Anyway, this friend, who was my best friend, was planning a debutant party at the country club in New Canaan, Connecticut.  And, I was planning to go and others were planning to go.  Well, not that many others but, I was planning to go, and--from the school, from the school and, you know, we would, we would sit around, we would help, we would plan, and you know, talk about how nice it's gonna be.  One day, I was in my dorm and I saw her coming up the driveway, crying and her mother was there trying to console her, and so forth.  And, pretty soon there was a knock on the door and her mother came into the room and said, "Well, you know, we're just, we're, we're, I don't know how to say this, you know, we're very sorry, you know, we have tried to do everything we could to reverse this situation.  But, we're very sorry that you will not be able to come to the debutante party because the country club does not allow black people into it."
Speaker 1: This was in New Hampshire?
Speaker 2: No, no, this is in New Canaan, Connecticut.
Speaker 1: New Canaan, okay, right, okay.
Speaker 2: This is in New Canaan, Connecticut.  "And, we're just, you know, we're just very sorry," and she had tears in her eyes.  Then it was, you know, then the girl came in and it was, you know, she was, you know, she was just distraught because, because of what was going on.  So, I remember that because it did, it struck me.  I mean, I come from a segregated situation.  So, I mean, I'm aware of segregation and what it is, because I lived with it throughout my entire, you know, previous to coming to the school.  But, there was something about this, this particular incident.  Because, it was almost a, it was not betrayal of friendship that's--or maybe it was.  To some extent it was betrayal of friendship, because to what extent do you, do you continue something when you know that there's a wrong that's been done at the same time.  Realistically, in a way, I couldn't expect the girl, you know, not to go ahead and have the thing (laughter).  But, it did affect me as a young girl.  It did affect me.  So anyway, I got over that and graduated (laughter).  And, the school, nevertheless was a positive experience for me.  Overall, it was a positive experience.  Although, again, there were some negative experiences.
Story_ID: 187284
Speaker 1: Do you remember any teachers [at Saint Mary's-in-the-Mountains School, later, White Mountain School, Bethlehem, New Hampshire] that, in particularly that took an interest in you, and--?
Speaker 2: Absolutely.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Absolutely.  First of all, it was absolutely beautiful.  It was monumentally beautiful up there.  We were in the middle of the White Mountains.  And, the main room where we had most of the activities had this huge window in front.  And, when you were standing there, you were just looking out into the mountains.  We had regular activities of mountain climbing.  It was just marvelous being out in nature in a way that I had never been before.  It was the academic experience that probably set me on the path for the rest of my life.  However, that was really--well, that and Spelman Nursery School [Atlanta, Georgia] and [University of Atlanta Laboratory Elementary School] Oglethorpe School [Atlanta, Georgia], that did.  I had some particular teachers there, at this school that were, that were singular.  One was a French woman, whose name was Madame Raphael [ph.].  She was a disciplinarian who believed in doing everything 100 percent correctly.  So, she taught French that way.  She taught French that way.  So, I got an excellent foundation in French from three years of being taught by this women.  To the extent that, when I left that school, I never had to take another grammar course in French, ever.  And, I went on to get a master's in French and I speak it fluently to this day.  But, it is all because of her excellent foundation.  I took Latin at [Henry McNeal] Turner High [School, Atlanta, Georgia].  I took it for two years.  When I got to this particular school [Saint Mary's-in-the-Mountains School, later, White Mountain School, Bethlehem, New Hampshire], they tested me and told me that I needed to take Latin II; that is the second year, over again.  And, when I took Latin II, I got something like a "C" or a "D", because I had really had not learned very much of anything.  And, yet it was assumed that I, that I knew more but, I just--my foundation was just very poor.  So, that woman was just key to what I did for the rest of my life.  Because, French and my, my francophone experience has been a real part of me from then until now.  Also, in Atlanta [Georgia], all my--many of my friends took piano lessons.  We took ballet lessons, and we took tap dancing.  So, I took piano lessons, and I took ballet.  And, from the time that I was, you know, six years old, I took ballet.  So, when I got to, to this school, it just so happened that the Budapest Uprising of 1954 [sic, The Hungarian Uprising of 1956] had taken place.  And, there was a Hungarian woman who escaped with her family and she ended up at this school.  She was a prima ballerina with the Bolshoi Ballet Company [Moscow, Russia], and she ended up, as I said, at this school.  She found her way to this school, and by my way of reckoning, I was her star pupil because I had already had ballet.  And, she was just, she was just like the French teacher, although she had a little bit more playfulness in her.  But, she was--you had to do everything absolutely correctly.  Your arms had to be in exactly the right position, your feet in the exactly the right position.  Your pirouettes had to be done perfectly.  And, she just kept you there until you reached perfection with the way you did this.  So that, at some point following my experience at that school, I was then able to go and teach ballet myself.  And, be in the Spelman College Dance Troupe of when I went to Spelman [College, Atlanta, Georgia] as well.  So, so, that woman, those two women played, played a key, key roles in my life.  There was a man who was also--who did not have very much to do with myself and the other black girl there at all.  But, he as magnificent in explaining classical music.  And, what we did every Sunday was we laid out, all of us, just on a big Persian rug in front of that great big window I was telling you about.  And, he would play classical music and he would explain to us what we were hearing.  So, different phrases, the repetitions, the melodies, he would, he would explain all of this to us.  And, then we would, we--for me it was, it was a new experience.  Because, I had had clearly some exposure to classical music, but I had not really learned it.  This was my first experience really learning fully about the different, so many different styles of classical music.  When you study piano, you know, you do [Wolfgang Amadeus] Mozart, and you're doing a little bit of [Frederic Francois] Chopin and so forth.  But, this was a different experience, learning, learning what it was, what, what, classical music was all about and it's various, various styles and throughout the various centuries.  So, they were, they were some key, they were some key people there who as I said, sort of set me off onto, onto a different, very different, different path that I appreciated very much.  There were negatives and positives as I said, that's clear.  But it was, it was generally a positive experience.
Story_ID: 187285
Speaker 1: Let me just go back to [Atlanta University Laboratory Elementary School] Oglethorpe [Atlanta, Georgia] because Oglethorpe it's--that school was, as far as I'm concerned, a sort of model of education.  Because, we--every teacher who was there was dedicated.  Every teacher who was there was excellent.  Every teacher who was there had longevity with the school.
Speaker 2: Now, this was in Atlanta U [University, later, Clark Atlanta University, Atlanta, Georgia], right?
Speaker 1: This is in, this is--now, I'm going back to that because, I just wanna, I just wanna talk about that for just a moment.  Because, I have always had this desire to do an ethnography of that school, and just write down what it was about that school that produced so many fabulous people.  Including, I think, [HM] Julian Bond, and Maynard Jackson, and a lot of his family and so forth.  The--we learn about African American History first of all.  We learn about our history.  We learn how to read and write, and we learn how to read and write well (laughter).  Every single year, we learned a different instrument.  So, when you're in the first grade, you learn triangle (laughter), you know.  A little bit later, you learn some drums, little bit later you learn flutes, and ukuleles and so forth.  We learned music.  We, of course, did sports.  We, as I said, we, we sang the Negro National Anthem every single day, and we were in a nurturing environment.  That was--if I could capture what we had in that school, and give it to, give it to principals today, I know that there is something that they can glean from that that would, that would really spur them to do even greater kinds of things in their various schools.  Excellent school.  Anyway, when I was in my junior year, I think going from junior to senior year, I took my first trip to Europe with my mother [Freddye Scarborough Henderson] and father [Jacob Henderson].  And, that was an eye opener that was still yet--that was yet another eye opener for me, because so young to go to Europe was just, was just great.  And, I would just never forget, you know, seeing, you know, things German, things French, things Italian and so forth, for the first time.  And, I have since then loved traveling, and I still do.  I still do love it; still like new cultures and seeing how culture intermix and how they, how they relate to one another, how they accommodate one another or don't accommodate one another.  And, it is by no accident, I think, that I am an anthropologist by training (laughter).  Know I got this legitimately (laughter), I think.  So, I left that school and went to Tufts University [Medford, Massachusetts].
Speaker 2: Okay, now did you, at that time had you determined that you were going to study anthropology?
Speaker 1: No. No.  That came, that came much later.  That came much--
Speaker 2: And, so what did you have as a career goal?  Or, did you have an idea of what you wanted to do?
Speaker 1: No.  No, no, I did not have a career goal.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: I did not have a career goal.  I think, I was constantly searching for one, but I just--I did not come up with one.  And, so I guess--
Speaker 2: Well, this is what, what year is this now?  You're in, you're in, this is 1960?
Speaker 1: This is '60 [1960]--
Speaker 2: Yeah, '60 [1960].
Speaker 1: --to '64 [1964].
Speaker 2: Okay.  Right.
Story_ID: 187286
Speaker 1: So, that what I did was to simply study what I was good at (laughter), and what I liked.  But, I did not know exactly what I wanted to do.  I went to Tufts [University, Medford, Massachusetts] that first year, and Tufts was a very unwelcoming place; very unwelcoming.  They were only five of us African American girls at all of Tufts University, at all of Jackson College, which was the female part of Tufts.  And, that was maximum.  Most of the time, there were only three of us there.  And, we were not welcomed in the sororities, and our boys were not welcome in the fraternities.  It was, it was not a welcoming place, not a welcoming place.  I spent three years there; my freshman year, junior year, and senior year.  My sophomore year, my parents thought it'd be a good idea and so did I, to come back home to go to school and I went to Spelman [College, Atlanta, Georgia].  And, that was a marvelous, wonderful experience for me.  I had great teachers, Maynard Jackson's mother [Irene Dobbs Jackson] was teaching me French, and she was great.  I had other teachers who were fabulous.  I was in an environment that was supportive.  There was a Civil Rights Movement going on and I could get involved with that.  And, I could go out and picket.  I could picket in front of stores that don't even exist now (laughter).  And, just get involved with all of that fervor, and I loved that.  And, as I look back over my college career, the only one that was truly meaningful to me was the one, the one year I spent at Spelman College.  With the exception of a couple of teachers at, at Tufts, one being a Mr.--a Dr. [Seymour] Simches. And, I read, I read in one of my Tufts magazines, in fact, he was just given a great celebratory send off because he was retiring.  But, he was an excellent, excellent French teacher.  And, he was, he was as exacting as the, as the French woman was at the, at Saint Mary's School [Saint Mary's-in-the-Mountains School, later, White Mountain School, Bethlehem, New Hampshire].  He was excellent.  I remember him, and the excellence of his teaching, as well as a Russian teacher.  I took Russian.  And, this teacher taught us well, and taught us Russian very, very quickly.  And, of course, the African students at Fletcher School of Law and Diplomacy [Tufts University, Medford, Massachusetts] were there and we became friends.  And, I enjoyed many of the friendships there, there with people who were in attendance there.  One was Lymae Kawa [ph.], who has worked in high level positions with Liberian government.  And, as I was looking at the speech that [HM Gen.] Colin [L.] Powell gave before the [United Nations] Security Council, just before we went into Iraq, I saw him sitting at the table with the, for the Liberian delegation.  So, it's good to see how you see these people sort of moving around from place to place.  Boston [Massachusetts] was a place where there were a few black at each of the schools up there; a few at Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts], a few at Boston University [Boston, Massachusetts], a few at Boston College [Boston, Massachusetts] and so forth, and we all came together.  So, we had our own community within the Boston, within the Greater Boston community.  So, there was a fraternity, there was a Kappa [Alpha Psi, KAP] Fraternity and Omega [Psi Phi Fraternity], Ace [ph.], a Delta [Sigma Theta] Sorority, and AKA [Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority]--
Speaker 2: Citywide chapters--
Speaker 1: For the citywide, yes, for the citywide group.  And, that was, that was nice.  Because, even though we were not in that friendly an environment because there were so few of us in most of the places, we could still come together and get to know one another and enjoy the place, which we did.  So, that was that part of my educational experience.
Story_ID: 187287
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, in '64 [1964], you wind up in France, right?  You go to France, right?  Well, how did that happen?
Speaker 2: My-yes, I did.  Yes, I did.  My father [Jacob Henderson] said to me as we were, as we were leaving my graduation, he said, from Tufts University [Medford, Massachusetts], he said, "Now, now you majored in French."  He said, "Can you speak French?"  I said, "Well, not so well.  But, I read it well (laughter)."  He said, "That's not good enough."  He said, "That's not good enough."  He said, "You have to be able to speak the language as well."  He said, "You have to go to, go to France."  I had also a little bit after that applied to the Peace Corp.  And, the Peace Corp was going to send me to North Africa, but in fact, I decided to go to the University of Dijon [also knows as, University of Burgundy], University of Dijon in [Dijon] France.  That was a wonderful experience.  There were three African American young women there at the same time.  One was--there were two from Spelman [College, Atlanta, Georgia] and myself (laughter).  One from Spelman is most, was most recently--is one of their highest women in [the U.S.] State Department.  And, she was most recently the director general of the Foreign Service.  First black woman to ever hold that, hold that post, and has the title Career Ambassador.  The highest that you can get as well.
Speaker 1: What's her name?
Speaker 2: Her name is [HM] Ruth [A.] Davis.  Her name is Ruth Davis.  We're currently working together on the [HM] Charles [B.] Rangel Program at Howard [University, Washington, D.C.].  But, even though our parents knew each other in Atlanta [Georgia], she and I did not meet until we actually cross the Atlantic and found ourselves at the University of Dijon together.  So, I learned to speak French there, learned to speak French there while studying at the University.  And, having the opportunity to live in that old city and to get to know French people, French students, get to know another culture was invigorating, and it was broadening, and it was a marvelous experience.  And, I knew how to speak French when I left.  If my father had asked me that question, I could have answered it very differently at the end.  So, I left there and went to a prep school, to a girl's prep school, largely white, and I taught French and Ballet there at that school.  That's the Westover School in [Middlebury] Connecticut, in Connecticut, in Danbury [sic, Middlebury], Connecticut as well.  I stayed there for two years and taught French.  And, enjoyed teaching French, because I was teaching the French Symbolist Writers and those who were writing about existentialism.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Is this 1965, or?
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: This is '65 [1965] to '66 [1966].  And so, you know, after you've been to so many different other environments, you know, Europe and France and California and New England, and you're studying people who have gone off to Algeria and wondering what life is all about.  So, just Andre Gide, or Jean-Paul Sartre, who wondering who they are.  I was forced myself to start thinking, well, well, who are you, and what, what are you all about.  And so, just teaching these students, this was very important for me.  And, I found myself really concentrating on certain poets who were also trying to figure out, you know, what life was (laughter) all about.  If I had listened to my grandmother a long time ago, I would've known (laughter).  But, (laughter) I did not (laughter); took me a long time to get to that point--
Story_ID: 187288
Speaker 1: What did she [Tyson's grandmother] say it was about (laughter)?
Speaker 2: She would say that it is about understanding a higher purpose and having the courage to know, having the courage to do right and to know that there's a God that supports you and loves you and so forth.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And, will guide you.  That's what she would say; took me a while to learn that.  So, so then I taught there at a while, for a while at the, at those schools.  Now, the Negritude movement as I--my life is sort of mixed up with a lot of these artistic trends that were going along, and movements that were going along at the same time.  Our first African American ambassador to Senegal was [Will] Mercer Cook, Mercer Cook.  And, Mercer Cook--I met Mercer Cook because I left Dijon [France] and went to France, I mean, went to, went to Senegal.  He had invited me down there and another student had invited me down.  So, I just went there to visit and to go to school at the University of Dijon during--University of Dakar [Dakar, Senegal] during the summer.  And, I did--and that was great and he introduced me to some of the Negritude, Negritude writer as well.  He introduced me to David Diop, David Diop.  Mercer Cook left there and came back to head up the Romance Language Department at Howard [University, Washington, D.C.].  So, I left the school where I'd been teaching for two year and went and worked with him on a master's degree in French.  And, so I translated a book of Senegalese writings on tales and legends and myths.  And, I was with him for one year.    And, he introduced me to Leon Damas, I wonder--I don't know if [Aime] Cesaire was dead at the time.  But, he introduced me to Leon Damas, who was one of the principle Negritude writers as well.  And, Mercer Cook himself had translated the, he translated Cheikh Anta Diop, and he translated some of these, some of the Negritude writers.
Speaker 1: Right.  That's right.  That's right.
Speaker 2: So that, so that, he had his hands firmly into this and he shared his experiences with me and with others.  So, that was a very rich experience and just drove my roots deeper and deeper into, into the African experience.
Speaker 1: That was a very exciting time for black scholars when they came into, when they crossed paths with the French scholars--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And all those writers that worked on Presence Africaine and France and those, the Negritude writers.  They began to compare their experiences and exchange ideas and--
Speaker 2: It was a very rich time.  It was a very rich time.  And mind you, the Anglophone people were getting together as well.  Perhaps more in political discussions.  I think, with the Francophones you had a stronger literary component.  But, don't forget that [Jomo] Kenyatta and [Kwame] Nkrumah and some of these people, you know, all have been to school, but not Nkrumah.  But, Kenyatta and some of the others had been to school in, in London [England].  And, they were intermingling with each other and some of the Caribbean people as well.  So, so there were these various circles that were occurring at the same time.  You know, the Anglophone African, the Francophone African, the American and it was a very rich and again exciting, exciting time.  So, when I left there I had expertise in African literature; both Francophone and African, and Anglophone.
Story_ID: 187289
Speaker 1: So, I went to the University of California at Berkeley [Berkeley, California] and I taught in the comparative literature department of University of California Berkeley.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: They are--
Speaker 2: Now, what year is this?  This is '66 [1966]?
Speaker 1: This would be sixty--now we are at '69 [1969].
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Because, my master's was '67 [1967] to '68 [1968] at--yeah, '67 [1967] to '68 [1968] at Howard [University, Washington, D.C.].  And, then I left.  In '68 [1968], '69 [1969] I was at Berkeley.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: I must commend Berkeley for having a Department of Comparative Literature that would have a teacher there teaching Anglophone and Francophone and African Literature (laughter).  Because some might consider that to be very (laughter) esoteric or maybe appealing only to one student on the whole campus (laughter).  But, they did.  And, I had, I had fifteen to twenty students in the class as well.  Well, this was a time when, when students were protesting Vietnam [the Vietnam War], particularly.  And, protesting racism on the campus.  So,--
Speaker 2: And you came right after the Free Speech Movement started--I guess, that started at '68 [1968], and you came at '69 [1969]?
Speaker 1: Right during the same time.  And, this is when the bombing was taking place, and strikes and everything were going on.  And, there was just, this was just a hot bed at that time.  And, the black students were very, very involved in various kinds of political activities and political action on campus.  The--yes, they were very involved.
Speaker 2: Okay, all right (laughter).
Story_ID: 187290
Speaker 1: You're at [University of California at Berkeley] Berkeley [California] Free Speech Movement, Mario Savio, and all of that.
Speaker 2: And, so that was, that was great, that was great being there.  But, there was a lot of disruption, you see, because we had to move our classes off campus because the bombings were taking place.  All classes had to be moved off campus.  The black students were disruptive of the classes that even, some of 'em, some of 'em, some of the leaders were disruptive of the classes of some of the blacks who held their classes even off campus.  And, I just remember one incident where there was an older woman, black woman, who had a class and one or two of the black leaders came in and actually pulled her chair from under her.  So, intent where they on disrupting their class and keeping it from going, I thought that was a very disrespectful thing to do.  But anyway, it happened.  But by and large, that movement was what it should've been.  That is to get different classes, different courses, and more involvement by African Americans in Univer--at University of California at Berkeley.  Then as I said, there was Vietnam [the Vietnam War], the whole Vietnam thing was going on at the same time.  So, so there were these two great movements simultaneously there on the campus.  So, it was a, it was a lot of ferment and activity and new thinking going on.
Speaker 1: Now, it--
Speaker 2: So from that point of view, it was a very rich environment as well.
Speaker 1: Now, in your classes did you have mostly black students?  Or, was it a mixture, or?
Speaker 2: I has mostly black student.  I had mostly black students.  Yes.  A couple of whites, and a couple of Hispanics, mostly black.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Where the Black Panthers on campus?  Did you meet any of them?
Speaker 2: I don't remember Black Panthers necessarily being, being on campus.  I don't remember that.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: No.  I don't remember that.  But, I do remember Black Panthers by the time I got to Boston [Massachusetts].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: In fact, I married one of 'em later on.  But, anyway we'll--maybe we'll get to that (laughter).
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Okay, when--
Speaker 2: But, I don't remember them necessarily (laughter).
Speaker 1: When you were there in that area, in the Bay area, it's a lot of intellectual activity among black folks--
Speaker 2: Oh, a trememd--
Speaker 1: [HM] Nathan Hare, they're the Black Scholar Group, Robert Allen--
Speaker 2: Nathan Hare was there, Don--there's a lawyer who was, I can see him right here in front of me, see him right here in front of me, who was very much in the political and educational--political scene.
Speaker 1: [HM the Honorable] D'Army Bailey, you talking about, or?
Speaker 2: No.  He then ended up a decade or so later in the Arabian Peninsula and he became Muslim.  Oh, somehow I want to put the name Rasheed in there somewhere.  But, he's a name that everybody who was in Berkeley in that time would know.  What's the current, current mayor's name?
Speaker 1: [HM the Honorable] Willie [L.] Brown.
Speaker 2: Willie, Willie--
Speaker 1: Of, Berkeley?
Speaker 2: Of Berkeley.
Speaker 1: I don't know.
Speaker 2: Anyway, he was there at that time.  And, he was involved.  He was involved politically.  It was just--Ron Dellums [HM the Honorable Ronald Dellums] was there.  I think by that time, he was a young congressman.  So, it was just a lot of activity at--going on at the same time.  I was also working at a textbook company, textbook company and, that was owned by IBM.  And, what we were trying to do was to put more African American content into, into textbooks.  So, I was doing that too.  So, I was really doing both of those.  I only spent one year at Berkeley, I only spent one year at Berkeley.  I left there after that one year, and transferred to Chicago [Illinois] with that same company.  And, I spent one year in Chicago with that same company.
Story_ID: 187291
Speaker 1: How'd you like Chicago [Illinois]?  You were there in 1970?
Speaker 2: This would've been, this would've been '69 [1969].  This would've been '69 [1969] to '70 [1970] or so, at that point.
Speaker 1: You were there when Fred Hampton was killed then, right?  Where you in Chicago then?  'Cause he was killed just at (simultaneously).
Speaker 2: I remember when he was killed--
Speaker 1: Of '69 [1969]--
Speaker 2: I don't remember where I was, I remember--
Speaker 1: December, of '69 [1969].
Speaker 2: That was what, what time?
Speaker 1: December of '69 [1969], he was killed.
Speaker 2: I remember when he was or, I--then I would've been there around that time.  I certainly remember when he was killed.  Funny I can't quite--I'm sure I must have been there.
Speaker 1: All right.  Okay.
Speaker 2: So, I spent, I spent some time there and it was a meaningful experience, but not, not one of my most meaningful years.
Speaker 1: Okay.  You had Operation Breadbasket, I think in Chicago, starting off.
Speaker 2: Yes.  Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  I think it was.
Speaker 2: I was, I was--I made some nice friendships there though.  That was very important to me.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: From there I went to, from there I went to Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts], there I went to Harvard to study anthropology.  And, I went there in 1970.  I went there in 1970.  And, I was in anthropology department.  There were about twelve of us students there.
Story_ID: 187292
Speaker 1: I mean, hearing that--even nowadays, there aren't that many black people involved in anthropology.
Speaker 2: No.  I think it's growing.  No, I think it's growing, but not, there are not that many.  No, not that many.  The provost at the University of California [UCLA], Los Angeles [California], is Dr. Claudia Mitchell-Kernan, she was at Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts].  She was teaching at Harvard.  She a black anthropologist.  Johnnetta [Betsch] Cole from--president of Spelman [College, Atlanta, Georgia] is an anthropologist.  The former president of Lincoln University [Jefferson City, Missouri]--I cannot think of her name--female is an anthropologist.  So, so we're around here, few and far between, but we're here.
Speaker 1: You had--did you know [HM S.] Allen Counter at Harvard?  'Cause he was--
Speaker 2: I have--I met him only last, last month or so.
Speaker 1: Okay.  'Cause he was, you know, he was engaged in that--
Speaker 2: He was there.  Yes.
Speaker 1: He as an anthropologist, but they did that trip to Surinam--
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: --he and David Evans--
Speaker 2: He and David Evans.
Speaker 1: In the early '70s [1970s].  Right.
Speaker 2: Yes.  Yes, that's right.
Speaker 1: It was an anthropological trip--
Speaker 2: That's right.  That's right.
Speaker 1: Even though they weren't trained anthropologist that I know of.
Speaker 2: That's right.  But, you know all these things (laughter).  My goodness, my goodness.  So, I went there and studied anthropology.  I never thought about studying anthropology in my life, in my life.  But, I went there.
Speaker 1: But, what sparked the interest in anthropology?
Speaker 2: Well, I think it was just natural.  In a way, I was involved in cultures and changing my cultural environment all up in my life, up until that time.  So, I think, it was just natural that I go and study what I had been doing informally, study formally what I had been doing informally all my life.
Speaker 1: Okay.  'Cause you went from one milieu to the next, right?  For a while and then--and sampled a lot of different things.  So, you kinda--
Speaker 2: I think I was sort of following a linguistic, a linguistic cultural root all along.  And, I still am to some extent, I still am.  But, we'll get to that.  Anyway, I was at Harvard and had the opportunity to meet some people who were very involved in a new filed that was developing; sociobiology, sociobiology.  And, that is looking at the behavior of animals and relating that to the human--to homosapianes.  And, that was very, very exciting.  Dr. Robert Trivers was very involved in that.  And, his--he's a well know--he is, he is the, one of the principal theorist in this whole field.
Speaker 1: A socio-anthropologist?
Speaker 2: Sociobiology.
Speaker 1: Sociobiology.
Speaker 2: Sociobiology.
Speaker 1: Social biology.  Okay.
Speaker 2: His name is Doctor, Dr. Robert Trivers.  Perhaps the principal theorist is Dr. E.O. Wilson.  And these people are very well published.  And, I had the opportunity to meet Doctor, Dr. E.O. Wilson and to meet him.  And, people who were on my thesis committee also were also involved in this area as well.  And, would go off studying chimpanzees and their behavior in Africa and come back and relate this to the field of anthropology.  So, Irven DeVore, Irven DeVore, who was a well-known anthropologist was once upon a time chairman of my thesis committee.  So, I certainly spent some time studying, studying some of his theories as well.
Story_ID: 187293
Speaker 1: I also, during that time, met a man whom I later, whom I soon married, whom I soon married.  We got married in 1971.  That's John Tyson, and yes he was a former (laughter)--
Speaker 2: Black Panther?
Speaker 1: Former Black Panther.
Speaker 2: Now, where was he a Panther?  Where was he a Panther at?
Speaker 1: I think in Boston [Massachusetts].  He's from Montclair, New Jersey.  And, he was--and that was in Boston.  That was in Boston.  I think maybe that was doing his early period in Boston.  That's, that's what I think.  And, he and his principal roommate, the longest person he roomed with, during the time that he was there, was Al Gore.  And, they were, they were good friends and continued to be very good friends.  In fact, Al Gore was very friendly with his family as well.  And, has been very, has been very supportive of my children as well, of our children.  And, in fact, one of my sons has worked very closely with Al a couple of time.  And, in turn with him when he was, when he was at the White House [Washington, D.C.] and so forth.  So, we then--after I had studied for two years--he was at Harvard Divinity School [Cambridge, Massachusetts] as well, at that time.  So, we decided that after we finished, we wanted to go to Africa, we wanted to go to Africa to do, to do some research.  So, we really wanted to go to Tanzania because, you know the reputation that Julius Nyerere had.  I mean, he was doing something revolutionary and something that was humanitarian, and so many of us were attracted there.
Story_ID: 187294
Speaker 1: --I'm sorry, what year is this when you go to Tanzania?
Speaker 2: This would be now 1973.
Speaker 1: Seventy-three [1973].  Okay.
Speaker 2: This would now be 1973.  I went to Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] in '70 [1970], in '70 [1970], got married in '71 [1971], had a child in '72 [1972], and we left in '73 [1973] (laughter).  I was not letting any grass grow under my feet then--
Speaker 1: This was like a, this was a--you were gonna study in Tanzania, you're gonna study people?
Speaker 2: So, we wanted to, so we wanted--I wanted to study child development in Tanzania.  So, I wrote a proposal to the government asking them to do this research because they had to approve research there.  And, they denied the, the--my request.  So, Harvard University had a research unit at the University of Nairobi.  So, we went to the University of Nairobi [Nairobi, Kenya] as well.  And, John Tyson got involved with business there, primarily with some Somalis.  In fact, the first educated, college educated Somali in Kenya was his, was his business partner.  So, we stayed there and had, had some eye opening marvelous experiences.  At times there--I remember there was one incident there and there was some thought that African Americans were there in Nairobi [Kenya] were flamenting [ph.] some political trouble.  And, I just remember that there was concern that we all had at a particular time.  But, we got over that, over that--
Speaker 1: That's in Tanzania's or not?
Speaker 2: This is, this is in Nairobi.
Speaker 1: Nairobi.  Okay.  All right.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  This is in Nairobi.
Speaker 1: I know there was a lot of trouble in Tanzania at one point.
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: With the American colony there.
Speaker 2: And, we had a pretty large, large community of African Americans there at the same time.  Joe Harris who was chairman of the History Department at Howard [University, Washington, D.C.] for a long time was there.
Speaker 1: And, Josephine Harris [ph.], right?
Speaker 2: [Robert J.] Bob Cummings who was chairman of the African Studies Department was there.  The Kalibalas who were with Thomas A. Wood Company.  Thomas A. Wood did--was a trucking company that did a lot of the trucking and shipping of natural--of minerals from--in east Africa.  There were just, there were just so many, so many people who, who were in that community at the time.  It was just, it was just a very, very rich community.  OIC [Opportunities Industrialization Centers] Reverend [Leon] Sullivan's OIC was there and there were just, there was a thriving community.  There was a lot of politics associate with, with what was going on in Kenya.  Of course, the [Jomo] Kenyatta--well, the relationship between Kenyatta and the Kikuyus on the one hand, and [Jaramogi] Oginga Odinga and the Luos on the other hand were, were overriding with regard to the political and economic situation there in, in Kenya.  And, a subsumed up under that was a political rivalry within each group as well, and that was significant.  Tom Mboya and his death and so forth that took place within, within the KANU [Kenya African National Union], the ruling party and the various other things that took place there were, were legendary, were legendary, and they continued for quite a while.  The whole time we were there Jomo Kenyatta was president.  We had very rich cultural experiences as well, very rich cultural experiences.  We got very close to the Somali, Somali community.
Story_ID: 187295
Speaker 1: And, I remember that when my first son was nine months old, we were invited to go out to--with a herder, with a herder, to just be in the, you know, in the desert with him for a while.  This is up by the desert area going toward, going toward Somalia, Somalia, and so we got there and we lived--we were in this tent, this was the most luxurious tent I have seen.  This was just a marvelous tent with just embroidered linens, and just, it was just, it was just great.  It was just great.  At one point, my son ran out of milk, and this is why I will not forget this, and I just didn't know what to do.  There was obviously no stores around and so the fella who was a herder said--we can call him a herder, but this is a man who owned real estate property in (laughter), who owned real estate in Nairobi [Kenya], but preferred to be out in the, in the desert with his animals.  He said, "Well don't worry about that, you know, we'll get the child some milk."  So, he sent somebody out to milk one of the camels over there (laughter) and he brought this raw camel milk back (laughter).  I said, "You know there's no way I can give my child this, this raw camel milk."  He said, "I know these camels.  These camels are healthy.  This is the best milk, in fact, that you could give them.  This is better than cow's milk."  So, I trusted him, and I had--you know, going through the '60s [1960s] there were a lot movements that were taking place.  And, natural health was one of the things that was going on.  And moving, people moving toward organic foods and Neig--and vegetarian foods, so I was a part of that as well.  And, so I knew that, I knew a little bit about, about raw, raw milk and so forth.  So, he drank it.  And, he was none the worst for it.  It was probably the better for him (laughter).  We were out in the wild.  And, there were lions out there.  There were camels out there.  There were all sorts of things.  We went--we took a little trip around to see what was happening in the, in the area.  And, there were little Somali girls and boys who looked as if they were six, seven, eight, nine years old out in the, out in the wild by themselves taking care of herds of camel.  We asked them, I asked them, "Well aren't you afraid of the lions?"  They said, "No.  We are not afraid of the animals.  And, you know, of lions and if lions come up that's just that."  And, these young people knew how to fend those lions up.  It's like going to, to Maasi land and, in fact, the lions are more afraid of, the lions are afraid of the Maasi, and the Maasi are not afraid of the lions (laughter).  There's a relationship that they have developed, shall we say.  So anyway, that was, that was a very nice, that was generally a very nice experience for a number of reasons.  For the political context, the sociological, the cultural, the linguistic, there was--when my son, my son at some point was about two years old, one and a half, one to two, and he was, he was learning English.  And, he was speaking, he was starting to speak pretty well.  We had an African couple who had a daughter who was the same age.  And, their daughter was not speaking.  And, they were concerned that their child, who was the same age, was not speaking.  So, pretty soon, after a while though, their child started speaking.  And, when the child started speaking, which would be what, what we would concerned to be late, the child started speaking three languages at one time; English, Kikuyu, and Kikambu [sic, Kikamba], at the same time.  So, I mean, just hearing, meeting people and living with people who spoke three, four, five languages, as a matter of course was really quite nice.  We then came back--oh, I had another child while I was over there, I had a child while I was in, while I was in Nairobi.
Story_ID: 187296
Speaker 1: Let me just move on to the next phase which would be back here in the U.S.  I came back here and I taught at Howard University [Washington, D.C.] in the African studies department.  Leon Damas was my boss at that point.  We had a wonderful relationship.  It was then, I will never forget, when I was sitting in my office, he had told me before that he was going to the doctor's office.  He came back from the doctor's office.  He came in--he just stuck his head in, he said, "They found a lump on my tongue, they found a lump on my throat."   That was a cancerous lump and it led to his death not too long thereafter.  But, I got a chance to meet him and to know him and his wife [Marietta Campos Damas] a whole lot more during the time that he was being cared for because of his--the cancer.
Speaker 2: So, he was at Howard?  He taught in the African studies department?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: And, what year is this?  This is like '75 [1975]?
Speaker 1: This would be, this would be now '76 [1976] to '78 [1978].
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Seventy-six [1976] to '78 [1978].  In '79 I joined the U.S. Agency for International Development [USAID] and I stayed with them for twenty years.  I spent four years in Senegal, two in Lesotho, four in Jamaica, and the rest of the time in the U.S.  So, and--
Speaker 2: Now, were you still married during all this time?
Speaker 1: Oh, and then I got divorced (laughter).  I got divorced in 1983, just as I was going out to Senegal.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Story_ID: 187297
Speaker 1: The four years in Senegal you were there, did you have any conversations with Cheikh Anta Diop?
Speaker 2: No.  I did not have any conversations with Cheikh Anta Diop.  No.  No, I heard him.  But, I did not have any conversations with him.
Speaker 1: Okay.  I know he was at odds with the, with [Leopold Sedar] Senghor, I think, in those days and, you know, wrote about it.  And, even ran for office, I think, a couple times.
Speaker 2: Um-hum.  I'm not sure when he passed away.  I'm not sure what year that was.  But, the university [Cheikh Anta Diop University, University of Dakar, Dakar, Senegal] now bears his name.
Speaker 1: Right.  Right.  I think that was '87.  I think when he died.
Speaker 2: Maybe.
Speaker 1: Eighty-seven [1987], '88 [1988].
Speaker 2: May so.
Speaker 1: I think, yeah.
Speaker 2: Maybe so.  Senegal was a good experience for my children [John Tyson and Emone (ph.) Tyson] because they were immersed in a new culture, they learned a new language, and they were in a nurturing environment.  And, I think it planted the seeds of International involvement in them as well.  So, now we're looking at the third generation, the third generation of internationalists in my family; my mother [Freddye Scarborough Henderson] and father [Jacob Henderson], myself and my siblings, and then my children.  And, I think that's, that's true for my sister's child as well, who's the same age as my children.  His name is (unclear) and I think that he too has been bitten by the International, International bug.  That's why I say that we're now three generations of Internationalists in the family.  Senegal--[Leopold Sedar] Senghor was president at that time.  And, I think that one things we see in Senegal an enlightened, an enlightened leader.  Not one that his people were always satisfied with or that the opposition was satisfied with.  But, an enlightened person of not anyone who was corrupt, who was very corrupt in government himself.  One who tolerated opposition, and one who left when it was time for him to go.  I think he set, set an example that has not been followed by that many people.  But, he set an excellent example.  Senegal is a country that has it challenges.  Its challenges have mainly to do with its environment because it's a difficult, physical environment.  When I got there, the country was just coming out of six or seven years of drought.  And, there is intermittent droughts, there are intermittent droughts throughout the Sahel and it really ravages the people because the culture is not sig--is not--because the economic infrastructure is not sound enough to absorb those economic stocks the way ours can.  We had a drought here last year.  But, our economy didn't collapse because of it.  Which is what can happen in some developing African countries.  So that's, that has been a challenge for Senegal, just mastering its environment, you know, with sufficient water infrastructure and so forth.  They haven't quite gotten, you know, completely where they, where they want to be yet, but they're moving with steady growth, with steady growth right now.
Story_ID: 187298
Speaker 1: There's a lot of concern about that in the '70s [1970s] I know, so was it your job to try to plan how USAID [U.S. Agency for International Development] was gonna be used in Senegal or to help--
Speaker 2: I was a deputy director of the mission for four years.  Acting, I would say, intermittently for about two of those years.  What we were trying to do was to--and we had a very large program, we had a large staff, was to assist in the development of an economic infrastructure, support to education, healthcare, and agriculture, and food assistance.  We were working closely with other donors at the time.  And, our principal guiding theory, I suppose, was that once you get the economic structure in place and the right economic policies, then you could hang everything, than you can hang education, you can hang your other physical infrastructure, you can hang your healthcare, and so forth, and your water development on that.  I'm not so sure that in hindsight that was the best policy.  In fact, I don't think that that has been proven to be the best policy.  But, it was, it was the principal policy that was used by most of the foreign aid development agencies at the time.  So, we were involved, we were involved in that.  Some of the, some of the art work that I have in my, in my house here [in Washington, D.C.], much of it I got from Senegal.  And, it's so varied because the artistic thrust of so many of the Segna--Senegalese artist was so very different.  Senegal, they do have some ethic problems in the southern part of the country.  But, if you exclude that, the various ethnic groups have learned to live well with one another.  And, to appreciate what the other one, what the other one does and brings to, brings to the table.  And, I have always enjoyed the amalgam of cultures that you see in their art, that you see in their, in their music.  If you look at the--hear, if you listen to the music of, Youssou N'Dour, I hear Arabic.  I hear Arabic music infused with African music there.  If you--the music of Baaba Maal who is, Baaba Maal same kind of thing, you see.  There's a fusion of cultures there that really produces very nice approaches and prospectives.  And, that is a lesson that one can take away, that one can take away from Senegal.  So, that was--when I left there I went back to, went back to [U.S.] State Department for a while.  Then, no, no--when I left there I went directly to southern African.  I went to Senegal.  I have to possibility of going to South African.  Excuse me, I went to Lesotho.  At the possibility of going to South Africa, being the deputy director of a start-up mission there.  But, I could not, I could not bring, I could not bring myself to put my children [John Tyson and Emone (ph.) Tyson] in school in South Africa.  It's during the days of apartheid.  This was '88 [1988] to '86 [1986].  So, I chose the place what was closest by, which was Lesotho.  And, we had a pretty sizeable program there, because we were trying to help Lesotho maintain its independence even though it was completely surrounded by South Africa.
Story_ID: 187299
Speaker 1: Now, you're going to Lesotho, yeah, right?
Speaker 2: Now, Lesotho is a unique country, Lesotho is a unique country.  It's a country of snowcapped mountains and if people say that snow does not exist in Africa, you must tell them to go to Senegal.
Speaker 1: Lesotho.
Speaker 2: Excuse me, to Lesotho.
Speaker 1: Right, 'cause you're not going to find it in Senegal (laughter).
Speaker 2: 'Cause there, there they can actually ski.  They can move around in ski mobiles, and they can just enjoy the snow.  Lesotho has a distinction of the, the country with the highest-lowest point of any country in the world.  It's the highest-lowest point.  It is a country that sits at the top of the mountains--
Speaker 1: It's near the Kalahari Desert too, right?  I mean, part of it is.
Speaker 2: This is, this is on the Indian Ocean side, actually, of South, of South Africa.  It is, it sits at the very top of the Drakensburg Mountains, and it is a mountain kingdom.  And, it's a mountain kingdom.  And, one is struck by the topography.  You are struck by what you see in that country.  Just because the vistas are so, are so dramatic.  In fact, I've got another picture, another painting here in my house that is a painting of a mountain with houses all off the side of the mountains.  And, the paints shows the houses as if the huts, as if they are going to fall off the side of that mountain.  And, in fact, huts sometimes look as if they are about to fall off the sides of the mountains.  It is, it's the kingdom of Lesotho.  There's a monarchy, and our goal in USAID [U.S. Agency of International Development] was to assist that country to become independent, or more independent of South Africa.  South Africa had a strong hold on that country, and there were incursions by the police looking for ANC [African National Congress] and other radicals often, often.  In fact, just before I got to Lesotho, the aid mission director found herself hiding in her house, up under the bed because of the bullets that were coming toward her house from the South African police.  And, at one point for some reason, the South Africans determined that I was not a welcomed visitor in their country either.  And, they made it very, very difficult for me to travel across the border into their country.  When I say they made it difficult, they searched--they would stop the car, they would search every part of the car; the front, the bottom, underneath, my bags, everything, which would take an hour plus.  And, even we tested this by having me drive in the ambassador's car, and they did the exact same thing.  Didn't give him or his car the courtesy of going across, across the border.  Because at that time, U.S. had relatively friendly arrangements with, relations with South Africa.  Anyway, this got to be so bothersome that we, that state department complained to the South Africans about it.  And, I was told that it was taken up in a conversation between the Secretary of State and the Minister of Foreign Affairs in South Africa at one point.  Anyway, that's just a side on my problems with South Africa.  We never determined why they thought I was a particular, particular threat or why I was a problem with regard to my visiting their country.  As I said, our goal was to try to make this country as independent as we could, but there were difficulties.  Because at any given point in time 70 percent of all the males in the country were outside the country and, in fact, working in the mines in South Africa.  Many of the mine workers came from, not South Africa, but from the countries surrounding South Africa.  And, in Lesotho, Lesotho was one of the principle places from which that labor pool was drawn.  And, I will never forget one day coming to the border between Lesotho and South Africa and just seeing almost as far as I could see, lines of men waiting to get across that border and go onto the buses.  And, in fact, they were being held in line and in place in a distinct line by policemen who were just going up and down the line, up and down the rows of men with whips just keeping, just keeping the men in place.  That is an image that is etched in my mind.
Story_ID: 187300
Speaker 1: I subsequently had the opportunity to go to a gold mine [in South Africa].  This was a gold mine that was a mile underground.  We went down there and it was hot.  It was humid.  It was dark.  Some of the, some of the miners--when you, when you are trying to dig the gold out, you actually have to go up against a wall of rock or the sediment or whatever it is in, and you mine there, you know, you dig, you drill in that area.  So, at some point, you actually have to get down on your hands and knees and do your drilling and your light is just there on your head.  And, you are in this situation anywhere from eight to ten hours a day.  And, I actually got on my hands and knees and went into one of these area where they, where the men were drilling.  And, I tell you, it is not comfortable to be there at all, much less spending hour after hour after hour where it is dark, humid and hot.  And, that's how those men lived.  When they were not in the mine, they lived in barracks that were often filled with cement beds.  But, you know, there was a little mattress over, over cement, cement area.  And, these were surrounded by prostitutes, little brothels, little knickknack shops, and so forth.  But, very few families were allowed to be there, if any.  So, this is the existence of the average adult male from Lesotho.  I went to that particular mine, and by the way, there was mine beneath that mine.  And, the farther down you go, the hotter it gets.  So, I just cannot imagine what it must have been like in the mine that was underneath the one that I was in that was already a mile deep.
Story_ID: 187301
Speaker 1: So, our task was to try to keep these mines--these miners in Lesotho in some sort of economic pursuit, largely agriculture.  So, we were trying to promote agriculture amongst us--with this group.  And, in fact, I was there to try to speak with some of the miners about coming back and getting engaged in agriculture.  I was there for, for two years.  I had the opportunity to go pretty often to South Africa before my problems began.  Edward [J.] Perkins was the, was the ambassador at the time.  And, my--by my way of thinking, he was an excellent ambassador.  So, I had a chance to get to know him just a little bit during the times that I would go back and forth.  I subsequently become much, much friendlier with him.  He's a man that I admire and respect a great deal.  Well, he was, he was our first black ambassador who was there.  My children [John Tyson and Emone (ph.) Tyson] were there with me, my children were in local high school there, in Machabeng High School [Machabeng College, International School of Lesotho, Maseru, Lesotho].  And, I'm pleased that they had the opportunity to spend some high school years with local Africans in the local African context.  They were not separate in an American school or anything, they were just in the local Machabeng High School.  And, they enjoyed that and I enjoyed that and I consider that a very rich experience that they had during that time.  We left, although, although my oldest son clearly met with racism when he went to South Africa.  He met with overt racism that I'm sure affected him the same way my debutant party affected me, because of the friendships that he had gained at Machabeng High.  But, anyway, I left there, went back to [U.S.] State Department, spent a lot of time working trying to get more African Americans into state department.  The whole time I was in state department, there were, there was a dearth, a lack of African Americans there.  Our numbers were few and far between.  And, I was at one point acting director of executive personnel.  That was for two years, for two years.  And, we spent time trying to convince people that we needed more African Americans, and be methodical about it.  I would say that we were not successful in doing either.  That is convincing people that there was, that there was value to having more African Americans in state department and then having them agree to, to being methodical and having a plan for getting more African Americans there.  This is not to say that we didn't, we didn't go out, you know, to HBCUs [Historically Black Colleges and Universities] and so forth looking for African Americans.  I even came out with the administrator of AID [sic, USAID, U.S. Agency for International Development], having convinced him to come down to the HBCUs in Atlanta [Georgia].  I cannot say that there was any single individual that came to state department as a result.  I hope there was.  I hope there was.  But, there was not a commitment on the part of that organization to really increase the participation of African Americans.  And, I would say that over the last thirty years our numbers have not changed in the state department.  And, in fact, what I am working on now with [HM the Honorable] Ruth [A.] Davis is to, with Ambassador Ruth Davis, is to in fact really put a system in place for changing that, so that we have more, consistently more African Americans in the state department.
Story_ID: 187302
Speaker 1: Anyway, I came back [to the United States].  I worked, I worked as director of the--subsequently of the Caribbean office [of USAID, U.S. Agency for International Development].  And, this was a time when, when America was embroiled in difficulties with Haiti.  And, you may remember, you know, the whole boat people situation, the election of [Jean-Bertrand] Aristide, then he was overthrown by the military that he came--
Speaker 2: By coup d'etat, yeah.
Speaker 1: Yes.  And, then he came back over here, stayed for a while, and then he was brought back there.  I was director of the Caribbean office and Haiti falls under the Caribbean office during that particular time.  And, that was a very, very stressful period, because--that was, that was a stressful period.  Because you have factors relating to the, to the president himself, the presidency, the type of opposition, the strength of the opposition, the role of the United States, the sustainability of our policies, the role of the U.S. Military, so, the role of the World Bank and the other organizations.
Speaker 2: Who was president during that--this is not, this is the early '90s [1990s], right?
Speaker 1: This was the early '90s [1990s].
Speaker 2: This was--
Speaker 1: Would that be--
Speaker 2: I guess, [President George Herbert Walker] Bush.
Speaker 1: Bush--
Speaker 2: Leading into [President William Jefferson "Bill"] Clinton, I guess.
Speaker 1: That would've, that was, that was Bush.
Speaker 2: Yeah, Okay.
Speaker 1: Yes.  It was Bush I [President George Herbert Walker Bush].  It was Bush I.
Speaker 2: So, that--we, we--I spent, I would never forget a trip that I took there, up to so--northern, northern part of Haiti, because children were not able to get the food that they, that they needed as well.  And so, we were bring in food aid and there was clearly a need for food aid right there at our doorsteps, you know, just a stone's throw, a stone's throw away.  That--the situation in Haiti to this day is difficult.  It is difficult.  And, in my way of think, the people of Haiti are still suffering a great deal in that country.  But, it's a country with a glorious, magnificent history.  We might not be where we are today if in fact Toussaint Louverture had not started the revolutionary process of--again, in my way of thinking, starting the beginning of the end of colonialism with his defeat of the French.  And, then we saw after that, the defeat of many of the other colonial powers as a sense of vulnerability that had begun to climb into the minds of the colonial powers.
Story_ID: 187303
Speaker 1: I then went to, went to Jamaica, and I spent four years working in Jamaica as director of the, of our foreign assistance program [U.S. Agency for International Development, USAID] there in Jamaica.  And, those were four of some of the happiest times in my life.  I very much enjoyed being there and working with the Jamaican people.  Unfortunately, my third year I was there, my father [Jacob Henderson] passed away.  He had come to visit me many times when we were there.  And, he enjoyed that climate but he passed away in March of '97 [1997], '97 [1997].  We all know, know our aid program was designed to assist the economic growth of Jamaica.  Understanding that so much of Jamaica's growth depends on its environment; sun, sea, (laughter), sun, sea, mountains environment.  You have to maintain your environment there in that country.  So, a lot of what we're doing had to do with the environment.  Some had to do with, a portion of it, with developing--improving the education, improving the educational system from a systemic point of view as well as working with individual schools, and individual programs, and individual curricula, and so forth.  Including the introduction of computers and experimental kinds of things.
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That's, that's interesting topic because early in the century some of the best educated leaders in the United States were from Jamaica.  Marcus Garvey was from Jamaica and Cyril Briggs and you can go on, and I mean, W. A. Domingo, all these men from the Caribbean, you know, came over.  J. A. Rogers, a writer, was from Jamaica, and most of them had high school educations, but were superior in their writing skills and other skills than some of our blacks with college educations.  So, but now, we find a situation where their schools have deteriorated because of--Is it mainly because of lack of funds or what, what is it?
Speaker 1: I think that there are some systemic problems that still have to be addressed in Jamaica having to do with, with some political factors as well as sociological and educational factors.  Barbados and Jamaica are vastly different countries.  They're culturally, I believe, very different.  But, they had been on two different economic roads.  Barbados has had its model and its road.  And, Jamaica, its model and its road.  And, we see the results of more economic growth, more comprehensive, a better comprehensive educational system, and healthcare system in Barbados than we do in Jamaica.  We see a different kind of political structure in both, in both countries.  So, that there are still some issues that must be address on the political side in Jamaica as well for some of the other, other benefits to flow to all of the people.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Were you there for the elections, those--there are some bitterly contest elections between [Edward] Seaga and [Michael] Manley.
Speaker 1: Yes.  Yes.
Speaker 2: At one time.
Speaker 1: Yes.  Yes.  I was there for elections between Seaga and P. J. Patterson--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --and, P. J. Patterson.  And, we participated in funding some observers to come and watch as well.  We did not fund [President James Earl "Jimmy"] Carter directly, but he was one of those who came.  And, there was a couple of other well-known people who came to observe those elections.  The Jamaicans often say that, when the ships came from Africa they left all the trouble--when the ships came from Africa and stopped in Jamaica they threw off all the troublemakers and left them there in Jamaica (laughter).
Story_ID: 187304
Speaker 1: Someone once said to me, some very prominent Jamaican once said to me, that Jamaicans have a great deal of bravado, bravado in whatever they do.  Whether it's their music, their literature, you know, lifestyle, they've got a lot of bravado.  And indeed, there is a, there is certainly a vibrancy to the culture, and to the people of Jamaica.  There's just no doubt about that, just no doubt about that.  You could again see it in the music, in the many different styles of music.  In the, in the different ways of life.  Jamaica is a small place, but if you go to certain parts of Jamaica, you might not understand the people there.  And, those people might not understand--I mean, if their speaking Patois, they might not understand the people in another part of Jamaica.  Meaning, that the dialects are, are somewhat different.  Which means that people have been living in those areas long enough to have developed a distinctly different, different dialect.  So, in a way you have different, different groups still trying to, to come together.  I'm not gonna say tribes, because that would be totally ridiculous.  But, you do have people with different perspectives, different viewpoints, different experiences.  If you live in Mandeville and have a mountain experience, that's very different from the south coast, which is very different from the tourist coast, which is very different from the mountains (laughter), you see.  So, you've got a lot of variety there.  And, again Barbados, if we continue the comparison, does not have that, that same kind of variety.  So, Jamaica has perhaps some more, more to deal with in a way.  But, we again, were working with, with sociological aspects of the country, economic in terms of providing assistance to small businesses, small businesses, working with the environment because you've got to protect the reef.  You've got to protect the beaches.  You've got to make sure that the hotels are interacting properly with the environment, particularly with regard to their sewerage.  And, so I think that we have made, we made some progress in that area.  I strongly believe that we made some progress in that area and with the education system too.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And, the UWI there, the University of the West Indies [Kingston, Jamaica], there, still is an absolutely excellent, excellent university.  As is the University of Technology [Kingston, Jamaica].  Superb!  They got two masterfully superb schools there.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Okay, now so you were there until '97 [1997], and then you--
Speaker 1: So, I was there until '98 [1998].
Story_ID: 187305
Speaker 1: Ninety-eight [1998].  Okay.
Speaker 2: Until '98 [1998], came back here [Washington, D.C.].  Worked with the Joint Center for Political and Economic Studies [Washington, D.C.] for four years as their vice president for international affairs.  And, did a lot of work on HIV [Human Immunodeficiency Virus] AIDS [Acquired Immunodeficiency Syndrome] research in South Africa.
Speaker 1: Which is a pandemic in South Africa.
Speaker 2: Yes.  Yes.  It really is.
Speaker 1: And, East Africa as well.  Yeah.
Speaker 2: Yes.  It really is.  So, we were just providing some basic research the policy makers needed in order to, in order to make their decisions on what--how they will address this, this pandemic in their country.  And, I have now started, and this is what I am very, very excited about.  I have just founded a company and the name of the company is Henderson's Global Voices [Washington, D.C.].  The purpose of this company is, I mean, the goal of this company, the raison d'etre of this company is to bring speakers on Africa, Middle East, and International Affairs to American audiences.  So, that our universities, corporations, trade and professional associates, can in fact, have a larger group of people to pick from when they get ready to bring their speakers to their audiences.  And furthermore, in today's world, America has to be educated about the rest of the world.  We have to be educated about the Middle East and we have to be educated about Africa.  Because our whole survival depends upon it.  We must know these people better.  We must be able to interact with these people better.  They must be able to interact with us better.  And, that takes knowledge and getting to, getting to know each other.  So, my purpose is in fact to broaden of horizon of Americans by bring information to them through, through these speakers.  Again, in universities or corporations where, where, wherever they are and I have an opportunity to bring a speaker, a marvelous speaker, marvelous American speaker, or Middle Eastern speaker, or African speaker.  And believe me, you can hear some speakers from these parts of the world that you have never heard before.  And, they are so compelling that you could hear a pin drop when they are talking.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And, you don't forget what they're saying.  And, that information they bring you is there left with you.  So, that's what I'm doing.
Speaker 1: So, these are people that you've met in your travels and associations and--
Speaker 2: And, some are Americans that many people have not, have not heard about.  Some people have, but they need, they need a broader audience.  So again, so compelling are they and their messages as well.  So, that's continuing in the, in the, continuing in the vein of Henderson Travel Service [Atlanta, Georgia].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I am still bridging bridges, building bridges, bridging gaps, and opening the world more to America.
Story_ID: 187306
Speaker 1: Now, what are some of your hopes and concerns for the African American community today?
Speaker 2: My hope is that we can free ourselves from any fetters and constraints that we have, and live, live our destinies as we, as we should.  Meaning, I would like, I would like to see us remove all--we cannot remove all obstacles of racism.  But, I do think that, if we look out over the world--they're six billion people in the world, six billion people in the world.  We, African Americans without per capita GDP [Gross Domestic Product] count at the very top of people in this world.  Meaning, of those six billion people, one billion can, can barely eat.  The next one billion lives on two dollars a day.  The next one billion is barely above them.  If we look at ourselves, not just as within an American environment.  But, if we look at ourselves within a global environment, we see that we have, we have, that we are those, to whom much as been given.  Despite what we might see in our smaller environment.  And, there is much for us to do.  And, if we concentrate on the much that us that we have to do, with the tremendous gifts that we had been given, tremendous gifts, then I think that we can move forward with no, with no self-imposed restraints.  Just because we have so much and we are so well-endowed with skills, and talents, and experiences that the world needs, particularly in today's world.  And, I'd, I'd like for us to, to move through those doors that we can open for ourselves.
Story_ID: 187307
Speaker 1: Is there anything when you look back on what you've done, is there anything that you would do differently?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.  You mean outside of everything (laughter)?
Speaker 1: Outside of everything (laughter).
Speaker 2: No, not, not everything.  Of course, of course, there are lots of things that I would do differently (laughter), lots of things that I would do differently.  First of all, I would do everything that my mother and father (laughter) ever said to.  You know, how we kids are, you know,
Speaker 1: They were really right (laughter)?
Speaker 2: We rebel.  Yeah, they were really right about everything (laughter).  Yes.  Yes.  There are lots, you know, I would just focus on--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: My children [John Tyson and Emone (ph.) Tyson] first.  I--you know, I'll focus on my children.  I have really tried my best to keep our, keep our family together; and, we are together in many ways.  But, I would give them even more confidence in themselves than they have, to move and break barriers and do--and learn themselves more, learn themselves more.  Because, I think, the key to so much is learning yourself and knowing yourself.  So, I would've concentrated just a little bit more on that.  And, I think we as a people need to, need to do so as well.
Story_ID: 187597
Speaker 1: Ma'am at this juncture, what would you consider as your legacy?
Speaker 2: I think what has been most important to me and what I have tried to leave behind with others, is helping them to, helping others to open, helping others to be able to fulfill themselves.  Helping--giving others the tools to be able to do what they want to do and can do with their lives.  So, whether it was teaching or whether it was taking travelers to various places in Africa, whether it was working with economic development assistance in African countries, and Caribbean countries, whether it is what I am now doing, I see myself as having, certainly tried and maybe in a few instances, given people the tools to do what they can do better with their lives.
Story_ID: 187598
Speaker 1: This last question is similar but different, slightly different and it's, how would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: You mean when the final day comes (laughter)?  I would like to be remembered as somebody who made a difference.  Somebody who made a difference in the lives of other people.  That is how I want to be remembered.  And, that follows in the tradition of my mother [Freddye Scarborough Henderson] and father [Jacob Henderson], and grandparents as far as I can see.
Story_ID: 187599
Speaker 1: This is a picture of Jacob Henderson, the father [Tyson's grandfather]; Jacob Henderson, the son [Tyson's father]; and Mrs. Margaret Butler Henderson [ph.], the mother and wife.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.  Can you hazard a guess as to the year?
Speaker 1: My--this would be in 1910 or 1911.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Great.  Next photo.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: Myself in the snowing Drakensberg Mountains of Lesotho, 1987.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Great.
Speaker 2: My two sons, John Tyson and Emone [ph.] Tyson, taken in Washington, D.C. about 1978, '78 [1978] or nine [1979].
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.  Next.
Speaker 2: My same sons, John Tyson and Emone Tyson taken, picture taken in London, England in the year 2002.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.  Next.
Speaker 2: This is a picture of Miss. [Mira] Berman who is president of the African Travel Agents--Africa Travel Association [ATA], followed by two individual from East Africa.  The woman, the third individual is the vice president of the Africa Travel Association.  The person on the right is my sister Gaynelle Henderson-Bailey.  Also, an officer with the associations. (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.  Spell Berman and spell Gaynelle for us.
Speaker 1: Berman, B-E-R-M-A-N.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 1: Gaynelle, G-A-Y-N-E-L-L-E.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  And, I guess while we're at it, Bailey, in case there's a couple--
Speaker 1: B-A-I-L-E-Y.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.  Some of those names have variations of spelling so, okay.
Speaker 1: I'm doing the best that I can on these.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Yeah, you're doing great.
Speaker 1: In the U.S. Embassy in Dakar, Senegal.  It is myself, [HM] Carole Henderson Tyson, and my brother, Jacob Henderson.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 1: Jacob Robert Henderson.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  The year?  (Simultaneously).
Speaker 1: And, this would have been 1998--1999.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, go ahead.
Speaker 2: This is John Tyson, Jr., John Tyson, Sr., and Emone Tyson.  This is my husband, John and--my former husband John and my two sons.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.  Very good, next.
Speaker 2: This is a picture of my mother [Freddye Scarborough Henderson] and her siblings.  My mother on the left.  Her sister, Lee [ph.] in the middle, her sister Johnnie [ph.] on the right, in California three years ago, 19--, 2000 [2000].
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  But, not to be a nuisance but on the prior photograph, I don't believe we got a date for that one, of your hus--your former husband and your sons.  The one we just had up.  Could you tell us a date for that?
Speaker 2: Maybe I didn't.  I can tell you right now.
Speaker 1: I think it's on the--it might be on the back of it.
Speaker 2: Do you see what that says?  I need my glasses.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  (Simultaneously) a guess.
Speaker 2: This would be, this would be a year ago, 2002.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: The previous photograph of John Tyson, Jr., John Tyson, Sr., and Emone Tyson, my former husband and two sons was taken in the year 2002.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Great.  Thanks.
Speaker 2: This was taken at my going away ceremony in--at the U.S. Agency for International Development [USAID] Office Building that I built with my staff and it is the deputy chief of mission on the left, my mother Freddye Henderson in the middle, myself on the right and this would have been taken in 1998.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Very good.
Speaker 2: This is on the left vice president, vice president George Bush [President George Herbert Walker Bush].  And, on the far right Carole Tyson, the year 1980, approximately 1983.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 2: Can I tell this?  The middle person's name.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Sure.
Speaker 2: The third woman in the picture is Mrs. Irene Petty.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 2: This is a picture of my father, [Jacob] Jake Henderson, my sister Shirley Henderson, my mother Freddye Henderson, taken at Shirley's graduation from Spelman College [Atlanta, Georgia] in 1970.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 2: Nineteen seventy-eight [1978].
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 2: Approximately, 1978.
Speaker 1: This is a picture of my brother, Jake Henderson at the Taj Mahal [Agra, India] in approximately the year 1996.  That's what I think.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.  Good enough.  Next photo.
Speaker 1: This is a picture of my son, Emone Tyson running a--running track as captain of the Brown University [Providence, Rhode Island] Track Team.  This would be in the year, the year 1970; approximately 1972.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.  Great.
Speaker 1: Excuse me.  Nineteen seventy-four [1974].
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 2: This is a picture--this is a family picture of my father, Jacob Henderson; my mother's sister that is my aunt, Lee; my sister, Gaynelle; myself, and finally my sister, Shirley.  This would have been taken in the year, given the afros, this would've been taken in the year approximately 1960-ish.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 2: Or, 1959.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  No.
Speaker 2: No, not with Afros.  That's--you're talking about '69 [1969] or '70 [1970].
Speaker 1: Okay, 1960.
Speaker 2: Yeah, '69 [1969] or '70 [1970] with Afros.
Speaker 1: So, I would've been in college.  Way, way into college.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  You put the Afro to far back in history (laughter).
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: This was--this is a picture of my sister Gaynelle, my sister Shirley, and myself taken at--taken in Jamaica at the wedding of my niece Chaka [ph.].  This was June of 19--, of 2003.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  All right.  Next.
Speaker 2: This is myself taken at my office, Director of the Office of Caribbean Affairs, USAID.  This would have been 19--, approximately 1990.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Very good.  Next.
Speaker 2: This is myself, Carole Henderson, taken nineteen--, does that look like an afro up under there, I think so.
Speaker 1: Looks like it might be 'cause it's so full, you know.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Is that an--
Speaker 2: Let's say 196--, yes, yes, 1962 or three [1963].
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: On the left is [HM] Peggy Cooper Cafritz, currently the--
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: The man seated in the center is Ambassador and General Mamadou M-A-M-A-D-O-U, Mansour M-A-N-S-O-U-R, Seck S-E-C-K.  I am next, and next to me is Beverly Cooper.  On the top row is a--this is at the Annual Marine Foundation Dinner.  The man at the--on the left is a marine and the next three gentlemen are among the first four black Marine Generals in the U.S. history, U.S. history.  The one on the right is Ambassador Garrett Cooper, also General Garrett Cooper.
Speaker 1: I've heard about him.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 1: My boss in Jamaica by the way.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.  Year?  Year for that (simultaneously).
Speaker 1: That would have been maybe three years ago.  So, 2000.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  For those of us who are kind of ignorant, the ambassador seated in the center was?
Speaker 1: Senegal.  From Senegal.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Senegal, okay.
Speaker 1: This is [HM the Honorable] Andrew Young and Carole Tyson in--on Safari with a group of people and that's last year, 2002.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 1: In South Africa.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 1: I do think that this was taken in 1971 in the Virgin Islands.  I think I was on my honeymoon.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 1: That's a cute picture.
Speaker 2: (Laughter).  That one was taken in the, in the Drakensberg Mountains of Lesotho in 1988, let's say '87 [1987].
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 2: Here are the same--
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Spell Drakensberg.
Speaker 2: D-R-A-K-E-N-S-B-U-R-G [sic, D-R-A-K-E-N-S-B-E-R-G].
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.  Thank you.
Speaker 2: That's what I think.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 2: Named by the natives themselves, right?  (Laughter).
Speaker 1: (Laughter).  This is a picture of the family of my sister, Shirley.  The first male child on the left is Patrick [ph.], his father Weldon [ph.] is above, his mother is to the right, Shirley Henderson, and the young girl at the bottom is his sister, Samone [ph.].
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Year?  Year for that last photo.
Speaker 1: Could I just take a look at that one again.  That would have been two years--let me see.
Speaker 2: Oh, it's on the back.
Speaker 1: That would've been two or three years ago?  Two thousand [2000], three years ago.
Speaker 2: All right.
Speaker 1: Okay.  This one was taken in 1997.  This is at my father's funeral.  Left to right; my son, John Tyson; my son, Emone Tyson; my nephew, Chakalong [ph.]; and my nephew, Quame [ph.] Bailey B-A-I-L-E-Y.  My father's coffin in the middle.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 1: This is myself and--well, this is my mother and her two daughters, Gaynelle Henderson Bailey, my mother Freddye Henderson, and myself.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: My mother's name, my mother's name is spelled F-R-E-D-D-Y-E, Freddye Henderson.
Speaker 2: Left to right, my son, John Tyson; my brother, Jake Henderson; my father, Jake Henderson, Sr.; my son, Emone Tyson, in Jamaica.
Speaker 1: This is my father, Jacob Henderson; my mother, Freddye Henderson, F-R-E-D-D-Y-E, in the Dominican Republic in 1997, nineteen--no no no, no no no, 1995.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.  Next.
Speaker 1: This is my mother Freddye Henderson, F-R-E-D-D-Y-E.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: This was taken ten years ago, approximately.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.  So, the early '90s [1990s]?
Speaker 1: Ninety-three [1993].  Yes.
Speaker 2: This is longer than ten years ago.
Speaker 1: This is my mother Freddye Henderson.  She was about sixteen, seventeen.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 1: She was born in nineteen--this--1917, that would make her, what, thirty-seven--thirty--this was taken maybe in 1935.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.  Good enough.  Next.
Speaker 1: These are like two good ones at a glance, I don't know.
Speaker 2: Okay.  This is when my--this was taken in Koforidua, Ghana. (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  You better spell that.
Speaker 1: K-O-R-O--no, excuse me.  K-O-F-O-R-I-D-U-A.  Koforidua.
Speaker 2: Or, J-U-A.  Here I got the Caribbean (unclear).
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Okay.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  And, the year and the location (simultaneously).
Speaker 2: And, this would, this would be approximately 1999.  This is the ceremony making--crowning my mother as Queen Mother of Travel in Ghana.  And this is at a huge Durba D-U-R-B-A with thousands of people including many of the, of the local kings and chiefs, excuse me, chiefs and paramount chiefs in the area.  So, there is, on the left, a paramount--a chief, my mother, myself, my sister Gaynelle on the right, and my brother, Jake, Jake Henderson at the bottom in white.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  All right then.  Next.
Speaker 2: This was taken at the same ceremony on the left is the minister of tourism, in the middle is my mother, on the right is my sister, Gaynelle.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.  Next.
Speaker 2: And--
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Oh, year?
Speaker 2: --we're in the, we're in the--same year, what year did I say that was for, did I say 2000?
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  I didn't, I didn't make--
Speaker 2: I said 1999, I think.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 2: Yes.  Yes, 1999.
Speaker 1: That's it, I think.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.  Go ahead.  You can talk now.
Speaker 1: This is Reverend J. A. Scarborough, who is my mother's father.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.  All right.  Next.
Speaker 1: This is Ophelia Magee Scarborough, who is my grandmother. She's my mother's mother.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.  Next.  Go ahead.
Speaker 1: This is Mr. Wade Magee, my great-grandfather.  My maternal great-grandfather.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.  We'll put (unclear).  Go ahead.
Speaker 1: And, this is Julia Magee.  My maternal great-grandmother.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: This is a book entitled the 'The Star Creek Papers,' based on the writings of Horace Mann Bond and Julia W. Bond.  It is about Washington, Parish [Louisiana], and the lynching of Jerome Wilson.  Jerome Wilson was my mother's cousin.  This is edited by Adam Fairclough.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.  Very good. Go ahead.
Speaker 1: And, it is the story of the lynching of Jerome Wilson.
