Story_ID: 168998
Speaker 1: My name is Julieanna Richardson. I am the interviewer and Matthew Hickey is the videographer.   And observing for a bit is Mary--Mrs. Tucker.  And I'd like to have you start out by stating your name and spelling it for us, including your middle name.  And give your date of birth.
Speaker 2: You want me to spell it because you can't spell Herbert (laughter)?
Speaker 1: No, it's just something--this is how we slate it, sir (laughter).
Speaker 2: Okay.  Herbert E Tucker, Jr., H-E-R-B-E-R-T, the initial E, T, capital T-U-C-K-E-R.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Your initial--your middle name is what?
Speaker 2: Edward.
Speaker 1: Edward.  Okay.  And your date of birth?
Speaker 2: August 30, 1915.
Speaker 1: And today's date?
Speaker 2: It's the 14th? August 14, 2003, I guess.
Speaker 1: So you have a birthday coming up, huh?
Speaker 2: In a couple of weeks.
Speaker 1: Yup.  And the location, where we're at?
Speaker 2: We're at--on Martha's Vineyard [Massachusetts] in the little
Speaker 1: town of Oak Bluffs [Massachusetts].
Speaker 2: And your profession?
Speaker 1: I am a lawyer.
Speaker 2: Judge, and judge.
Speaker 1: And a retired--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Judge.
Speaker 1: --Judge.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Story_ID: 168999
Speaker 1: I ask five questions of everyone, just bear with me.  They're a little People magazine-ish.  I'd like to have short answers.  I'd like to know what your favorite food is.
Speaker 2: Favorite food?  I don't know I should give them a commercial or not, but I like Kentucky Fried Chicken (laughter).
Speaker 1: (Laughter). Favorite color?  I'm sorry.
Speaker 2: I love Kentucky Fried Chicken.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Every time we go to Boston [Massachusetts] I make sure that we have time enough to stop at the Kentucky Fried Chicken.  And the funny part of it is, it tastes better on there--on premises rather than off premises to me.  So I have to go to the premises.
Speaker 1: Okay (laughter).  And your favorite--do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: Color?  No, not particularly--black and white looks good on my bride.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Those are not colors.
Speaker 2: What are they?
Speaker 1: They are colors.  Okay.  Favorite time of year?  Favorite time of year?
Speaker 2: Fall, early fall.
Speaker 1: Favorite place to vacation?
Speaker 2: Well, as a favorite we vacationed here [Martha's Vineyard, Massachusetts] until I was appointed out here.  And so really I like it here as a vacation spot also.  In fact, it's a vacation now.
Speaker 1: And a favorite phrase or saying.  Do you have one?
Speaker 2: Favorite--
Speaker 1: Favorite phrase or saying.  A favorite saying?
Speaker 2: Favorite thing?
Speaker 1: Saying.
Speaker 2: Should not be recorded (laughter).
Speaker 1: (Laughter)  Okay.  Okay.
Speaker 2: It can't be recorded.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 169000
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now we're gonna get started.  And I'd like to ask you about your mother.  If you can give her name and talk about what you know about her background.
Speaker 2: My mother [S. Ella Fitzgerald Tucker] was born in Blackstone, Virginia.  The fifth of seven children, I believe.  And she was a female, of course.  And my grandfather had wanted a boy so he named her Samuel.
Speaker 1: Hmm.
Speaker 2: And so she went by S. Ella Tucker, S. Ella Fitzgerald. And they tell me that that's the Scottish Fitzgerald and not the Irish Fitzgerald, thank goodness.  And she had a large family and they lived on a large farm in Blackstone, Virginia.  And she married my dad [Herbert Tucker] who also came from Blackstone.  You know, strangely enough I don't know too much about my dad from his background. He never spoke much of him--of her or him.  He did speak of a brother that lived in Chicago [Illinois].  But I never met him.  And he just spoke so little of him I just didn't realize he was still alive.  I understand I have some cousins out there, but we're not in touch with one another.  And he left [Blackstone] Virginia.  I think he was coming to Boston [Massachusetts], eventually to go to school.  But he got sidetracked by becoming a waiter.  They make so much money he wondered why he should have to go to school to make money.  So he didn't never went to school.  And ended up in the--in that field.  But he saw to it that--he told me when I was five years old that I was to be a lawyer.   That's all I knew.  I don't know what else I could say about him.
Speaker 1: Let me ask you, your mother, did she talk about growing up at all in Virginia?
Speaker 2: Well, she may have, but my mother died when I was eleven years old.  So I don't really remember too much of what she said about--what she said about Virginia.  I know that during my lifetime she visited there a couple of times.  But I never wanted to go South from the--from the beginning when she took my brother both times I never wanted to go down there.
Story_ID: 169001
Speaker 1: Now you--do you know how your parents [Herbert Tucker and S. Ella Fitzgerald Tucker] met?
Speaker 2: School.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: In the middle school, grade school or whatever it is.  They--I suppose in Blackstone [Virginia] everybody knows one another.  And I guess, just a--they grew up together.
Speaker 1: And do you know how they ended up coming to Boston [Massachusetts]?
Speaker 2: Well, that's what I say.  He [Tucker's father, Herbert Tucker] was coming here with the intention of going to school.  He stopped in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] for a year or two to visit my mother [S. Ella Fitzgerald Tucker]'s sister who had already been established in Philadelphia.  And then moved on to Boston.  But he got hooked up with hotel business and became a waiter.  And decided apparently not to go to school.
Speaker 1: And did your--your parents, did they seem to like Boston?  Did they--I mean your--I know your mother died when you were young, but did they seem to sort of feel at home there?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.
Speaker 1: Mm-hmm.
Speaker 2: Oh, yes.  Very much at home.  We had a large family too.
Speaker 1: Can you talk about how many--how many siblings?  And--(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: Six of us.
Speaker 1: Can you give their names and birth order and where you fit?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Thelma [Tucker] was my oldest sister.  And there was Virginia [Tucker] next to the oldest.  And there was Constance [Tucker].  And there was Herbert then John [Tucker] and Estelle [Tucker].
Speaker 1: So four girls and two boys?
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: And you were the--the fourth child, but the oldest son?
Speaker 2: That's right.
Story_ID: 169002
Speaker 1: What is your earliest memory of--of growing up?  Do you have an earliest memory?
Speaker 2: Yes.  Playing with wooden trains on the front porch of our home on Walnut Avenue in Roxbury [Boston, Massachusetts].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Playing with wooden trains.  We couldn't afford electric trains.  And my daddy [Herbert Tucker] used to buy these parts of wooden trains and we'd put 'em together and play with 'em on the front porch.
Story_ID: 169003
Speaker 1: Now you know you said your father [Herbert Tucker] started talking to you about becoming a lawyer when you were age five.  Do you know why?  What influenced him or--(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: I don't know.  I don't know.  You know I hear him say it and I can remember it now, my son is going to be a lawyer.  My son is going to be a lawyer.  And I guess I was (laughter).
Speaker 1: And was he--were you--did you have a close relationship with your father?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.  I was the last one.  All of my sisters married and after my mother [S. Ella Fitzgerald Tucker] died my father and I kept a bachelor apartment until this lady come along.
Speaker 1: That's nice.  So--I mean it's nice 'cause you had a bond with him you know--(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.
Speaker 1: --a lot of sons don't necessarily have bonds with their--you know, their fathers.  Tell me what--(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: He was a kissing man.  I'd have to go to the--(laughter) many times I used to have to come to the station where he worked last as a redcap and, you know, I'd always come down there and he'd have to kiss me.
Speaker 1: Hmm.
Speaker 2: But he was a kissing old man.
Speaker 1: So now what--talk about life on Walnut Hill [sic, Walnut Avenue] in--in Roxbury [Boston, Massachusetts].  You said you grew up on Walnut Hill.  What was the address?
Speaker 2: 168 Walnut Avenue.
Speaker 1: Walnut Avenue.  Sorry.
Speaker 2: Yeah, we was there.  Well, I kind of say I grew up there because we had so many places in those days.  My father was ducking the landlord, I suppose, in those hard times.  And we moved any number of places.  But all I can remember is (laughter) if somebody knocked at the door, we don't open the door.  Nobody's home.  Landlord couldn't collect his rent.  But it was one of those things.  We all had hard times I guess.  Eventually they were paid of course.  But on the due date somehow or other they was paid right.
Speaker 1: Well, if you could take yourself back to your childhood, can you tell me what sights, smells, and sounds, remind you of growing up in Boston [Massachusetts]?
Speaker 2: Nothing in particular.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 169004
Speaker 1: I thought it [Boston, Massachusetts] was a nice place.  I fell in love with all of my teachers.  In Boston, in Massachusetts, no teacher could get married.  They were all Miss.  And I thought I was a man, I guess, when I was in the second, third grade.  I used to hug these teachers (laughter). I can remember Miss. Comley [ph.], Miss. Bailey [ph.].  Miss Bailey used to have her boyfriend pick her up at the school and I used to sit back and watch and say, "you son of a gun.  Why should you be doing that?"  But I was about eleven years old.  But when I went to the Boston Latin School [Boston, Massachusetts]--which you probably have heard of, which is the oldest public school in--in the United States--we had all male teachers and I remember some of them.  I liked many of them.  We'd have to call them Masters.  They didn't call them teachers.  They called them Masters.  And in order to get their attention you'd have to say sir, sir, sir, sir.  It was very interesting.
Speaker 2: Now Boston Latin [School, Boston, Massachusetts], was that for high school or was that--
Speaker 1: No, I started there in the seventh grade.  And then go through high school.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Now where did you go for elementary school?
Speaker 1: Place called Lewis Intermediate School [George A. Lewis Middle School, later Higginson/Lewis School, Boston, Massachusetts].  I went there for the fourth, fifth, and sixth grade.  And then W.L. Boardman School [Boston, Massachusetts] from the kindergarten to third grade.  And the Boston Latin School from the seventh grade to the twelfth.
Story_ID: 169005
Speaker 1: And how would you describe yourself as a young--young--young person?  I mean, were you like a typical boy?  Were you--
Speaker 2: I guess I was a typical boy.  But I wish, you know, as I look in retrospect I wish I had studied a little more.  I wish I had paid more attention to the books.  I mean I just barely got by where ever I went.  And I think I lost something there.  But--
Speaker 1: And why do you say that in hindsight having had the--(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: Because as I look back--see I didn't go to college.  I went directly from high school into law school and I missed that.  I missed that four years of broad training and experience of academic life and so forth.  But I made it through all right.
Speaker 1: So, what were your interests as a young boy?  Well, how would you sort of describe yourself?  That's why I am saying what--I mean is I'm talking about even before junior high school?
Speaker 2: I should say that, maybe it's embarrassing in a certain way, but I guess it was girls.  I guess that's my problem.  I was reading my scrapbook the other day and the kids brought it out of the attic and there was a letter in there from a girl in 1927.  I was twelve years old and she's writing a letter to me telling me I love you but leave me alone so I can love Johnny Parnell [ph.] (laughter). So I guess that was my interest.
Speaker 1: That's cute (laughter).  That's cute.  Oh, that's cute.
Story_ID: 169006
Speaker 1: So can you describe though, what family life was like, you know, or even just some 'membrance of growing up?
Speaker 2: Well we didn't have too much of a family life as I say because everybody, my sisters, older sisters [Thelma and Constance Tucker] left.  And at home then was my sister Virginia [Tucker], my brother, John [Tucker], no not John really.  And not even Essie [Estelle Tucker]. My sister Virginia, my father [Herbert Tucker], and me.  My sister Virginia got married and left my father and me.  And we made it for a long time, about 20, 20 years, I guess.
Speaker 1: Hmm.
Speaker 2: So it wasn't too much family.  I mean I was going to school and working after school.  And I used to work at one of the hotels as a doorman after school.  And that was pretty hard, because I was working until one o'clock in the morning, two o'clock in the morning and trying to get up at seven in the morning day after day.  It was not easy.
Speaker 1: (Unclear)
Speaker 2: And I think it affected--as I look in retrospect, I think it affected my studies.  'Cause I used to put my head down on a desk when I went to school and go to sleep.  But as far as family life was concerned, it was just my dad and I.  He'd go one way and I'd go the other way, and we'd meet at 3:30, 4 o'clock in the afternoon have meals.  And we'd play some cards together.  And I'd go out 7, 8 o'clock.  Come back by 9:30 and 10 on the days I didn't have to work.  But when we were much younger now that I remember it, the service people used to have Wednesdays off.  And dad used to tuck us all--and we didn't have a car--and he used to tuck us all in the public transportation and we'd go to a place called Revere Beach [Revere, Massachusetts] or to Norumbega Park [Auburndale, Massachusetts] which was an amusement park.  All of us.  I don't know where he got the money but we used to fight over what attraction we were going to ride on and (laughter) that sort of thing.  But we did that every Wednesday.  See in that sense we had a great family life. But then when they started separating it was just my dad and I.  We didn't do that.
Speaker 1: Right.  But that's why I was asking the time before even your mother [S. Ella Fitzgerald Tucker]'s, you know, passing.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: You know what--(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --what family life was like.  So was she working also before she--(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: No, she never worked.
Speaker 1: She never--okay.  So that's why I was trying to, you know, understand that period before she passed.
Speaker 2: Oh, no, she never worked.  But we'd have these family outings.  I can see her now, making sandwiches and lunches and tying the bags for us to go.  Keep us all together, you know, that's quite a gang to keep together riding on public transportation (laughter).  But they did it.
Story_ID: 169007
Speaker 1: Now, sir, what did she [his mother, S. Ella Fitzgerald Tucker] die of?  Do you--
Speaker 2: I believe it was cancer.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And do you remember the whole, you know, her dying and how the family, you know, did the family sort of have--the family sort of--people started going in the different directions after her death it sounds like.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Yeah, yeah.  This was a sad occasion of course.  She died at home.  And there was one thing that was very poignant I remember my dad [Herbert Tucker] going up and down the hall, "Lord have mercy, Lord have mercy."  That's all you knew.  My poor mother was in there struggling.  At first he blamed it on the doctor, but the doctor didn't have anything to do with it.  Yeah.  I don't know what else I can tell you about it, it was just--
Speaker 1: Had she been sick a long time before that?
Speaker 2: No my mother was not well for a long time.  She was a very weak person.  And was in ill health.   (Unclear) as long as I can remember.  In fact in those days they used to allow her to smoke marijuana because of whatever she had in those days.  I forget what the (unclear) I know it was for asthma.  I don't know what it was.  I was too young.  But I know it was marijuana.
Speaker 1: So that--it may have been cancer then?
Speaker 2: Huh?
Speaker 1: It may have been cancer.  Like you said--you thought it was cancer.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Story_ID: 169008
Speaker 1: So it's you and your father [Herbert Tucker] together?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And it was you and your father and another sister Esther [sic, Virginia Tucker]?
Speaker 2: No, she lived in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania].
Speaker 1: Okay.  So it's the two of you--(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: And then she went to Virginia State College [sic, University] [Petersburg, Virginia] and so she was out of the house.  And got married while she was at Virginia State [University, Petersburg, Virginia] and went to New Jersey to live.
Speaker 1: So at age eleven, you are actually going to junior high school; right?  Or twelve?  No at twelve--
Speaker 2: Twelve I was in--I was at the Boston Latin School [Boston, Massachusetts].
Speaker 1: Okay.  Boston Latin [School, Boston, Massachusetts].  Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And at the Boston Latin, now was the--did it take--was that special admission to get to Boston Latin or everyone could go?
Speaker 2: No you had to take exams unless your grades were, a certain mark.
Speaker 1: So did you take--(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: Level.
Speaker 1: --an exam or you--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: So your grades were good?
Speaker 2: All A's.  All A's.  At that time I was a good student (laughter).
Speaker 1: And what--and so this was really an honor for you to go to--to Boston Latin?
Speaker 2: Well, if you wanna consider that.  I didn't consider it.  I just thought I was supposed to go (laughter).  I never considered it at all.  I was one of the few blacks there.  There were I think four others besides me in the school of about three thousand students.  Weren't many of us there.  So I sense, I suppose, it was an honor.  But I never thought of it as being an honor.
Speaker 1: And how, do you know if--who had been instrumental in you even applying for Boston Latin?  Was that a teach--(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: My dad.
Speaker 1: Your dad.  Okay.  'Cause he was determined that his son was going to be a lawyer--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --and get the best?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: See the [Boston] Latin School [Boston, Massachusetts] was a classical school which prepared you only for college.  And that's why I went there.  There was a number of other high schools in Boston [Massachusetts] but he didn't select that.
Story_ID: 169009
Speaker 1: And do you remember, you know, your--like your first teacher there [the Boston Latin School, Boston Massachusetts] or the first day of school and what your thoughts were about the whole place and--
Speaker 2: Oh, I was impressed because I fell in love with our teacher.  In love I mean I liked him very much. Bill Raycroft [ph.], and he liked me.  I guess I was a teacher's pet in the seventh grade.  I liked him very much.  He was a German fellow.  And he liked me and we got along very beautifully.  And then I had Ralph Quate [ph.] another one I remember him very well.  And we got along beautifully.  I liked him.  But the--the rest of the teachers (laughter) I just tolerated.
Speaker 1: And did you find that they--were they--how did they treat the black or, you know, colored students?  Were they same as anyone else?
Speaker 2: Same as anybody else.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you remember the other students who were in your, you know, the black students who were in your class--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --In--in--in the school?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I remember.  My brother-in-law, who turned out to be my brother-in-law.  Was four years older, four years ahead of me.  He was an honor student.  Frank Snowden turned out to be a professor of classics at Howard University [Washington, D.C.].  I don't know whether you've met him or not.  And another fellow, we used to walk to school together, as fast as we could walk to school 'cause we couldn't afford to ride.  So we used to walk from Roxbury [Boston, Massachusetts] to over there by the [Boston] Latin School [Boston, Massachusetts] in twenty minutes I think.  It would take me about two hours to do it now.  Irwin Hebron [ph.] and I used to meet every morning.  Walk to school.  And there was a fellow by the name of Clue [ph.], David Clue [ph.].  His father was a Baptist minister in Boston [Massachusetts].  And I can't think, Reed Pegram [ph.].  I don't know, I think he went to France.  I can't understand what--what-- why I don't remember what happened to him.
Speaker 1: Hmm.
Speaker 2: A fellow called Ralph Johnson.  He became an executive secretary to the governor's counsel here.  I think that's about it.  Oh, another fellow became a barber, you know, when the idea first came out of straightening hair and all that sort of business.  And he made a beautiful business out of that here in Boston and did very well.  James Guilford.  I think that is about it.  About five or six of us there, that's all.
Story_ID: 169010
Speaker 1: You're saying during this time at Boston Latin [School, Boston, Massachusetts] because you were there from seventh to graduation, you were also having to work you said at the bell desk?
Speaker 2: Mm-hmm.
Speaker 1: Okay.  That started what age?  How old were you?
Speaker 2: Nineteen thirty-one, I guess I was sixteen.  I worked there as a substitute bellhop and doorman.
Speaker 1: What I'm trying to understand is what things also were forming you as a young man.  I mean what--what was, you know,--what--who was influencing you or what was influencing you and--and, you know, what were your interests?  Were they sports, music, were you--I'm--
Speaker 2: I became interested in becoming a lawyer and I guess it was just inculcated (laughter).  I sat there and listened to it for all my life.  And--and then strangely enough I used to substitute as a doorman for a fellow who was in law school.  In the day when he would go to school, I'd work in his place.  I was just thrown into it.  And that was during the end of the [Great] Depression in 1935 I guess it was.  And I had been out of high school a year and working and I said hey this is not getting anywhere--getting me anywhere.  So I guess I wanna try law school.  See what happens.  So I went over to there and talked with the registrar and sure enough they let me in.  And I said I'm not going to waste any more time.
Story_ID: 169011
Speaker 1: So you--why did you not go to--to--to college?
Speaker 2: Couldn't afford it.
Speaker 1: So you took a year off and worked and then went directly to--to law school?
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: And was that--was that atypical in that day?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Can you--
Speaker 2: Not many of us did that.  Most of us--in fact, everybody in my class went to college.
Speaker 1: And did you to--what was the whole process--did you have to--you--you applied and got in was there a test, I mean what was the process of--
Speaker 2: Well I think because I came out of the [Boston] Latin School [Boston, Massachusetts], even though I had to repeat the senior year.  I tried to explain that by saying I was working nights and couldn't make those classes in the morning to stay awake and so forth, I had to repeat the senior year.  But when I did--my grades were not too bad.  And I guess that had some merit in the selection of letting me get in there.
Speaker 1: Now, at that time I know, you know you had an interest in law, but were there any other subjects in [the Boston] Latin [School, Boston, Massachusetts] that you liked?  Was it--did you like history?  Or did you like English (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: I liked history.  I liked history.  In fact I thought I was I was going to be a history teacher there for a while because I liked the teacher very well.  I liked American history.
Speaker 1: And certain periods or certain things that sort of fascinated you about American history?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  The [American] Revolution and the [American] Civil War and the Spanish American War, Mexican uprising [sic, Texas Revolution?].  Yeah.
Speaker 1: Did you have any favorite books around that time that you remember reading?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.
Speaker 2: Unfortunately, I'm not a reader.  I'm missing something there but, I know I don't read very much.  And now I don't read very much because my eyes bother me so I'm missing a lot.  My wife [Mary Tucker] makes up for it though.
Story_ID: 169012
Speaker 1: You're living with your father [Herbert Tucker] are you--let me understand.  Your father was--was he much of a talker?
Speaker 2: A what?
Speaker 1: Did he talk much?  Did you--like would you--
Speaker 2: Ordinary conversation. (Unclear)  I don't know what you mean when you say did he talk much.
Speaker 1: Well I was just wondering because it was like the two of you were sort of pals together and I'm just wondering what, you know, how did he message to you?  Did he--you know about his expectations or you know or his hopes and desires or, you know, or--
Speaker 2: Well, I'm sure his hopes and desires made him determine that I'd go to law school.  And he persuaded me--not persuaded me, but assisted me as much as he could.  And--but our relationship was just a good relationship.
Story_ID: 169013
Speaker 1: --Love with her [Tucker's wife, Mary Tucker] today as I was sixty--
Speaker 2: Aww.
Speaker 1: --we eloped.
Speaker 2: Isn't that wonderful.
Speaker 1: We eloped.  I met her on a blind date.  And I said this is for me (laughter).
Speaker 2: That is wonderful.
Speaker 1: And I met her a couple of times.  I chased her.  I'd say--I was working for the railroad at that time. I used to get passes on the railroad.  She was in school at Howard [University, Washington, D.C.].  I was in law school.  And I used to say to my buddy, "You take the (unclear) I'm going down to see my girlfriend."  I'd get on the train and go to Washington [D.C.].  I thought I--I--people (laughter)--in fact, they thought I was a Howard alumnus.  I used to get there (laughter)--
Speaker 2: 'Cause you were there so often?
Speaker 1: --I'd get there--(laughter) yeah.  And that's after I met her.  And one day I said, "You know, I don't like to go back to Boston [Massachusetts] without you being my wife."  She said, "I think you're right." So we went and found a justice of the peace somewhere and got married.  In 1937.
Speaker 2: Oh.
Speaker 1: And we've been married ever since.
Speaker 2: That's wonderful.
Speaker 1: Got two children.  The pictures at the top.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Two of our, us daughters.  The next two is her.  That's such her son.  And that's her daughter over here.  So now we have 2 great-grandchildren.  They were here last week.  Oh boy.  I'm telling you (laughter) these kids really tear it up.
Speaker 2: (Unclear) they what?
Speaker 1: They tear the place up.
Speaker 2: (Laughter) that's wonderful though.
Speaker 1: Sixty-six years.
Speaker 2: Not many people can say that.  These days.
Speaker 1: (laughter)
Speaker 2: So--
Speaker 1: Well you have your ups and downs just like--(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --anyone else but you're able to overcome them.
Speaker 2: That's right.  That's right.  That's right.
Speaker 1: Some people give in to that stuff.
Story_ID: 169014
Speaker 1: So I wanna--so it's the--when you graduate, do you--your father [Herbert Tucker] attends your graduation?
Speaker 2: Did what?
Speaker 1: Graduation from Boston Latin [School, Boston, Massachusetts].
Speaker 2: No.  I didn't even attend.  Because I told you I repeated a year.
Speaker 1: Oh, that's right.
Speaker 2: And I guess I was embarrassed.  And I didn't go to graduation at all.  And they sent me my diploma in the mail.  And I didn't go to my college graduation--law school graduation 'cause I didn't have enough money.  I owed them six hundred dollars (laughter).  You can't get your diploma until you pay us the six hundred.  So I didn't go to that either.
Speaker 1: So now when you--you decide--so you take the year off--I'm just wondering you decide--you go over to Northeastern [University] Law School [Boston, Massachusetts] and how had you chosen that law school and, you know, and what did you tell--you know what did you basically tell them?
Speaker 2: Because that was a night school number one, and I could work during the day.  And it had, it had really just started.  Of course it's quite a school now.  In fact, it was closed in 1956 and then opened again in '68 [1968] again.  I think it was 1968.  But at any rate, I don't know how I happened to chose--choose it except that I thought that me being in night school that I could work during the day.  And that's how I happened to choose it.
Speaker 1: Now, with it being a night school how many--how long--how many years did you go to--
Speaker 2: Four years.
Speaker 1: Four years.  Okay.  And you--did you immediately like it?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what--what were your--some of your favorite courses that you took?
Speaker 2: I liked business, corporations.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Because I had--it's what I--let's see, I had a friend whose father was a--oh, some sort of a foreman in the post office.  And he got me a job in the post office.
Speaker 1: In 19--after I came off the WPA [Works Progress Administration].  I had--I was digging ditches there for a while.
Speaker 2: Now, you did the WPA work?  Was that when you were in law school?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Okay.
Speaker 1: So I started and you get twelve dollars a week, four dollars a day, twelve dollars a week.  But anyway, I was working.  I started--left that and went in the post office and then I was sitting down at night and all the people didn't realize what we did at night, but I used to work at night.  You sit there throwing (unclear) (laughter), and you're talking with your friends or--and they had some openings in Internal Revenue Service [IRS].  And I found out that--that he had gone over there.  I went over to the--whoever was hiring man at the time.  And I said, "I'd like to be an agent."  And I--we started in 1943 and was an agent till 1952.  And so my interest then was in taxation and business and that sort of thing.  That's how I started out.  In fact, in those days they allowed us to do income tax returns for people.  They don't allow them to do that now.
Speaker 2: Hmm.
Speaker 1: And I built up quite a practice.  I was looking at my little book the other day and back in 1952 I made--I took in $5200 just making tax returns.  And so I said heck if I can do this for Uncle Sam, I think I can do it for myself.  So I quit the Internal Revenue Service and started practicing law.  But the emphasis was on business, corporations, and taxation.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Now, you know--was that--that was--was that usual for black people at that time to focus in the business area?
Speaker 1: Well, I found it useful.  And I don't recommend it for everybody.
Story_ID: 169015
Speaker 1: The other question I want to ask is just the context of the Boston [Massachusetts] that you lived in.  You know I want you to give sort of an idea of the times and even, you know, what Boston was like, who mayor--who the mayor was at that time and--
Speaker 2: Who was the mayor?
Speaker 1: Mm-hmm.
Speaker 2: Oh, I was in [Boston] Latin School [Boston, Massachusetts].  The mayor at that time was James M. Curley.  His son used to sit right beside me the whole time we was--we were in--unfortunately poor Jim died--for the six years.  Well, I don't know just what you mean me to say what Boston was like?
Speaker 1: Yeah.  What was the--what was Boston like just as a community?  'Cause it's changed a lot in that time so I'm just trying to--(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: Well, it's changed a lot.  It started in 1946 after the World War II [WWII].  We had a great migration, and oh, the black population increased probably a hundredfold.  I suppose prior to that time I--I--think there probably weren't more than five thousand blacks in Boston, but now there must be a hundred thousand or more.
Speaker 1: And--and the--so how did the--the--the population that existed beforehand, how did they differ from the new immigrants?
Speaker 2: How'd they differ from what?
Speaker 1: How did they differ from, you know, the people who came by way of the great migration?
Speaker 2: Well, the people that I was associated with, even though my father [Herbert Tucker]--'cause it was a funny thing--even though my dad grew, rose no higher than a waiter, all of his friends were professional people.  And those were the people I came in contact with.  We had Dr. Latimer [ph.] Dr. Jones [ph.], doctor--Attorney Rainey, Julian Rainey.  Attorney Schenck [ph.] That's all I was associated with.  All these--this type of person.  All professional people.  So I suppose that had some affect up on--upon me.  I saw what they could--what they were doing and they seemed to be doing all right.
Speaker 1: And when you were in, you know, aspiring to be a lawyer and in law school, was there a--a lawyer that you had a great deal of respect or wanted to emulate?
Speaker 2: Well the fellow that I went into partnership with, yes.  I admired him a great deal.  He was a Portuguese fellow and was hardly--well when I first met him, he had a very heavy accent.  Tried to speak English--but he knew the law and he impressed me.  And I asked him if I could come and see if--he had a--a two room suite, three room I guess, there was a room for a secretary and two offices and I asked him if I could take the other office and pay half of the expenses.  And eventually we made a partnership [Cardozo & Tucker, Boston, Massachusetts] and we had six associates--
Speaker 1: Hmm.
Speaker 2: --when I quit.
Speaker 1: So now of the--what was his name?
Speaker 2: Antonio De Jesus Cardozo [ph.].
Speaker 1: Can you spell the De Jesus?
Speaker 2: Capital D-E, capital J-E-S-U-S.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 169016
Speaker 1: Okay, so let me just get perspective.  You--you are in law school [at Northeastern University, Boston, Massachusetts].  It takes four years.  You're working during the day and you work at a variety of places.  You're working at the day right, during the day?
Speaker 2: (Nodding)
Speaker 1: And you work--you do--you--you work on the Works Project Administration [WPA]--(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: Well, I think--
Speaker 1: --for a while?
Speaker 2: And I ended up being a Red Cap.  I guess I was a Red Cap for most of my law school.  I started in law school in '35 [1935] and I started as a Red Cap in '35 [1935].  So I was in--at that time I was a redcap.  I used to take the train up to school.  Well, you're not--probably not familiar with Boston [Massachusetts] but--
Speaker 1: I am.
Speaker 2: --the classes used to begin at six o'clock and I'd take the commuter train up to the next stop, go to law school then come back put on my uniform start carrying bags until midnight (laughter) and go home.
Speaker 1: And where were you a Red Cap at?
Speaker 2: South Station [Boston, Massachusetts].
Speaker 1: Okay.  And Red Caps, did they make a lot of money or was it sort of a hard--
Speaker 2: It was a lot of money for those days.  In fact I can remember we saved--well, I got my pound that means you made five dollars.  And if you made five dollars you had a good day.  So I would say--and we had no schedule, you could work--you were supposed to have a schedule but nobody objected to your coming and going.  And if you get five dollars you had a good day.  I used to work seven days except when I went to go to law school--used to go to Washington [D.C].  But a fellow from Chicago [Illinois] became interested in me, Willard [S.] Townsend.  Do you remember him?  You don't remember him?  He formed what we call the United Transport [Service] Employees of America.  And this is in 1936 when the social security first became.  That's when you started paying fifty cents a bag, to carry.  We used to not get any salary.  And so he came and I guess he picked me because I was one that had the good--greatest amount of education in the Red Caps in Boston, a one hundred and sixteen of us.  And I became his assistant and helped form the union here.  And we started getting paid then.  But we'd have to charge fifty cents a bag, to carry a bag.  But we used to cheat now and then.  I don't feel that I was cheating and I think they cheated us.  Actually, we used to sell the same ticket two or three times (laughter) and make money that way.  But that's how we, you know, made our salary.  That's how we get our social security.
Speaker 1: So that was in 1936--
Speaker 2: 1936
Speaker 1: And you were--you were--I think twenty-one at that time.
Speaker 2: I was in law school
Speaker 1: Yeah.  And--but the--but the--the question I have about that is, were you--can you talk about the forming of the union?  You know, I mean what the whole--what that whole process was like, working with--
Speaker 2: What process?
Speaker 1: 'Cause he--he--you said that you were his contact here.
Speaker 2: Yes
Speaker 1: You know to help form the union.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And I was just wondering if you could talk about that?
Speaker 2: Well, it wasn't anything but a series of meetings and organizing the--all the fellows.  A lot of the old timers didn't wanna become members because they was happy with the way things were.  They didn't like us (unclear) coming in there anyway.  Changing things for them --they were liked it.  But it was a series of meetings and organization and finally we got the charter here and we all had to become members.  But it wasn't too difficult a job.
Speaker 1: So you didn't feel that you were gonna get blacklisted or you know or--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: No, no, no.  The--we had no objection either from the railroad authorities.  The way they got back at us is to say okay, you can become a union but we're gonna have to make you charge you--but you're gonna have to charge people fifty cents a bag.  And you're supposed to turn the money in at the end of the day, but we didn't have any real trouble.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Willard Townsend.  He was a (unclear)--he was a friend of [A.] Philip Randolph.  And Philip as you know had the, the sleeping car porters.  And Willie had the Red Caps throughout the nation.  We called them UTSEA.
Speaker 1: What were they called?
Speaker 2: UTSEA, U-T-S-E-A.  (Unclear) United Transport [Service] Employees of America.
Speaker 1: So was there--(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: (Unclear) (simultaneous)
Speaker 1: Okay.  Were there other unionizing activities?  Were there--you know, cause I--Willard Townsend, A. Philip Randolph, were there others that were, you know, responsible for other unionizing activities?
Speaker 2: For the railroad? Not that I know of.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.
Speaker 2: Not that I know of.
Speaker 1: So it was those two?
Speaker 2: No they had a stranglehold on both the Red Caps and the Pullman porters.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 169017
Speaker 1: Now when you--so you're doing this--now--you're doing this during law school [at Northeastern University, Boston, Massachusetts], you're--you work for the WPA [Works Progress Administration].  What else are you doing?  You meet your wife [Mary Tucker].  When do you meet her in 19--
Speaker 2: I met her in 1936.  The summer of 1936.  Just about this time.  A week before my birthday.
Speaker 1: And you--you--tell the circumstances under which you met her?
Speaker 2: Well, as I said this friend of mine, Frank who now is my brother-in-law and I had been friends since we were six years old.  Had married her sister two years before.  And he brought his wife to Boston [Massachusetts] to visit his family I guess.  And Mary [Tucker], my wife, had just got through--sent as being a counselor at Camp Guilford Bower or something in New York and they said why don't you come up and visit us?  And so she came to Boston.  And to visit them.  And he called me and said, "Listen my sister-in-law Mary's coming I want you to come around and meet her."  And I said, "I can't do it.  I got a date."  I was supposed to be engaged (laughter) at the time.  I had a date with that--with that girl.  And I said, "I can't do it I got a date I can't do it."  "Oh come on man you know it won't take you long, I just want you to meet her."  Meeting her was the end of me.  Soon as I saw her I said this is for me.  And I forgot about the engagement and everything else (laughter).  Those are the circumstances.
Speaker 1: (Off camera discussion) You said it--so it was love at first sight.
Speaker 2: For me and--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --for her I think too.  Even though (laughter) I put it on heavy I guess those first two or three days because she left town.  I went over to see her after about three days and they said she left.  I said, "She left?  She didn't even say goodbye (laughter)."  Next thing you know there were four guys (unclear) riding over to New York [New York] for the Olympics [sic, Olympic Trials] that were at Triborough Stadium [later, Downing Stadium] at that time.  And she got in the car and went off with them.  And I said, "I'll be darned is that what happened?"  So I get on the next bus and went over to meet her in New Jersey.  And made (laughter) sat--oh dear, how innocent we were--sat on the porch, front porch with her.  And the bus got there about ten o'clock.  I had the first bus 'cause I had to get back to Boston.  Left at six o'clock in the morning.  So we sat on the porch much like this.  All night long.  I said goodbye to her and then I got back to Boston. I said now this'll never do.  I gotta see her much more than this.  So then I asked for a pass to Washington [D.C.] and every two or three weeks I'd get a pass and go to Washington.  That's the way it was
Speaker 1: And she was a student [at Howard University, Washington, D.C].  What was she studying?
Speaker 2: She was studying to be a nurse.  She's an RN [Registered Nurse] now.  She was studying (unclear) she was taking bachelor's courses and nursing courses at the same time.  I--I--I don't know how they do that.  But she was doing--doing both of them at the same time.  She was a junior and they expelled her.  Her father was the president [Leslie Pinckney Hill] of Cheyney [University of Pennsylvania, Cheyney, Pennsylvania].  I don't know if you ever heard of Cheyney's.
Speaker 1: Of course.
Speaker 2: Her father was president of Cheyney and they kicked her out of school.  Of course, she had to come home and tell her father.  And I said now this is not manly enough.  This--this I've got to be a man.  I've got to go down and face this music.  So I went down there and the funny part of it is, he liked me.  Its two things he asked--told me what you gotta do.  "You know what you have to do," I said, "What sir?"  He said, "You got to pay her insurance," which was fifteen dollars a year.  "And get her fur coat out of storage."  And that's all he had to say.  And like I say.  I know I was (unclear) I was calling him Pop.  I asked him to let me borrow the car.  He never seen me from anybody but let me borrow the car to go see the Howard [University]-Lincoln [University] game, which was in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] that week.  And I just fit right in with him.  But he was a great guy.  And to take me like that.  I guess if somebody did that to my daughter I don't know what I would do (laughter)--
Speaker 1: Now she got expelled because she was out with you or what--(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: No because she was married and they didn't allow married students--married students to be in the--at Howard [University, Washington, D.C] at that time.
Speaker 1: So because you had--(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: Married--
Speaker 1: --eloped (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: Huh?
Speaker 1: You had eloped.
Story_ID: 169018
Speaker 1: Yeah.  But that's another story.  We--we [The Honorable Herbert Tucker, Jr. and Mary Tucker] had thought it was secret.  But the Afro-American [newspaper] got a hold of it from the Pittsburgh Courier.  They didn't have anything to write about except that.  And the headline was this big and I'm not lying.  This big.  'Howard University Co-Eds Still Unwed.'  And that's what the headline was.  That sounded so bad.  And then of course everybody found out about it.  But how they found out about it, I don't know.
Speaker 2: Because she [Mary Tucker] was part of black society?
Speaker 1: I guess so.  Here she was marrying a porter, redcap (laughter).  Her father [Leslie Pinckney Hill] was president of the school [Cheyney University of Pennsylvania, Cheyney, Pennsylvania].  But we get along fine.
Speaker 2: And so he liked you.  He saw something in you.  Did he ever say--did you ever ask him later?
Speaker 1: I asked him for help and he offered help.  I didn't ask him now that I think of it.  'Cause I know that after I passed the bar, he had said that he had a friend that was in Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] with him--he went to Harvard and graduated class of 1903.  He said I really want you to meet this classmate of mine.  He can help you in the law.  And so he had this fellow, fellow's name Ernst [ph.]--Ernsten Young [ph.].  And had me take him out to--he took me out to lunch and we talked business but I wasn't quite satisfied with what he offered.  I thought I could do better on my own.  So I never took it, his offer.  But I had no problems and her mother was like my mother.  No, it was a beautiful relationship.
Speaker 2: Hmm.
Speaker 1: Beautiful relationship.
Speaker 2: That was a relationship meant to be in many ways.
Speaker 1: Huh?
Speaker 2: It's a relationship that was meant to be.
Speaker 1: Yes (unclear).
Speaker 2: Now, so when you--what was her father's name though, first?
Speaker 1: Leslie Pinckney Hill.
Speaker 2: Okay.  And when you--when you--you eloped and you know came--she came back to Boston [Massachusetts] then to live, right?
Speaker 1: No.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: No.  She--well let me put it this way.  She did but after a while she stayed home for a couple of months and after that she came to Boston.  And her father helped her get into the Lincoln School for Nurses in New York [the Bronx, New York, New York].  And so while she was waiting for that to become a reality she lived in Boston with me and my father [Herbert Tucker], the three of us.  And she went to school and after two years of school, poor thing, she got pregnant with that one.  And so she had to stop for a while.  Then she went back and finished.  She was a wonderful nurse.  Wonderful nurse.  When she left Mass [Massachusetts] General Hospital [Boston, Massachusetts] where she worked, she only worked part time and I say part time because we had two children at that time and this had to be around when they were in school and so forth.  So she wasn't on the regular payroll.  But she did that for about twenty years.  She asked for a retirement they said no she wasn't a regular employee.  So she couldn't get it, to retire.  And I showed them a letter in which a former patient had written a copy--and sent a copy to her.  In which he said that he wanted to thank the hospital for helping him get well and so forth.  And mainly it was due to the services of one Mary Tucker.  And enclosed a check for $500,000 to the hospital.  And I said, "On the basis of this you can give her a retirement--you can give a retirement, can't you?"  They said, "No."  So they didn't give her any retirement at all.  For all those years.  (Unclear) $500,000.   But we made it.  We get along.
Story_ID: 169019
Speaker 1: Tell me at that time when you were working for the IRS [Internal Revenue Service], how was that different than what the, you know, being an IRS agent, besides the fact that you could do tax returns?
Speaker 2: How was what different?
Speaker 1: The IRS at that point.  As an agency.
Speaker 2: Is it different?  I don't know how.  You can't make any comparison--
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.  Okay.
Speaker 2: --'Cause I don't know what it's like today.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.
Speaker 2: I know that they--during my period there they stopped--they stopped giving permission for fellows to do income tax returns.  But other than that I don't know what's going on.
Speaker 1: How did you get the job there?
Speaker 2: I just went over there and I think the--the collector, they had a collector of Internal Revenue and he had a staff.  I made an appointment to see him, went over and said I'm Herb Tucker and I want a job.  He said what do you do?  And I told him I worked at the post office.  And I had a law degree or I was getting a law degree and he said okay.  You go to work.  Had a little--it was fluid in those days.  It was very easy to get a job.  That's how I got it, all right.
Speaker 1: And then when you set up your private practice [Cardozo & Tucker, Boston, Massachusetts] that was in 1952, right?
Speaker 2: I set up my private practice actually in '47 [1947].  I was still in the Internal Revenue Service at the time.
Speaker 1: And--and that's when you said you were doing tax returns and you moved.  Did now--and did you move into contracts and things like that also?
Speaker 2: Move into what?
Speaker 1: Contracts.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Contractual work.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So can you talk about who your clients were and you know and--and you joined together that's what you were saying--you joined together with the gentleman from--
Speaker 2: Portugal.
Speaker 1: From Portugal.
Speaker 2: Mm-hmm.  Well, he was an immigration man.  He specialized in immigration.  And he was also instrumental in starting a credit union.  Which now has assets of maybe twelve million dollars.  And so I became interested in--in the business aspect of that.  And moved on from there.  I had--at the start--its funny there was an admission tax in those days.  And we used to have to go out and spot check places.  So my partner and I decided we'd spot check a burlesque house.  So we went to this, ticket office asked for a couple of tickets and I looked at the ticket and the ticket was for some theater in Buffalo [New York].  So he was just avoiding paying the tax on--on this.  So I said who's the manager here?  Anyways it turned out they became one of my best friends.  And they had a string of six theaters throughout the country.  And I was counsel for them.  And go from Cleveland [Ohio] to Youngstown [Ohio] to Buffalo [New York] to Baltimore [Maryland], Boston [Massachusetts].  It was six of them I can't think of the other town.  But anyway they all had their problems and I was counsel to--for them.  That was my biggest client.  And so then when--well see this was in '61 [1961].  [President John F.] Jack Kennedy asked me to go to Africa, Gabon, be his personal representative for the first year's--first anniversary of their freedom from France.  And a fellow by the name of Charles [W.] Engelhard [Jr.] went with me.  Come to find out, he was one of the ten or twelve richest men in the United States at that time.  Worth about $450 million.  I suppose it's in the billions--he's dead now--but I suppose his estates up there.  But anyway we became friends and we came back home.  And one day I picked up the newspaper, I saw old Charlie [Charles W. Engelhard] was having trouble with the blacks in Newark [New Jersey].  And I said there's no need of this.  I just wrote to him, "Charlie," I said, "if I can be of any help to you let me know."  And he jumped on it.  And before I knew it, I was general counsel for humanitarian affairs for the Engelhard Company in New Jersey.  And I used to go there.  That was a beautiful job.  I used to go there once a week.  It paid $1500.  Boy, that was beautiful.  To go there once a week.  Take the--the--what they call the shuttle.  Go down there once a week and just confer with him.  And we helped young [Kenneth A.] Gibson become mayor of Newark [New Jersey].  He apparently had run the ire of many of the blacks there and I said maybe I can help you in a relationship with these people.  So we started out with Gibson and then we moved into affordable housing.
Story_ID: 169020
Speaker 1: Okay.  Sir, wait.  Let's--let's--can I go back just a little bit to your--you know, your practice [Cardozo & Tucker, Boston, Massachusetts] and then I wanna go to how you met [President John F.] Jack Kennedy.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Okay.  But you can you--you were talking some about, you know, some of the clients you have but, I'm just wondering--(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: Oh, and I was also general counsel for a--for a Simmons College [Boston, Massachusetts] which is a women's college here in Boston.  That was the time when the students were taking over the presidents of the colleges offices and so forth.  And this poor guy he was scared to death (laughter) and I was president of the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] at the time.  And he called on me.  Well, actually he didn't call on me.  [Edward] Ed Brooke was a dear friend of mine.  He called Ed Brooke, and Ed referred his (unclear) he was in public life referred all his business to me.
Speaker 1: But can we go back to the beginning of your practice.  Just a little bit.  Just so I can establish some--some basic things.  Just--that's if we could.  When you're working with--I can't remember his name.  But so--
Speaker 2: [Charles W.] Engelhard.
Speaker 1: No, not Engelhard, no.
Speaker 2: [Antonio De Jesus] Cardozo?
Speaker 1: Cardozo.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you and Cardozo you get--you're--he's doing immigration, you're doing, you know, a lot of work with the IRS [Internal Revenue Service].
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And then you--I'm just trying to understand how you built the, you know, how you built the business.
Speaker 2: Well, that's how we built it.  I built it on doing tax returns for people.  And, you know, when you get into tax returns you get into people's business.  The average person doesn't want to tell you how much they earn. And when you get into their business and learn how much they earn and you get their confidence you get all their business.  You get their wills, you get in their real estate transactions.  So that's how it started actually.  I was doing tax returns mainly and I got into estates and business.  But had a supermarket had three supermarkets in Boston [Massachusetts] and I was general counsel for them.  I can't think, you know, we're talking almost forty years ago (laughter).
Speaker 1: I know, I know.
Story_ID: 169021
Speaker 1: How did you meet [President John F.] Jack Kennedy?
Speaker 2: How did he meet me (laughter).
Speaker 1: Or how did he meet you?  Let's ask that question.
Speaker 2: Well, I think I owe that to my fraternity.  I was Grand Basileus of Omega Psi Phi [Omega Psi Phi Fraternity].  And that means I was the national president of--and of course had contacts all through the states.  Jack Kennedy was a congressman from Boston [Massachusetts] in an all Irish--with all Irish constituents.  And he didn't know any black people.  And somehow I took a liking to him.  And when I was Grand Basileus we had what we call program of--achievement week program we have national speakers come.  And I asked Jack [Kennedy] if he wanted to speak to this group.  And as it turned out, had over 250 people come out too.  I guess he said this is an important (unclear) (laughter) person.  I guess that's what he said.  Because we became friends right after that.  And he made me treasurer of his congressional campaign back in 1948 or '49 [1949] somewhere around in there.  No '58 [1958] (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) No, '58 [1958], it would be--
Speaker 2: --fifty-eight [1958], '58 [1958], '58 [1958].  And then he asked me to give him a dinner and I established a dinner with over a thousand people came to this dinner.  And I guess he thought I had some, some background or had some knowledge of what to do.  In fact I was looking at a letter from Congressman John McCormack who used to be the Speaker of the House.  And he writes a letter to me: "Dear Herbert, banquet that you were chairman of was the best banquet I ever attended," and so forth, "and you are to be congratulated."  And so after that it was just calling on me to take care of--to get him into the Negro community, which I did by--I was going--I went to twenty-two NAACP conventions.  And Thurgood [Marshall] was there and I used to ask him on the legal side of it could he have--we'd invite lawyers.  And have a lawyers' reception at each of these conventions and I invited Jack and his brother-in-law, Sargent Shriver, to come.  And they come because he had to know some black people.  And that's how he got to know the black people throughout the country.  So I got the key people who were NAACP workers, but they were key in their area.  And got him--introduced him to those.  And we moved from there.  That's how we became friends.  And it stuck.
Speaker 1: So when, when you were working on his campaign, you know as treasurer, when he asked you to be treasurer--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --that, that gave you a whole new level of contacts that maybe you didn't have before?
Speaker 2: Well no.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Gave him contacts.
Speaker 1: Okay (laughter).
Speaker 2: Gave him contacts he didn't have before.  I had the contacts.  I was making the contacts for him.
Speaker 1: In the black community?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I got him--he used to always--his favorite expression was, "You people."  I said, "Jack, you don't say that in a Negro crowd.  (Unclear) say 'you people' anymore."  And after a few more times of stuttering over (unclear) he stopped saying that.  You people.  You people are (unclear) (laughter) and I will never forget that--got him to stop saying that.
Story_ID: 169022
Speaker 1: Now what about [HM Edward] Ed Brooke?
Speaker 2: Well Ed and I go back, way back to college days, I guess.  He went to Howard [University, Washington, D.C.] at the same time my wife [Mary Tucker] did.  And we became friends.  And when he came to Boston [Massachusetts], he was a--we became friends (laughter).  He was a democrat, so I was from a political point of view.  And he ran for local representative and was defeated on the democratic side but he got the republican nomination and that's how he became a republican.  But--then he got into politics of course.  He was elected attorney general.  And of course being the first Attorney General they figured they want to get rid of him so they brought up with some tax matter which he indiscreetly handled a--an estate during this time when he was practicing law, and I represented him in that.  And got him out of it.  They were going to get him for tax fraud.  And we became closer as a result of that.  And he--when he became attorney general he appointed me as assistant.  And I stayed assistant for twelve years.  But that's all out of the personal relationship and a political relationship.
Story_ID: 169023
Speaker 1: Now when--when were you assistant attorney general?  What years?  What twelve year period?
Speaker 2: From '58 [1958] first appointed by Edward McCormack and went through '69 [1969].  When I was appointed to the--and mind you I never asked for these jobs.  I was sitting in my office one day and a fellow called up Herb, yes this is--what is his name Charlie (unclear) name but I know--I remember his first name.  He says, "Go down and hire yourself a morning suit."  I said, "For what?"  He said, "We're gonna take you in as assistant attorney general."  I said, "You're going to do what?"  And he told me again.  I said, "Okay, I'll do it."  But I didn't ask for the job.  And so I started out there and went through five attorneys general.  And [Edward] McCormack and he gave me freedom to go around the country and speak on behalf of the president.  And what endeared him to me was when Teddy [Ted Kennedy] came along I never liked Teddy and I don't like him today.  Teddy decided he was going to run for United States senator against Ed McCormack.  And of course my loyalty at that time was with Ed McCormack and so we parted friends, right--right there.  But there's just a series of events I can't remember 'em all. I can answer a pointed questions.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well, let me ask this.  When you--when you worked at--as assistant attorney general, can you tell me do you remember any of the important cases that you worked on or issues that you worked on that same up during that time, that twelve year period?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now at the--that same time you know, well not with--but in the same period that's when you were--is that the time you were stilling working with Charles Engelhard?  'Cause you said that was from 19--oh, 1967.
Speaker 2: Yeah, 19--I started with [Charles] Engelhard in '62 [1962] no, '62 [1962].  Yeah, '62 [1962] I started with him until '71 [1971].
Speaker 1: But you said that--
Speaker 2: I was still the assistant attorney general at that time.
Speaker 1: So you could also serve as his general counsel and that wasn't a--
Speaker 2: That's right.  That was not a--
Speaker 1: --'cause the assistant attorney--
Speaker 2: --that was not a conflict and it was permissible.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.
Story_ID: 169024
Speaker 1: And that whole area of affordable housing, was still really just sort of taking off at that time, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And can you take about some of the issues or who were the main sort of movers and shakers in the country when it came to affordable housing?
Speaker 2: Oh, gee, I can't think of the names.  I can't think of the names here.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It all came about from my work with the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] actually.  But I can't think of their names.
Speaker 1: Now how--how long were you with NAACP?  You were--you said you were head of the local chapter--
Speaker 2: I was.  After I had my first problem with discrimination I started with NAACP (sic) in '47 [1947].  And ended in 1958 when I went to the attorney general's office.
Speaker 1: And for--what was the problem you had with discrimination?  What happened?
Speaker 2: It was a personal problem, two of them.  We moved into a section, bought a house in a section of Boston [Massachusetts] which I found out later was inhabited strictly by Irish democrats.  And moved into this house and we didn't have much furniture in those days so I got a friend of mine with a truck and we moved at night.  And moved our few pieces in there.  It had a, what do you call, a starter for the furnace or something I forget what it was called.  I didn't know how to start the furnace.  So this fellow came in and he lived next door, two doors down.  "Can I help you?"  He says, "I'm gonna be your neighbor."  I says, "Yeah help me -- I want you to light this furnace."  So he lit the furnace and shaked my hand--shook my hand and said, "See you later."  Next day my wife [Mary Tucker] and two children and my dad [Herbert Tucker] came out and that night or the next morning I got up there was a note on my door.  Nigger go home.  We don't want you out here.  I said, "Well I'll be damned."  (Unclear) say I gotta do something about this or try to do something about it anyway.  And so I did.  And although I left there, I left there because I wasn't going to leave my wife in that hostile attitude with two infants and go into the [U.S.] Army, I was being drafted then in 1944, I guess, just as (unclear) it ended.  And we left there, but it was a very hostile neighborhood.  And I said I want to be interested in this.  And that's how it is.
Speaker 1: And what area was that in Boston?
Speaker 2: Hyde Park.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Hyde Park.  And the funny part of it is now over fifty percent of the area is black. (Laughter).  I meant to go by there some time when I'm in Boston but I forget about it.  But I'd like to drive by.   They were cute little houses.  Paid $5700 for a house (laughter).  Boy that was a big deal then.  One, two, three bedrooms in it.  Bath, dining room, kitchen.  $5700.  It was a beautiful little house.  Clean cellar. Ah, boy but those neighbors.
Speaker 1: So what was the other issue?  You said you had two incidents of discrimination.
Speaker 2: The other discrimination and those are the only two that I had.  Was that goes back before--goes back to my wife's [Mary Tucker] time.  When I took her out the second night we were there I took her down to a place called Revere Beach [Revere, Massachusetts].  Oh, I had worked as an elevator operator to (laughter) see I forget all these things.  I worked as an elevator operator in one of the big department stores in Boston and they didn't ask me whether I was black, white, green, or yellow.  They just filed an application and they said well you're hired.  We got friendly with the other employees in the--that's usual-- have the usual after work softball games and all that sort of stuff.  So when Mary [Tucker] came we--I took her down to Revere Beach and we were walking along the concourse that second night and I see him hanging in front of the store.  The next day I go into work they said, "We don't need your services anymore."  Just like that.  So those were two incidents that I had.
Story_ID: 169025
Speaker 1: Who was active in--with the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] in those early days when you got involved?
Speaker 2: You mean nationally?
Speaker 1: Nationally. And locally.
Speaker 2: Well, of course, what's his name?  White.
Speaker 1: Walter White.
Speaker 2: Who?
Speaker 1: Walter White.
Speaker 2: Walter White was the Executive Secretary.  And my brother too. Who succeeded him? What was his name, Powell? [sic, Roy Wilkins].  Oh, Lord.
Speaker 1: Wil--no, no Wilkens was at the [National] Urban League [New York, New York].
Speaker 2: Who succeeded--
Speaker 1: Walter White?
Speaker 2: Walter White.  This is a doggone shame.  Anyway that was when NAACP and the Legal Defense Fund was one organization.  And Thurgood [Marshall] was head of the Legal Defense part of it.  And what was the fellow's name?  Frank--Frank--
Speaker 1: [Constance Baker] Connie Motley.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: She was in there.  And Frank--they both became district judges.  I can't think of his last name.  It'll come to me some time during the conversation I'm sure.
Speaker 2: So that was an exciting time though.  A lot happening around the country with NAACP at that time.
Speaker 1: Oh, it was, it was.  I was part of the--I didn't have a real active part, but Thurgood called a meeting of--I was chairman of what they call Legal Redress Committee.  I was chairman of the Legal Redress Committee for the New England area.  And he called all of these chairmen together I think there were about fifty of us, it was one for each state, to have a meeting to determine whether or not we were going to go all out on this discrimination business or whether we were going to try to strengthen the Plessy-Ferguson [Plessy V. Ferguson 1896] business the separate but equal.  And each of us we had a big discussion on that and finally a vote.  And it was decided that we would attack the whole situation.  That was my input.  It was one of were you going to accept-- accept Plessy-Ferguson.  I didn't have anything to do with reading the brief writing brief or anything of that sort.  But I did have a part in the discussion that led up to brining Brown verses Education--board of--School Board of Education [of Topeka, 1954].  But they were the leading lawyers all through the country.  I can't remember some of their names.  There's Fred Gray of Alabama one of them.  Oh, Lord.  I can't think of all their names, could if I see 'em. No. But that was a great time.  Great time.
Story_ID: 169026
Speaker 1: So the discussion.  The whole debate about whether Plessy v. Ferguson [1896] or you know,--Brown--in preparation for Brown [v. Board of Education of Topeka, 1954].  Where did you fit on the whole discussion?  Did you have views one way or the other about what--you know, what approach should be--
Speaker 2: Well, I did.  I says--I said that I thought that we ought to attack the whole situation.  It would be to easy.  We get all these lawyers together and we legal box them all over the country just as we're gonna accept Plessy versus Ferguson.  And we ought to try it.  They says the majority of us said essentially the same thing.  And that's why we did that.  That's why we did it.
Speaker 1: So there were people--who were the key people around?  A lot of, you know, the perception is a lot of things were centered in New York.  You know, there was William Cart--no Bob is it Carter?  Carter who worked for Thurgood [Marshall]--(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: [Robert] Bob Carter.  That's--
Speaker 1: Bob Carter.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  He's the federal judge.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Yes, Bob Carter. Okay. Who worked for--
Speaker 2: Yeah, Bob Carter. (Unclear) I used to call him Frank.  Now where I get Frank--Frank I don't know.  Bob Carter.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That's how I remember Bob.  It was dry humor.
Speaker 1: Right.  So he worked--he was working for (unclear) (simultaneous)
Speaker 2: He was working with Thurgood at the time.
Speaker 1: Right.  And who were--and then there was Constance--
Speaker 2: And Connie Motley.  And those were the three, big three and [Jack] Greenberg.  And they--those were the principal actors in the Legal Defense Fund at that time.
Speaker 1: Right.  Well a lot of people said that really Brown started not with Thurgood but with his mentor, Charles--Charles--
Speaker 2: Houston.
Speaker 1: Houston.  That he was really the--the--the--you know, that Thurgood really took--
Speaker 2: Well remember that there were about four or five cases there.  They just came out under Brown verses [Board of] Education [1954] but there were about three or four cases that were involved in that.  And we just (unclear) call it Brown verses Education but that wasn't the only case that was argued.
Speaker 1: And then there was the issue after the, you know, the--the--the ruling by the U.S. Supreme Court.  Do you remember where you were when the ruling was announced or you know or you heard about the ruling with Brown?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Do you remember where you were?
Speaker 2: No, (unclear)
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.  But--but, you know, but a lot of people say that in that ruling, the ruling had no teeth.  And so it took subsequent cases to get it to have some legs to stand on.
Speaker 2: Well, that's a matter of opinion.  Which is not shared by the majority.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.
Speaker 2: There are probably some fine points that had to be brought out in any broad scope of legal issues.
Story_ID: 169027
Speaker 1: Now this, you know, I wanna go back a little bit to Charles Engelhard because that was sort of fascinating work that you did during that time, you know.  And you said you were general counsel to his company, right?  No--
Speaker 2: Well, actually to him.
Speaker 1: To him?  Oh, to him.  Okay.
Speaker 2: Actually to him.  Humanitarian matters.  Trying to increase his or change his image in the black community.  Which I think I did.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: In fact I got two black employees there.  I got him to give a $100,000 to [National] Urban League [New York, New York].  And we had a couple of housing developments built.  I can't think of the names of them now.  And he supported [Kenneth A.] Gibson.  He was the first black mayor of--I think of Newark [New Jersey].  Turned out to be a jackass but all right.
Speaker 1: So with--with--with--do you remember the Gibson--I mean can you describe who Gibson--what Gibson was like, you know, and why you sort of got behind the--you know behind his campaign.  Mainly because he was the first black?
Speaker 2: Mainly because not the first black.  Mainly because he was black that's--just wanted to sort of add something to his reputation in the community by helping.  Well, that's the only thing we had.  We didn't have any other black.  And so we had to help him.
Speaker 1: And that was in what year?
Speaker 2: This was in oh, I'd say '70 [1970], maybe '73 [1973], '74 [1974].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Somewhere around there.  I know it was when I first came to New Jersey.  Yeah I first came there in '70 [1970]--did I say '72 [1972]?
Speaker 1: You said, yes.
Speaker 2: No, no.  Well, this must have been '60 [1960] something.  'Cause I first went there, it was '62 [1962].  And then '70 [1970]--
Speaker 1: You said '67 [1967] to '71 [1971] you worked with--
Speaker 2: Did I say '67 [1967]
Speaker 1: Mm-hmm
Speaker 2: Well that's what you wrote.
Speaker 1: (Unclear)--
Speaker 2: I don't think I said that.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well you worked with affordable housing I think '67 [1967] to '71 [1971]
Speaker 2: Well, that may have been (unclear) (simultaneous)
Speaker 1: Okay.  Yeah.
Speaker 2: But I went with Charlie [Charles Engelhard] right after we came back from oh, within a month after we came back from Africa.  And we went to Africa in August of 1962.  Yeah '62 [1962].  So this would had to be in '63 [1963] or '64 [1964]--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --that he was elected mayor I think.
Speaker 1: Were you on--did you know a gentleman named Bynoe, by the last name Bynoe?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Victor here in Boston.
Speaker 1: Victor, right.  Victor Bynoe.
Speaker 2: Victor Bynoe and John Bynoe, yeah.
Speaker 1: And they were involved--were they--now they were involved--were they involved in immi--okay.
Speaker 2: No.  John--they were--they were--they were very involved in civil--well John had some involvement.  I think he became president of the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] back in around 1980.  But the main thrust was over after--by that time.
Speaker 1: At that point.  Okay.  Okay.
Story_ID: 169028
Speaker 1: Now I want--I wanna ask you also the other work that you did at--as president of the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] have we covered it?  Were there other things that you did that you're sort of proud of that happened?
Speaker 2: Yes. I'm proud of.  I got the first black baseball player to break the color line in the Boston Red Sox [Boston, Massachusetts].  They refused to put a black player in there.  We did arrange that.  We--(simultaneous)
Speaker 1: Do you remember his name?
Speaker 2: Yeah [Elijah Green] Pumpsie.  I don't know his true name.  But his name as far as I remember is Pumpsie Green.  I don't know whether you remember that or not.  If you're a baseball fan.  But things went to his head after a year.  He stayed out to late at night.  He didn't last.  But anyway he got on the roster.  We broke down discrimination in several of the restaurants.  They wouldn't say we aren't serve you here, but they would put you in awkward places in the--in the restaurant.  And say or they would say no reservations and we're filled up and that sort of thing.  We broke that down completely.  We did that because I had a friend who was chairman of the Commission Against Discrimination.  And I used to bring all this stuff to him and get the quick action.  And we used to (laughter) we used to fine these people seventy-five, seven thousand, five thousand. And we stopped it.  Surprising that was happening in Boston [Massachusetts] but it was.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: I believe that couldn't--had an office downtown.  I gave it (unclear) but couldn't go to the luncheon.  And it was in this restaurant.  (unclear) restaurant I'll never forget that.  Until we broke it down.  What else did we do?  Oh, we had took part in the March on Washington [1963].  March on Selma [Alabama] [Selma to Montgomery Voting Rights March, 1965].  I can't think of (unclear) what may seem important to you didn't seem important to me.
Speaker 1: Right.  I understand.  I understand sir.  But let me ask you, what--oh, you mean what seemed important to the --the questions I'm asking don't seem important to you?
Speaker 2: No, no, these things that I did--
Speaker 1: They didn't seem important at the time?
Speaker 2: No, no, no.
Speaker 1: Okay. Okay.
Speaker 2: I was just doing what I was supposed to do.
Speaker 1: Right.  But they were--okay.  But it--those--those--those steps have a lot to do with how things are now.
Speaker 2: Oh, I'm sure they did.
Speaker 1: That's right.  That's right.
Story_ID: 169029
Speaker 1: When did you become general counsel for Simmons College [Boston, Massachusetts]?
Speaker 2: Simmons College?  That was in 1970 I think.  Or 1971 either one.
Speaker 1: Okay.  But in 1970 and '71 [1971] you were also with the [Massachusetts] Department of Public Utilities, you were the commissioner then; right?
Speaker 2: Of what?
Speaker 1: The Department of Massachusetts--(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: Public utilities.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Now can you talk about how that appointment came about?  'Cause you were no longer, you know--
Speaker 2: Well, how that came about.  As I said these things seem hard--
Speaker 1: Well, it's just--okay.
Speaker 2: I worked with a fellow in the attorney general's office.  Who now is an appeals court judge.  And a woman who graduated from Wellesley [College, Wellesley, Massachusetts] and went to Harvard [University] Law School [Cambridge, Massachusetts] and worked not under me but she was working in my office as a research person.  Who is now a [Massachusetts] Supreme Court Justice by the way.
Speaker 1: And her name?
Speaker 2: Judith Cowin.  And she was (laughter) assigned to my office and Bill [Cowin] and I had been friends and he'd have to walk by my office to do some many things.  And every time he walked by he would distract her so I said, "Why in the hell don't you marry the guy?"  As it turned out they got married.  And they give me credit for it.  But anyway that's the relationship.  And one day as I say they're both judges now, both capable lawyers.  I saw Bill on the street one day.  And I said, "What's the matter you look like you worried."  He said, "Gee, I got a vacancy I gotta fill."  He was chairman of the Public Utilities Commission.  He said, "I got a vacancy on the Board and I don't know how to fill it."  I said, "I'll take it."  He said, "You will?"  I said, "Yeah."  (Laughter).  That's how it happened.
Speaker 1: Hm-mm.
Speaker 2: Just like that.
Speaker 1: And his last--
Speaker 2: On the street.
Speaker 1: His last name?
Speaker 2: Cowin, C-O-W-I-N.
Speaker 1: Okay--
Story_ID: 169030
Speaker 1: So I was at the, you know, becoming the [Massachusetts Department of] Public Utilities commissioner.  And, you know, a lot of times with public positions they give you a vantage point that you would--and--you know that you wouldn't otherwise have so, I--if you could just talk about what, you know, what the commission was over, you know the --
Speaker 2: Well we had--do you mean what supervision?
Speaker 1: Yeah.  What supervision?
Speaker 2: We had supervision over rate cases and increase in rates for the telephone company.  Liquor companies, the gas companies, water companies.  That's about all.  Public utilities.  That kept us busy enough and it was all based on rate changes except when I came in I started something else when I found out what they were doing is the telephone company was collecting a twenty-five dollar deposit from areas which you--I was familiar with when I looked at the exchange and it was all black neighborhoods.  I said what the heck you doing with collecting a twenty-five dollar deposit from them and you're not collecting twenty-five dollars from so and so out in this neighborhood.  So I stopped that.  I asked them what they did with that money.  (Laughter) and they said--they said they invested it.  I said are you gonna give it back to 'em with interest? Which they did.  I broke that down.  In fact, I think I broke down, or started the breakdown of the--of the entire telephone system where American--what is it?  AT&T [American Telephone and Telegraph Company, formerly Southwestern Bell Corporation] what's that?  American Telegraph network [sic] practically owned the whole telegraph and telephone system.  I broke that down.  So that they have individual telephone.  Every state or city now has a different telephone company and they're no longer [Southwestern] Bell [Corporation, later American Telephone and Telegraph Company].
Story_ID: 169031
Speaker 1: You were able to use your--your position to make some things happen you know--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --for--for the [Massachusetts Department of] Public Utilities Commission.  Did you--did you like that better than being assistant attorney general or not?
Speaker 2: Did I like being--Yeah, I liked it very much.
Speaker 1: Did you like it better than being assistant attorney general or you liked both of them?
Speaker 2: Well what did you say?  What did I like?
Speaker 1: Did you like being, you know, one of the commissioners of the--
Speaker 2: Oh, I'd rather be an assistant attorney general.  Commissioner I mean, I'll be honest with you.  I had a hard time understanding all these rates and changes and so forth.  And although I went along with the majority.  I really didn't understand it.  I wasn't there long enough actually.  I was only there for a year and a half and then when they made me chairman, I just had somebody else do the work and I'd sign it.  (Laughter).  I didn't understand it.
Speaker 1: Now who was mayor at the time that you were on the --
Speaker 2: That a gubernatorial (unclear) (simultaneous)
Speaker 1: Oh, that's a gubernatorial--I'm sorry.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Who was governor?
Speaker 2: Same fellow that appointed me a judge [sic, Donald R. Dwight].  Now, what the heck is his name?
Speaker 1: Oh geez I wish I knew.  Okay.  Okay.  Well, I wish I knew.  Okay, we don't--that--there's a record of that.
Story_ID: 169032
Speaker 1: So you did say that the--the whole thing you had--now is your father [Herbert Tucker] alive at this point?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: He's not.  When did your father die?
Speaker 2: Nineteen forty-eight [1948].  He was hit by a train.  Red Cap you know, he was hustling at that.  He was--ran across the tracks to come beat an incoming train and thought he could beat the train that was coming in the opposite direction.  Didn't do it.  And the train hit him and threw him about a hundred yards.  And he lay in bed for a year almost and then he just gave up.
Speaker 1: Hmm.
Speaker 2: That was my first case.  (Laughter)  I sued the railroad for negligence.  Ever been in Boston [Massachusetts] and ridden on a train?  Well, you know, when you leave back--South Station [Boston, Massachusetts] goes through a tunnel.  Well I told them that, that tunnel was something that they should not have because the steam trains go through there, they can't see anything and the (unclear) the steam from the steam trains forms a cloud, or shroud almost around the train.  They can't see anything.  These engineers didn't see my father.  And I think they gave me eighty-five thousand dollars which was a big settlement.  My first case.  Yeah. It was very interesting.
Speaker 1: How long did it take to get that award on your father's case?
Speaker 2: How long did it take me?
Speaker 1: Mm-hmm.
Speaker 2: Maybe a year and a half.
Speaker 1: That was a large sum amount.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Yeah.
Speaker 1: You were married at the time too?
Speaker 2: And so was he.  I got it for his widow.  He was married.  That son of a gun he was so loyal to me and I to him I guess he didn't marry after my mother died for twenty-five years sticking with me.  And he married this woman she was a very nice woman.  I guess I was jealous of her because I--he--she was taking him away from me (laughter).  But she turned out to be a nice lady.  And we got along pretty well.  But anyway that's who I got the settlement for.
Speaker 1: I just think of all the fantastic things that you did and your father he must be smiling down looking on you, but I mean he--he would have been busting buttons and then some.
Speaker 2: Oh, I think he would.  I think he would.  Yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  So--so when you--'cause you really--you--you met his expectations and surpassed them by a great deal.
Speaker 2: I did what?
Speaker 1: You surpassed your father's expectations.
Speaker 2: Oh, I don't know whether I did that or not (laughter).  I don't know whether I did that or not.  I often think if I had been a good student I probably--where I would have been today.  But I was just an average student.  These kids coming out of law school today starting at $125,000 a week.  That's their starting salary.  'Cause I wouldn't have done that anyway.  I wouldn't take a job.  I wanted to practice.  I think these kids are coming out of school and going to these law firms are just professional clerks.  They're in little cubby holes about as big as this section here.  They don't see the light of day.  Don't know anything but--one thing.  I mean maybe arguing electric company rates and maybe about environmental affairs it's just, I don't know, I didn't like that.  I wouldn't like life like that at all.
Story_ID: 169033
Speaker 1: Sir, I want to ask you then, when you became a special justice that was in 1973?
Speaker 2: Seventy-one [1971] or seventy--(simultaneous)
Speaker 1: Seventy-one [1971].
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  '71 [1971] [sic, 1973].  And you said that happened just the same way that you became a, you know--commissioner.  You said someone called you and said would you--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Now, okay.  And--and did you leap at the--was--was a judge what you wanted to be?
Speaker 2: Eventually I hoped to be a judge, yes.  Yeah.  That wasn't the judgeship though at that time a special judge was paid about I think it was $2500 a year.  I mean it wasn't anything to it but I saw--I think I saw a future in it.  Right.  I think I better take this and although I had took it at a great financial sacrifice it turned out pretty well.
Speaker 1: And you were assigned Dorchester [Boston, Massachusetts].
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And I'm wondering what was the makeup of Dorchester--the ethnic makeup of Dorchester at that time?
Speaker 2: About ninety percent white.  In fact they didn't want me out there.  They didn't want me out there.  They had some neighborhood association that called after I was confirmed by the executive council.  Called and said that she represented Dorchester neighborhood.  She was telling me, "We wanted somebody from the area."  Well I knew what she was talking about.  And I said "Well that was not your choice."  I said, "The choice is with the governor."  She said, "Well we want you to meet with us."  I said, "I don't see why I have to meet with you (unclear) on the phone."  I said, "Why do I have to meet with you?  I mean I have a point if you don't like what I've done you go to the governor."  Heck I had--one of the few cases I had out there to give an example of how unwelcome I was out there.  I had some little kid--two instances--two.  One little kid there I guess he was about ten, twelve years old I had him for armed robbery.  Listened to what this kid is alleged to have done.  Is to have waited for this little kid who happened Caucasian.  To come out of the bank and robbed him of what he supposedly to have taken out of the bank out, of his account.  And they arrested him for that.  So I had some doubts about it.  And I said, "Look," to the prosecutor, I said, "I am going to continue this case 'cause I want to see a bank book and see the fellow from whom this--money was taken."  Well I didn't have to see him because I just saw the bank book.  There wasn't any withdrawal on the day that he alleged to have taken money.  So I threw the case out of the court (laughter) threw that back and criticized the cop.  I was on the cops all the time.  Another one I had I guess you probably read about a University of Massachusetts president, [William M.] Bulger.  I threw him out of my court when he was a lawyer.  A little girl sitting in the back of the room she was charged with assault and battery.  I think she was about nine years old.  And they had this force of lawyers in there to prosecute her for assault and battery and I look up and I see Bulger back there.  And he wasn't really even supposed to even be in this case.  But he represented the Massachusetts Teachers Union.  And what happened was that I don't know if you have it in Chicago [Illinois] or not but apparently somewhere along the line in grade school or primary school you're supposed to go through your head and see if there's lice in there or something.  But as far as I can see you have to get permission from the parents to do that.  Well they failed to get permission of the parent and this little girl was sitting in the chair and they came to her and she was, "Go away, go away, go away."  And she hit the person that came by doing this you know.  This was one of the charge of assault and battery that they were sentencing her with (laughter) assault and battery. And that damn Bulger was trying to aid in the case and see if this girl was convicted.  I threw him out of court.  I did throw him out of the court I said to the court officer, "Mr. Court Officer will you kindly escort that gentleman out of this courtroom," and he did.  And he never forgot.  Anyway I threw the case out of the court.  But that's the sort of thing I confronted--which confronted me when I first went to Dorchester.  Now, they don't-- (simultaneous)
Speaker 1: Now--(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: They didn't want me there in the first place.
Story_ID: 169034
Speaker 1: Now that--that--those cases did they receive publicity, the second one especially with the throwing the--him out of the courtroom?
Speaker 2: No more than, you know, just an ordinary thing about a finding of not guilty but not the throwing out of court or (unclear) the police--they had a police--police paper--newspaper in which they used to give me the dickens all the time.  I forget they used to call it Certurian [sic, PAX Centurian].  It said I shouldn't be on the bench.  And I shouldn't be doing this and that.  So (unclear) (laughter) those police men were really something.  They were really arresting those blacks for no reason at all.  And if they came before me, they knew they were in trouble.  I had a great time until they began to respect me.  Then I got friendly with 'em and they got friendly with me and they knew where I stood and they stopped all that damn business.  So we got along pretty well.  But I had trouble with policemen though all over the state.  I had one policeman down here in New Bedford [Massachusetts] for bringing in a fellow in for assault and battery on a police officer, that's a big crime if you do hit a police officer.  And seems as though he had a boat and this fellow with who he charged had a boat.  They were both arguing over the same (unclear).  And the fellow beat him up.  He wasn't there actually as a police man at that time he was a--I said you were bringing the wrong action, Mr., in the wrong court.  And I--I had another where the police man was in an after hours--he played football for, I guess, for recreation on a team.  So he said when they got through with the football game they stopped at the local bar to get a glass of beer or something and the fellows at the other end of the bar starting ragging him and telling him he can't play football.  So he started (laughter) to come down and try to do something to these guys.  And he got the worst end of it and he called other cops.  And they all, all the police men came in the door and we got a big brawl down there.  And I threw that one out to.  So they got to know Herb Tucker throughout because I sat in probably every court in this Cape.  They knew they couldn't do that to me.
Speaker 1: Now did you want to get assigned out of Dorchester when you--after that?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: No you didn't you were fine there.
Speaker 2: No, this was my assignment
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  No, no, I didn't want--
Speaker 1: No.
Story_ID: 169035
Speaker 1: Now what did you like about being a judge, sir?  'Cause you had a thriving practice [Cardozo & Tucker, Boston, Massachusetts], you know, beforehand and what--
Speaker 2: I know.  Well, I tell you what.  I figured the way I was making money I had to also think of retirement.  And that I had to--if I wanted to retire at the level, or the economic level that I wanted to, I would have to pay a heck of a lot of money while I was working.  So that I would make--be making (unclear).  So I thought maybe I'd better look for this.  And I got the pension I didn't have to pay a cent for.  Seventy-five percent of my salary for the rest of my life.  And that's what made me really move.  And it's not bad.  Particularly since I didn't have to pay for it.
Speaker 1: That's right.  Now did you--did you miss any of your private practice though?
Speaker 2: Did I miss it?
Speaker 1: Mm-hmm.
Speaker 2: No.  If I'm being honest about it, and the rest may seem immodest, but I like the authority.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I liked that. The authority and respect.  That's what I really liked.  I had probably hundreds maybe thousands of cases in my fifteen years and I had two appeals that I know of and they lost both of them.  So that makes me feel very good.
Speaker 1: And why do you think you were such a good judge?
Speaker 2: Common sense.  That's all it is.  Common sense.  You gotta see through things and I don't know what it is but a Supreme Court Justice and he said to me one time, "There are only nine men on the Supreme Court," he said, "Attorney, you seem to hit the knot on the head right off the bat."  And I said, "Thank you, your Honor."  And that meant that I could see through some of these things and I felt very good about that.  Although they gave me hell later because when I stopped filing briefs I would submit on brief rather than going to arguments, there's no need to argue this case it's open and shut.  And so I didn't go up and they complained that Tucker didn't appear before the justices as often as he should.  But that was the reason.  I figured they know about as much about it as I did.
Speaker 1: And the cases that you saw you didn't get tired of seeing the same cases over and over again the types of cases?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Mm-hmm
Speaker 2: Only so many capital cases you can have.  Can't see them over--no situation is the same.  Factual situations differ in every instance.
Speaker 1: Was there a case that you felt you weren't--that you maybe didn't call it right?  You, yourself not being overturned but yourself, 'cause remember you're saying that you know I had sort of an instinct about things and being able to see through, but was there a case that afterwards you sort of struggled over and--
Speaker 2: Never.  Never.  Maybe that says conceit, I don't know.  But I never thought about it in fact I forgot about 'em after I come out of the courtroom.
Speaker 1: And did--now were you--did--did--how many jury trials did you preside over?
Speaker 2: None.  I refused the jury trial 'cause I wanted to make my own decisions.  I didn't want the jury and I know what a jury does.  They go on a jury having served on a jury although I never served on a jury but it's quite an experience.  They come in there they talk about everything but the case.  And I just didn't want them to bother.  So I wouldn't take jury cases.
Story_ID: 169036
Speaker 1: Can you describe the--the--the--the municipal court system there, I mean in, you know in Boston [Massachusetts]?  How many judges are part of it and you know and the different divisions--(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: Oh we have a funny, funny system here.  We have the Boston Municipal Court which is comprised--it's a separate court from the so called district courts and we have about maybe twenty-five or thirty districts in Massachusetts.  And each one has its presiding justice.  And maybe two or three associate justices.  The Boston Municipal Court is a separate entity.  And it has its own presiding justices.  Its own budget.  Its own staff and everything else.  So its--its not difficult to assess.  It's a court of primary jurisdiction actually.  And now they've made it so that you can appeal those decisions only on matters of law.  It used to be so that you can get two bites of the same apple.  But you can't do that anymore.  If you bring a suit in the district court, then you can appeal only on matters of law.  So that's cut down the trials a little bit.  And they've got into a--a situation of Adult Dispute Resolution, ADR.  And which I started here in, oh in Martha's Vineyard [Massachusetts].  And that helps a lot and reduces the case load by getting people to settle their disputes outside of the courtroom.  They're not bound so much by--too much--by rules of evidence.  And they can more easily come to a resolution (unclear) more in a more timely fashion than going to courts.  And its very--becoming very popular.
Speaker 1: And you were a proponent of that because of what?  Because you felt that things--people would fight unnecessarily or--I mean why were you a promote--a proponent of the a--adult--what is it?
Speaker 2: Adults.
Speaker 1: No adult what is the term again?  Adult--
Speaker 2: Res--
Speaker 1: Resolution --
Speaker 2: ADR.
Speaker 1: Di--
Speaker 2: Dispute resolution.
Speaker 1: Resolution.  So is that like really a form of arbitration.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Yeah.  But arbitration one person settles it, mediation the two people agree to a settlement.  There's no arbitrary there at all--
Speaker 1: So ADR is a form of mediation then?
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  Okay.  And what--and why were you a proponent of that?  Why did you sort of lead the charge on that?
Speaker 2: Well, because I worked with a fellow a judge in the Dorchester [Boston, Massachusetts] court who tried it in Dorchester, there's so many frivolous actions coming in there.  And he thought of the idea.  And I just carried on from what I saw that he had done.  And brought it down here.  It worked.
Speaker 1: Now the difference between the municipal courts and the--the--I mean the, the district courts though there part of the same system what were--you said Boston had a different system.
Speaker 2: They had--(simultaneous)
Speaker 1: What was--what was the difference between--
Speaker 2: Jurisdiction is the same.  That's what they have a big dispute about that right now.
Speaker 1: But what--what cases would be brought in municipal and what in the district court?  Are you saying they had overlapping jurisdictions?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: But if I were, if I'm a plaintiff where am I--where am I filing my, you know, case?
Speaker 2: It all depends.  File your case where your defendant is.  But people bring it to Boston Municipal Court because that has jurisdiction over the whole city whereas West Roxbury [Boston, Massachusetts], Dorchester and so forth are all subordinate in a sense. Not subordinate but at least they can bring actions in those courts as opposed to Boston Municipal Court.  And they're trying--the legislature is now trying to consolidate that.  So that the Boston Municipal Court and the district court are one and the same.  Although right now they have the same jurisdiction.
Story_ID: 169037
Speaker 1: So--so you're saying that the jurisdiction that there's a fight right now.  I mean they're trying to resolve the fight between the municipal and the--
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Yeah.
Speaker 1: --the district court.  What were other things that you played a role with in terms of you know the judicial system there [Boston, Massachusetts] or you know participated in--on committees or things to either help institute reform or changes?
Speaker 2: I can't think of anything else.  Although I can recall.  I tried this (unclear) his mother.  I tried to start an association of judges for Massachusetts and the Supreme Court said you can't do it.  We don't want an association of judges.  And yet a year or so ago or a year or so later, someone else did and they formed an association of judges.  It's a pretty strong organization.  But I put the seed in there for that.  Some thirty years ago.  I and Elwood McKenney.  But I didn't participate in any--anything like--I could have and should have but I didn't.
Speaker 1: Well how many judges were part of the municipal system?
Speaker 2: Oh, they're innumerable.  I can't tell you.
Speaker 1: You don't know how many, I mean--
Speaker 2: I can't tell you.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.
Speaker 2: Maybe a hundred.
Story_ID: 169038
Speaker 1: Any other stories about your time on the bench?
Speaker 2: Well, anyhow I happened to get down here [Martha's Vineyard, Massachusetts] was like what is it?  What is the expression, Br'er Rabbit in the briar patch or something?  Because we'd be coming down here for you know weekends and so forth.  We bought the house and we come down here weekends all year long.  And the fellow I worked with was a presiding judge in Dorchester [Boston, Massachusetts].  I was sitting down have lunch with him and I said, "Paul," I said, "Why do you--well when do you have--when do you see your brother?"  He said, "I see him--."  His brother was governor.  I said, "When do you see your brother?"  He said," Oh, I see him quite frequently, we have dinner together."  I said, "When are you gonna have dinner with him next time?"  He said, "Tonight."  I said, "Well you tell him I wanna be at Martha's Vineyard [Massachusetts]."  And that's the way it happened.  Next thing I know they put my name in and they appointed me down here.
Speaker 1: So that's how you--okay.  And so you were down here and not at--I thought you were also at New Bedford [Massachusetts] too?  No--
Speaker 2: Well then, you know, when you're down here--see 'cause we don't have business in the wintertime that warrants the court being open every day.  So three days a week I would be either in New Bedford or (unclear) or any other, I'd be on the circuit.  Any other court in this area.  But--and just here on Fridays and Mondays.
Speaker 1: And--and so the whole--the--the--the court load it must have not been as much down here?  Was it as much the court--the case load, I'm sorry, case load?
Speaker 2: Well, for the two days you're down here the case load is pretty heavy.  But they would manage to put everything on Friday or Monday.  So you'd have Monday, you'd have the arraignments of the hell raisers who come down here on the weekend.  Think they can get away with something.  I used to put, (laughter) I had a system called operation clean sweep.  What was that?  We had a whole lot of warrants.  People come down here and get parking tickets or speeding tickets and say oh, we don't have to bother with those country folk.  We don't pay any attention to 'em.  So we find out where they are turn the warrants out and bring 'em back. Not only do they have to pay the expenses to come back here, but they have to pay the fine on top of that.  And they say--and then these kids who'd come down here they'd get themselves into trouble I had a system for them too--but although their violation would be minor, their parents didn't know that they were acting like damn fools coming down here.  So I used to hold them at fifty dollars and tell them I want the cash forth with.  Nine times out of ten they don't have it.  They'd have to call home and get it and I know darn well the parents are going to say what do you want it for and they'd get their butts whipped when they get home.  So I--I used that (laughter)--as a weapon down here.  But the judges that come down here now, don't seem to care.  They don't do anything.  They have a different judge every week almost.
Speaker 1: Now when you--so what year did you come down here?  What year did you--you--
Speaker 2: Seventy-eight [1978], '79 [1979]. '78 [1978] or '79 [1979] I forget.  To--to be judge down here?  Is that what you're talking about?
Speaker 1: Yes, sir.
Speaker 2: Either --'79 [1979] I guess it was.
Speaker 1: And you retired in 1980--
Speaker 2: Five [1985].
Speaker 1: --five [1985].  Okay.
Story_ID: 169039
Speaker 1: Sir, let's talk about the first time that you came to Martha's Vineyard [Massachusetts].
Speaker 2: Well, I was eleven years old when I first came here.  Eleven--ten or eleven when I first came here.  And we stayed up in a cottage over there where a woman rented rooms in what they call the Highlands.  And my father [Herbert Tucker] brought us down here.  My father was a great (laughter) number player--he used to play the numbers.  And when he hit, you know what happened: we'd buy new shoes and we'd get new suit and we got a vacation.  So he brought us down here.  And that of course was when the numbers were illegal.  And I can't remember we used to--I don't think she fed us, the woman.  I think all she gave us was rooms.  But we couldn't eat in every restaurant down here.  At least they weren't--we weren't welcome, we'll put it that way.  And I can't remember now exactly what restaurants were open.  But there was, there were two or three on Circuit Avenue.  I call that Circus Avenue (background noise).
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: So you were talking about, you know, coming here.  And you said Circuit Avenue was called Circus Ave-
Speaker 1: I call it that.  I don't know who else calls it (laughter)--I call it Circus Avenue.  You see more weird people down there than not.  But I don't--I can't recall whether we ate down there or not.  There weren't a number of restaurants down there.  I think we used to eat up at a place called Shearer Cottage [Martha's Vineyard, Massachusetts], which has been around for a long time; founded by the Shearer family.  Some of their more famous residents were--geez, I can't even think of his name.  He was quite a writer, a singer around the time of W.E.B DuBois.  Oh, what was his name?  I can't think of his name.  I don't know why I forget these things.  I can't tell you.  But there's quite a--well it was quite a nice place.  Quite a nice place.
Speaker 2: So what was--what was the Martha's Vineyard of that time like?  Back in the 1920s when you were a young boy?
Speaker 1: It was lovely place to have a vacation.  We used to go to the beach every day; (unclear) didn't have any problem.  If we had money we'd go to the Flying Horses I remember.  But nobody looked at you peculiarly.  It wasn't as lively as it is today--there weren't as many people.  You know the population of this island even now is, in the wintertime the permanent population is under twelve thousand; and it grows to about a 130,000 in the summertime.  So it's--it's hard to say.
Story_ID: 169040
Speaker 1: Can you talk a little bit about the history of blacks on the island [Martha's Vineyard, Massachusetts]?
Speaker 2: Well one of the early--did you ever hear of Lois [Mailou] Jones?  Now, her family was one of the first families to come here.  And they came here to work in service in somebody's home or something.  And established a rooming house for--for blacks down here.  And they were--at that time they were servants in the homes of these other people.  And they had no place to live.  In fact they had sort of a group of cottages down in Edgartown [Martha's Vineyard, Massachusetts] where all the black help used to live.  But not having an interest in race relations as such in those years I don't remember anything outstanding that people were of any particular note.
Speaker 1: Now you were coming down from the '20s [1920s] on or was there a whole period of time--
Speaker 2: Whole period where we didn't come.
Speaker 1: And then when did you start coming again?
Speaker 2: My aunt bought this place around 1950.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: This--this place I have is alleged--is alleged to have come up from the campground.  They move houses down here like you move furniture.  And this was nothing but a wooden structure with four walls.  You could sit in here and watch--look through the cracks and see outside.  And she bought this place and sold it to me for $4600.  It's assessed now for, I think, it's $384,000.  Oh, boy.
Speaker 1: So, the--that's what I'm wondering.  Back when you start coming here.  So when you came, you know, when you were young you didn't have any sense except it was a fun place to come; right?
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: When you came back, you know, when your aunt bought it, in 1950, did you have--what was the black community like here and who was--who were some of the families that were coming, you know, on a regular basis.
Speaker 2: MARY TUCKER: Shearer Cottage.
Speaker 1: No, dear we was talking about families.  Oh, the Jones family come here on a regular family--on a regular basis.  And there were a few people who lived here year around like Casey and Dr. Howard from New York.  I don't remember the names of these people.  What was the name--Roy Wilkins is what I'm trying to say.  Just--just came to me like that.  I was trying to think of the fellow who succeeded Walter White.
Speaker 2: That's right. I should have said that Roy Wilkins, right.
Speaker 1: Couldn't think of his name.  I don't know of any--Mr. Allen used to live across the street.  Used to come down here.  Who's Pat--Pat's maiden name, you know dear?
Speaker 2: MARY TUCKER: (Unclear)
Speaker 1: Who?
Speaker 2: MARY TUCKER: (Unclear)
Speaker 1: What dear?
Speaker 2: MARY TUCKER: Sanridge [ph.]
Speaker 1: Yeah Sandridge [ph.], Sandridge [ph.].  Hatten [ph.], I can't--Dorothy White.  I can't think, most of these people were my clients (unclear) I should be able to think of their names but I can't.
Speaker 2: Mary Tucker: Dorothy West.
Speaker 1: Dorothy West who claimed she was a writer from the Renaissance.
Speaker 2: Now when you--your wife [Mary Tucker] had talked earlier about it being a place, there were no place for blacks to stay.  There were, you know, it was--and so I'd like you to address, you know, what period of time, we were talking about 1950 or are we talking about back in--in 1920s?
Speaker 1: I'm talking about 1920 up to about 1950.  That was the age--the era in which blacks had to do it all the time.  In fact, they have this place called the Inkwell down here.  Now that isn't because black people go there (unclear) they do go there but that--you know that got the name because the people who were in the newspaper business down here or the printing business or whatever it was used to go down there to have lunch every day.  And because of the ink they used to call it the Inkwell because of the printer.  And that's how it got its name.  Long before the blacks even thought of going down there.  But people jokingly call it now the Inkwell.  In fact, the proper name for it is the Inkwell.  They print in the newspaper the Inkwell.  But it isn't because black people go there.  Can't think of any others, dear.
Story_ID: 169041
Speaker 1: Well, what stories would you hear about, you know, how blacks were treated on the island [Martha's Vineyard, Massachusetts] during those years [1920-1950]?
Speaker 2: Nothing.  I don't--nothing outstanding.
Speaker 1: Okay.  But then-- (simultaneous)
Speaker 2: As far as treatment is concerned.
Speaker 1: But then--then let me ask this.  So when did Oak Bluffs [Martha's Vineyard, Massachusetts] develop as the Oak Bluffs today?  Why was this the area that black people, you know, settled in and it was known (unclear)--
Speaker 2: 'Cause there was more cheap homes here than there were in any other part of the island.  And easily accessible.
Speaker 1: MARY TUCKER: (Unclear)
Speaker 2: Okay.  What--what?
Speaker 1: MARY TUCKER: The boats came in.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Well, the boats came here.  But that was it.  Homes here were much cheaper than a lot of 'em (unclear).  Oak Bluffs came out--it used to be called Cottage City.  And as opposed to the permanent homes that were in Edgartown [Martha's Vineyard, Massachusetts] and other places.  But this used to be called Cottage City.  And it was built on cottages such as this.  And other cottages that you see around here.  I don't know if you've been through the campground or not but that's what it was, what it's all about.  And I think that's why people settled here.
Speaker 2: Okay.  And the community that's--that was attracted here, did they come from all over or were they mainly Boston [Massachusetts] focused--(simultaneous)
Speaker 1: Started out for Boston only and Massachusetts people.  But then it spread to Connecticut and New York, New Jersey and still spreading.  There are people come here all the way from California now.  Just for a weekend some times.  They move around so easily and inexpensively they claim.
Speaker 2: So what made this community sort of unique here?  You know, it's been the subject of books and it's been the subject of a TV movie starring Halle Berry and--
Speaker 1: Well, everybody knows everyone down here in Oak Bluffs.  You go down the street and you know everybody.  And everybody speaks to you.  And it's not just a courteous thing, they know who you are.  They know this is Suarez's [ph.] son.  This is Sal Wisen's [ph.] nephew and so forth.  It's a--it's a great family.  A Portuguese settlement, actually.  Not so much for Cape Verdeans but for the actual people who live on the continent.  And everybody knows one another.  So that's one of the--one of the reasons.  This Portuguese American society up the street here.  It is big and powerful.  And it run--run the town in the sense that people who are in public office here have all come out of that club.
Speaker 2: And, you know, what was the relationship between the Portuguese and the black community?  I was just thinking that your--you know you hear so much about the Boston Irish.  You don't hear so much about the Portuguese.  You hear about Cape Verdean and yet you know what I find interesting is that your first partner was, you know, Portuguese.  The Portuguese were critical, you know, critical here at Martha's Vineyard.  So I'm just wondering, you know, what the relationship between the black community and the Portuguese.
Speaker 1: As far as I know it's, it's a normal relationship except for what they get from these Americans who are here.  They don't know anything about poor relationships in Portugal.  And they come over here and they learn from the white man here that you're not supposed to like Negroes.  And--but that's few and far between.  That's not an essential salient point.
Story_ID: 169042
Speaker 1: Now let's talk about Omega Psi Phi [Fraternity].  And you became Grand Basileus but can you talk about when you first were inducted into the, you know,--and you know what year you were and--and then I wanna talk about your role within the organization.  'Cause I read this whole report about the role you played in terms of the organizations fighting you know and there were off shooting you helping sort of bring things back together.
Speaker 2: I don't know I became a member in 1935.  And--
Speaker 1: Who recruited you?
Speaker 2: Nobody recruited me in a sense.  I knew I wanted to be an Omega man because in that--those days everybody I knew older than I and respected was Omega and that's why I wanted to be an Omega man.  Nobody recruited me.
Speaker 1: So who were some of the Omega's that--that you--you respected and admired?
Speaker 2: My brother-in-law was one, Bill Dabney [ph.].  Gee whiz.  Who was the fellow was in the White House with [President Dwight D.] Eisenhower and then became secretary of housing?  Roy Wilkins.  Percy Julian.  [Benjamin] Benny Mays, who used to be president of Morehouse [College, Atlanta, Georgia].  But they were all prominent successful men who met--everybody respected and liked.  And I just wanted to be in that coupe--company.  And I sought Omega.  Omega didn't seek me.  And I can't think of any other names.  Can you think of any names, dear?
Speaker 1: So who was--who was in the chapter that you became a part of?  Do you remember?
Speaker 2: Willie Brown, a lawyer from Charleston, West Virginia. Oh, dear.  Hugh Magbie, Bumpy Louden [ph.] a lawyer from Boston [Massachusetts].  I can't think of anyone else.  They're probably gone by now.
Speaker 1: How large was the chapter?  Do you know how--I mean locally when you joined?
Speaker 2: How large you said now?
Speaker 1: No.  How large was the chapter when you joined?
Speaker 2: Oh, maybe twenty-five or thirty members.  It's about the same today.  That's undergraduate.  The graduate chapter is about the same too.
Speaker 1: Can you talk about the whole philosophy behind Omega Psi Phi?
Speaker 2: Well, Omega Psi Phi why the slogan is friendship is essential to the soul.  And it's based upon more than brotherhood.  Based on friendship which is much more important than brotherhood.  Brotherhood sometimes is forced on you.  You don't have any choice.  But friendship is a choice.  And that's the philosophy.  I suppose, like any other Greek organizations try to help one another and what surplus you have, just to help those who are less fortunate on the outside.  So their programs are developed to help those who have a socio-action program.  Which attempts to help those who are less fortunate.  Even a--even abroad they send in a group of physicians over to Africa. Although I personally didn't see any point in that. We got enough illness and disease here.  Rather than going to Africa but--everybody has a niche.  Every Grand Basileus has a point he wants to make.  And a history he wants to leave.
Speaker 1: Now there was a time that--do you remember the name Alonzo Grigsby?
Speaker 2: Alonzo what?
Speaker 1: Grigsby.
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Do you remember the time when Alpha Omega break off to form its own chapter from the Omega, do you remember any of that?
Speaker 2: (Shaking head no)
Speaker 1: How about Tau Upsilon?  No.
Speaker 2: Who?
Speaker 1: It's Tau Upsilon?  Tau Upsilon? Well, it says in a response grand counselor Herbert E.  Tucker, Jr. wrote the supreme counsel in support of Alpha Omega's petition urging it to reconsider its decision.  The framers of the fraternity's constitution could never have intended that the prevention should be made for any group of nine or ten men to break away from the chapter and form another within the same jurisdiction of the former.  The evil of such a practice and the ultimate harm to the fraternity is quite apparent.
Speaker 2: That's me?
Speaker 1: That's you.  Is there another Herbert E. Tucker, Jr.?
Speaker 2: (Laughter)  No, I don't think so.  Because I can't remember I talk a lot. (unclear) (simultaneous)
Speaker 1: Okay.  To establish merely for the purpose of satisfying the whim of a certain few members rather than for the purpose establishing one for the benefit Omega is a practice that no supreme council should take.  The prerogative to further discretion of this sort should be great--could be greatly abused and Omega thereby weakened.  And then because you were the grand--it says the grand counselor so when would--this is--
Speaker 2: I was grand counselor from '48 [1948] to '53 [1953] I think.
Speaker 1: And this happened in 1950.
Speaker 2: Nineteen sixty [1960]?
Speaker 1: Fifty [1950]
Speaker 2: Fifty [1950].
Speaker 1: Nineteen fifty [1950]--
Story_ID: 169043
Speaker 1: Yes, 1950.  But it also talks about a letter in 1952 to Carl Moultrie.
Speaker 2: Carl Moultrie, yeah.
Speaker 1: Yes (laughter) national exec--okay.
Speaker 2: Do you know him or did you know him?
Speaker 1: No I'm just saying this is something I--I was able to print out and it, you know, your name came up in it, you know, as having sort of played the peace maker role and brought the groups back together again--
Speaker 2: Oh boy.
Speaker 1: --it says both Alpha Omega and Tau Upsilon, Upsilon or (unclear) chapters [of Omega Psi Phi fraternity] and then they, they learn--do you--this is--
Speaker 2: Well I--I--if it's there I must have done it.  But I don't remember it.
Speaker 1: (Laughter).  Okay.  Okay.  But look (laughter)--it's okay.  (Unclear) Okay.  What about, can you talk about some of the work that you did or your time, you know as grand basileus and what you're sort of proud of that--that happened.  Now you became grand basileus in what year?
Speaker 2: Fifty-five [1955].
Speaker 1: Fifty-five [1955].  Okay.
Speaker 2: Oh, I don't--my prime concern I was still with the civil rights organization and I got every chapter in the--in the fraternity to take a life membership in the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People].  And that stands today.  I started the--a life membership program for Omega Psi Phi [fraternity].  Figuring as naive as I was at the time that probably we could live on the interest.  Exist on the interest rather than upping the dues every year.  But that didn't prove because the inflation happened so fast we couldn't do that.  But it's still the life membership program is in existence and I've been given credit for having started it.  Those are about the two major things.  I can't think of anything else.
Speaker 1: How does the, you know, what is the--the difference between Omegas and, you know, Kappas and I mean as an Omega man?
Speaker 2: Nothing.
Speaker 1: Nothing?
Speaker 2: No difference.  Just in the name.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.
Speaker 2: I mean they're essentially for the same purpose.  And it happens that if your group of friends decide to go one way then they go that way.  Another group will go another way.  That's all that is.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 169044
Speaker 1: You know I want to ask you about certain people, if you have sort of you know favorite stories about them.  Like--I'd like to ask you do you have a favorite story about [HM Edward] Ed Brooke that you--you would like to share?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) no.
Speaker 1: You--
Speaker 2: I can't talk about my friend.
Speaker 1: Okay.  But, no, no, no.  Not talk about them in a negative way.  It could be a funny story.
Speaker 2: (Laughter)
Speaker 1: No.  Okay.  No.  Okay.
Speaker 2: I see (unclear)
Speaker 1: You must have some story.  Just a harmless story.
Speaker 2: He's a lucky son of a gun.  Decided to have--cause he--he can take a piece of mud and turn it into candy.  He has that knack.  He could always do that come up from nowhere.  Son of a gun.  No I don't remember any story about him.
Story_ID: 169045
Speaker 1: Is there anything else that we haven't discussed that you think would be important to--to talk about?
Speaker 2: Well I was alumnus of the year of my law school [Northeastern University, Boston Massachusetts] in 1971.  And I've gotten several awards.  I got everything but an honorary degree.  (Laughter) I worked on that but couldn't get it.
Speaker 1: What about being general counselor for Simmons College [Boston, Massachusetts].  We never really, you know talked about that.  You mentioned it.
Speaker 2: Well, my first job--Simmons College is situated in the heart of the city [Boston, Massachusetts].  But adjacent to a black community.  And they wanted an expansion program--a building.  And not one black person was working on the building.  So I told the president [William Holmes] we ought to do something about that.  So somehow I was able to cancel the contract and take pride in the fact that they told me we saved by canceling that contract, saved $600,000.  And we hired a firm that was interested in diversity.  So I feel good about that.  That was Bill--what was his name?
Speaker 1: MARY TUCKER: Holmes.
Speaker 2: [William] Bill Holmes.  He was the president [of Simmons College] at the time.  We also had an in-college--as they say in court--an in college hearing on the young woman who was--they claimed was discriminatory and they got her fired.  Those are about the two most important things.  The rest of it was just perfunctory.
Speaker 1: But how did you come to be general counsel of Simmons [College, Boston, Massachusetts]?
Speaker 2: I said I think I told you that.  That that was a time during the great social unrest of the country when the kids were taking over the president's office of the colleges.  And this fellow was scared out of his wits.  The president, and he called Ed Brooke and Ed was attorney general at the time and he called as I told you he referred all of his business to me.  And asked me to go out and talk with him.  I forget his name now.  It's a one syllable name.  And I go out and have a talk with him and see if we couldn't work this out.  And I did.  And was able to work it out to get the kids out of the--out of the office and back on the ground and stop making unreasonable demands.  That's how I got there.
Story_ID: 169046
Speaker 1: Now your view about the Civil Rights Movement.  Do you feel that--are you happy with the changes that occurred and--during that time?  The things that you fought so hard for?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Yeah.  I think there (unclear) may have been abused by some of us.  Unfortunately but they expect that.
Speaker 1: Well, what do you mean by that?
Speaker 2: Well basically what we're trying to do is to uplift people.  Socially, educationally, economically.  And there's so many of 'em who seem to be unwilling to, to do that.  Stealing, damn gangs all in the streets shooting one another in all the big cities.  I sat in a restaurant yesterday with a joker who kept his hat on the whole time he was sitting there eating.  And so I said--well that's what I mean when I say abuse.
Speaker 1: Are there things that you are disappointed with in terms of the direction of the black community?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: No.  You think things--they're better?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: You feel that they're much better.
Story_ID: 169047
Speaker 1: Oh, you must have known [William Robert] Bob Ming [Jr.].
Speaker 2: I was gonna ask--that's the name that was just in my head to ask you about Bob Ming.
Speaker 1: Oh, yeah he was a good friend of mine.
Speaker 2: Yeah Bob Ming--
Speaker 1: In fact we worked a case together.  And [HM] [the Honorable] George Leighton.  Well my partner [Antonio De Jesus Cardozo]--George Leighton is really Portuguese.  He spells his name L-E-I-G-H-T-O-N but it's really L-A-T-A-O which is the Portuguese for Leighton.  And he changed it to the L-E-I-G-H-T-O-N.  He left his sister here and my partner married her. So I know him.  He's been here [Martha's Vineyard, Massachusetts] several times, George.  Those were the two guys that I remember.  Only there was a woman Otis Nicholson [ph.].
Speaker 2: Hmm.
Speaker 1: You don't know her?
Speaker 2: Mm-mm.   But Bob Ming you know he died.
Speaker 1: Yeah I know, I know
Speaker 2: --penniless.  I mean it was--
Speaker 1: Untimely too.
Speaker 2: Right.  But a brilliant mind.  Everyone talks about--
Speaker 1: He was brilliant
Speaker 2: --how brilliant he was.
Speaker 1: He was the--he used to talk about Thurgood [Marshall] like I don't know he said I don't pay any attention to him. He's only a Fourteenth Amendment lawyer.  Fourteenth Amendment lawyer (laughter).  He used to give Thurgood a devil.
Speaker 2: Did you also know [HM] Truman [K.] Gibson [Jr.]?
Speaker 1: Yes.  He's from Chicago [Illinois] too.  He used to come here.  Yeah.  He used to come here.  In fact I think he was a politician in one of the presidential campaigns or something I forget which one.
Speaker 2: Now did you ever have any dealings with President [Harry S.] Truman when he was president?  A lot of people you know served--a lot of blacks served in his--in his administration.
Speaker 1: No.  First time I got into presidential politics was when [President John F.] Jack Kennedy was in it.  Other than that I had none.
Story_ID: 169048
Speaker 1: Now your assessment of [President John F.] Jack Kennedy's presidency, do you think he was a good president?
Speaker 2: I think he was a good, good, man.  I think he was a good president.  Yes.  He just didn't have time to develop what was all in the back of his mind.  Probably wouldn't had to deal with that fellow [President Richard] Nixon had he not been shot.  (Unclear) we gotta get rid of [President] George W. [Bush].
Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite Jack Kennedy story besides the one where he was saying, you know, you people that you had to get him to sort of stop.
Speaker 2: Well one-night after a speech he raided our meeting we had in the hotel.  It was in the hotel Statler [sic, Statler Hotel, later Boston Park Plaza hotel, Boston, Massachusetts].  He used to live on Bowdoin Street [Boston, Massachusetts] which is back in the state house.  And we were walking home and that's when they had the pay stations and he asked--asked me for a dime.  He never gave me back the dime.  He died owing me a dime.  He said, "Herbie you got a dime in your pocket?"  And I did.  I gave him a dime.  He put it in the pay station and made his telephone call.  He never gave me the damn dime back (laughter).  I remember that.  The pay station right at Charles Street and the foot of the common, Boston Common [Boston, Massachusetts].  He had to cut through the common to get to his house.
Story_ID: 169049
Speaker 1: How would you describe a black Bostonian though?
Speaker 2: How would I?
Speaker 1: Yeah.  The--the--the Boston [Massachusetts] community.  You know because it's a different community than a lot of the rest, you know, of the, of the--you know it's different from--
Speaker 2: From which community--which black community are you talking about?  Are you talking about the immigrants that came here in '46 [1946] or those who lived here?
Speaker 1: I'm talking about the ones who lived here.  Lived there.
Speaker 2: Well--
Speaker 1: Mary Tucker:  (Unclear)
Speaker 2: No what do I think of 'em.
Speaker 1: Mary Tucker:  (Unclear)
Speaker 2: I was asking how would he describe them, what he thinks of the Boston black community.
Speaker 1: Well they were almost as bad as the white community.  Like myself.  We thought we were somebody.  Really.  I can--you know what I used to go around the country talking about what you ought to do here in Charleston is this.  And what you ought to do in Mobile, Alabama.  And Tulsa, Oklahoma and so forth, I realized that we're doing the same doggone thing here in Boston.  Not realizing that they're doing the same thing here in Boston.  Well, we were being discriminated against.  It was so pure we handled-- we (unclear) put your--hold your head in a hole and want to believe it's not happening.  I think that's what it was.  You know the big shots of society in the so called bulwark of--of social and economic life was built around the post office, railroad porters and waiters in the city of Boston.  And yet if you see 'em outside of their occupation you'd think that they were bankers and all kinds and so forth.   So, that was--that was the Bostonian.  But now we're just like anybody else I guess.
Speaker 2: The bus thing.  What about the busing controversy?  That was not Boston's finest hour?
Speaker 1: It certainly was not.  It certainly was not.  And this fellow [William M. Bulger] that we just fired from the University of Massachusetts was one of the bulwarks we had to overcome during that period.  He resisted that like the dickens.  I'll never forget--I'll never forget him nor forgive him.  I suppose you know about that.  The University of Massachusetts president his brother [James 'Whitey' Bulger] is a most wanted man by the FBI [Federal Bureau of Investigations].
Speaker 2: Oh, yes.  I heard that.  That's right I read that recently.
Speaker 1: He's been before the congressional committee and he refused to disclose the location.  He says he doesn't know where he is but--
Speaker 2: That's right (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --he has been known to have been contact with him.  And so our governor [Mitt Romney], who is a Republican by the way, was putting pressure on him to get him to resign.  He wasn't going to resign.  But he resigned as of last Friday I believe it was.  We're glad to get rid of him.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I read about that.  I--I didn't know the other part.  But I read you know when they first said that his brother was--he had been visited by the FBI.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  Oh, yeah.
Story_ID: 169050
Speaker 1: Sir, your--your father [Herbert Tucker] wanted you to, you know, be a, you know, a lawyer and that's what you became and went on to become a judge.
Speaker 2: Mm-hmm.
Speaker 1: And when you look back at it would you choose another career?
Speaker 2: No.  No.  I'm glad I did.
Speaker 1: And why do you think the legal profession is such a wonderful career?
Speaker 2: Well it gives you an opportunity to express yourself.  Not--not necessarily orally.  It gives you an opportunity to bring a solution to a problem.  Like a lawyer says it isn't anything in the world that can't be solved.  One way or another.  Maybe favorably or unfavorably or what but it can be solved.  And I like doing that.  And my wife [Mary Tucker] says that I'm a little bit to realistic in my thoughts.  I don't give enough.  But I have certain basic principles I believe in and stick to 'em. That helps me.  The law helps me.  But I suppose it gives me as many enemies as it does friends.  So that (unclear) because I--I seem to be inflexible.
Speaker 1: And what are your principles?  What are a few of those principles?
Speaker 2: I don't wanna go into that.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.
Story_ID: 169051
Speaker 1: Then let me ask what--what is your--what do you want your legacy to be sir?
Speaker 2: My legacy to be?  It's just strange you should ask that because I've thought I would agree with my wife [Mary Tucker] that I wouldn't have any legacy.  Don't say another darn thing about me when I die, let me die and go away and forget about it.  Nothing.  That seems strange, but that's the way I feel.
Speaker 1: Mary Tucker:  He sounds ignorant.
Speaker 2: Well, (laughter) that too.  I'm pretty inflexible I don't care what--I don't have any legacy.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Mary Tucker:  She's not asking you to write you obit--
Speaker 1: What'd you say, dear?
Speaker 2: Mary Tucker:  She's not asking you to edit your obituary (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: I just want what--you know, what you want your legacy to be?
Speaker 2: I know what you want, I know what you want I don't have any.
Speaker 1: Okay.  What do you want to be remembered for?
Speaker 2: I want to be remembered for being a pretty decent fellow.  That's about it.  That's all.
Story_ID: 169052
Speaker 1: From left to right is my father.  Herbert E. [Tucker] Sr.  Next to him gently standing is my oldest sister, Thelma [Tucker].  Next to her is Virginia [Tucker].  Next to her is my mother [S. Ella Fitzgerald Tucker] seated with my baby brother [John Tucker] in her lap.  And next to her is my sister Constance [Tucker].  And I am between my dad's legs.  Standing up.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Okay.
Speaker 1: Looking at the picture.  I was about--must have been about four years old.  So that was picture was taken probably eighty-four years ago.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.  Ready.
Speaker 1: This was probably was taken on the same day.  That's my dad and I'm standing between my dad and my oldest sister.  My mother is seated in front of my father with my baby brother, John.  And to his right is my sister, Virginia.  And to his left or to my left is my sister Constance.
Speaker 2: (Next photo)
Speaker 1: And cameras in the courtroom and this artist did that and when he put he it in the newspaper I called him and asked him could I have the original.  He said sure.  And he gave it to me.  But that was during an actual trial.  But the trial was--was a bunch of blacks who created problems up in the white neighborhood.  They wanted me to put 'em all in jail.  Which I refused to do.
Speaker 2: OFF-CAMERA VOICE:  Do you remember when this was?
Speaker 1: That one had to be in 1972.
Speaker 2: Oh, good, you found one here?
Speaker 1: (Next Photo)
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.  And what was the occasion of this?
Speaker 1: There wasn't any occasion.  It was just--it was just my little bride.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  (Laughter).  And when--when was that taken?
Speaker 1: Oh, it was taken about ten years ago.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Here in Martha's Vineyard?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: (Next photo)
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.  Tell us about this one?
Speaker 1: My two daughters.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  And when was that taken?
Speaker 1: That was taken around 1956.
Speaker 2: You have to tell who's in the picture, sir.
Speaker 1: Huh?
Speaker 2: Did you tell him who's in the picture?
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Can you name your daughters for us?
Speaker 2: Well, there's Mary [Tucker] and my--me, and my two daughters.
Speaker 1: Okay but you have to, you have to give their names.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Name your daughters and with whom (unclear)
Speaker 1: Oh.  Gwendolyn [Tucker] is the tall one.  Gretchen [Tucker] is the shorter one.  Of course, Mary is seated there and that's me.  This one is dean of students at Brookline High School [Brookline, Massachusetts] now.
Speaker 2: Which one?
Speaker 1: The one that's the shorter one.
Speaker 2: Gwendolyn?
Speaker 1: The baby.
Speaker 2: (Next photo)
Speaker 1: That's just a study of me.  I used to keep a pipe in my mouth all the time.
Speaker 2: It's a beautiful picture.
Speaker 1: Until they operated on my mouth for cancer.  What darling?
Speaker 2: Mary Tucker:  You have two daughters.
Speaker 1: I'm not looking at that now, baby.
Speaker 2: Mary Tucker:  Okay.
Speaker 1: That's me.  That has to be at least fifteen years old because cause I haven't had a pipe in my mouth since fifteen--since 1985.
Speaker 2: (Unclear) you look tired.
Speaker 1: (Next photo)
Speaker 2: My buddy.  Honorable Muriel Snowden.  You know she got one of those MacArthur awards.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  See I know.  I mean I was saying, I don't know--She got the genius award?
Speaker 2: Huh?
Speaker 1: Did she get the genius award?
Speaker 2: I don't know.  I know that Otto that he was gonna get the balance of it when she died but they cut it off.
Speaker 1: They cut--oh, okay. Yeah I heard about--
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  When was that photo taken?
Speaker 1: This photo?
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Mm-hmm.
Speaker 1: This photo was taken around 1980.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Was there any special occasion?
Speaker 1: Huh?
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Was it a special occasion?
Speaker 1: No.
Story_ID: 169053
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.  Can you tell us about the photo?
Speaker 2: No.  I don't know what that is.  Well I haven't worn that type of glasses for twenty years.  So that should be around 1980.
Speaker 1: Do you know this man?  Do you know what this picture of her--come around here.
Speaker 2: Mary Tucker:  That one?
Speaker 1: Mm-hmm (Unclear).
Speaker 2: Mary Tucker:  (Unclear) I think it was Easter Sunday.
Speaker 1: Where?
Speaker 2: Mary Tucker:  Easter Sunday.
Speaker 1: Oh, that's when it was?
Speaker 2: Mary Tucker:  Yes.
Speaker 1: What are you holding?
Speaker 2: Mary Tucker:  You're holding--you have your arm around--
Speaker 1: Oh, I see.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: (Laughter)
Speaker 2: (Next Photo)
Speaker 1: Mary Tucker:  That's me and that's--
Speaker 2: That's Frank, I think.
Speaker 1: Mary Tucker:  Thats not Frank.
Speaker 2: (Next photo)
Speaker 1: That was in my practice.
Speaker 2: Mm-hmm
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  And the painted portrait?  (Unclear)
Speaker 2: Sir, you have to lean back.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Lean back. (Unclear)
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  And what was the occasion for the portrait?
Speaker 1: Nothing.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):   Did you have it commissioned, or?
Speaker 1: Yeah I--Bacharach [ph.] did that.  They had that out in the street advertising it.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: (Next photo)
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Can you tell us who was in this picture?
Speaker 1: Those are six people all (unclear) my kid.
Speaker 2: Just say from left right.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Just start from left to right.
Speaker 2: Left.
Speaker 1: Sit back, sit back, sir.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  (Unclear) side of the camera.
Speaker 1: Left to right.  Is Mary. And of course me.  Who is that one in front I can't see?
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Gretchen.
Speaker 1: Gretchen.  And then above her is Gwen.  And Gretchen Mary.  And then Pete. (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  That's it.
Speaker 2: (Next photo)
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay can you state that for me?
Speaker 2: A kid.  That kid is now an Episcopalian priest.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  And who he is?
Speaker 2: He's my nephew.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  And your wife's father?
Speaker 2: Huh?
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  And the man?
Speaker 2: And the man is my father-in-law, Mary's father.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.  I need to get his name on that tape.
Speaker 2: Leslie P. Hill.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  'Cause it's not necessarily Julie and I who will be--
Speaker 2: (Next photo)
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): is that this cottage?
Speaker 2: That's Bellrose [ph.] where Mary was born.
Speaker 1: Oh, is that where she was born?  I thought that's where you met?
Speaker 2: No that's where she was born.  The president--that's a president's house.
Speaker 1: Mary Tucker:  Oh, yeah.
Speaker 2: At Cheyney [University of Pennsylvania, Cheyney, Pennsylvania].
Speaker 1: Mary Tucker:  I thought that was an actual picture of Mary when she was born.
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  And she was born in the house?
Speaker 1: No I mean she was living there.  What's that one?
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 1: (Next photo)
Speaker 2: Well that's just a clowning picture.  My granddaughter on the ground, Gretchen Mercer now.  I   can't--
Speaker 1: Mary Tucker:  Gretchen, you and me.
Speaker 2: Gwennie [ph.], Gretchen, big Gretchen?
Speaker 1: Mary Tucker:  Yeah.
Speaker 2: My daughter on my right arm.  My wife on my left arm.  And I'm in the center.
Speaker 1: And on your favorite tennis court?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: (Next photo)
Speaker 2: I like to take the six of us.
Speaker 1: Mary Tucker:  At the fiftieth anniversary.
Speaker 2: That's the six of us.  He was--that's my oldest--older daughter and her son.  And me and Mary. And Gretchen Mary and her mother.
Speaker 1: (Next photo)
Speaker 2: Mary Tucker:  Who are those people?
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  (Laughter).
Speaker 2: You and me babe (laughter).
Speaker 1: That's wonderful.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: Next picture.
Speaker 1: That's in our youth.  The children say, "Shame on you."
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Were you married yet?
Speaker 1: Yeah (simultaneous)(laughter).
Speaker 2: Mary Tucker:  Yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: Okay (laughter).
Speaker 2: We were just married.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Where--where were you?
Speaker 2: We don't want a scandal, right?
Speaker 1: At a local beach.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Pardon?
Speaker 1: At a local beach.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
