Story_ID: 317492
Speaker 1: Okay, I'm gonna start by slating.  My name is Evelyn Pounds and I'm the interviewer and Scott Stearns is the videographer.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Please state your complete name and spell it for us.
Speaker 2: My name is [HistoryMaker] Beverly Daniel Tatum.  Beverly is B-E-V-E-R-L-Y, Daniel is D-A-N-I-E-L, no S on the end (laughter), Tatum is T-A-T-U-M.
Speaker 1: Your date of birth and location?
Speaker 2: I was born in Tallahassee, Florida, on September 27, 1954.
Speaker 1: Today's date?
Speaker 2: March 17, 2006, is today's date.
Speaker 1: The location of this interview?
Speaker 2: This interview is taking place in Reynolds Cottage, which is the president's residence at Spelman College [Atlanta, Georgia].
Speaker 1: Okay.  Your profession?
Speaker 2: I am a trained psychologist, so I would say I'm a psychologist by training.  I have been an educator for twenty-plus years, and currently I serve as the president of Spelman College.
Story_ID: 317493
Speaker 1: Now, I'm going to ask you a few People magazine-ish type questions.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: So bear along with me.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: What is your favorite food?
Speaker 2: Tofu (laughter).
Speaker 1: Caught me off-guard there. Favorite time of year?
Speaker 2: I like the fall in New England, the spring in Atlanta [Georgia].
Speaker 1: Okay.  Your favorite color?
Speaker 2: I probably should say blue, but it's not (laughter).  My favorite color is pomegranate red.
Speaker 1: Your favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: The ocean, anyplace.
Speaker 1: And, do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: Well--
Speaker 1: If you have one, and if you don't then that's fine.
Speaker 2: --well, you know, it depends.  I have certain, yes, I mean, I like to tell people to breathe deeply, so (laughter).
Speaker 1: Breathe deeply.
Speaker 2: Breathe deeply.
Story_ID: 317494
Speaker 1: Tell us something about your mother; what kind of person is she, but first tell us her name and if you remember her date of birth.
Speaker 2: My mother, her name is Catherine Maxwell Daniel.  She was born Catherine Faith Maxwell, married--my father's [Robert A. Daniel] last name is Daniel, so (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay.  Would you spell her maiden name?  Maxwell, M-A-X-W-E-L-L.  Did you say Faith, or--?
Speaker 2: Faith is her middle name.  You know, when she was born, I have a middle name.  My middle name is Christine.  Beverly Christine Daniel is my birth name, but I, the name I use today is [HistoryMaker] Beverly Daniel Tatum.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: My mother's birth name is Catherine Faith Maxwell, but her--the name she uses today is Catherine M. Daniel, but the M stands for Maxwell.
Speaker 1: And--
Speaker 2: And she was, and her date of birth is October 14, 1926.
Speaker 1: And where was she born?
Speaker 2: She was born in--I believe she was born in Danville, Virginia; though, I just wrote it down, actually, what did I write?  Clinton, North--
Speaker 1: Clayton, North Carolina (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Clayton, North Carolina. She grew up in Danville, Virginia, but she was born in Clayton, North Carolina.
Speaker 1: Now, tell us a little bit about her.  What kind of person is she?
Speaker 2: My mother is a very intelligent woman, very sociable.  She likes to chat with people.  She is very outgoing.  She is--she looks--I look a lot like her.  People often comment on that (laughter).
Speaker 1: I agree (laughter).
Speaker 2: My mother is, certainly was an excellent mother.  She worked for many years as a public school teacher.  She was a homemaker, initially the mother of four children.  When my youngest brother [Kevin Daniel] was in kindergarten, I think, she started, she went to work as a teacher, but she was--(unclear), but, you know, she was a very outgoing kind of person, very social.  She likes to be engaged in the world around her.  She was, she is a very well-educated person.  She went to college at Howard University [Washington, D.C.], graduated with a bachelor's of fine arts.  She was an art major, and then married my father, and she went back to school, it was to earn a master's degree in education, and then she got a second master's degree as a reading specialist and when I was a graduate student trying to finish my Ph.D., I used to say to myself if I can--if my mother could do two master's degrees with four children, I can be able to do one Ph.D. with one baby (laughter), yes.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Right, that is so true.  Do you have any favorite stories that she used to tell you when you were growing up?
Speaker 2: Oh.  Well, my mother used to tell a lot of stories; you know, I'm not sure that I can think of one that's a particular favorite, but she used to talk about her own growing up experiences.  She was the youngest member of the family.  She had a brother and a sister.  Her sister [Ruth Maxwell Mills] was, I think, five or six older and the brother [John Maxwell] may be three years older, but she lived in--she grew up in Danville, Virginia, and her mother came from a family, her mother's family owned a funeral home in Spartanburg, South Carolina, and my mother used to go visit her relatives, you know, the Callahans.  That was her, my grandmother's name was Viola Callahan Maxwell, and my mother used to go stay with the Callahans.  She had an aunt who was childless, I think, and my mother was like the favorite niece, and she would go stay there and she used to tell stories about how she would be nervous, you know, hanging out at the funeral home and like that (laughter). But she does, I remember my mother telling me one story where she went to visit her aunt and uncle and her aunt suggested that perhaps she stay there, you know, because she was childless and, I don't know, maybe she thought it would be helpful to her mother if, you know, she stay.
Speaker 1: To just stay moving just to be a part of that family (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, yes. And you know, my mother didn't like that idea much (laughter).
Speaker 1: I can imagine (laughter).
Speaker 2: I'm sure her mother didn't like that idea either, but I remember her telling me that she went one time and her aunt suggested that she just stay and she was like, no I have to go home.
Speaker 1: She was ready to take the first thing back to Virginia--
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Yes.
Speaker 1: --the first ride, anything that would take her back home.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 317495
Speaker 1: Did she talk anymore about her growing up days in Virginia?
Speaker 2: My mom [Catherine Maxwell Daniel] didn't, you know, talk a lot about it.  I don't remember a lot of stories.  I did visit her home in Danville, Virginia, when I was about sixteen.  She would take--my mother and I travelled to Danville to visit my [maternal] grandmother [Viola Callahan Maxwell].  My [maternal] great-grandmother [Carrie Callahan (ph.)] was still living at the time, and she and--I'm trying to remember my great-grandmother's first name.  Her last name was Galleon [ph.], but I'm trying to, my grandmother's name was Viola and I'm trying to remember my great-grandmother's first name--but at any rate, I'm having trouble remembering that, but we, you know, travelled to Danville and I remember spending time with my grandmother and my great-grandmother and it was kind of interesting.  You know, I remember the house where my grandmother, where my mother grew up and, it was in a black neighborhood and what was important about the visit, for me, was--because I grew up in a predominantly white community.  My parents moved to Bridgewater, Massachusetts in 1958 and we were the only black family on the street, and so when I went back home to Virginia with my mother to visit her mother and my great-grandmother, it was part of a larger black community.  There were a lot of black kids and I remember it being, you know, just being impressed with how many black children there were because I lived in a neighborhood where there weren't any except for what--my brothers [Eric Daniel and Kevin Daniel] and sisters [Patricia Daniel Keenan].
Story_ID: 317496
Speaker 1: Tell us about your father.  What is his name and where was he born?
Speaker 2: My father, his name is Robert Alfonse Daniel, Robert A. Daniel is how he signs his name, and he was born in Maryland; I believe I had wrote down Ridge, Maryland (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Ridge, uh-huh.
Speaker 2: --was born in Maryland. He is a retired college professor and an art professor.  His field was art education and he had a large family, six or seven brothers and sisters.  His parents [Constance Hazel Daniel and Victor Daniel] were also educators.  I actually, am what I would describe as a fourth generation educator and, so my mother [Catherine Maxwell Daniel] was an educator, my father was an educator, my mother's parents [Viola Callahan Maxwell and Edward Maxwell] were also educators, my father's parents were educators, and, you know, it goes back a few generations, particularly on my father's side of the family.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: And, so he--his parents, when he was born they were running a school in Maryland called the Cardinal--I'm blanking on the name but I actually have this piece of information--a family history was written about my family--and--
Speaker 1: On your father's side?
Speaker 2: On my father's side, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And Cardinal Gibbons, that was the name--it was the Cardinal Gibbons School [sic. Cardinal Gibbons Institute, Ridge, Maryland]--the Cardinal Gibbons School was a vocational school, kind of like Tuskegee [Tuskegee Normal and Industrial Institute; Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, Alabama], in fact sometimes it was referred to as the Catholic Tuskegee, it was a Catholic school, and my grandparents were like the heads of the school.  My grandfather and grandmother shared that responsibility, and it was intended to provide a liberal arts education for farmers in western Maryland, and my father grew--when he was born that's where they were living, so he and his brother and sisters lived there.  The school eventually closed, I think, during the Depression [Great Depression] it closed, and my grandfather, who was from the West Indies, he was from St. Thomas [Danish West Indies; St. Thomas, U.S. Virgin Islands], returned to the Islands to work and the family was, you know, he was still connected to the family but he couldn't find work after the school closed and so he returned and ran a boys school, I think in St. Thomas, and sent money back to the states.  My grandmother was a very strong personality as I remember her, and she had all these children, but she was a well-educated person herself.  She had gone to college.  She, in fact, spent a year at Spelman College [Spelman Seminary; Spelman College, Atlanta, Georgia] and then graduated from Atlanta University [Clark Atlanta University, Atlanta, Georgia], went on to Tuskegee, where she got a teaching certificate and that's where she met my grandfather.
Story_ID: 317497
Speaker 1: He [Tatum's paternal grandfather, Victor Daniel] had come to Tuskegee [Tuskegee Normal and Industrial Institute; Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, Alabama] from the Islands [Danish West Indies; U.S. Virgin Islands].  He left St. Thomas [Danish West Indies; St. Thomas, U.S. Virgin Islands] when he was about eighteen and pursued his education in the states and my grandparents got married.  They met and married in Tuskegee; so anyway, they had this career as educators together, but my grandmother [Constance Hazel Daniel], as I said, was a well-educated person and she became a writer.  She worked as an educator, but she also wrote for a black newspaper in Baltimore [Maryland], called the Afro-American [Baltimore Afro-American].
Speaker 2: Oh, really?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Okay, all right (unclear) (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And she was involved in Washington [D.C.]--so, my father's [Robert A. Daniel] family moved, ultimately moved to Washington, D.C., and he, I think, spent most of his growing up years in Washington, D.C. in a house called--on 1311 Girard Street, and I remember that because we used to visit every summer.  We would go to Washington to visit my father's relatives, and my mother [Catherine Maxwell Daniel] had rel--had family in Washington, D.C., too.  Her sister [Ruth Maxwell Mills] married and lived in Washington, D.C., so we visited my aunt and uncle and their families and my father's families and my grandmother, while she was still living, and my grandfather, too.
Speaker 2: Let me back up a second.  Now, your grandfather, and this is on your father's side, the school [Cardinal Gibbons Institute, Ridge, Maryland], you said that the family history has been written.  Was there a book written on the school also?
Speaker 1: Yeah.  Do you want me to show them to you?  Maybe A.J. [ph.] can get them.  I can hold them up for the camera--
Speaker 2: All right, and the name, well we can get that and then get the name of the book (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Well, there was a book--there was a published called 'Twenty Families of Color in Massachusetts' ['Twenty Families of Color In Massachusetts: 1742-1998,' Franklin A. Dorman], I think that's the name of it.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I've heard of that.  Okay.
Speaker 1: Anyway, it's sort of a genealogy of--the person [Franklin A. Dorman] who published this book was interested in black men who had fought in the Civil War, and he identified twenty such soldiers and traced their family genealogies, you know, out several generations.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: So, one of the--so the family that my mo--my father's mother was a descendant of the Kellogg family; William A. Kellogg, I think, was his name.  But, anyway, there was a Kellogg who was involved in the Civil War as a solider, and that family lived in the Boston, Massachusetts area in Cambridge, Massachusetts.  My grandmother, Constance Eleanor Hazel, was a--the Hazels were descendants of the Kelloggs.
Speaker 2: Now, let's go back.  Was this the black Kelloggs or the white Kelloggs?
Speaker 1: The Kelloggs I'm talking about were black.
Speaker 2: (Unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now whether they had any connection to some white Kelloggs, I don't know.
Speaker 2: No, I just wanted to make a little clarification 'cause I know the book was the 'Twenty Families of Color.'
Speaker 1: Yeah, 'Twenty Families of Color.'
Speaker 2: And it started with the war and, Civil War.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  So, the first, so if you go--if you're looking in the book, it starts with, you know, the chapter that my family's in is the chapter of the descendants of the Kellogg family.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Story_ID: 317498
Speaker 1: I can tell you the part about my grandmother.  So, Constance Eleanor Hazel [Constance Hazel Daniel] married Victor Hugo Daniel [Victor Daniel].  Constance Eleanor Hazel was my father's [Robert A. Daniel] mother.  Victor Hugo Daniel was my father's father (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Father, okay.
Speaker 1: So, Constance Eleanor Hazel was born in St. Paul, Minnesota, where her father, William Hazel [William Augustus Hazel], I believe his first name was William, was a artisan.  He made stained glass, and he, at some point, left Minnesota and came to Massachusetts, and she grew up in the Boston [Massachusetts] area.  She attended the Boston Latin School [Boston, Massachusetts] and she graduated from that school and came to Spelman [Spelman Seminary; Spelman College, Atlanta, Georgia] in the early 1900s, and--but she only spent one year at Spelman and then she transferred to Atlanta University [Clark Atlanta University, Atlanta, Georgia].  But her father, William Hazel, was, I believe, a self-taught artist, but he became, apparently quite well-known for his stained glass windows, and I'm told that there are buildings in the Boston area that have some of the stained glass that he made in them.
Speaker 2: And there are a lot of buildings, too, that do that even down by Paul Revere's--
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: --house down in, I think that's the West End [sic. North End] of Boston--
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: --right outside of Little Italy, or the Italian section.
Speaker 1: So he, and he, at some point, I'm not exactly sure when this happened in terms of timing, but at some point he had the opportunity to teach at Howard University [Washington, D.C.], William Hazel did, and he was the first dean of their School of Architecture [Howard University School of Architecture, Washington, D.C.] at Howard.
Speaker 2: So, we're really talking like early 1900s, like 1920s, 1930s (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Probably before then, probably before then because she came--
Speaker 2: Your father was born in 1926, right?
Speaker 1: He was born in 1926.  She went to, she came to Atlanta [Georgia] in the early 1900s.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: So probably in the 18--
Speaker 2: If we're talking about her father, we're talking about 1800s.
Speaker 1: So her father would have been 1890s, maybe.  You know, this history is chronicled in much more detail than I'm going to be able to give you in this book, 'Twenty Families of Color in Massachusetts' ['Twenty Families of Color In Massachusetts: 1742-1998,' Franklin A. Dorman].
Speaker 2: Okay.  And do they mention the school, if you remember, the school that you said your grandfather ran, Cardinal--
Speaker 1: Yes, um-hm, Cardinal Gibbons Institute [Ridge, Maryland].  So there's an article ["To 'Be of Some Good to Ourselves and Everybody Else': The Mission of the Cardinal Gibbons Institute, 1924-1934," Cecilia A. Moore], there's a very detailed article about the Cardinal Gibbons Institute, not only--well, it's referenced in that book, but there is a journal called the Catholic Historian, U.S. Catholic Historian, and some scholar [Cecilia A. Moore] wrote a chapter--wrote a paper about the Cardinal Gibbons Institute and its, you know, its existence, its history, and because my grandparents were the heads of the school, there are pictures of my father and his brothers and sisters on the school.  In the article, there are pictures of my grandparents at the school, some of the students at the school, and an article about the school and its philosophy, how it was run and its ultimate closing.
Story_ID: 317499
Speaker 1: 'Twenty Families of Color in Massachusetts' ['Twenty Families of Color In Massachusetts: 1742-1998,' Franklin A. Dorman].
Speaker 2: Kind of hold it up to here, yeah, like this.
Speaker 1: So, this is the--so this book actually was a real gift to me because, you know, somebody else did all the research, but there's quite a lot of family history in it as it relates to the descendants of the Kellogg family of which my grandmother [Constance Hazel Daniel], my father's [Robert A. Daniel] mother, was a member of that family and then it documents as each generation.
Speaker 2: And how did you get a copy of the book?
Speaker 1: The author of the book, Franklin Dorman [Franklin A. Dorman], is a friend of my aunt.  I have an aunt, my father's sister, who is also interested in family history, and so Mr. Dorman, connected with my aunt, whose name is Louise Hutchinson [Louise Daniel Hutchinson], and so he talked with her and I think she provided a lot of the information in the book as well as some of the pictures, and then he interviewed each of us, you know, members--he interviewed me as one of the descendants and asked me a lot of questions about my family and when it was all finished, I got a copy of the book.
Story_ID: 317500
Speaker 1: What's most, I guess significant about all of this is that, you know, education really has, in some ways, been the family business.  My grandparents were in that business and my father was in that business, both of my parents [Catherine Maxwell Daniel and Robert A. Daniel] in that business, and I and my husband [Travis Tatum] are in that business, and now my oldest son [Travis J. Tatum] is preparing to be a professor, so if he does indeed become a professor, he'll be the fifth generation educator in my family.
Speaker 2: All right.  Now, your father and mother--did they tell you any stories about how they met?
Speaker 1: Yes.  I know all about how they met.  So, my parents--my mother grew up in Danville, Virginia, as I said, but she had an older sister [Ruth Maxwell Mills] who lived in Washington, D.C., and my mom used to come to Washington to spend summers with her sister, and one summer when she was about fifteen years old, she was visiting her sister and going to summer school in the Washington, D.C. schools, and my father, who also grew up in Washington, D.C., was also attending summer school, so they actually met at the age of fifteen or sixteen, as high school students.  They subsequently--and they became friends during that time period, then they both went to Howard University [Washington, D.C.], and presumably dated during that time.  My father left Howard to join the [U.S.] Army.  He had some financial needs and, you know, because of the G.I. Bill [Servicemen's Readjustment Act of 1944], decided that he would go into the [U.S. military] service and then when he would come out, he would pursue his--he would finish his degree using the resources available to him as a veteran, and that's what he did, but my parents were friends, and mother tells the story of my father deciding, somewhat impulsively, to join the service.  I don't know if he would call it an impulsive decision, but it seems as though he and his mother [Constance Hazel Daniel], my grandmother, had an argument, and as a result of that argument, she threatened to stop paying for his education, and he decided he would take matters into his own hands and be independent and join the service, and when he did that, he didn't tell anyone that he was going, so, or at least he didn't tell my mother (laughter) and so my mother tells the story of storming up onto the bus that was, you know, taking their recruits away to wherever they were going and, you know, sort of challenging him as to why he didn't tell her that she was--he was leaving and so, you know, he was, I guess, somewhat embarrassed by that but, you know, she--he did indeed go into the service and, you know, spent his two years and then returned to school.
Story_ID: 317501
Speaker 1: But throughout this time they [Tatum's parents, Catherine Maxwell Daniel and Robert A. Daniel] were friends and when he graduated--they married actually after my father--they married in 1951. They graduated from college [Howard University, Washington, D.C.] in 1949. So, my father, right after college went to graduate school at the univer--he got a master's degree, I think maybe it was an M.F.A., master's of fine arts, from Iowa State [sic. State University of Iowa; University of Iowa, Iowa City, Iowa].  It might have been the University of Iowa or Iowa State, I can't remember, but he went to school in Iowa, got a master's degree and upon his return, my parents got married and then they--they got married in the chapel at Howard University and shortly after they married, they moved to Tallahassee, Florida, where my father took up a teaching position at Florida A&M [Florida Agricultural and Mechanical College for Negroes; Florida Agricultural and Mechanical University, Tallahassee, Florida].
Speaker 2: Well, did he tell you any stories about when he was in the [U.S.] Army?
Speaker 1: I know that he spent his time in the Aleutian Islands [Alaska], up near Alaska, and that it was cold and (laughter), and gray a lot of the time, and we actually travelled to Alaska last summer, my husband [Travis Tatum] and children [Travis J. Tatum and David Tatum] and my parents; it was a multigenerational trip.  We took a cruise to see the glaciers and, you know, just visit Alaska, and it was the first time.  We didn't get to the Aleutian Islands, but we were--it was the first time my dad had been back in that region.
Speaker 2: And how did he feel about that?
Speaker 1: Well, he certainly enjoyed the trip; I will say he certainly enjoyed the trip, but he did talk about it being a much more pleasant experience to be on this vacation cruise than what he spent in the [U.S.] military.
Story_ID: 317502
Speaker 1: Your mother's [Catherine Maxwell Daniel] side. Now, they were from North [North Carolina] and South Carolina.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: My mother's mother, my grandmother, was from the Callahan family (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) The Callahans.
Speaker 2: --Callahans of Spartanburg, South Carolina, and the Callahan family apparently was fairly well known in that community because of segregation and being a funeral home owner, you know, there was a lot of business with the Callahan Funeral Home in Spartanburg, South Carolina.  I don't know much about my grandmother's growing up, but I do know that my grandmother, Viola C. Maxwell [Viola Callahan Maxwell], was a shy woman, very quiet and kind of shy.  She was a very light-skinned woman with straight hair and she--my mother sometimes talks about the fact that she was teased because of her appearance.  She looked, to me, I would say that you could tell that she was of African ancestry in terms of her physical appearance, but she was very light-skinned, and some of my--and also had the straight and sometimes when she came to visit us, she did occasionally come to visit us in Massachusetts, some of my friends who are white and not accustomed to the skin color variations in black families, would ask me if my grandmother was white.  But I think because of her physical appearance, she sometimes had social difficulties where she grew up, but she seemed to be very shy and kind of quiet woman, and one of the things that my mother would talk about was that my mother, who can be quite chatty, would come home from school and entertain my grandmother, you know, with her stories of what had happened at school and that kind of thing, and it seemed to me something that was a closeness in their relationship, that, you know, my grandmother was shy but my mother was kind of an outgoing person who liked to talk and entertain her.
Speaker 1: Well, did your grandmother ever talk about her mix, like her parents, or--?
Speaker 2: My great-grandmother's name has come to me (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: My great-grandmother's name was Carrie Callahan [ph.], and Carrie Callahan, as I understand it, was a biracial person.  That she was--maybe had a black mother, white father, I'm not really sure which was which, but she was raised by someone else.  She was a child of, she was a child of an interracial coupling and that her mother, she was raised by a foster parent. And I don't know how Carrie Callahan came to marry Mr. Callahan, but she did apparently marry into a family that was relatively affluent.
Story_ID: 316263
Speaker 1: --My grandmother on my mother's [Catherine Maxwell Daniel] side, I remember her.  Certainly, she--you know, we visited her in Danville, Virginia.  She came to live with us for a short time in Massachusetts, in Bridgewater, Massachusetts.  She died when I was in college, and she was the last of my grandparents to--you know, living, so my grandmother [Constance Hazel Daniel] on my father's [Robert A. Daniel] side, died when I was about eight years old, I think, eight or nine years old, and my [paternal] grandfather, Victor Hugo Daniel, died in 1967, so I was about thirteen, I guess.  The, my mother's father died when she was in college, so I never knew him.  I only saw pictures of him.
Speaker 2: And you have pictures of him?  Or, you can get pictures of him, okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, yeah.  I have a picture of him.  My mother had a picture and she made copies of the picture and gave each of us a copy.
Speaker 2: What was his name again?
Speaker 1: Edward Maxwell.
Speaker 2: Edward Maxwell, okay, all righty.
Speaker 1: He was a teacher, as I understand it.  He graduated from Morris College [Sumter, South Carolina] in South Carolina, and--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --I think my grandmother, Viola Maxwell [Viola Callahan Maxwell], may have also attended Morris College.
Speaker 2: And they taught in the Carolinas?
Speaker 1: Yes--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --or Virginia.  I mean, they lived in Danville, Virginia.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And so I'm not sure when they got from Carolina to Virginia.
Speaker 2: (Unclear) Virginia, okay.
Speaker 1: But my mother grew up in Danville.
Speaker 2: Right, okay.  So they might have taught in both places (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah.
Speaker 2: --but we know that they taught in Virginia.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  Yeah.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: My--my grandfather was a teacher and my grandmother, I don't think she was a teacher in the same way, but she worked, my mother told me that she worked in a school, kind of like a house mother, you know, at a college.  I don't remember which college, but she--or maybe it was a girls' boarding school or something, but she was kind of like a dorm mother.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Story_ID: 316264
Speaker 1: We talked about the Kellogg connection--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --and the Civil War connection.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Was the ancestor Kellogg one of the ones who fought in the Civil War?
Speaker 2: I believe so.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I mean I think that's how he got in the book ['Twenty Families of Color In Massachusetts: 1742-1998,' Franklin A. Dorman].
Speaker 1: Okay. All right. And which Kellogg did you say his first name was, again?
Speaker 2: I'm gonna have to look it up.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, but we're looking at (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I think it's William.
Speaker 1: All righty.
Speaker 2: But I can tell you--yes, descendants of William Kellogg [William A. Kellogg].
Speaker 1: Now, did he fight in the Massachusetts Fifth, Fourth, or--?
Speaker 2: Now let's find out.  Okay, William Kellogg was born, it says, probably in North Carolina about 1807.  He was described as a wheelwright.  He was--he is described in this history as a free black man--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --living in Wilmington, North Carolina.  They left Wilmington for Ohio about 1857, arriving in Massachusetts about 1859.  Let's see--so I'm trying to figure out where is the Civil War part.
Speaker 1: Well, we could look at it when we get (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, we could do that off-camera--yes.
Speaker 1: --the tape change and we could come back and talk about that one.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Now, what is, is there any more that you want to tell about your ancestors that you can remember at this particular time?  Any more great-greats or greats?
Speaker 2: Okay, I found the part.  Let me just say this.  So, Jeremiah Kellogg was the son of William Kellogg, and it says Jeremiah Kellogg arrived in Cambridge [Massachusetts] with his parents about 1859, and was listed there in the 1860 federal census.  On December 23, 1863, he enlisted as a private in Company A of the Fifth Massachusetts Cavalry [5th Regiment Massachusetts Colored Volunteer Cavalry].
Speaker 1: It was the Fifth, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, described as a waiter, residing in Cambridge.  He was discharged from [U.S.] military service October 31, 1865, as a sergeant.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: There's more in there about that part, but--so it's the Kelloggs that are--so, I'm sorry, you wanted to ask me a question.
Speaker 1: No, that's excellent, okay.
Speaker 2: So, so anyway, I don't know very much, you know, about, I don't have much personal history.  I know more about my father's [Robert A. Daniel] family, in part because my Aunt Louise [Louise Daniel Hutchinson] has--my father's sister has been, you know a real collector of family history and has shared it periodically.  So, for example, I know about--I have an article that my [paternal] grandfather, I mean, excuse me, my Aunt Louise found about my grandfather's family, the Daniels.  Victor Hugo Daniel [Victor Daniel] originated from, you know, he came to the states from St. Thomas [Danish West Indies; St. Thomas, U.S. Virgin Islands], and he came from a family that apparently had some prominence in St. Thomas in Charlotte Amalie [Danish West Indies; Charlotte Amalie, U.S. Virgin Islands], that city of--you know, that's the location in St. Thomas, and there's an article that I have a copy of that my aunt got about the Daniel family in St. Thomas, and the original Daniel [Joseph Nathaniel D'anielli] was apparently from Italy, whose--and the name was originally D'anielli, D-A-N-I-E-L-L-I, and he, the original D'anielli, came to St. Thomas and because of some, I don't know, British animosity toward Italians, changed his name to--or anglicized it to Daniel, so that's the origin of the name Daniel, but there's some family history in this article that she copied from the St. Thomas newspaper, and--but my grandfather left the island when he was eighteen, and it seemed as though, interestingly because my father left to go into the [U.S.] Army because of a conflict he was having with his mother [Constance Hazel Daniel], my grandfather's apparently left the island because of a conflict he was having with a parent.
Speaker 1: Okay. And he did return.
Speaker 2: Eventually he did return, yeah, to work (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) He did return. Did he come back to the United States after that?
Speaker 2: Yes, he died in the United States, so when my grandparents, you know, ran that school, Cardinal Gibbons Institute [Ridge, Maryland], at some point my grandfather had to leave the family to find work, and he worked as a, the head of a boys school [Bordentown School; Manual Training and Industrial School for Colored Youth], I think, in Bordentown, New Jersey, for a period of time, and then he went back to St. Thomas for an appointment for a period of time, but did eventually return to the states, I'm not sure at exactly what point, but I remember, you know, seeing him as an old man in Washington, D.C., and he was living in Washington, D.C. when he passed away.
Story_ID: 316265
Speaker 1: What is your earliest childhood memory?
Speaker 2: I remember living in Florida.  I was born in Tallahassee, Florida.  I--my father [Robert A. Daniel] taught at Florida A&M University [Florida Agricultural and Mechanical University, Tallahassee, Florida] when I was born, and so I have memories of going to preschool in Florida, and I have memories of playing with my older brother [Eric Daniel].  I have an older brother who is about two and a half years older than I am.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I have memories of, you know, playing with him and I learned to read at a very early age, and one of the reasons I learned to read was because my brother had gone off to school and I wanted to do what he was doing and so my mother [Catherine Maxwell Daniel] used to play school with me at home and she--that's why I remember reading with my mother.  I remember, you know, sitting and there was a book of stories about, in fact, my mother probably owns this book.  There was a book of stories about Indians [Native Americans]--different Indian tribes, and reading these stories about--written for children about Indians and that was the first book I learned to read and my mom had me, like circling the words I could recognize and, so I was about three when I could read, and so we left.  The chronology is a little fuzzy in my mind, because I remember Florida, but my dad wanted to pursue his doctorate and in 1954, he was, you know, the schools were still segregated in Florida and probably in 19--somewhere after my birth, maybe 1956, my dad moved us to, maybe 1957, we moved to Pennsylvania, Penn State, College Park, Pennsylvania, I think is--State College, Pennsylvania, that's the name of the place.  We moved to State College, Pennsylvania where Penn State [Pennsylvania State University] is located because my dad was getting his doctorate from Pennsylvania State University (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) But isn't that little story attached to why he went to Penn as opposed to--?
Speaker 2: There is a little story, yes.  So the story is that the state of Florida--so, you know, my father would have liked to go to Florida State University [Tallahassee, Florida], because that had--one, they had the program he was interested in, and two, it was right there in Tallahassee, about ten minutes away from Florida A&M, but because of segregation he was not able to attend Florida State.  They were not accepting African American graduate students, and so the State of Florida, I think, had to address, you know, separate but equal and the requirement, they had to provide graduate school education for black students, but rather than desegregating their own institutions, the way they got around the law was to pay for black students to go to school elsewhere, or at least pay their transportation to go elsewhere.  So, the State of Florida paid my father's transportation to Penn State, and he ultimately got his degree at Penn State, because he couldn't go to school in Florida.  So, but I remember, you know, vaguely, State College, Pennsylvania. I remember, for example, riding in the car and seeing signs that said, beware, deer crossing, and actually seeing some live deer, you know, I have kind of visual memories of being in State College, Pennsylvania and after we left State College, we moved, when my father completed his degree, we moved from Pennsylvania to Baton Rouge, Louisiana, where my father taught at Southern University [Southern University and Agricultural and Mechanical College, Baton Rouge, Louisiana] for one year.
Speaker 1: What year was that?
Speaker 2: Oh, probably 1957, 1958.
Story_ID: 316266
Speaker 1: You know (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And he [Tatum's father, Robert A. Daniel] taught in the fine arts department there?
Speaker 1: Yes, at Southern University [Southern University and Agricultural and Mechanical College, Baton Rouge, Louisiana], and so I remember being in Baton Rouge [Louisiana], and seeing, you know, again, I have some of these visual memories.  I remember playing with other children.  I remember the housing.  There's a picture, I think, that I shared with you of my mother [Catherine Maxwell Daniel] and I sitting on the step of a house.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: I think that was probably in Baton Rouge, Louisiana.  I remember the moss growing on the trees, but it was, I was probably three years old at that time that we lived in Baton Rouge, maybe three going on four, and I remember people asking me to read because they couldn't believe that a three-year-old could read (laughter), you know. And so I remember being places where somebody would say, "Read this."  And I'd be able to read it, you know (laughter).  It's kind of funny.
Speaker 2: Okay, and then after Baton Rouge--?
Speaker 1: I'm sorry, then after Baton Rouge my father left Southern University and got a job at Bridgewater State College [Bridgewater State University], in Bridgewater, Massachusetts, and that was when we moved to Massachusetts as a family.  I was four years old, and this was 1958.  My father was the first African American professor at Bridgewater State College, and so, and we were one of the very few families in that town.
Speaker 2: Yes, and we were also one of the first (laughter) families of color in Bridgewater, too. I used to live in Massachusetts (laughter) (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yes, yes. Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: Okay. Well, name your siblings in order; you know, with you included.
Speaker 1: So, my oldest brother's name is Eric Daniel, and he, Eric James Daniel, and he now lives in Italy.  He's a jazz musician, and he has lived in Italy, in Rome, for many, many years, more than twenty years, he's been living there.
Speaker 2: And he was born in--?
Speaker 1: He was born in Washington, D.C.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: My parents got married in 1951.  My brother was born in 1952, and shortly after he was born, they moved to Tallahassee [Florida].
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: I was born in Tallahassee in 1954.  My sister, her name is Patricia Ann Daniel.  Now she goes by Patricia Daniel Keenan.  Her married name is Keenan.  She was born in Bridgewater in 1960, November 27, 1960, and--or was it November 29.  I'm not sure, November 1960, the end of November.  It must be the 29th, 'cause my birthday's the 27th, so November 29, 1960.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And, so she's six years younger than I am, and then I have my younger brother [Kevin Daniel], who was born in 1965, eleven years younger than I am.  His birthday is December 20, 1965, and he was also born in Bridgewater.
Story_ID: 316267
Speaker 1: Once my parents [Catherine Maxwell Daniel and Robert A. Daniel] moved to Bridgewater [Massachusetts], they never moved again, so from 1958 to the present, they have lived in the same address, 455 Center Street, Bridgewater, Massachusetts, and that's the house where I grew up; though, when we first came, it was an interesting transition when we first came to Bridgewater.  My father, you know, given the time, being one of few black families and, you know, the Civil Rights Movement underway, and all of that--
Speaker 2: Yeah, 'cause you have a little statement where you say that you were born how many months after Brown--Brown versus Board [Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka, 1954] (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yes, just a few. I was born in September and Brown passed in May; you know, the [U.S.] Supreme Court decision.
Speaker 2: Right.  So what is the title that you give--what do you call yourself in the quote?
Speaker 1: Oh, an integration baby.  Yes, I was an integration baby and so I was an integration four-year-old (laughter) when we went to Bridgewater, Massachusetts, and my father wrote to--was, you know, anxious, I would imagine, moving from Louisiana to Massachusetts, moving his family into this new world of the Northeast and wrote to pastors of churches in Bridgewater to get some information about housing and, you know, looking for some assistance, I guess, in terms of trying to understand.
Speaker 2: Was this the black pastors in the area, or just the pastors--?
Speaker 1: No, no.  There are no black pastors (laughter).
Speaker 2: Well, in the Bridgewater area; I thought maybe surrounding areas you might run into--just in Bridgewater, okay.
Speaker 1: No, I mean I think he was just thinking about, you know, Christians, good Christians, you know, trying to find some good Christians who might extend the fellowship of, you know, some hospitality.  So, I'm not exactly sure why he was writing to the ministers except to get some information, and I do think he thought perhaps people of god might be welcoming in some way.  And so, he wrote to a number of ministers in the Bridgewater area looking for assistance in terms of finding housing for his family and one of them wrote back; only one.  But, the one who wrote back was--became a close family friend.  His name was Carl Bock [ph.].  He's no longer living, but he was very kind to my parents.  So he wrote back and, in fact, offered to allow my parents to stay in his home, that he was gonna be away for vacation but--and they were moving probably in July or August, and so they would have a place to stay while they were looking for housing.  He opened up his home to them and so that was, you know, something that they always remembered and they were lifelong friends, and--
Speaker 2: Well, did your father take him up on the offer or not?
Speaker 1: Oh, yeah.
Speaker 2: Oh, okay. (Unclear)--
Speaker 1: Oh, yeah.  No, we went and stayed there, you know, for a brief period of time, you know, until they could find an apartment and then they found an apartment and we lived in that apartment maybe for several months, and they eventually bought a house and we moved into the house where I grew up and where they still live.  But, my father often talked about the generosity of Reverend Bock, and for--so when we first came to Bridgewater, we attended Reverend Bock's church.
Speaker 2: And what church?
Speaker 1: It was a Unitarian church, actually, and then when Reverend Bock left his church, at some point he retired and moved to another church or something.  He left Bridgewater.  We moved to a different church, and I grew up attending a congregational church [Central Square Congregational Church, United Church of Christ, Bridgewater, Massachusetts] in Bridgewater
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: United Church of Christ.
Story_ID: 316268
Speaker 1: You told us a little bit about Tallahassee [Florida]--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --where you were born.  What are some of the other memories that you might have of Tallahassee?  You were very young, so it was kind of hard to actually (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I was very young, so I remember rolling down a hill.  You know, with my brother [Eric Daniel] there was, I had the chance to visit.  I had not been back to Tallahassee until the year 2004, and since we left in '55 [1955] or '56 [1956].  I'm not exactly sure what year we left, but I myself had not returned until the year 2004, and when I was there it was to give a speech, ironically enough, at Florida State University [Tallahassee, Florida], the same school that my father [Robert A. Daniel] was not able to attend fifty years before.  So, I gave a speech at Florida State and someone there was kind enough to give me a little driving tour of the campus and they asked me what I remembered at Florida A&M [Florida Agricultural and Mechanical University, Tallahassee, Florida], and I asked if it was on a hill, or if it was hilly, because I had a childhood memory of laying in the grass and rolling down a hill with my brother, and--but much beyond that I don't really remember much.  I remember oranges; eating a lot of oranges and rolling down the hills.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And then the next move to Pennsylvania (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) To Pennsylvania. And I remember State College, Pennsylvania, again only vaguely.  I remember, like being on a playground.  You know, being in a swing, my mother [Catherine Maxwell Daniel] pushing me on a swing with some other children.  I remember seeing deer on the side of the road, a lot of trees, you know, sort of a rural, wooded area.
Speaker 1: Okay, and--Baton Rouge [Louisiana]?
Speaker 2: And then, Baton Rouge, I remember again, I remember children; you know, by that time I was three, and I remember playing with another child who--this is actually one of my early memories.  I sometimes talk about this when I used to do unlearning racism workshops.  I would sometimes talk about my earliest race-related memory and that memory was playing with a little boy who was a family friend, and he said to me that I was black, and I said, "No I'm not, I'm tan."  And we got into an argument about it, where he was insisting that I was black and I was insisting that I was tan, and, of course, as an adult looking back on that I can see that we were both right.  You know, I was black in the sense of African American, but tan was probably a better description of my skin color, and--
Speaker 1: Now, was this a black child?
Speaker 2: A black child, yes.
Speaker 1: And this was in Baton Rouge?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: You know, we were just playing together outside and got into this argument--
Speaker 1: So you were in a predominantly black neighborhood in Baton Rouge?
Speaker 2: Yes, right.  Southern University [Southern University and Agricultural and Mechanical College, Baton Rouge, Louisiana] is a historically black college [HBCU] and we lived in probably what was the graduate student housing or housing for married--
Speaker 1: You lived on campus?
Speaker 2: We lived on campus.
Speaker 1: I went to Southern.
Speaker 2: Yeah, okay, so they had some, I don't if they still do, but they had some campus housing for professors and their families and we were living there and there were--and this child was a child of a professor, too.
Speaker 1: Oh, a professor--okay.
Story_ID: 316269
Speaker 1: Then when you moved to Bridgewater [Massachusetts]--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --you lived with the--with pas--with the pastor [Carl Bock (ph.)].
Speaker 2: Well, we didn't actually, we just stayed in his house.  He wasn't actually there, but he was kind enough to make his house available for a sort of transitional housing.  He was on his summer vacation, we stayed, maybe for a few weeks in his house and--
Speaker 1: Do you remember that house at all?
Speaker 2: Vaguely.
Speaker 1: Was it attached to the church, or was it not with the church?  Was it just down in the neighborhood, if you can remember?
Speaker 2: No, I'm not sure, I don't know if it was physically attached, but it was close by. And, so it was the parsonage, and we were there for a, you know, few weeks, not very long, and then we moved into an apartment building, sort of a duplex, you know, in, when they have these houses that are (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) House that are attached, uh-huh.
Speaker 2: --stacked, yes, so we were living in an apartment in that kind of setting.  I think we were there maybe for several months and then my parents [Catherine Maxwell Daniel and Robert A. Daniel] found a house.  It took them awhile to find a house to buy; partly because, I don't whether it had anything to do with economics, but certainly one of the issues was, where could they buy a house that would be receptive to a black family?  And when we moved in, we were the only black family on our street, and probably any place we would have moved in Bridgewater, that would have been the case.  But, my parents, interestingly, did not drive.  You know, they had grown up in Washington, D.C., and so had not been car owners or drivers and both of them had to learn to drive when they got to Massachusetts, because in a small, New England town, there is no public transportation (laughter).
Speaker 1: It's true.
Speaker 2: And so--so, the first thing, I think they were looking for a house within walking distance of my father's job.  And so the house they found was, indeed about a mile away, and I remember walking to school because my father taught at Bridgewater State College [Bridgewater State University, Bridgewater, Massachusetts], and Bridgewater had a laboratory school [Burnell Laboratory School, Bridgewater, Massachusetts] and my father's office actually was in that laboratory school, and that's where I went to elementary school.  And so, we would walk to school together every morning, and it was about a mile walk, but my parents did eventually learn to drive and they got a car, you know, all of that.  But, when we first came to Bridgewater, they didn't have a car and they would use a taxi service to get to the grocery store and would go, you know, and buy a lot of groceries at once and, you know, that kind of thing.
Story_ID: 316270
Speaker 1: What are some of the sights and sounds and smells that you remember, let's start with Bridgewater [Massachusetts], of growing up?
Speaker 2: Well, I certainly remember the house we lived in, which is still the house where my parents [Catherine Maxwell Daniel and Robert A. Daniel] lived.  It's not changed very much.  It was, I have a picture of it actually, that you might use later.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But it is, you know, it's a ranch-styled house.  My brother [Eric Daniel] and I were there, of course, for a while until my sister [Patricia Daniel Keenan] was born.  I was six when my sister was born, and then eleven when my younger brother [Kevin Daniel] was born, and we had a dog and so I remember, you know, there was a big back yard.  There was a lot of space in the back yard and playing on the swing-set with my brother or being outside with the dog, or taking walks.  I was a voracious reader.  I learned to read at a very early age, as I said, and my mother took me to the Bridgewater Public Library [Bridgewater, Massachusetts] when I was four to get a library card, and I spent a lot of my childhood in the library.  The library was on the way to school and I would pass by the library on the way home from school; so, on the way, I didn't stop there on the way to school, because it probably wasn't open then, but on the way home from school, I would walk home, I would stop at the library, I would spend a lot of time there.  I became very good friends with the children's librarian, who had a group of children that she made, she called us her library aides and, in fact, she had little buttons made that said "library aide," and so when I was in elementary school [Burnell Laboratory School, Bridgewater, Massachusetts], third or fourth grade, I would go to the library every day after school and help the librarian put books away and just read or whatever, and I spent a lot of time at the library and, and then eventually, you know, make my way home.  It was a different time then.  You know, your parents didn't worry if you didn't come straight home from school (laughter), and, but I really enjoyed reading.  That was probably, you know, what I remember most about my childhood was all the time I spent reading.
Speaker 1: Now, what was your block like, you know, your street (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah. So, my street, it was a street with a lot of children.  In Massachusetts, it makes a difference, or made a difference, whether you were Protestant or Catholic.  I grew up in a Protestant family, but many of our neighbors were Catholic and because, perhaps because they were Catholic they had a lot of children (laughter). I always associated the two things.
Speaker 1: You sure that's not the opposite--Protestants would have children?
Speaker 2: No, no.  You know the birth control thing (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I know, the birth control thing, yeah, yeah, that's true.
Speaker 2: But--
Story_ID: 316271
Speaker 1: There was one family across the street, the Aniskevich [ph.] family, that had, I want to say seven or eight children, but most of them boys and one, only one, all of them boys except for one girl.  There was one girl in the family who was my age, approximately.  We were in the same year in school; and I say that to say she's probably older than I was because I skipped a grade in school.  Actually, didn't go--because I learned to read at such an early age, I skipped kindergarten, I started right with first grade.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And so, I started first grade when I was five, and then I skipped second grade, so I, you know, started in the first grade, then went to the third grade and was younger than everybody throughout my elementary, middle school, and high school years, so I was sixteen when I graduated from high school [Bridgewater-Raynham Regional High School, Bridgewater, Massachusetts].
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: So, the--so she was probably a year ahead of me but we were in the same grade in school.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: And, then next door to them was the Arrhigi [ph.] family.
Speaker 2: Now what name was that?
Speaker 1: Arrhigi, they were Italian.  The Aniskeviches were, you know, probably Russian, Polish, you know it's a Russian name, Eastern European but Catholic.  And, across the street, next door to them across from my house was the Arrhigi family and the Arrhigis were Italian, also Catholic, and they had, I want to say five children, and two girls and three sons, and the girl, one girl was my sister's [Patricia Daniel Keenan] age, so about six years younger than me, and the other girl was a little older; you know, maybe two or three years older than I was.  One of the boys was my same age, you know, but we were all sort of in the mix together, and then next to them there was the Holberg [ph.] and the Holbergs were probably, you know, German ancestry, also Catholic and they had two girls, one of whom use to babysit for me sometimes.  She was a cheerleader.  She was older, of course, but she was a cheerleader in high school and I used to, she used to give me her pom-poms (laughter), you know, and I aspired to be a cheerleader and used to practice with these leftover pom-poms during the football games, but the, and then next door, immediately next door to us was another family, I want to say also Catholic, and the reason why this is significant that everybody was Catholic, because they all went to, you know, Catholic Mass and catechism and, you know, the things that Catholic children do, but I did not do those things.  I went to Sunday school and, you know, was doing my own religious education.
Story_ID: 317503
Speaker 1: And you were telling us about the street that you lived on in Bridgewater [Massachusetts] (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay. Yeah, so it was, there were a lot of--
Speaker 1: Do you remember--the name of the street, again, you told us was what?
Speaker 2: Center Street.  We lived on Center Street.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: It was about maybe a mile, mile and a half from the college [Bridgewater State College; Bridgewater State University, Bridgewater, Massachusetts].
Speaker 1: Right. Okay.
Speaker 2: So, it was walking distance from the college, maybe two miles.  Maybe it was like a twenty minute walk to the college, and that's where I went to elementary school [Burnell Laboratory School, Bridgewater, Massachusetts], but I lived in this neighborhood with children who--it's an interesting thing about religion in Massachusetts, because, you know it was founded by the Puritans, and it's a Protestant state in that sense, but there were a lot of Catholic immigrants; Irish Catholics, of course in Massachusetts, the home of the Kennedys, but the, but there were a lot of Protestant churches in Bridgewater and the Protestant churches are in the center of the town.  There is one Catholic church [Saint Thomas Aquinas Church] in Bridgewater, which is sort of on the outskirts of Bridgewater, but on Center Street; actually, Center is kind of a long street, we didn't live--we lived on one end of Center Street, the Catholic church is on the other end of Center Street, but most of my neighbors were Catholic, and I used to wonder when I was growing up why there was--why the Catholic Church wasn't in the center of town where all the other churches were, and one of the things I was told in, probably in high school somebody told me that, they tried to build it in the center of town and the Protestants kept burning it down, and (laughter) so, you know, now, of course, we would like to think that today there is, you know, interfaith harmony in Bridgewater, Massachusetts, or Massachusetts, generally, but that was the history and, in fact, on Center Street at the other end, where the Catholic church is, there is also a cemetery [First Roman Catholic Cemetery, Bridgewater, Massachusetts] that, when I was growing up, was referred to as the Catholic cemetery, which is where the Catholics were buried, and there was another cemetery within walking distance of my home, which was referred to as the Protestant cemetery.  I don't know whether today there is, you know, the Catholics are buried in one place and the Protestants are buried someplace else, but when I was growing up, that's how it was referred to.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So, I grew up as the only black family on my street, and one of the few Protestants.  There were (laughter)--the neighborhood was essentially a Catholic neighborhood and the, so right across the street from me were the Italians, you know, the Arrhigi [ph.] family and the Aniskevitch [ph.] family and the Holberg [ph.] family, and next door on our side of the street was the LeClair [ph.] family, and then another family that's name is escaping me, but the family immediately next door, on the right, that father worked at Bridgewater State College, and was a professor there, as was my father [Robert A. Daniel].
Story_ID: 317504
Speaker 1: Mr. Arrhigi [ph.] was a self-employed taxi cab owner and, in fact, he operated his business from his home and sometimes, when I got old enough, I would work for the Arrhigis as a taxi dispatcher.  You know, if they were going to be away for the weekend or something and needed somebody to work the phones, I would do that sometimes, and Mr. Aniskevitch [ph.], I think, worked in a local hospital as a, not as a doctor, but you know, like a medical technician of some kind and Mr. Holberg [ph.], I'm not exactly sure what he did.  I think he worked in a factory.  The LeClairs [ph.], maybe, worked in a local factory, too.  I'm not exactly sure.  But, they were not--probably my family was probably the most educated family on the street [Center Street, Bridgewater, Massachusetts], as well as the other family in terms of college and graduate education and that kind of thing.  So, it was kind of an interesting mix.  There were, behind, the next street over there was another family, the Veronis [ph.], actually lived there and Jimmy Veroni [ph.] was my age and that was also a large family of boys, also Catholic family, so anyway there were families which, my family with four children in it, was one of the smaller families in my network (laughter), but the--and the neighborhood changed a little bit during the time that I lived there, but not much.  I mean, the Arrhigis are still there, the Aniskeviches are still there.  There was a family that moved in down the street, a college professor named Professor Dacey [ph.].  Mr. Dacey and his wife had, Dr. Dacey I should say, and his wife had a couple of children.  I used to babysit for them.  So, it was relatively, even though we were--oh, but I left out that there was a family when we first lived there, before the Daceys came, the family that lived in the house that the Daceys ultimately moved into was a Jewish family, and I'm not going to remember their last name, but the son and the family was, they only had one child, and his name was Michael [ph.] and Michael was Jewish and used to get teased about being Jewish, and the--I remember having an argument with Michael in my backyard, where we had a swing set in the backyard and Michael came over to play and he was hogging the swing set, and, at least in my opinion; you know (laughter), I must have been about seven or eight at the time, and I told Michael he had to get off.  It was my swing set and he told me it was a free country and he didn't have to (laughter), and we got into an argument about it, but I remember that he--I think felt somewhat isolated.  You know, I don't attribute this argument to his being Jewish anyway, but I think he felt isolated in the neighborhood because, even though there were the Protestants and the Catholics, we were all Christian, you know, celebrating Christmas, all those kinds of things, and I think he felt a little, he probably felt more different in the neighborhood than I did at the time (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) What was he, was there a synagogue in town?
Speaker 1: No, there was not.  There was no Jewish synagogue in Bridgewater [Massachusetts], and I don't think there is today.  He did attend synagogue, but I think he had to go to Brockton [Massachusetts], which was a town about fifteen minutes away--
Speaker 2: To attend?
Speaker 1: --to attend.
Speaker 2: Okay. But that was definitely a diverse neighborhood.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Story_ID: 317505
Speaker 1: The children--you played with all the children that were in the neighborhood (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, so we did.  We played--we played a lot of collective games, you know, hide-and-go-seek, a variety of--we did all play together.  I did not experience race as an issue in my neighborhood, except that one time we were playing hide-and-go-seek.  I must have been about six years old and we were doing eeny, meeny, miny, moe, and the, one of the white kids said, eeny, meeny, miny, moe, catch a nigger by the toe, and I knew that the "N" word was not a word to be used, and so I came home, told my mother [Catherine Maxwell Daniel] about it and she sent me back to teach them a different version, and so I taught them the eeny, meeny, miny, moe, catch a tiger by the toe version, which is the version that we used from that point on.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, what school did you attend?  What elementary school did you attend?
Speaker 2: So, that was another thing that distinguished me from my neighbors, because my father [Robert A. Daniel] taught at Bridgewater State College [Bridgewater State University, Bridgewater, Massachusetts], and Bridgewater had an elementary school.  It had its own lab school, and that school was called the Burnell Laboratory School [Bridgewater, Massachusetts], and most people would attend, most of my neighbors attended the McElwain School [William H. McElwain School, Bridgewater, Massachusetts], which was the sort of region--the neighborhood school for my street was the McElwain School, which was up Center Street and down Main Street, close by to the Catholic church [Saint Thomas Aquinas Church, Bridgewater, Massachusetts], but I attended Burnell, because my father taught at Bridgewater State, and so I had, as the child of the professor, access to that laboratory school.
Speaker 1: Were there any teachers who influenced you in elementary school that you--that actually stand out in your mind?
Speaker 2: There are some teachers that stand out in my mind in elementary school.  I was fortunate to have a great first grade teacher.  Her name was Mrs. Gamson [ph.], and she was somebody I really remember very fondly.  She--all my teachers growing up were white teachers.  I never had a black teacher in school, and I never had a black teacher until I got to college [Wesleyan University, Middletown, Connecticut], and not counting my own parents who, of course, were important teachers in my life.  But, Mrs. Gamson was a great first grade teacher.  I was an unusual first grader because one, I didn't go to--I skipped kindergarten, and I came to first grade already knowing how to read very well, so, you know how they put you in those reading groups?  You know, the bluebirds, the robins, the whatever.  I was often in a reading group by myself because I read at a level above everybody else.  So, when I was--I was the only black kid in the class and one of the things that I take from that experience, actually growing up in Bridgewater [Massachusetts] where I was often the only black child in the class, but a child who came to school knowing things that the white kids didn't know how to do yet.  I had--I never had a sense of inferiority because I always felt, perhaps wrongly, but I always felt I was the smartest kid in the class, because I read better than everybody else (laughter), so, you know, sometimes people ask me why, you know, where my sense of self-confidence comes from and I think part of it is just having had a lot of early academic success; you know, where everybody acknowledged that I was a smart kid.
Story_ID: 317506
Speaker 1: I had this benefit of, you know, knowing how to read, and I remember my teacher [at Burnell Laboratory School, Bridgewater, Massachusetts], you know, talking to my parents [Catherine Maxwell Daniel and Robert A. Daniel] about what to do with Beverly [HistoryMaker Beverly Daniel Tatum] because I had read all the books that the first graders were supposed to read, and then I read all the books that the second graders were supposed to read, and I was moving on to the third grade books and what were they going to do with me?  So, she recommended that I skip the second grade, and my mother was hesitant to do that because she thought, you know, I would be the youngest child in the class and that would be a social disadvantage for me, and I was a shy child and--but, you know, they were persuaded that it was the thing to do.  I think it was the thing to do, actually.  And so, then I went to the third grade and I liked my third grade teacher very much, too, and--
Speaker 2: Do you remember her name?
Speaker 1: Yes, Mrs. Borders [ph.].  And she was very, you know, I liked the third grade and I enjoyed it.  I was shy and the other kids were older than me and there was this kind of, you know, who do you think you are?  You're supposed to be in the second grade (laughter), you know.  Kind of a social dynamic that emerged but, you know, I always had at least one good friend in school.  I was the kind of person that never had a lot of friends, but would have one or two best friends that I associated with, and that was true in the third grade, and I remember, however, getting in trouble in the third grade.  We had a student teacher who was really mean.  She yelled a lot and was kind of, you know, I don't know how she was evaluated by her supervising teacher, but from my point of view, she wasn't a very good student teacher, and we were out on the playground and the kids were unruly, and she was just, you know, yelling, yelling, yelling, and she yelled, "Who do you kids think you are?"  And I said, "Who do you think you are?"  (Laughter) Which was not a very thing to say.  You know, I'm sure my parents would not have wanted me to say it and I got sent to the principal's office, you know, and it was a sort of an unusual thing, but it just seemed to me, and maybe it's just through the sense of social justice, but it seemed to me she was, you know, her behavior was not appropriate (laughter), and so I got in trouble; my father had to come down and check on me.
Speaker 2: But, to say that you were shy.  That's kind of an understatement because you--was it Michael [ph.], the little Jewish guy, you defended yourself against him, and then you, the one that was doing the eeny, meeny, miny, moe (laughter).
Speaker 1: Well, no.  You're right.  That's a good point, but I remember myself as shy in the sense that I would not speak.  I would speak up for myself, as you can see.  I spoke up for myself at an early age but I was not one to volunteer.  I wouldn't raise my hand in class.  I didn't like to be called upon.  You know, I shied away from the spotlight.  But, I was often in it because of my academic ability, you know, so I was this, you know, the fifth grade spelling bee champion and stuff like that.
Story_ID: 317507
Speaker 1: The one teacher I remember that I did not like, and I can't remember--I won't mention her name.  She was my fourth grade teacher, and I thought she was horrible, and so (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Why did you dislike her?  What was there about her that made you not care so much for her as opposed to the others?
Speaker 1: It wasn't, I think maybe because she singled me out a lot in a way that made me uncomfortable.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: You know, not in a way that, you know, perhaps Mrs. Gamson [ph.] or Mrs. Borders [ph.] did, but that she kind of--I had a seventh grade teacher, who did the same thing; you know, who would sort of call me out in class in ways that made me uncomfortable.
Speaker 2: Did they catch you off guard when they called you out, or was this way that they--?
Speaker 1: Well, no, I mean it wasn't, it was just the seventh grade teacher who I really didn't like.  He would tease me in ways that I didn't like; for example, I'll give you an example.  When I was in the seventh grade, I got, for my birthday, a archery set.  I had gone away to summer camp and had been exposed to archery and really wanted a bow and arrow for--as a--and so I got one.  I got this archery set and it was in the backyard and I used to practice, you know, shooting my bow and arrow and one time this teacher drove by my house and saw me, you know, at the side of the house, and I was in the backyard but the house didn't, you know, you could see the backyard from the street.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Saw me with my bow and arrow and then asked me about it at school and kind of teased me about it; not in a mean way, really.  Looking back on it now, it wasn't mean, but I stopped using after that, because I, I just didn't want to--I think this was out of my shyness, didn't want anyone to bring attention to me in a particular way (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right, okay.  Do you think they were doing it because you were black?  Did you feel that that might have been it?
Speaker 1: No.  I never attributed this to him.  You know, maybe, you know, maybe he thought I've got this black girl in my class, she's the only one.  You know, I need to do things to make her comfortable.  I don't know what his motives were, but I didn't like him, and he knew I didn't like him, and--'cause he used to tell my mother [Catherine Maxwell Daniel], who was also a teacher in the public schools, "I don't know why Beverly [HistoryMaker Beverly Daniel Tatum] doesn't like me," (laughter) but I didn't.
Speaker 2: Okay, now.  Did you all have a junior high?
Speaker 1: We had middle school.  So, we were, I was in one school [Burnell Laboratory School, Bridgewater, Massachusetts] from first through fourth grade, another school [Bridgewater Middle School, Bridgewater, Massachusetts] from fifth through eighth grade, and then ninth through twelfth grade in high school [Bridgewater-Raynham Regional High School, Bridgewater, Massachusetts].
Speaker 2: Okay.  Well, what were holidays like, and seasons--
Speaker 1: I lived across the street from the high school; I should say that.
Speaker 2: Oh, okay.
Speaker 1: Yeah, so, it was very close to my house.
Story_ID: 317508
Speaker 1: And (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, what were holidays like during the time that you were in elementary and even before elementary (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah. Well, you know, Christmas in my home was--my family was very, was, you know, a small family, not by today's standards--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --but by the standards during which I was growing up.  You know, we had the four of us, my parents [Catherine Maxwell Daniel and Robert A. Daniel].  We did not have relatives in our vicinity.  My parents' relatives all, you know, my aunts and my uncles, my cousins, all lived in Washington, D.C.; so, we were, you know, a pretty nuclear, a close-knit nuclear family, but we didn't have a lot of visitors, aunts, uncles, cousins visiting like other people might have had.  So, when I think about family holidays, I think about them as, you know, my brothers [Eric Daniel and Kevin Daniel] and my sister [Patricia Daniel Keenan] and my parents, our dog.  We had a dog almost always, and you know, happy times, putting out the Christmas stockings, you know, at Christmas, waiting for Santa Claus to come.  We--Thanksgiving, you know, I'm a vegetarian today.  I became a vegetarian in college, but I remember eating, the turkey at Thanksgiving, and the ham at Christmas, you know, going to church.  I was very involved in my church growing up.  My parents took us to church.  I attended Sunday school.
Speaker 2: And this was the Congregational church [Central Square Congregational Church, United Church of Christ, Bridgewater, Massachusetts] (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) The Congregational church.  Again, it was mostly a white church, and my existence growing up was a mostly white existence.  The--but, you know, I participated actively in the Sunday school.  I sang in the church choir.  I was part of the youth group, went on the hayrides, did all that stuff. And the youth group was a very important social network for me.  As I said, you know, I lived in this neighborhood of Catholics and so my school friends, and I went to a different elementary school [Burnell Laboratory School, Bridgewater, Massachusetts] than my neighbors did--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --so my school friends didn't necessarily live in my neighborhood; not so far away, necessarily.  My closest friend from elementary--from middle school and high school was a young woman named Marilyn Findley, and she attended the same church I did and, in fact, my friends, my high school friends were largely members of my church community.  You know, we went to the same school, but they didn't live in my neighborhood, but we were part of the same Sunday school and part of the same youth group, and spent our times, you know, all day Sunday together--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --and after school, you know, visiting.  But they--I had to travel to their homes.  Like if I wanted my friend, Marilyn, after school, I would ride the bus home with her.  I--she lived too far from the school to walk.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Story_ID: 317509
Speaker 1: In middle school [Bridgewater Middle School, Bridgewater, Massachusetts], that was seventh and eighth grade, right?
Speaker 2: Well, fifth, sixth, seventh, and eighth.
Speaker 1: Fifth, sixth, seventh, and eighth, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: What was middle school like?  Was it--describe that for us.
Speaker 2: Middle school, you know, was shifting.  That's that awkward stage where you're starting to, you know, you're entering puberty and, especially, sixth, seventh, and eighth.  You know, you're entering puberty, your friends are starting to get crushes on boys, all that kind of stuff, and so I remember that as a very awkward time.  I was one of a few black girls.  At the time, when I got to middle school, there were maybe two or three black girls in my school, in my age, grade.
Speaker 1: Did they live in Bridgewater [Massachusetts], or did they just (simultaneous)--?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) They--no, they lived in Bridgewater, but there, in my middle, in my elementary school [Burnell Laboratory School, Bridgewater, Massachusetts] there were no other black children in my class.  My brother went to my elementary school, you know, but there weren't other black kids in my school.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: But when I got to middle school, you know, middle school is the combination of, you know, maybe there are three or four elementary schools in the town and all of us went to the same middle school.
Speaker 1: So, you weren't at Bridgewater anymore, in the laboratory school?
Speaker 2: No, still in Bridge--the laboratory school only went through fourth grade.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And then you moved on to the middle school.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: So the middle school included, so the kids who were going to McElwain [William H. McElwain School, Bridgewater, Massachusetts] or going to the Hunt Elementary School [A.F. Hunt Elementary School, Bridgewater, Massachusetts]--all the elementary schools came together in the middle school--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --so there weren't very many black students in the whole of Bridgewater, but all of the ones who were there showed up at the middle school (laughter).  So, the--there were two twin sisters, who were my age, two black girls, who were in some of my classes.  That's the other thing that happens in middle school, is, you know, tracking occurs.  You know, they start tracking you in terms of the honors class, standard.  I was always in the honors classes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And in those honors classes, maybe there'd be one other black student.  There weren't very many to begin with, but once you get separated according to those academic tracking--you know, once the academic tracking system is in place, the likelihood of black students being in your class decreases because of the way black kids get tracked in school sometimes.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: So, anyway, so I remember the Gibb [ph.] sisters, you know, they were twins and they were the same age as me, but I had this experience in the fifth grade, which I remember, with a black girl.  I don't remember her last name but her first name was Ramona [ph.], and Ramona came up to me, and she was from Boston [Massachusetts].  She had just moved.  Her family had just moved to Bridgewater.  She was from the city and she came up to me and she said, "Who do you think you are?"  It was so interesting, you know, and she, in kind of an intimidating way, kind of pushed me and I didn't quite get, you know, I didn't quite get where she was coming from.  Today, I know, I have a better sense.  I mean, I think she thought that I wasn't black identified, you know what I mean?
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: And that--I'm not sure why--because I didn't hang out with the other black kids, but there weren't very many other black kids to hang out with, so I don't think it was that.  But there was just something about me that she was responding to that, you know, she thought I wasn't black enough, something like that.  It was a weird interaction, but I remember being kind of intimidated by her.  She was bigger than I was, and, you know, sort of tougher, and you know, and she was like, you're not acting the way you're supposed to act.
Speaker 1: How did you react to it?
Speaker 2: Well, I was confused (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I mean, what did you do--did you say anything, did you respond at all?
Speaker 2: No, I mean, I don't remember what I said, but I was shy and clearly intimidated, you know, and I think I just avoided her, tried to avoid her.
Story_ID: 317510
Speaker 1: So, did you avoid black children period after that?
Speaker 2: No, well, like I said (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Because of that--there weren't that many but--
Speaker 2: There weren't that many, no, no.  I mean, there weren't that many and I can count them.  You know, I mean there was Ramona [ph.], there were the two, the twin sisters, the Gibb [ph.] sisters, and then there was another girl who was in my class, and she was a foster child.  She lived with a black foster family in Massachusetts, I mean, in Bridgewater [Massachusetts], but it was not her biological family, but I can't remember her name, but she and I were in the same fifth grade class, and we were friendly.  I mean, it wasn't that--but it was like Ramona was--you know, I'm not sure where she was coming from, yeah.
Speaker 1: That was quite an interesting experience.
Speaker 2: And then, but let me tell you, there's a sort of another interesting dynamic, so the family whose name I can't remember that lived on the right-hand side of my parents' [Catherine Maxwell Daniel and Robert A. Daniel] house, they eventually moved away and a new family moved in, and the new family that moved in was Cape Verdean.  In Massachusetts, there's this whole category of people who are sort of mixed Portuguese, African ancestry from the Cape Verdean islands, and they were Cape Verdean, and what's interesting about them was that family was browner in complexion than my family, but they didn't describe themselves as black, which I thought was interesting.  You know, it took me awhile to figure that out (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) It's amazing that some of them do consider themselves black and others do not, because they are very prominent in the Massachusetts area.
Speaker 2: And, I of course now understand that, but as a child, I was, it was puzzling to me.
Speaker 1: Did they speak fluent English or was there a Spanish twist to it?
Speaker 2: The children did. Portuguese is the language, but yeah, the children did.  You know, they spoke, I mean, they were, I'm sure they were born in the U.S., I believe they were born in the U.S., and, you know, they spoke English.  The mother was--English was clearly her second language and she spoke English but with a heavy accent.
Speaker 1: Okay, and the father?
Speaker 2: That might have been true of the father, too.  I don't remember.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: He was there, but I don't remember.
Speaker 1: Were the children, they were around your age, too, weren't they?  Or your brother's age, or--
Speaker 2: Yes. A little younger probably--yeah, yeah.  But they were in the same ballpark, the same generation, and they didn't go to, they moved in probably when I was in high school [Bridgewater-Raynham Regional High School, Bridgewater, Massachusetts].
Speaker 1: All right.  What church did they attend?
Speaker 2: I'm sure they were Catholic (laughter). I'm sure they were Catholic.
Speaker 1: They were Catholic also, that's interesting, very interesting. Okay. So, were there any teachers who actually caught your eye, that you were, you liked them or--
Speaker 2: In middle school [Bridgewater Middle School, Bridgewater, Massachusetts]?
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: My sixth grade teacher, I liked quite a lot and he was, his name was Mr. Lynch [ph.], and he--there was an honors sixth grade as sort of an accelerated, gifted class for sixth graders and he was the teacher of this class and he was just a great guy, very--I can't really put my finger on what made him so likeable, but everybody liked him and I thought he was just a fabulous teacher and really, really liked him and then I got to the seventh grade and couldn't stand my seventh grade teacher, my homeroom.  It was your homeroom teacher because, you know, by then you're going to a different teacher for math, different teacher for English, et cetera, but my--Mr. Lynch was fabulous.  I thought he was great.  And then, seventh grade, I don't remember eighth grade.  I don't remember who my eighth grade teacher was, but then--homeroom teacher--but then, you know, we went off to high school.
Story_ID: 317511
Speaker 1: Well, what kind of child do you think you were?  You say you were shy.
Speaker 2: I was definitely shy. Painfully so (laughter) (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay.  Well, what other--how else would you describe yourself (laughter)?
Speaker 2: Chubby (laughter), I was a shy and chubby child, and definitely an introvert.  I liked being alone.  My mother [Catherine Maxwell Daniel], who is an extrovert, used to worry about the fact that I spent so much time alone, and--but I loved to sit alone in my room and read books, or sit out on the back, in the backyard, there was this big rock in the backyard and I used to sit on it and it would be, on a sunny day, alone, I would just sit on this rock and think.  You know, I would sort of go off by myself and think, and my mother thought this was, you know, strange behavior (laughter) and she used to worry that I didn't have enough friends or that I was, you know, lonely and, but I really wasn't.  I just enjoyed my own company and that's still true today.  I have the kind of job that requires me to be very social, but if I have time to myself, I like to spend it alone, actually.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: The--you know, there were some things that were hard about growing up in Bridgewater, Massachusetts; particularly, as one of few black children, and most of those things I experienced most intensely in high school [Bridgewater-Raynham Regional High School, Bridgewater, Massachusetts], you know, as my friends started dating, I didn't date very much.  I had a crush on a--you know, there was a young, black man in my school who was older than me.  He was a year ahead of me.  He was a football player.  He was a star football player and I had a crush on him, you know, and I suffered (laughter), because he didn't know who I was or even notice me, until later.  I mean, I did actually eventually when I was a junior in high school, he asked me out and I was like on cloud nine, but too shy to even speak (laughter), hardly so, that was kind of funny.
Speaker 1: Did you have many choices in high school?
Speaker 2: I did not have many choices; I mean, certainly there were, you know, certainly some white guys in my school that I knew that I liked or thought liked me, but, you know, that line in terms of interracial dating was a very clear one; at least, I understood it as a clear one and I think they understood it as a clear one.  And so, you know, I can think of, you know, this young man or that young man who I think probably thought I was cute, but would not have wanted to say so, do you know what I mean?
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: And, by the time I was a freshman or sophomore in high school, I had developed this undying love for this football player (laughter), unrequited love.
Speaker 1: So you had something to occupy your time (unclear) (laughter).
Speaker 2: Yeah, I had a focus, I had a focus.  I definitely had a focus, but while I was focusing on this unattainable goal, my friends were dating, so I was sort of living vicariously through them.  In my senior year, I did have a boyfriend who was Mexican.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And, I did--I had that one date, one or two dates with that, you know, football player.  He was a junior, I was a senior and in my junior year just as he was graduating we had a couple dates, and that was a wonderful experience for me, but, you know, it didn't--.
Speaker 1: It didn't materialize.
Speaker 2: --it didn't really materialize. And then, in my senior year I kind of blossomed, between my junior and my senior year, I really--I became much less shy, a lot more outgoing.  I did, I never was like really outgoing, but I had a group of friends that I was, you know, a real clique with, and in that group of friends was this young man who was my boyfriend, I went to my senior prom with him, but I also knew that I needed to get out of Bridgewater, and I plotted my escape--
Story_ID: 317512
Speaker 1: Tell us a little about the classes that you had in high school.  What were your favorite subjects and--?
Speaker 2: I took, you know, your basic college prep courses.  I took, you know, English and math and I had, as I said, I was younger than everybody else and I attended some summer programs for gifted youth.
Speaker 1: Were they at universities, or colleges--?
Speaker 2: At Bridgewater State [Bridgewater State College; Bridgewater State University, Bridgewater, Massachusetts].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I--one summer I did a summer program for gifted and talented youth and in that program, I took geometry, so it was a very condensed summer experience of geometry, but as a result of that I didn't do geometry in high school, so I did compressed math, you know, not that math was, I probably would have been better served doing it the regular way because math was always kind of a weakness for me but I did English, I did math, I took French, I took four years of French, and really liked my French teacher, social studies, biology, chemistry, you know, sort of standard college preparatory curriculum.  I was always in honors classes and--
Speaker 1: Well, what were some of your favorite classes?  What was your favorite class?
Speaker 2: Well, I liked to read and because I liked to read I probably liked English; you know, I liked English literature, the literature classes that I took.  I liked French because I liked my French teacher and I thought she was very cool and all, and I took a lot of French, and--
Speaker 1: Was she one of your favorite instructors or was she one of your mentors or was she (simultaneous)--?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah.  She was one of my favorites in that I couldn't tell you her name right now, but it was an Italian name.  I can't remember it right this minute.  I can see her, though I can visualize her but she, you know, she was relatively young relative to the other teachers that we had, and she seemed very sophisticated and hip.  This is the language that I would use today.  She is very hip, cool, this is probably what we called her, and I remember going to a concert with her one time.  She took a friend--there was going to be a rock concert that a friend of mine and I wanted to go to, and she was also going and we were trying to figure out how we were going to get there and she agreed to give us a ride and I thought that was pretty neat.
Speaker 1: Okay. That was pretty neat.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: Anything--now what was the name of the high school, again?
Speaker 2: I--excuse me--I went to Bridgewater-Raynham Regional High School [Bridgewater, Massachusetts].  It was, as the name sounds, a regional high school that combined the town of Bridgewater [Massachusetts] and also Raynham [Massachusetts], which is the next town over, and so the kids from Raynham were bussed to Bridgewater and we all went to Bridgewater-Raynham Regional High School.
Speaker 1: So, were there more blacks this time since you're bussing children in?
Speaker 2: You know, this area was, did not, was predominantly white, so maybe there were, there were Cape Verdean families.  I remember some Cape Verdean students from Raynham.  You know, we were not that far from New Bedford [Massachusetts], and New Bedford has a very large Cape Verdean population, so there were a few brown-skinned Cape Verdeans that lived in Raynham that were bussed to this high school, but they didn't identify as black and I didn't think of them as black because they were clear that they were Cape Verdean.  You know, I mean you have to understand that Massachusetts-Cape Verdean dynamic, and today I know some Cape Verdeans who do think of themselves as black.
Speaker 1: Yeah, some of them do, yeah.
Speaker 2: You know, but most of what they--I didn't think of them as black.  You know, you were sort of white or you were black, and in the world that I lived in, I think they were considered more white.
Story_ID: 317513
Speaker 1: At this particular time in your life did you know what you wanted to do after school, after you graduated [from Bridgewater-Raynham Regional High School, Bridgewater, Massachusetts] (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I did.  Well, I knew two things.  I wanted to get out of Bridgewater [Massachusetts] (laughter).  I wanted to get out of Bridgewater, and I knew I was going to college.  I knew from a very early age that I was going to college.  My parents [Catherine Maxwell Daniel and Robert A. Daniel] were college-educated, everybody in my extended family was college-educated, it seemed, and so it was a clear goal and when I was fifteen, I went with my mother to Danville, Virginia to visit my [maternal] grandmother [Viola Callahan Maxwell], and I had an experience in Danville, which was an important one, and that was there were all these teenaged boys in my mother's--in my grandmother's neighborhood who seemed to think I was pretty cute, you know, and what was interesting about that, what was important, I mean it was a black neighborhood and there were black boys and I was getting a lot of attention and it was different from the attention that I got, or didn't get, in Bridgewater, Massachusetts, and so a little bell went off that said you need to be some place where are some black boys, and so when I got ready to think about college, I really thought in a very strategic way about being in a place where my social life would improve and so I decided to go to Wesleyan University [Middletown, Connecticut].  Now, you might say why Wesleyan, because Wesleyan (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yes, I will say why Wesleyan (laughter).
Speaker 2: Wesleyan was certainly at the time, and still is, a predominantly white institution, but it was just going co-ed.  At the time that I was entering Wesleyan, they had just started admitting young women and it had also just started actively recruiting black and Latino students and because they just--they had been doing that and they just started taking women, there were many more black and Latino male students than there were black and Latino female students.  It was like 7:1, the ratio, and so I realized that and thought, well this would be for the best of all worlds.  I had grown up in New England and had grown up with the idea of, you know, there's a certain elitism in New England, about New England colleges and so I wanted to go to a New England school, and Wesleyan was a school that was high on my list.  I read their literature.  I was impressed with what I had read.  I visited the campus.  I thought it would be a good place for me to be, and it had the 7:1 ratio, and so I thought this is a good plan (laughter), and that's where I went.  So, I was fortunate to be able to choose.  I had, you know, I was accepted to all the schools I applied to and Wesleyan and was where I decided to go--
Story_ID: 317514
Speaker 1: Well did you apply to any HBCUs [historically black colleges and universities]?
Speaker 2: I did not. And--
Speaker 1: And why wouldn't you apply to HBCUs?  Your parents [Catherine Maxwell Daniel and Robert A. Daniel] and grandparents' undergraduate degrees were all black--
Speaker 2: Exactly, and my mother, now I have to say that my knowledge of HBCUs was limited.  Even though my [paternal] grandmother [Constance Hazel Daniel] attended Spelman [Spelman Seminary; Spelman College, Atlanta, Georgia] and went to Atlanta University [Clark Atlanta University, Atlanta, Georgia], she was no longer living at the time.  You know, she died when I was in the third grade, so I didn't know anybody who had gone to any other historically black college other than Howard University [Washington, D.C.].  You know, my parents went to Howard and their friends, their black friends had gone to Howard, so my knowledge of historically--and we went to Washington, D.C., ever summer to visit relatives.  So, I was quite familiar with the Howard campus and the idea of Howard and my mother, I think, would have been very happy for me to go to Howard.  But I wanted to do something different, and I--as I said earlier in our interview, that I look a lot like my mother and she and I are similar in personality in some ways.  She is much more outgoing.  She is more outgoing than I am, but there are other characteristics, personality characteristics that are similar and when I was a teenager, one of the things I wanted more than anything was to be different from my mother.
Speaker 1: Right, okay.
Speaker 2: So, I didn't want to go to my mother's school and, you know, I had my own ideas and so I wanted to go to Wesleyan [Wesleyan University, Middletown, Connecticut], and it seemed like a great opportunity since they just started taking women and it was something exciting about being among the first to attend there (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) To go. Okay. Now, what types of universities did you apply to?  I mean, what are the some of the names of some of the others that you applied?
Speaker 2: All of them in New England.
Speaker 1: All are in the New England area?  Okay.
Speaker 2: All of them New England.  I applied to Tufts University [Medford, Massachusetts], I applied to Brandeis University [Waltham, Massachusetts], I applied to Boston University [Boston, Massachusetts], I applied to the University of Massachusetts in Amherst [University of Massachusetts Amherst, Amherst, Massachusetts].  I didn't apply to any women's colleges.  My guidance counselor tried to encourage me to apply to Mount Holyoke College [South Hadley, Massachusetts], but I was not interested in attending women's college because I had this social agenda (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay, that's true, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Now, had you thought about what you would major in before you--
Speaker 2: Yes, I was very clear about that.  Sorry to interrupt.
Speaker 1: That's okay.
Speaker 2: I was--I knew I wanted to be a psychologist, and I decided I wanted to be a psychologist when I was sixteen because I read a book about a psychologist.  I worked, I told you that when I was growing up I spent a lot of time in the children's library [at Bridgewater Public Library, Bridgewater, Massachusetts] as a kid, and when I got to be fourteen, I started working in the adult library.  I had a job after school filing--putting the books away.  I was a, you know, sort of librarian assistant.  I put the plastic covering on the new books when they came in, you know--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So, anyway, I read a lot and I read all kinds of books because I was the person putting the plastic covers on the books, so whatever kind of book came in I was reading the flap, you know.  So, I read books of all kinds and I read a book about a psychologist called 'Dibs in Search of Self' ['Dibs in Search of Self: The Renowned, Deeply Moving Story of an Emotionally Lost Child Who Found His Way Back,' Virginia M. Axline].  And it was about a child psychologist working with a young boy who was emotionally disturbed, and based on reading that book I decided I wanted to be a psychologist, 'cause it seemed, I just was fascinated with the story.
Story_ID: 317515
Speaker 1: You applied to Wesleyan [Wesleyan University, Middletown, Connecticut].  Was it also because of their curriculum, their psychology curriculum or was it mainly to (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, it was mainly the other things (laughter), you know, I mean every college has a psychology major, you know, and I'm sure I asked about it when I was visiting the campus, but it was mostly the social environment and the fact that it was a very--I was a very strong student.  You know, throughout my high school--throughout my education, I was an A student, an honors student, and I did well on my SATs, and I qualified for the national--what was called at the time the National Achievement Scholarship, which was a program for black students who had scored well on the National Merit [National Merit Scholarship Corporation] tests, and so anyway, because I was a strong student, I had certain expectations about the kind of college I would go to, and I wanted to go to a school that had a strong academic reputation; that was a given, but I also wanted to go to a school where I was going to improve my social life, and so I thought Wesleyan would be the trick, do the trick, and it did.  I actually, I enjoyed my Wesleyan experience a great deal.
Speaker 1: So this was 19--what 1970?
Speaker 2: I started in, I graduated from high school [Bridgewater-Raynham Regional High School, Bridgewater, Massachusetts] in 1971, and I started at Wesleyan in September '71 [1971], graduated in the spring of '75 [1975].
Speaker 1: So what was your experience like at Wesleyan?  Did you accomplish your goals?
Speaker 2: I did (laughter), I did.
Speaker 1: Socially?
Speaker 2: I did accomplish my goals (laughter).  I--Wesleyan at the time had a summer program for students of color.  It was like a pre-freshman experience, where you came and it was to help--a lot of the students that they recruited to Wesleyan were coming there--a lot of the black and Latino students were coming from urban school environments and it was intended, I think, to be sort of a transition, help students make the transition, a successful transition to college, and so the summer program was called Prospect Wesleyan and you had the opportunity, you didn't have to attend, it was voluntary but you could attend, and I was eager to do that, because I thought it would be important for me.  My transition wasn't so much about coming to Wesleyan, it was about coming into a community that had a lot more black and Latino students than the one I had come from where I wasn't going to be the only black kid.  And I was really glad I did that.  It was a great experience for me to spend that summer getting to know other black kids from all over the country and really forming my friendship network, and I spent the rest of my college years really as part of that friendship network and, so, even though I was at a predominantly white institution, all of my friends were either black or Latino, and I had a boyfriend by the, you know, the first fall I--of my freshman year.  I had connected with a young man who was my boyfriend throughout my four years at Wesleyan.  We parted company after that, though. (laughter)  That was the case.
Story_ID: 317516
Speaker 1: Okay, so what was different about the Wesleyan [Wesleyan University, Middletown, Connecticut] environment as opposed to the Bridgewater [Massachusetts] environment? I mean definitely more (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, well, a critical mass of black people.  I mean, that was the key thing for me.
Speaker 1: But, again, you had mostly white professors, or all white professors?
Speaker 2: Sure.  I had mostly white professors, but I had a black female professor for the first time, who I met in my very first year at Wesleyan, and who was a mentor to me and a woman who is still living, and she came to my inauguration for, when I was inaugurated here at Spelman [Spelman College, Atlanta, Georgia].  But, she was, her name was Mrs. Boulware, Mrs. Faye Boulware [Faye Davis Boulware] and she--
Speaker 1: What'd she teach, did you say?
Speaker 2: She taught, she was the director of what was then called the African American Institute--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Now it's called, I think, the Center for African American Studies.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: But, Mrs. Boulware, as we called her, sometimes Mrs. B, Mrs. Boulware taught courses on black child development and she had an interest in, her background was in psychology, and there was also a black male psychologist who taught at the African American Institute.  His name was Ron McMullen [Ronald McMullen].  He is also still living, and both of them influenced me considerably in terms of introducing me to works that I used throughout my career.  You know, I first read about ritual identity development theory and the work of William Cross [William E. Cross, Jr.] at Wesleyan in their courses.  Mrs. Boulware was very encouraging.  I became a teaching assistant for her and worked doing tutorials, tutoring children.  I got very involved in the activities of the African American Institute.  I spent a lot of time at the Malcolm X House.  I didn't live in the Malcolm X House, but hung out there and used to, she used to have seminars in her apartment and I spent a lot of time with her.  My roommate and I both did, and my roommate my freshman year of college, became actually very close to Mrs. Boulware, like a daughter really, and they have an ongoing relationship and the two of them came together to my inauguration (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now was this a black roommate or--?
Speaker 2: Yes, I had a black roommate.  I had black roommates throughout my college experience.
Speaker 1: That's quite a change from Bridgewater (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It was quite a change, much desired and needed.
Story_ID: 317517
Speaker 1: It's an interesting thing because, of course, my professional interest, my research interest has been on the experience of black youth living in predominantly white communities, and you don't usually have to search very far to find the autobiographical routes of somebody's research interest, and of course, part of my research interest was that I had had this experience growing up as one of very few black families in this New England town [Bridgewater, Massachusetts], and when I went to college and then later to graduate school, and read about black families, I was always reading about black families that lived in black neighborhoods, you know, in southern communities or urban environments.  I never read anything about small town life for black families in predominantly white communities and I thought surely, I'm not the only one in America who has had this experience.  And so, when I wanted to pursue a research topic as a graduate student, I thought that's what I wanted to write about.  I wanted to find out what was it like for other people who had grown up in predominantly white communities or who had been raising children in predominantly white communities, and that led to my first book, 'Assimilation Blues: Black Families in a White Community' [Beverly Daniel Tatum].
Speaker 2: Okay.  Now, with all the kids sitting together in the cafeteria, now that didn't happen at your school [Bridgewater-Raynham Regional High School, Bridgewater, Massachusetts]?
Speaker 1: No, there weren't enough of us (laughter).  Though, it did happen in college.
Speaker 2: It did happen in college?
Speaker 1: Oh, absolutely.  We all sat together, and I was right there with them.
Speaker 2: All right, so how was college life at Wesleyan [Wesleyan University, Middletown, Connecticut]?
Speaker 1: I loved being at Wesleyan.  I mean, I have to say that, you know, I have very fond memories of my experience at Wesleyan and my young, my oldest son [Travis J. Tatum] also attended Wesleyan; in part, because he heard good things about it from me, but I made great friends there, I enjoyed my experience, I learned a lot, I was a successful student, and I, it launched me to my graduate school career at the University of Michigan [Ann Arbor, Michigan].
Speaker 2: Okay.  Now what would you think was the, if you look back over your Wesleyan experience, what do you think was the, (unclear) let's say the highlight or the highpoint of your--
Speaker 1: For me, it was really about the social opportunity it presented me.  Really, you know, that's not to take anything away from the classes I took or the professors I had.  You know, certainly the relationship I had with Mrs. Boulware [Faye Davis Boulware] as the black female professor I ever had was an important relationship and it was an important learning experience, but certainly I think for me the most important part of my college experience was the social network I was able to develop.  You know, as a young, black girl growing up in Bridgewater, Massachusetts, I really didn't have the opportunity to have black friends or to be part of a social network or go to parties or do some of the things, you know, that would have been common if I had grown up in a black neighborhood.  And, I got to do those things in college and that was really important to me.
Story_ID: 317518
Speaker 1: I want to move forward and back, if we can say (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay. Yeah.
Speaker 1: --at the same time.  Now, a lot of black children in your shoes, growing up in all-white environments and then attending predominantly white institutions, sometimes lose their identity, or they become confused.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: But what would you contribute your staying on track and staying focused and not being confused and, you know, maybe going astray or doing like some of the others might do (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, yeah. I think a lot of it was timing, you know, in that I graduated from high school [Bridgewater-Raynham Regional High School, Bridgewater, Massachusetts] in 1971.  You know, it was still sort of the height of the civil rights--I mean, the Civil Rights Movement was after the assassination of Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] and Malcolm X, but the influence of the Civil Rights Movement was still very strong.  [HistoryMaker] Angela Davis was one of my idols.  You know, I stopped straightening my hair.  I made an intentional choice when I got to college [Wesleyan University, Middletown, Connecticut] to stop straightening my hair.  I had straightened it in high school and, you know, I had braids as a child and then straightened it in high school, and then when I got to college I was very influenced by, sort of, black nationalism and the cultural icons like reading 'The Autobiography of Malcolm X' [Malcolm X and Alex Haley], or hearing Angela Davis speak at Wesleyan, or listening to the music of Gil Scott Heron, or, you know, I, and so I, in my freshman year stopped straightening my hair.  It was long, though.  My hair was long, so I stopped straightening it and so then I had, you know, this instant Angela Davis fro, you know, (laughter) high maintenance, but I, anyway, and I was with this group of young, African American men and women and I always say black and Latino, because there were Puerto Ricans, there were Dominicans, you know, it wasn't just black people, but also Latinos and we sat at the table together and we talked about politics together and we were--and I was taking African American studies classes and learning about African American history and reading about African American literature.  I was a psychology major but I took a lot of African American studies classes, and I thought about being a double major.  One of the things about me was that I always took many more courses than I needed to take.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Because, I was interested in a lot of things.  So, I--you know, standard load would have been four courses.  I would regularly take five or six or seven courses a semester.
Speaker 1: Outside of your major, so many outside and so many required, or--?
Speaker 2: I mean, I was doing all the required things but I took a lot of English classes, I took a lot of American studies classes.  I was really interested in American studies and African American culture, and so I just, you know, if I saw something in the catalog and I could fit it in my schedule, I took it.  As a consequence, I graduated early because I had more credits than I needed, and in my senior year, I was breaking up with my boyfriend and tired of being at Wesleyan.  It was a small community and even though we had--I grew a lot in that community and it was very intellectually stimulating and personally, my personal development--was just a wonderful time.
Story_ID: 317519
Speaker 1: By December of my senior year [at Wesleyan University, Middletown, Connecticut], I was ready to be someplace else, and so I cashed in my credits and said I'm outta here (laughter), and I came back in May for my graduation, but I returned to Bridgewater [Massachusetts], got a job, started working, applied to graduate schools and then by September of '75 [1975], I was in Ann Arbor, Michigan, at a Ph.D. program in clinical psychology [at the University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan].
Speaker 2: So, what did you do between that time--between December and May?
Speaker 1: I got a job, well, I was applying to graduate school.  I wanted to go to clinical, I wanted to get a Ph.D. in clinical psychology, and I had worked with children summers and tutoring and volunteering and that kind of thing, but I had never worked with emotionally disturbed children and I thought it would be good to get some experience as--to strengthen my graduate school application.  So, I had met a psychiatrist who worked at McLean Hospital [Belmont, Massachusetts] outside of Cambridge [Massachusetts], and I talked with him about whether I could do an internship at the hospital, and he helped me arrange that, so I spent a month, or six weeks, probably, right after Christmas, from like January--maybe it was just a month; the month of January.  I spent it volunteering as a classroom aide in the psychiatric ward working with emotionally disturbed children.  They have a children's unit, and I was working with children in that children's unit as a volunteer to get some clinical experience as part of my preparation for graduate school.  When that month was up, I took a job.  I actually--the summer between my junior year and my senior year, I had been a management trainee and intern, working for Sears and Roebuck [Sears, Roebuck and Co.], and I had interned in the Cambridge, Massachusetts Sears store, and at the end of that summer, I was offered a job by the Sears and Roebuck Company; so, basically they said, "When you graduate, if you'd like to come and work for Sears, we'd like to have you," and so I graduated in December, I wrote to the Sears people and said, "I'd like to come and work for you in February."  I spent January volunteering at McLean Hospital and then in February I became a management trainee for Sears and Roebuck and I worked in the Brockton, Massachusetts store, lived at home, used my money to buy a car and did that until August, when I tendered my resignation and went off to graduate school.  If I hadn't gotten into graduate school, I would have stayed at Sears, you know, probably a little longer, but in as much as I got accepted to the school of my choice, I left and went to graduate school.
Story_ID: 317520
Speaker 1: Now, I want to ask another question about your being centered and focused as it related to your race.  Would you attribute that to your parents [Catherine Maxwell Daniel and Robert A. Daniel] and what they taught at home or (simultaneous)--?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh yes, yeah.  So I--so I want to say something about that, and that is that the question you asked me about, you know, that sometimes when young people, young African Americans grow up in predominantly white communities, they emerge from those communities a little confused about their own identity, or where they fit; you know, I recently read an essay by someone who grew up in a predominantly white community who described himself as a cultural mulatto, you know, that--and in that term he was sort of trying to capture the experience of being--not quite fitting in with the white kids but not quite fitting in with black kids if you've grown up in a predominantly white community.
Speaker 1: Which is an experience that you had.
Speaker 2: Well, it was an experience that I--
Speaker 1: Especially with the one with Ra--what's her name?
Speaker 2: Ramona [ph.].
Speaker 1: Ramona?
Speaker 2: Yes.  That's the experience I was having with Ramona, but when I got to, but I don't quite know why I felt this way but I knew that the solution to my problem was to spend time with young, black people.  And I think I got the insight when I visited my [maternal] grandmother [Viola Callahan Maxwell] in Danville, Virginia; that there was sort of a window into another kind of experience and I thought, oh, I want this experience, and so when I went to Wesleyan [Wesleyan University, Middletown, Connecticut], I worked hard to figure out how to fit in.  You know, I mean, it was certainly the case that when I first hooked up with the black kids and Latino kids in, you know, from New York, and I mean my boyfriend had grown up in Harlem [New York, New York].  He had gone to Phillips Academy [Andover Phillips Academy] in Andover [Massachusetts], but his family lived on 123rd Street in Harlem and the, it was important to me to fit in, and I was enough of a social observer, you know, as sort of the quiet, shy person who watches people, to figure out what I needed to do, you know, to learn a language, to pick up the dance moves, whatever it was, to be part of that community, and I became part of that community pretty easily, but it was something that I was highly motivated to do.
Story_ID: 317521
Speaker 1: But when I was at Wesleyan [Wesleyan University, Middletown, Connecticut], I became a resident advisor in the residence halls, and in my--on my residence hall, I had two black girls who also had grown up in predominantly white communities. And one of them did it the way I did it in the sense that she came to Wesleyan and she really became part of the black community, and another one didn't.  She seemed to be uncomfortable, not able to make that transition, and hung out mostly with other white students--with white students.  And I wondered at the time what made the difference.  What made the difference for me, what made the difference between these two girls, and that was really my research question when I went off to graduate school.  It was like, what makes the difference?  And, I studied that question when I did my doctoral dissertation, and I tried to answer the question in my book, 'Assimilation Blues' ['Assimilation Blues: Black Families in a White Community,' Beverly Daniel Tatum], and in the book I described three kinds of families.  I discovered, as part of my research, that there were three kinds of families that I described.  One was families that were what I would call race conscious.  These were black families living in white communities that, even though they were in a white community, they really worked hard to try to make sure that their kids developed a strong sense of black identity. And maybe they did that by visiting their relatives other places, or sending the kids to a black church, or, you know, maybe joining Jack and Jill [Jack and Jill of America, Inc.], or you know, they did things (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Just immersing themselves in some kind of black environment--
Speaker 1: Trying to find some way to maintain that kind of ongoing connection for their children. And then there were some families that said it was important but didn't really do it, that they were kind of neutral.  And then there were families that didn't think it was important, didn't really talk about it, didn't, you know, kind of avoided the whole topic of race, and I called them race-avoidant.  If I had to characterize my family, I would call my parents [Catherine Maxwell Daniel and Robert A. Daniel] race neutral.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: You know, they didn't talk a lot about race, they really talked--or when they did, it was in the spirit of judging people by the content of their character, not by the color of their skin.  They were really humanitarians in the sense of I can honestly say I never heard my parents make negative comments about white people or anybody, you know.  They were very much guided by the golden rule: treat people the way you want to be treated.  That was a clear principle in my household, so I would not give my parents credit for my own desire to establish--to connect with black people because it wasn't necessarily something that they talked a lot about.  They didn't say you should do this or you should not do that and, in fact, when I went off to college with my Angela [HistoryMaker Angela Davis]--and came home--I went off to college one way, came home, you know, looking like Angela Davis and talking about power to the people (laughter), you know, my mother thought I had really become kind of anti-white, and she and I had a long conversation about this in my summer after my first year of college, when I said to her, you know, "It's possible to be pro-black without being anti-white," you know.  It's not necessarily both--you know, you don't have--I still had white friends, I still saw my high school friends, but clearly my focus had shifted.
Story_ID: 317522
Speaker 1: Okay, but no, we were saying off tape that it was like your parents [Catherine Maxwell Daniel and Robert A. Daniel] didn't want to influence your decisions about who or what you wanted your life to be like, you know (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: --racial wise, as it relates to husbands, et cetera, and with them staying out of the picture then you made your own decisions and you came to your own conclusions, but I made the statement that it seems as if your brother, your older brother, had different decisions.  He made different decisions.
Speaker 2: Well, my brother--I have two brothers, my oldest brother Eric [Eric Daniel] and I are the closest in age.  We're two and a--two years, four months apart, and he was, because I skipped a grade in school, he was just one grade ahead of me and we walked to school together and, you know, we were close growing up, but he was a very talented musician, is a talented musician.  He is a professional musician today.
Speaker 1: And did he start early with music?
Speaker 2: He did.  He started early with music.  He--his talent became apparent early on, so at the Burnell School [Burnell Laboratory School, Bridgewater, Massachusetts] where we attended elementary school, they had a music program and he started playing the clarinet in the third or fourth grade, and it was pretty clear early on that he was good at it and my parents found a private teacher for him and he went on to play in the Greater Boston Youth Symphony Orchestra, and but probably by the time he was in high school, he had his own, you know, he was a card-carrying musician.  You know, he joined the musicians' union and his teacher got him opportunities to play like in summer music theater at the Cohasset, you know, on the Cape [Cape Cod, Massachusetts] or various places.  He had his own little band he played in at this trio with--my brother, like I, was one of few black children in the school so, you know, he played in a trio with other musicians, but they were white kids.  You know, he was in this trio with a piano player named Paul DiRocco [ph.] and a drummer named Gary Benson [ph.], and the three of them used to play Dave Brubeck's song, 'Take Five.'  I remember that (laughter).  But they were good.  And they were, you know, middle school guys playing this little band together and throughout high school he played music of one kind or another, at one point, he took up the guitar and, you know, he had, he was sort of the Jimmy Hendrix impersonator (laughter).  You know, I mean he was wearing the hair like Jimi Hendrix, and, you know, the little headband, and psychedelic tee-shirts and all that, but he was very talented and played, as I said, in the Greater Boston Youth Symphony Orchestra, spent summers at Tanglewood [Lenox, Massachusetts] at the youth symphony orchestra summer camp.  He was, he competed in the All-State music competitions, played first clarinet in the statewide competition, that kind of thing.
Story_ID: 317523
Speaker 1: But anyway, he [Tatum's brother, Eric Daniel] played clarinet, saxophone, flute, picked up the guitar, but it was clear he was going to be a professional musician early on, and he went off to college and attended--at first, he went to the New England Conservatory of Music [Boston, Massachusetts], but he dropped out of the New England Conservatory of Music, probably after his first semester, to join a band in California, to go out to be a professional musician.  While he was traveling and being in a band, it was during the Vietnam [Vietnam War] era and he lost his draft deferment because he was out of school, and so he got drafted and so--he was very fortunate, however, though because he spent, he served his time and the fact that he reenlisted, he probably was in the [U.S.] military for years but he spent all of his time in the military as a music instructor at the [U.S.] Navy music school [Naval School of Music] in Virginia; Virginia Beach, Virginia.  So, he never actually saw any combat duty, but served as a musician for the [U.S.] Armed Forces and when he came out of the service, he went to Berklee College of Music [Boston, Massachusetts] and focused on jazz, and so he, you know, has worked professionally and one of his jobs after he got out of school was working as an orchestra musician, you know, on Broadway that do those Broadway shows and they hire musicians to play the music, and some of those shows tour, and he got a job touring with the Broadway musicals, some Broadway musicals, and then one of the tours was a European tour and it took him to Europe and while he was in Europe, he met a woman [Angela Daniel] from Italy, an Italian woman that he fell in love with and decided to go back to Italy to see if there was a future in that relationship and it turns out that there was and they got married, and he's lived in Italy ever since.  So, for him, you know, we have occasionally had conversations about race and ethnicity and we've talked about whether or not he would ever want to come back to live in the states and, for him, it's like well why would I want to do that (laughter) you know, that he finds as a, you know, as an African American or black man, I mean he's a light-skinned black man living in Italy.  I'm sure that there's some people who look at him and think of him as just, you know, a dark-skinned Italian, maybe.
Speaker 2: That's true.
Speaker 1: But he has a life that is relatively neutral as far as his race or ethnicity is concerned; at least, that's my impression, you know, and certainly as a musician who's travelled all over the United States, you know, he certainly had encountered race issues and understood racism and he misses, I know he misses seeing my parents [Catherine Maxwell Daniel and Robert A. Daniel] and the family ties, but, you know, he's had a happy life (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) He's over there, okay.
Story_ID: 317524
Speaker 1: So, you leave Wesleyan [Wesleyan University, Middletown, Connecticut]--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --and you get accepted at the University of Michigan [Ann Arbor, Michigan] (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) of Michigan, yep.
Speaker 1: --and so how--tell us about that experience.
Speaker 2: Yes.  So going off to the University of Michigan was a good experience.  Michigan has been a leader in diversity and higher education in many ways.  You know, it was the University of Michigan that took up the African, the affirmative action case [Gratz v. Bollinger, 2003]; you know, when affirmative action was challenged, it was the University of Michigan that really stepped up to the plate and said, "No, we're not gonna just, you know, be bullied out of our diversity programs and our outreach.  We're gonna really fight that affirmative action case," and I'm very proud to be a Michigan graduate, in part, because of the stand that the University of Michigan took.  But when I was at Michigan, in 1975, there were not a lot of black graduate students, but probably more at Michigan than at other places, and I continued down that path of, you know, hanging out with other black students, so there, I was a very active member of the Black Student Psychological Association and went to the Black Law Student Association [BLSA; National Black Law Students Association (NBLSA)] parties and, you know, the network of black graduate students of cross disciplines was very wide and it was at Michigan that I met my husband [Travis Tatum], who was a graduate student, African American student in political science at Michigan at the time.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, why did you choose the University of Michigan, and did you apply to other schools also?
Speaker 2: I did.  I applied to, I applied to seven colleges and got into all of them and so, with the arrogance of my youth, I applied to seven graduate schools and expected the same results, (laughter) but that was not the case.  I applied to seven programs in clinical psychology and based on reputation, I was looking for schools that had strong graduate programs in psychology, and of the seven that I applied to, I was only admitted to two, and the two that I was admitted to were Michigan and Ohio State [The Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio].  As it happens, they were probably among the strongest of the programs that I applied to, so I had to decide between Michigan and Ohio State, and I went with Michigan.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, what were some of your experiences at the University of Michigan career-wise as it related to your psychology career (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, I liked, at Michigan I enjoyed my program a lot.  I liked living in Ann Arbor [Michigan].  Ann Arbor's a very dynamic place, and Michigan is a great school.  The University of Michigan has a psychology program that's considered probably best in the nation, and so it was a wonderful place to be in school. The clinical psychology program that I was in was not all that I expected it to be, or let me just say that I was not as well informed about the program as I probably could have been. And, one of the things I discovered when I got there was that it had a very strong psychoanalytic focus.  It was very Freudian; highly influenced by the theories of Sigmund Freud.
Speaker 1: Well, wasn't Wesleyan like that, too?
Speaker 2: No, actually Wesleyan was much more behaviorally oriented.  B.F. Skinner was the influential person there.
Speaker 1: All right, okay.
Speaker 2: And, at Wesleyan, the psychology that I studied at Wesleyan was kind of broad.  You know, I took social psychology courses, courses in developmental psychology, courses in abnormal psychology.  I certainly learned about Freud at Wesleyan as part of the psychology curriculum, but there was not a strong clinical psychology focus, but I came to Wesleyan with the idea that I wanted to be a clinical psychologist, so I majored in psychology and then I applied to clinical psychology programs and when--and I didn't really know the difference between one clinical psychology program and another.  So, when I got to Michigan, I learned, after I got there, that most of the professors had been highly influenced by Freudian theories, and I wasn't particularly that enamored with Freud, and so I was a little bit marginalized in the program, not in terms of the way people treated me, but simply that I wasn't that interested in the major theoretical approach of the program that I was in.
Story_ID: 317525
Speaker 1: I was, however, very interested in family psychology, family therapy, and there was one professor in my department [at the University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan] who was interested in family therapy, and I got hooked up with him so, as I say sometimes to graduate students that I meet today, you really only need one (laughter).  You know, you need one professor in graduate school that you can really work with and I found that person, whose name is Eric Berman, and Eric was--became my dissertation advisor, and I took all his courses and I became his teaching assistant, and he became a mentor to me and I really appreciated working with Eric, because he had an interest in something that I was interested in, and also he gave me a lot of freedom to pursue the ideas that I was interested in.  I came really wanting to learn more about black families and the experiences of black families in white communities.  This was not something that he had studied.  Eric was a white, Jewish man and he was sympathetic to my interest, but it wasn't his area--it wasn't his own area of expertise, but he gave me a lot of freedom to pursue my own interests and could support what I was doing because he shared my, he was very knowledgeable about families, and family systems and family therapy and also he was interested in qualitative research, and I wanted to do my dissertation by interviewing people.  I wasn't necessarily interested in doing surveys and questionnaires; I wanted to do interviews, collect oral histories, narratives, kind of like the one we're having today, and Eric was also someone who thought that was a very legitimate and important way of collecting information, so it was great working with him.
Story_ID: 317526
Speaker 1: The times, we're looking at '70s [1970s].
Speaker 2: Yeah, late '70s [1970s]; I was there--I was in Ann Arbor [Michigan] from 1975 to 1979.  I didn't actually finish my degree until 1984, but I got married in 1979, and left Ann Arbor because my husband [Travis Tatum] got a job in California.
Speaker 1: Did you discontinue your studies or did you (simultaneous)--?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, I continued them in California.  I was still technically a Michigan [University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan] student, but I had completed all my coursework and done all my clinical internships, so all I had really left to do was write my dissertation, and so we moved to California and I actually collected the data for my dissertation in California because we were living in a community that had very few black families, so I interviewed the black families there about the experiences raising children in a predominantly white community.
Speaker 1: So it worked out fine.
Speaker 2: It did, it worked out (laughter).
Speaker 1: It worked out extremely well.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: Do you think you would have had the same success at the University of Michigan if you had stayed in the Ann Arbor area (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I'm not--well, you know, in Ann Arbor, I certainly, Ann Arbor is also a predominantly white community and I could have interviewed black families in Ann Arbor if I had been there.  You know, I could have pursued the same topic, but, and I probably would have gotten finished sooner.  You know, I started my program in 1975.  I didn't finish it until 1984, nine years later.  I think if I had stayed in Ann Arbor, I probably would have completed my dissertation faster and would have been in regular contact with my committee chair and all of that, but I'm a pretty self-motivated person and I was determined to do it and, you know, one of the things that delayed me, the completion of my work, was that I got married in 1979 and in 1981, I decided we should have a baby and so (laughter) I--you know, that slowed me down.  In fact, there was, on my dissertation committee, I had three men on the committee and one woman, and the one woman on the committee gave me a piece of advice and she said--when I was getting ready to get married and move away, she said, "You know, if you can at all finish your dissertation before you have children.  That would be a good thing to do," she said, "because if you have a baby the baby will be two years old before you finish your dissertation.  That's just the way it goes."  And I didn't think she was right necessarily, but it turned out she was exactly right (laughter), because when I--when my son [Travis J. Tatum] was born in May of 1982, he was two years old and one month when I finished my dissertation.  So, she was exactly right.
Story_ID: 317527
Speaker 1: After you grad--got your dissertation completed and you got your degree conferred up on you, what did you do then?
Speaker 2: Okay, well really my--that part of my story really begins before I finished my degree.  So when I got married in 1979, my husband [Travis Tatum] and I moved from Ann Arbor [Michigan] to Santa Barbara, California.  He had a teaching position at the University of California in Santa Barbara [University of California, Santa Barbara, Santa Barbara, California], and I got a job working as a therapist in the campus counseling center.   Even though I wasn't finished with my Ph.D., I had completed my master's degree and had enough clinical internship experience to qualify as a therapist and so was working in the campus counseling center, and--just part-time, and working on my research part-time.  And then, after we had been there a year, I got invited to teach a course in the African American studies department, in the black studies department, on racism, and I had not studied racism as a topic except that I had taken all these African American studies courses as an undergraduate [at Wesleyan University, Middletown, Connecticut], and my research was focused on black families, and so I read a lot about black family history and slavery and the--there was at the time that I was in graduate school [University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan], one of the questions that researchers were talking about was whether black families were the way they were in terms of the patterns of behavior, because of cultural continuities from Africa; you know, was there sort of an African carry-over in terms of family traditions, or was it the response to the stress of oppressed environments, poverty, et cetera, particularly the kinship networks.  You know, in a lot of black communities, black families have elaborate extended family networks and if they don't have those extended family networks, sometimes they form what researchers would call fictive kin relationships; you know, play aunts, play uncles, you know, your play mama, you know, those kinds of, they're not blood relationships, but they're like family.
Speaker 1: Extended but still family.
Speaker 2: Right.  Very important family relationships even if they're not biologically related to you.  And, some researcher said that those relationships were that way because of the response to slavery and the destruction of the family and other people said, no, it's not about slavery; it's about African culture and the continuation of African culture, even despite slavery and all the stress of slavery and the ways in which families were destroyed during slavery.  The resilience of black families during the slavery period was a result of this continuing African tradition.  So, I had been reading a lot about this stuff because I was interested in the experience of black families.  So, even though I was a psychologist, I was pretty well-versed in African American history and literature, because of my coursework in college and the reading that I had been doing in graduate school.
Story_ID: 317528
Speaker 1: So, I got invited to teach a course in the black studies department. The first course I was invited to teach was a course called--was really about black children and education.  It was called Education and the Black Child.  So, I taught that course and it went pretty well, and then I was asked to teach another one, and the second course I was asked to teach was called Group Exploration of Racism. And I had not ever taught a course like that before, but I, as a psychologist, had facilitated groups, you know, assertiveness training groups, all kinds of groups.  And I had done all this reading about coping patterns and responses to racism on the parts of black families and so, anyway, to make a long story short, I thought I could do it and so I, and I needed the money (laughter) so I was offered the opportunity and I took it and I was, I wasn't, I was twenty-five years old, I mean I was still young, and--I was twe- maybe I was twenty-six.  I got married when I was twenty-four, going on twenty-five, so maybe I was twenty-six at this time, but I was a new professor and even though I wasn't very experienced, I had a very powerful teaching experience, because at the end of the semester, teaching this course, Group Exploration of Racism, my students said, "This course was the best course we've taken at this university.  Everybody should take this course.  It should be required."  And I just felt like, wow, this is really powerful, and what was it that was making the course such a powerful learning experience?  And, what I concluded was it was really about giving young people the permission to talk about a topic that had been a taboo up to that point for them.  I mean, it was a very uncommon thing to be able to come together in a racially mixed class and talk about race.  Most people hadn't had that experience before.
Speaker 2: Now were there as many whites as there were blacks, or were there (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Oh, there were more whites, it was mostly white, so it wasn't evenly divided.  The University of California at Santa Barbara [University of California, Santa Barbara, Santa Barbara, California] was the least diverse of the University of California campuses at the time that I was there, and that's probably still true.  The black student population was about two percent, the Chicano student population was maybe five percent, the Asian population was a little higher perhaps, but it was still largely white campus.
Speaker 2: Well, a lot of times black students will shy away from classes on racism, but in that particular instance, you still had black representation (simultaneous)--?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yes, I did.  I did.  So, you know, if their class had maybe thirty students in it, maybe five of the students were black, and that's not a huge number but it is certainly, you know maybe 20 percent of the students would be black, and that, for most of the white students, was a new experience, being in a class with 20 percent of the students being of color, because most of the time, maybe there'd just be one or two.  And, but anyway it was a very powerful teaching experience, and as the result of it, I made a personal decision that I wanted to always teach a course on racism.  I thought it was an important social duty that I should engage in.
Story_ID: 317529
Speaker 1: When we left UC Santa Barbara [University of California, Santa Barbara, Santa Barbara, California], which we eventually did, we stayed there three years, or four, we came in '79 [1979] and we left in '83 [1983].  When we left Santa Barbara [California], we left to move to Massachusetts.  I had gotten--my husband [Travis Tatum] and I decided that California was too expensive a place for us to live.  It's much more expensive today, but at the time Santa Barbara was a very difficult housing market.  Santa Barbara was the first place I really felt I experienced racism, overt racism, you know, where we would go looking for an apartment that people would tell you was already rented and you'd know it wasn't.  You know, or where you would be in a grocery store and, you know, I had this happen to me more than once in a Santa Barbara grocery store.  A white person would come up to me and ask me if I could help 'em choose a watermelon.
Speaker 2: Oh, boy.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) I mean, really.  So, it was just--
Speaker 2: That's amazing.  You would have thought maybe Massachusetts, (laughter).
Speaker 1: Oh, you know, I mean I grew up in Massachusetts, and if I were looking back on my growing up experience today, I can look at situations and say race was probably a factor in this situation.  But, at the time, when I was a child, I didn't recognize it, you know.  I didn't, because, I think partly it was because I didn't have a point of reference.  You know, if somebody, if I walked into a store and somebody was mean to me, I might have thought that person's having a bad day, do you know what I mean?  Not that that person is being mean to me because I'm a little black girl in this store.  But, if there had been other little black girls who were having the same experience, we might have compared notes and concluded it's because we're black.  You know what I mean?  But because it was just me, you know, I didn't necessarily see it.  The other thing is that because I lived in a small town and my father [Robert A. Daniel] was a college professor, the first black professor at Bridgewater State College [Bridgewater State University, Bridgewater, Massachusetts], many people knew me as Dr. Daniel's daughter, and in that sense saw me, perhaps, as an exception.  And that's one of the things, I think, that happens if you are one of few in a predominantly white community.  Sometimes people will say things like, "Oh, you're not like the, you're different.  We like you, we don't really think of you as black."  You know, that kind of stuff.  And, when I was growing up, I didn't really recognize the racism inherent in those statements.  Today, I can look back on them and see it.  But, I didn't see it when I was ten.
Story_ID: 317530
Speaker 1: And then to be known in the town [Bridgewater, Massachusetts], too, by everybody.  Everybody knew each other.
Speaker 2: Yes, yeah.
Speaker 1: But, in Santa Barbara [California] it wasn't that way.
Speaker 2: Exactly.  In Santa Barbara it wasn't that way and I would have the experience of calling up and asking; you know, the housing market was very tight in Santa Barbara.  When we first moved to Santa Barbara, my husband [Travis Tatum] and I lived in a furnished apartment near the university [University of California, Santa Barbara, Santa Barbara, California], which was very expensive, and so we wanted to move out of that furnished apartment, and it--and it was hard to find housing.  I mean, we moved into that expensive furnished apartment because it was hard to find an apartment to begin with, and there were times when, when we first got there we were staying with some friends who lived in Santa Barbara, and, you know, we stayed in their house for a couple weeks, while we were looking for an apartment and when we--you know, I would look in the paper and I would find places that appeared to be affordable and then we'd go there and then they would be, you know, just dives; you know, places that you wouldn't want to live.  And then, I'd find some place that maybe was more expensive, but seemed manageable on our graduate student income, and I'd call up and they'd say, "Yes, the place is fine," and then you'd get there and they'd tell you that it had already just been rented.  You know, you could just tell.
Speaker 1: This sounds like something out of a TV commercial or something but (unclear) (laughter).
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, and I had not had an experience, I had never had an experience like that in Michigan and had no reason to look for housing in Massachusetts, and so when I, though, this brings me back to Massachusetts, I didn't know this when I was growing up but my mother [Catherine Maxwell Daniel] told me when I was in college that when my parents were moving, when they were buying their house on Center Street, that their--that one of the neighbors circulated a petition trying to keep them out of the neighborhood, and so that's an interesting story to me because it was something that she never, you know, I think my parents tried to protect us from the racism in the environment to try to, you know, keep it from us as much as possible.  My mother tells the story when we first moved to Bridgewater [Massachusetts], of going to a parade for Memorial Day, or maybe it was Fourth of July or something.  It was a parade in the town and seeing people parade in black face, and being just, you know, horrified by this and going to the organizers of the parade and telling them how offensive it was and that they shouldn't do it, and they did stop.  I don't remember it, but, you know--
Speaker 1: And this was during the '50s [1950s]--
Speaker 2: Yeah, '58, [1958], 1958 when we moved there.  So, but, you know, my parents were, and my father [Robert A. Daniel], I mean, my father did not have an easy time at Bridgewater State College [Bridgewater State University, Bridgewater, Massachusetts].  He was a successful professor.  He was tenured, but you know, was well-published, wrote articles, and, you know, was an accomplished person but it took him much longer than it should have for him to get promoted from associate professor to full professor, that he was passed over repeatedly and I believe, and I think he does, too, that a lot of it had to do with racism in the community.
Speaker 1: Did any other professors join him with color at Bridgewater? Are they still there (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Eventually, eventually.  I mean, there today, today they have a black president [Dana Mohler-Faria] at Bridgewater State College, actually he is Cape Verdean, but he describes himself as a man of color and he, the current president at Bridgewater State College, has really reached out to my father as a history maker in his own right as the first black professor at Bridgewater State, and they have collected his history as part of the Bridgewater State archives.
Story_ID: 317531
Speaker 1: You accepted a position at Westfield [Westfield State College; Westfield State University, Westfield, Massachusetts].
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Did you apply to different locations, you know, to different schools, or why Westfield?
Speaker 2: Well, what happened was, you know, my husband [Travis Tatum] and I were in Santa Barbara [California], and we had a lot of trouble finding places to live, so, in part because of the housing discrimination and the housing, the buyer's market was beyond affordability for us.  We knew we would not be able to afford a house in Santa Barbara.  It was very expensive to live there, and so we moved.  For a variety of reasons we moved almost every year.  We were there--we lived there four years and we moved four times and the fourth time, it was harder because a lot of places wouldn't rent to people with children and so by the time, you know, we were moving the last time, I had a baby and I was just getting frustrated and I said to my husband, "Let's just move."  You know what I mean? Like, "Let's just get out of here altogether."  And so, we were looking to move to Massachusetts because I grew up with my parents [Catherine Maxwell Daniel and Robert A. Daniel], and my siblings in Massachusetts, but without regular contact with my grandparents, and I thought it important for my kids to be closer to their grandparents, and my parents lived in Massachusetts and I thought--and my husband, who was a professor and I was an aspiring professor, I knew it might be hard for the two of us to get jobs at the same place, but I knew there were lots of colleges in Massachusetts, so it seemed like if you looked for schools in Massachusetts, we might both find positions reasonably close to one another and we would also be pretty close to my parents, and so I wanted to, I was intentional actually, about looking for a job in Western Massachusetts, because my parents lived in Eastern Massachusetts, and I didn't want to live too close (laughter).
Speaker 1: Not too far but not too close, okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) But not too far away, right. So I thought two hours away would be perfect, and so I was looking and there are a lot of colleges in Western Massachusetts, and so I was kind of looking for jobs for one or the both of us in that area, and it happened that I got a job opportunity first.  Westfield State College was looking for a psychologist, and I interviewed for the position, and I didn't get it the first time, but they called me.  Apparently, I impressed them.  I interviewed and they offered the job to somebody else, but within two or three months later, they called me up to say another position had opened up and would I consider coming for that position and so I accepted it, and we moved and they were very helpful in helping my husband find a job also at Westfield State, so he actually taught his entire teaching career at Westfield State.  I, after six years at Westfield, left to become a professor at Mount Holyoke College [South Hadley, Massachusetts], which was also in the region.  So, we didn't have to relocate, but I took another position and stayed at Mount Holyoke until I left to come here to Spelman [Spelman College, Atlanta, Georgia].
Story_ID: 317532
Speaker 1: Is it by choice, or is it intentional or is it just by happenstance that you would always choose or end up at a predominantly white college or university, and also--I'm not sure about Westfield [Westfield State College; Westfield State University, Westfield, Massachusetts], but somewhat religiously oriented?
Speaker 2: I think, certainly I think the predominantly white is a matter of geography.  I mean, there are no historically black colleges [HBCUs] in Massachusetts, you know, and so when I was looking, so when we were leaving California our destination was Massachusetts, because that's where my family was and in that context any school I would have ended up with in Massachusetts would have been a predominantly white school.  Westfield State was a school that was certainly, I was the first black female professor at Westfield State and when I got there, my husband [Travis Tatum] and I doubled the black population (laughter).  There were two black professors, and when we came it went from two to four, and you know, now it's more diverse today and the student population (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What was the student population (unclear) blacks?
Speaker 2: --the student population, right, was maybe 5 percent black.  It was small.  It was a largely white, blue collar, working class, Catholic population.  Interestingly, you know, I talked about the whole Protestant/Catholic thing that I experienced in Massachusetts, Catholic students were in the majority at Westfield.  I'm not sure why that is, but there were a lot of Catholic students at Westfield, and a lot of them first generation college students, so the, you know, it was a pretty conservative, politically conservative student body, but I taught this course on racism and the students responded very positively, much like they had in California [at University of California, Santa Barbara, Santa Barbara, California], saying, "This course should be required for everyone, I've learned so much, it's changed my life."  It was a very positive teaching experience.  I came to Westfield saying, "If you hire me, I want to teach a course on the psychology of racism," and so I taught many things.  I taught child development and theories of personality and introductory psychology and a lot of things, but one thing I always taught was a course on the psychology of racism, and it was really that experience teaching that shaped my research interests and my writing from that point on.  I spent six years at Westfield State, and I enjoyed that experience, not only was I teaching but I was also doing therapy.  I was working as a counselor in the campus counseling center.  It was a combined teaching, clinical position.  I wanted to become licensed in the State of Massachusetts as a therapist and I was able to, in order to be licensed as a psychologist you have to do a certain number of clinical hours that have been supervised after you complete your Ph.D., and I was able to get that clinical supervision and those hours while I was working at Westfield State.
Story_ID: 317533
Speaker 1: Once I had done that, I took the licensing xam--licensing exam and began doing a private practice on the side, you know, just a little bit, maybe five hours a week and we were living, my husband [Travis Tatum] and I bought a house in a small village called Florence [Massachusetts], which is a section of Northampton [Massachusetts], and we were living there and I was seeing clients in an office in downtown Northampton and raising my children [Travis J. Tatum and David Tatum] and working at Westfield [Westfield State College; Westfield State University, Westfield, Massachusetts], and I started doing workshops on unlearning racism, anti--what I would call anti-racism workshops, as part of just the kind of community activity that I was involved in, and got involved with an organization in Amherst, Massachusetts, which is just a couple towns over from Northampton, and the organization was called The Equity Institute [The Equity Consulting Group, Amherst, Massachusetts] and the founders [Carole Johnson and Joan Steinau Lester] of Equity Institute--Equity Institute no longer exists as it did then, but the founders were two white women who were very involved in social justice, education, and they were building a multiracial group of facilitators to work with them, and I got involved with them and was doing a lot of that work, and there was just a very, I was doing lots of things and, as I said, my kids were growing, I had a second child while we lived in Northampton.  My children are four years apart, and then I published my dissertation.  The title of my dissertation was 'Life in Isolation: Black Families in a White Community' ['Life in Isolation: Black Families Living in a Predominantly White Community,' Beverly Daniel Tatum].  I found a publisher who was interested in publishing it as a book, and we changed the title to 'Assimilation Blues: Black Families in a White Community' [Beverly Daniel Tatum].  That book was published in 1987, and once my book came out, people, some of my professional colleagues, started suggesting to me that I might use the book's publication to leverage a more prestigious teaching position.  I was perfectly happy at Westfield State, but the teaching load was very heavy there.  You know, a lot of the state colleges, you teach many more courses a year than you do at some of the private institutions, and so the teaching load at Westfield State was four courses a semester, and I was doing three courses a semester and doing clinical work ten hours a week, and that was a pretty heavy load and I felt that if I wanted to do any writing, or to continue writing, I would need to be in a different kind of teaching environment, so I started thinking about making a job change, and right about that time, I learned that there was a position open at Mount Holyoke College [South Hadley, Massachusetts], and I applied for it and was hired, and Mount Holyoke had a teaching load in the psychology department of two courses a semester, and so instead of doing four and four, I was doing two and two, which was considerably less, and that gave me a lot more freedom to pursue my research interests, and it was while I was at Mount Holyoke, that I began to publish the articles that really built my career and ultimately led to the publication of my second book, 'Why Are All the Black Kids Sitting Together in the Cafeteria: And Other Conversations About Race' [Beverly Daniel Tatum].
Story_ID: 317534
Speaker 1: I know that while I was in Cambridge--at Cambridge College [Cambridge, Massachusetts] working on a degree, your book ['Why Are All the Black Kids Sitting Together in the Cafeteria: And Other Conversations About Race,' Beverly Daniel Tatum] was required reading for teachers (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Um-hm, yes.
Speaker 1: Yes, and because there's a lot of word going on in Massachusetts schools about culture--
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: --and cultural differences, et cetera, because there are so many different cultures in the inner city schools and all.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Now did you choose Mount Holyoke [Mount Holyoke College, South Hadley, Massachusetts], let's just ask this--why did you choose Mount Holyoke?
Speaker 2: Because they were advertising (laughter).
Speaker 1: That's it, okay.
Speaker 2: I mean--I--actually, there were two positions that were open.  At the time that I was thinking about leaving Westfield State [Westfield State College; Westfield State University, Westfield, Massachusetts], Amherst College [Amherst, Massachusetts] was advertising for a professor, an assistant professor in psychology, and Mount Holyoke was also looking for a professor, and I applied to both places and I interviewed both places.  Mount Holyoke offered me a job first, and it wasn't clear to me that Amherst was going to offer me a job; I mean, they might have, but Mount Holyoke was very, but Amherst was iffy, was definitely iffy.  Mount Holyoke was very clear that I was their candidate of choice.  They were very aggressively pursuing me, and I liked it quite a lot.  I liked the colleagues in the department, and, for the first time in my professional career, I was not going to be the only black woman in the department.  At the time that I was hired at Mount Holyoke, there were two other black women in the department already, so of the fourteen faculty members, there were, when I joined them, three black women and then right after I joined, they hired a fourth, so it was a much more multi-racial community than Westfield State had been, or certainly more than UC Santa Barbara [University of California, Santa Barbara, Santa Barbara, California], and it was a very progressive learning environment, and I liked it quite a bit.
Speaker 1: Good.  So did you ever hear back from Amherst?
Speaker 2: I did hear back from Amherst, and they did decide, as I expected, that they were going to, they decided to hire somebody else but I had already told Mount Holyoke yes, so it wasn't, it wasn't a problem for me, but they did offer the job to someone else.
Story_ID: 317535
Speaker 1: What made you choose, and I know we talked about the--from an autobiographical standpoint, what made you choose the topic about the black kids in the cafeteria all congregated together?
Speaker 2: Well, when I was, when my first book came out, 'Assimilation Blues: Black Families in a White Community' [Beverly Daniel Tatum], I had the opportunity to give a lot of talks about that particular topic in schools, because in Massachusetts, you know, particularly in the Boston [Massachusetts] area, there had been this painful history around school desegregation, and there had been a voluntary desegregation program created, called METCO [Metropolitan Council for Educational Opportunity, Boston, Massachusetts].  METCO is an acronym that refers to educational opportunities, I don't even remember what the acronym stands for, but the METCO program was a voluntary desegregation program that took black students from Boston and placed them in suburban schools in the greater Boston area, so Wellesley [Massachusetts], Newton [Massachusetts], Needham [Massachusetts], Sudbury [Massachusetts], Lincoln [Massachusetts], places like that, had this METCO program and they had black students from Boston coming in to their districts, where they were clearly in the minority, and some of those school districts began to look at how they could create more inclusive learning environments, more hospitable learning environments for those young, black students and they were interested in talking to me because I had written about the experiences of black youth in predominantly white communities.  And there they had these black youth in predominantly white communities, and so I got invited to give talks in these school districts about my research about racial identity and about some of the things that I had been writing about in the articles that I was writing, and one of the questions that repeatedly came up was, why are the black kids sitting together in the cafeteria?  You know, why are all the METCO students clustering together?  You know, why aren't--here we are, we've got this voluntary desegregation thing going on, why don't the black kids mix with the white kids?  The truth is the black kids did mix with the white kids in elementary school.  It was really in middle school and high school that they started sitting together in the cafeteria, and I would talk about that phenomenon from the point of view of racial identity development and response to racism, and the kind of heightened self-consciousness about one's racial identity that starts to occur when you're an adolescent, and as I talked about it--the more I talked about it, the more I got invited to talk about it.  You know, I'd give a talk in one school district, and then somebody would hear about it and they'd say, "Oh, please come to my school district."  And as I did that work, often the conversation would begin with somebody saying, "Why are all the black kids sitting together in the cafeteria?" And I decided that rather than continually answering that question on a school-by-school basis, I really ought to write it down, and I not only wanted to answer that question, but other questions that people might ask or had been asking as it related to race or racism, drawing upon what was then, you know, when 'Why Are All the Black Kids' ['Why Are All the Black Kids Sitting Together in the Cafeteria?: And Other Conversations About Race,' Beverly Daniel Tatum] was written, that was in 1996 [sic. 1997]; sixteen years I've been teaching courses on the psychology of racism since 1980, and so for sixteen years I had been, you know, reading, writing, teaching about it, and I decided it was time to put it in book form.
Story_ID: 317536
Speaker 1: Why were they sitting together?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) This is too long an answer for your tape.
Speaker 1: Just abridge it (laughter).
Speaker 2: The reality is, is that if you are a young person of color growing up in the United States, sooner or later you're going to become aware of your racial group identity; you know, whether that's because you've encountered racism, or because you grew up in a family that encourages you to define yourself in a particular way or, you know, because of the social environment you see yourself in.  You begin to think about your racial membership; your racial group membership and what it means, and as you begin to think about that, those questions of, who am I, who do I belong with, who do I spend time with, how do other people perceive me, those what I would call who am I questions, are questions that often really start to emerge in a big way in adolescence, and so when you have kids of color thinking about who am I, it makes sense that they would turn to other young people of color to see whether they can find the answers there.  You know, if I'm trying to think about who am I, somebody who's not having my experience is not going to really understand it in the same way that I do.  But, if I'm trying to figure out, you know, what does it mean to be a young black woman, maybe I want to talk to other young black women about that; even if I don't necessarily say that or define it in that way, I mean, when Ramona [ph.] came up to me in the fifth grade and said, "Who do you think you are?" she was asking me a racial question.  I didn't really understand it in the fifth grade, but she had a sense of her identity as a young black woman, and she saw another young black woman who was behaving differently than she was. And that sense of, you know, who are we, how do I perceive how other people are treating me and responding to me, I sometimes use this example and it's a true story from my work with the schools in the METCO [Metropolitan Council for Educational Opportunity, Boston, Massachusetts] program.  I was working with some teachers and students, and I heard this incident of a young girl who was in the eighth grade, black student in a predominantly white suburban Boston [Massachusetts] school, and she was--one of the problems with a program like METCO, one of the dilemmas is that students are bussed long distances and because they have this long bus ride, sometimes they can't stay after school because they don't have transportation.  They have to leave when the bus leaves, otherwise they won't have a way home.
Speaker 1: And the unfairness of it, it's always the black kids that are bussed.
Speaker 2: Exactly.  And so, one of the results of that arrangement is that it's hard to stay after school to participate in the after school activities, unless there's a late bus, and in this particular case the school had arranged for a late bus for a dance.  There was going to be a school dance, but the black kids weren't necessarily choosing to participate and there was a teacher who was trying to encourage this eighth grade girl to go to the school dance, and she said she didn't want to go and he was trying to persuade her, and you know, he was well-intentioned trying to get her to participate in the life of the school.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: She finally said, "No, no, no," and he finally, in frustration, said, "Oh, come on, I know you people love to dance."  (Laughter) And so, when he said that, she, of course, recognized the racial stereotype and the racism in his comment, and was offended.  And so, you know, she is now not only not going to the dance, but upset with this teacher, right?  So, imagine she's going down the hallway and she bumps into a young white girl, who is maybe also in the eighth grade and maybe a friend of hers, and the white girl sees that she is upset and asks her what's wrong.  Well, let's imagine the black girl describes what has just happened.  It would be not uncommon for the white girl to say something like, "Oh, come on, Mr. Smith is such a nice guy.  He didn't mean it.  You're being oversensitive," or something like that.  And, if the white girl says something like that, the black girl is likely to feel like, you don't get it.  You know, you don't understand why I'm upset.  And now, is she not only upset with Mr. Smith, the white teacher, let's say, but she's also feeling alienated from this white girl who doesn't understand what's just happened.
Story_ID: 317537
Speaker 1: So let's say she goes a little further down the hall and then she bumps into another black girl, also from the METCO [Metropolitan Council for Educational Opportunity, Boston, Massachusetts] program, and she sees that black girl who sees that she's upset, asks her why, and she explains.  The black girl might say, "Oh, I know just what you mean.  He said the same thing to me yesterday."  You know what I mean?  They can connect around that shared experience.  They go off to lunch together, they're sitting together in the cafeteria because they have a shared frame of reference, they have shared experiences, at a time when they're trying to make sense of how do people see me, how do they recognize me, what difference does my racial group membership make, and it's a natural thing to connect.
Speaker 2: (TAPE INTERRUPTON)
Speaker 1: Okay, well I want to ask a question then.  The flip side of that is if all the black kids are sitting together, then all the white kids are sitting together (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Of course they are, of course the white kids are sitting together, and nobody--
Speaker 1: And what is their dynamic?  What is their group dynamic?  What are they dealing with?
Speaker 2: Their group dynamic is they're in the majority.  They're sitting with the kids they know, do you know?  I mean, it's not necessarily that they are not sitting with the black kids, but they're sitting with each other and they are more than willing to have a black kid sit with them, but they are not going to, they are not going to put themselves in the minority.  You know what I mean?  It's the rare white adolescent who is going to get up from her mostly white table.  It might not be an all-white table.  It might have a few kids of color at it, but it's going to be a majority-white table.  It's the rare white kid who will want to move from that comfort zone into sitting at what is an all-black table.  Now, there are some white kids who have done it, and there might be some black kids who will say, "Yeah, you can sit here, you can hang.  You can be with us, and dress like us and listen to the kind of music we like," and there's an expression for white youth who take that up, and you may have heard it, but the term is wigger. It means white nigger, and that they are, there are some white children who are able to cross those boundaries in ways that work for them and that they find acceptance among black kids at that particular time in their lives.  And, of course, I'll use myself as an example.  When I lived in Bridgewater, Massachusetts, all my friends were white, with the exception of, you know--and there was variation in there.  My white friends were the marginal white kids, do you know what I mean?  I mean, we were all smart.  We were all in the honors classes, but, you know, one of my closest friends was Jewish.  There weren't very many Jewish kids at the school, so it made sense that the white Jewish girl would hook up with the black girl, do you know what I mean?  You know because we were both sort of on the outs of the mainstream experience.  One of--another one of my closest friends was white, a white Protestant girl who went to the same church [Central Square Congregational Church, United Church of Christ, Bridgewater, Massachusetts] that I did, and so we had that church connection.  You know, I told you that I had a boyfriend in my senior year who was Mexican, and he was actually from a multiracial family, interestingly.  His parents were Mexican and his, but one of his brothers was adopted and he had a sister who was an adopted Korean child, so it was a multiracial family, but we had this connection, you know, we had this connection, but--and that was in high school [Bridgewater-Raynham Regional High School, Bridgewater, Massachusetts], but when I got to, and you know, growing up and through high school.  When I got to college [Wesleyan University, Middletown, Connecticut], I--all my friends were black and Latino, and I, over time, moved away from my former--I'm not in touch with any of my friends from high school.  I go back to Bridgewater to see my parents [Catherine Maxwell Daniel and Robert A. Daniel], but I don't, I haven't stayed in touch with any of my white friends.
Speaker 1: You don't have family, I mean you don't have class reunions?
Speaker 2: I'm sure they have them, I'm not interested in going (laughter).  I mean, I know they have them and I have no interest in going, but I stay in touch with my college friends and I have been to college reunions and, but when I got to graduate school [University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan], my friendship network was mostly black, but not exclusively so, and you know, and certainly as an adult today I have a very multiracial group of friends.  I mean, of course I have a core group of black friends; here I am the president of an historically black college [HBCU], but I have spent many years of my life working very closely with a white woman who, she and I have done unlearning racism workshops together, and I think of myself as a person who can work effectively with people across many backgrounds.
Speaker 1: You think maybe Ramona [ph.] was saying to you when she approached you that you're sitting on the wrong side of the cafeteria?
Speaker 2: I think so.  Now, the thing is, there weren't enough of us to sit all together at that school, but she was probably looking for a table (laughter).  She was probably looking for a table.  She was a little ahead of me though.
Story_ID: 317538
Speaker 1: You accepted a position at Holyoke [Mount Holyoke College, South Hadley, Massachusetts]?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay. And what was your title again, you were prof-- (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I came to Mount Holyoke as an associate professor of psychology; actually an associate professor of psychology and education.  I was in the Department of Psychology and Education.  I'm a psychologist, but it was a combined psychology and education department.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And, you taught the two courses for how many years?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I taught two courses a semester, and I did my research and got involved in the community.  I was a professor for a number of years, and then over time I became the chair of my department and then I became dean of the college and then, when I left Mount Holyoke, I served the last six months of my tenure at Mount Holyoke, I was the acting president, serving as president while the sitting president, Joanne Creighton [Joanne V. Creighton], was on sabbatical.  But, I started out in 1989, as a professor in the classroom, and I taught psychology of racism, but I also taught theories of personality, I taught a research methods course on qualitative research, I taught introduction to psychology.  I taught a variety of things, but always psychology of racism.  That was sort of one of my signature courses, which I introduced to the psychology--which I introduced to the Mount Holyoke curriculum.  It was a course that I introduced when I came there as a professor.
Speaker 1: Are they still teaching that now?
Speaker 2: They are.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: When I left, a colleague of mine started teaching it.
