Story_ID: 253015
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe, I'm interviewer today for The HistoryMakers, our videographer is Scott Stearns.  Sir, could you please state your name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: Abraham Thompson, Jr., Abraham, just as in the Bible, A-B-R-A-H-A-M, Thompson is T-H-O-M-P-S-O-N, and Junior is abbreviated with J-R.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you have any nicknames or anything?
Speaker 2: Abe (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.
Speaker 2: I'm sure I probably have some other nicknames but I don't know if they're repeatedly.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: Best left unsaid, I guess.
Speaker 2: Yes, yeah, you got those names that are best left unsaid.
Speaker 1: So, can you give us your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: November 22, 1951 at a house in Chicago [Illinois].
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: Father and friend, now.  Used to be father, husband, and friend so it's father and friend.  That's my occupation.  I do a number of other things.  I own a radio station, I invest in market movies.  I advise and consult companies.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, before we go into depth--
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: Oh, let me ask you, I'm sorry.  Well what is today's date?
Speaker 2: What today's date?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: December 7, 2004, I think.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: It's the 6th or the 7th (unclear).
Speaker 1: It's the 7th.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Okay.
Speaker 1: And (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I, I can barely see the number on my watch (laughter) but I think it's the 7th.
Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: In The HistoryMakers office, 1900 South Michigan [Avenue]--
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: --Chicago, Illinois.
Story_ID: 253016
Speaker 1: All right.  Now, before we go into depth, there are five lightweight questions that they always ask me to ask people--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --(unclear) as a warm-up sort of.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And they don't require anything but a short answer.
Speaker 2: Like basketball you gotta warm-up before the real game.
Speaker 1: That's right.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: So this is stretching here.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Yes.
Speaker 1: Sir, can you tell us what your favorite food?
Speaker 2: Man, yesterday it was chicken marsala but it's been everything from perch fish to I don't know, what, (unclear) whatever I got a taste for (laughter) when I'm hungry.  So, I don't know, it varies.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: Last week it was red, sometimes it's purple, but it goes between, and, and, and lime.  So, I guess I have favorite colors (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.  And do you have a favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Yeah, right now.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And your favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Ooh, it's hard to say.  I don't know.  I like Birmingham, England, I like anywhere in the Caribbean, and I like Spain.
Speaker 1: What part of Spain?
Speaker 2: All of it.  I like everywhere from Madrid [Spain], San Sebastian [Spain], Segovia [Spain], I don't know, I just like Spain.  I like the culture.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And the last question in this set is, do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I love you.
Story_ID: 253017
Speaker 1: We're gonna ask about your family history. And we'll ask about your mother's side and your father's [Abraham Thompson, Sr.] side.  If, we'll start with your mother's side.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: Wilma, maiden name Jean, J-E-N, I think it's J-E-N, J, I'm sorry, J-E-A-N, Bledsoe, B-L-E-D-S-O-E.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what is her date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: Oh, man, that's a good question.  She's fifteen, almost sixteen years older than me, so we can figure that out.  I didn't expect a math class but and, and she was born in Little Rock, Arkansas.
Speaker 1: Okay.  About 1935 or so (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I think about that, it wasn't, in fact, I think it's '36 [1936].
Speaker 1: Thirty-six [1936], okay.
Speaker 2: I think it's '36 [1936].
Speaker 1: (Unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And it's March, ooh, 13th.  And I said ooh because my, my stepmother and mother were both born in March, one's the 13th, and one's 14th.  And my father and stepmother have been married forty years so I get their birthdays mixed up a lot of times.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So, they both get two birthday wishes (laughter) every year.
Speaker 1: All right.  So, well, what, what do you know about your mother's side of the family?  How far back can you trace that side?
Speaker 2: All the way back to my, well it depends, I, I knew my, I was blessed enough to know my grandfathers on both sides of my family, and my great-grandmother on my mother's side of the family.
Speaker 1: Okay.  What can you tell us about 'em?
Speaker 2: I love and feel, I loved them and feel blessed in being able to know 'em.  So I, I mean beyond that, my grandmother, my great-grandmother lived to be, I think in her nineties and was still whipping us, not whipping, whooping us with switches when I was a little boy.  So, (unclear) one thing I can tell you, she could still move and run at ninety (laughter)--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --so.  And my, my, my mother's mother, my grandmother, who died a lot younger than that, I think she was in her seventies or late seventies when she passed away, was a, was a real pretty and resourceful woman.  And my mother's father was a, a real resourceful gentleman, even though he probably worked maybe less than a year his entire life.  On my father's side my, his mother, my grandmother was real resourceful and a really interesting woman.  And his father, my grandfather, was just a great man, a wonderful man.  I mean a great example for, for me and just a great example for any, for any human being.  He was just a great man.
Story_ID: 253018
Speaker 1: What can you tell us about their activities, I mean what, and are there, are there stories that are passed down in your family that--
Speaker 2: Wow, I don't remember many stories.  Now see when I leave this interview I'll probably come up with a lot of 'em, but I, I cannot recall any stories.  I just remember always interacting with him, with, with my grandparents and my great-grandmother.  My great-grandmother and my mother's [Wilma Jean Bledsoe] mother, my grandmother lived in St. Louis [Missouri], or they lived in Madison, Illinois, right, right outside of St. Louis.  My mother's father lived in Arkansas most of his life.  My grandmother, I believe, my mother's mother was married maybe once.  However, my grandfather, my mother's father was married five times.  But I don't remember any stories and I'm searching (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Like, like what did they do for a living and what did they talk about--
Speaker 2: My, my grandfather, nothing I can remember.  My grandmother did everything from work, move here, well she, my grandmother, my mother's mother, for some time moved here to Chicago [Illinois] and worked at Aldi's  and Spiegel's [Chicago, Illinois] here in Chicago.  My great-grandmother I, I don't remember what she, what occupation she ever had, 'cause, you know, when I knew her when she was old and when she died she was older so I don't know what she did.  My grandfather on my father's [Abraham Thompson, Sr.] side, well he was a, a maintenance man at the Argonne Laboratories [Argonne National Laboratory], I think in Summit [sic. Lemont, Illinois].  My grandmother, my father's mother, worked, she had done various laborer kind of jobs in factories, and I think everything from Brach's [Confections, Chicago, Illinois] to, I think she also may have worked at Aldi's or Spiegel's at one time.  But they were just regular, for the most part regular, everyday working kind of people.
Story_ID: 253019
Speaker 1: My father was born in Mississippi.  So we would (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Now, well, give, give me your father's full name then since (unclear).
Speaker 1: Well, you see I'm a junior, so his is Abraham--
Speaker 2: Same thing, right?
Speaker 1: --um-hm, [Abraham] Thompson, Sr.
Speaker 2: And what, what's his date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 1: I don't know he's eighteen years older than me so (laughter).  I guess I should know those numbers.  I never bothered, I always figured you could find them.  I just, Larry [Crowe], I just recently learned my social security number.  And I have a friend who knows her, and you may know yours to, but it seemed unusual to me, knows her driver's license number.  I have no idea (laughter) what my driver's license number is.  But so I, I don't, I don't recall his date of birth.  But he's, is, is, I don't, I can't recall the year but it's January 15th.  His, his birthdate the, well, well the month and day are the same as Dr. King's [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.].  In fact, January 15th (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: Now is he from Arkansas?
Speaker 1: He's from Mississippi.
Speaker 2: Mississippi.  What part?
Speaker 1: Oh, man.  I believe he was born in Meridian [Mississippi].
Speaker 2: Okay.  That's a town made famous by Alice Walker's book ['Meridian'].
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: Yeah, 'Meridian.'  So, well let me go back to your mother [Wilma Jean Bledsoe] first--
Speaker 1: Um-hm, okay.
Speaker 2: --and then, we'll come back to him.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Did your mother talk about growing up and how she grew up?  Did she grow up in Arkansas or did she grow up in--
Speaker 1: Well, just remember--
Speaker 2: (Unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) she and my, she was fifteen when she had me so she was married.  So her growing up I, I kind of experienced it, I mean, you know, 'cause my father was eighteen so it wasn't like they got married when they were twenty-five, thirty, and they said well when I was a kid, well she was a kid, I mean, and, but probably like most kids now at fifteen and at eighteen they probably thought they were grown, you know, so.
Speaker 2: But did, did she grow up in, in Arkansas or did she (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Well, she grew up in, yes--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) (unclear)--
Speaker 1: --she grew up in Arkansas.  She talked, you know, often she would talk about just other family members and how, you know, things that they did like, you know, chasing hogs and playing in the yard and riding on the tractors and those kind of things.  We often went back to Arkansas and Mississippi to visit family--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --you know, and it was interesting.  You know, sitting here thinking retrospectively to my, to both of my parents, family was always real important.  You know, going to family reunions, going to see people, or going to visit family here on the weekend, people coming, moving here, or visiting here from other parts of the country, primarily the South, living with us and staying with us, so it was also about family, you know, so.  You know, you, you, and, you know, and there were no, there were, I don't recall any stories of family traditions that were passed down but I just recall, even though I can't recall 'em specifically, the things that were just talked about, you know, like they talk about this cousin was moving here and what they had done and, you know, that they're, or, or a cousin would come here who maybe didn't have a job or was just a good handyman who would live with a family member and that's what they do, be a handyman for that family member or for the family to kind of earn their keep.  So it was always all about family.
Story_ID: 253020
Speaker 1: Did your mother [Wilma Jean Bledsoe], was she married before she moved to Chicago [Illinois]?
Speaker 2: No, they, she, she lived here, they got married, they had both lived here and met here in Chicago and they got married here.
Speaker 1: So did your mother like move up here when she was a teenager or--
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, she was like, since she, she was about fourteen or fifteen when she moved up here.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So it's shortly thereafter she married (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, yeah.  I guess she got pregnant with me, I believe, when she was about fifteen, (unclear) close, I think they were closer to sixteen but fifteen.  And, you know, then she and my father [Abraham Thompson, Sr.] got married.
Speaker 1: Now was she in high, in high school here in Chicago when she--
Speaker 2: No, my mother, yeah she was.  I think she was in ninth grade.  I think that's as far as my mother went in high school is ninth grade.
Speaker 1: And was she on the West Side [Chicago, Illinois] or on the South Side [Chicago, Illinois] or--
Speaker 2: West Side.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, on the West Side on Hastings [Street], you know, and, and then the, around Roosevelt [Road] and Hastings and those areas.
Speaker 1: So where did she go to school (unclear)?
Speaker 2: I, I don't recall.  I don't recall.  I remember my first elementary school was Gladstone [Elementary School, Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But, I don't even recall.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Is there a story about how your parents met?
Speaker 2: Yeah, my father saw her and thought she was cute.  My father, my mother saw him and my mother always told me my father's real dark and my mother said I like my men black, and he was black (laughter), so.  He was a good dresser and fine and, and they met and that's it.  She became pregnant and they got married shortly after that.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And by the time they were, by the time my mother was twenty and my father was twenty-three, they had five boys.  So it was me and my, and four younger brothers.
Story_ID: 253021
Speaker 1: Tell me something about your father's [Abraham Thompson, Sr.] side of the family.  How, you said they're from Meridian, Mississippi?
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: And when did he come to Chicago [Illinois]?
Speaker 2: I think he came to Chicago when he was about, when he was in his early teens.  I, I believe he came from Meridian to Cleveland [Ohio] in that area first and then he came up here to Chicago.
Speaker 1: Now on his side did they have any, any stories about life in Mississippi (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, well the reason he came here, he got in a fight with a little white boy and they moved him here 'cause them folks said they was gone kill him.  You know, so, yeah, but, you know, but the kids--
Speaker 1: Was this in Cleveland?
Speaker 2: No, no this was in Mississippi.
Speaker 1: I mean in Cleveland, Mississippi.  Oh, I mean--
Speaker 2: Cle, cle--
Speaker 1: Cleveland, Ohio he went to first then (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Cleveland, he moved to Cleveland, Ohio, I'm sorry.
Speaker 1: Oh.
Speaker 2: Well, you're right, there is a Cleveland, Mississippi.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I know about Cleveland (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) You know, they got the, you know, it's kind of like Birmingham, you know, there's Birmingham, England, Birmingham, Michigan, Birmingham, Alabama.  But yeah, so he got in a fight with a little white kid and they was just kids though but, you know, adults always exaggerate things.  And so, you know, he moved here, he moved north which was I think Cleveland, then as a teenager he moved here to Chicago.
Speaker 1: So you get the impression that Mississippi was a dangerous place in those days, I guess.
Speaker 2: Not the impression, it was real (laughter).  Yeah, it was real, so, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) But, but it's interesting because he still has, Meridian is such a beautiful place, oh, the South is such a beautiful place, but we still have a lot of cousins down there.  And it's interesting, many of the relatives who moved north from Mississippi, it's interesting, they did not advance as far academically as the family members that stayed in the South.  But I have a number of cousins in Meridian, who are my father's contemporary who, who, who got college degrees and became educators and that kind of thing, so it's interesting.  Yeah, real interesting.
Speaker 1: So, did your father go to high school here?
Speaker 2: Yeah, my father, I believe, also went as far as maybe the ninth grade, yeah.  My father didn't, my father and mother [Wilma Jean Bledsoe] both, while they did not care to advance academic education, they're real smart.  I mean real smart.  I mean, well, you know, what, what we would call, they have, they have so much what we would call common sense but would, you know, refer to it in the South as mother wit.  They were real smart, you know, yeah.  Well the thing about it you had to be, I mean, before they were twenty-five, to have five boys, own property, raise their boys, we had nice Christmases, we went places, my father had a car, that's, you know, you got to know a lot about economics, being efficient, and a lot of other things to be able to do that.
Speaker 1: So, so what did your father do for a living?
Speaker 2: Now, he's retired and in Arizona but he worked in a factory, worked in factories for his professional career except for a brief period when he and I owned a fast food restaurant together.  But he's worked in factories for the most part and before he moved from Chicago to Mesa, Arizona, where he and my stepmother now live.  Let's see, he worked at a company on the West Side of Chicago, a factory on the West Side of Chicago.
Speaker 1: Okay.  You can't remember the name of it?
Speaker 2: Oh, it was the Pride Container Corporation [Chicago, Illinois].
Story_ID: 253022
Speaker 1: Do you have a first childhood memory, like a earliest childhood memory?  Was there one, one period of time when you really were aware that you were, you know, or what you were doing?
Speaker 2: I mean something that could, yeah, something that comes to mind.  I, I think I was in fifth or sixth grade, I remember having on a plaid shirt and I remember sitting in that classroom thinking about how much I loved my mother [Wilma Jean Bledsoe] and how pretty she was, and how much I loved my father [Abraham Thompson, Sr.] and how handsome I thought he was, and how great, I thought, it must have been fifth grade, how great I thought they were and how lucky I was, and how I wanted to be successful.  But I didn't know what it meant.  But I just kept thinking about all of that.  And, and that, by that, I mean success.  And I said, well I know one thing I gotta do is get an education.  So I just remember some time, it must have been fifth grade, sitting in that classroom, thinking about my mother and father, and thinking about life and wanting to be successful.  Yeah, that's what I, that's, that's a memory I've just thought about time and time again.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 253023
Speaker 1: Let's see, you got, you, you were one of five children?
Speaker 2: Well it depends on who, we have a, a, a rather, I'm from a rather interesting family structure.  My mother [Wilma Jean Bledsoe] and father [Abraham Thompson, Sr.], birth, birth parents had five boys.  My father and mother divorced and my father remarried and he and my stepmother have been married now for over forty years, she, so I have two brothers and a sister from, from her.  She had two kids when they married.  And my mother also remarried and she and her second husband had one son.  So depending on how you look at it, there were, you know, eight kids in my, nine kids in my family.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So and I have seven brothers and one sister.
Speaker 1: That's pretty, so, that's what it is, I guess, you know, most, I don't know how, how your family, how did your family look at it?  Do you like see them as, as half brothers and sisters or do you see 'em as brothers and sisters?
Speaker 2: You know what, it's kind of like being half alive, you're either alive or you're not, kind of like being half pregnant, that's my brothers and sisters.  I love them, you know.  And what makes you a brother or a sister well it's, it's what's in your heart.  It ain't, it ain't, it ain't the, it ain't the parentage, it's not the, the blood running through your brains, it's your heart, you know.  That's, yeah, so, they ain't half nothing.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: They're my brother and sisters.
Speaker 1: So, where do you fall in the order--
Speaker 2: I'm the oldest.
Speaker 1: --and can, can you name 'em?  Okay, you're, you're the oldest--
Speaker 2: I'm the oldest.
Speaker 1: --of them all, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Well, well, oh, I'm sorry, you know what, I, I keep forgetting this, I've always had the most responsibility so I always considered myself the oldest but one of my brothers, and just for, for this discussion, the sake of clarification, one of my stepbrothers is, is older than me by three months, you know, Gordon [ph.], he's older than me by three months, but I'm, I've always been considered the oldest.
Story_ID: 253024
Speaker 1: So, well tell me about growing up.  I mean, now you grew up on the West Side of Chicago [Illinois] (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Until high school [Calumet High School, Chicago, Illinois] then I moved to the South Side [Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well, we're going to go through this slowly then.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: So--
Speaker 2: Fine.
Speaker 1: --just give, give us an idea of where you grew up and what were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up?
Speaker 2: Oh, man.  I grew up on, well for, as I said for a while I lived on Hastings [Street].  I also lived on Drake [Avenue].  And over there I just remember on Hastings, I just, and, and I often think about that, that, that area, when I go over to Bucktown [Chicago, Illinois], the communities and where the old buildings are, that's how, that's the way Hastings was, it was a, it was a neighborhood, you know, you walk down to somebody's house.  You know, I remember going to people's homes and they had those wood burning stoves in there and that kind of stuff.  And I remember smelling the ash and then, and I remember going to stores and getting candy, you know, the corner stores and that kind of stuff.  And when I lived on Drake, I just remember, and I often think about that to if I'm walking down North State Parkway, those brownstone buildings, those are the same buildings that were on Drake and I just remember always thinking man, how nice the structure of the buildings, you know, the, the concrete the way they had it designed, it was just nice, and I think about that.  When we moved over on Gladys [Avenue] and California [Avenue], it was still a neighborhood, corner stores but it was a little different, they were more like homes, you know, like the, and then some two flats and that kind of stuff but it was nice.  And I just remember, I remember that's the first place I started playing basketball.  You know, I would go play basketball.  And I also remember a social, a social well, it was a social center kind of place called the Marillac House [Marillac Social Center; Marillac St. Vincent Family Services, Chicago, Illinois], which is still there, where I would go and play and they always activities.  And they'd always serve us spinach and bread and butter and I promised when I grew up, I would never eat spinach or bread and butter but it's funny, I love spinach (laughter) and bread and butter but when I was a kid I would say, Lord if I ever get away from this bread and butter.  But it was a, it was, you know, you used to play basketball there, they showed movies on Saturday in the gymnasium.  You could go see a movie, they'd show the movies, you go see the movies and afterward, if you helped clean up, you could play basketball.  That's one of the first places on Gladys and California at Marillac House, I started playing basketball.
Story_ID: 253025
Speaker 1: Lived there [West Side, Chicago, Illinois] until I was eleven or twelve.  My parents [William Jean Bledsoe and Abraham Thompson, Sr.] got divorced then we, my brothers and I moved with my father to a two flat building with my grandmother and grandfather, my father's parents.  (Unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Now how was that transition made, I mean did the was there like, did you have a choice of who you were going to live with--
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: --or just went with--
Speaker 1: Um-hm.  My father asked us, you know, the court, no not the, the court, my mother is deaf, and so she and, and my grandmother and some of our aunts, thought it more advisable for my brothers and I to live with my father and to work out a deal where she got the property and he got the kids, that was fine with him.  And so he asked us what we wanted to do and we all said individually that we wanted to live with him.  It was interesting because there was a time when I really didn't like my father 'cause he was strict and, you know, and mean, I thought.  But boy thank God, you know, thank God parents don't listen to their kids, (laughter) you know.  You know, so and we end up living with him and it, and it worked out great.  And then as I said shortly, not shortly a year, two years after that, he met my stepmother and married and, you know, the rest is history.  Now they married and I, I, I moved from elementary school to junior high school, I went to [Roswell B.] Mason Upper Grade Center [Chicago, Illinois] on the West Side [Chicago, Illinois].  Then after graduating from Mason, my parents bought a house on the South Side [Chicago, Illinois] on 86th [Street] and Union [Avenue] and so I ended up going to Calumet High School [Chicago, Illinois].
Story_ID: 253026
Speaker 1: Oh, but let me go back to the, to the West Side [Chicago, Illinois] 'cause one of the smells I remember is Jew Town [Maxwell Street, Chicago, Illinois], those Polish sausages.  And that continued through high school [Calumet High School, Chicago, Illinois] because in high school you'd go to Jew Town to shop.  You know, you'd go to Jew Town, you know, negotiate on a good pair of silk and wool pants or this sweater, this shirt, it was wonderful.  And I remember going to Jew Town to shop and buying that Polish.  And I lived 86th [Street] and Union [Avenue] so the, the Halsted Street bus went straight down Halsted from 87th Street to Jew Town, one shot (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Sounds like that you were there in the, in the heyday of it 'cause everybody--
Speaker 1: Aww, man, (making a sound).
Speaker 2: --in, in, in your age talks about that, you know, those who--
Speaker 1: Oh, yeah.
Speaker 2: -grew up in Chicago [Illinois], talk--
Speaker 1: Aww.
Speaker 2: --about going to what they call now Maxwell Street [Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah, you know, it was Maxwell Street then but it was (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) It was Maxwell Street but we called it--
Speaker 2: --you knew it as Jew Town.
Speaker 1: --everybody referred to it as Jew Town.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: You know, with, with great affection too (laughter).  (Unclear) yeah, but it was, but it was everything there.  I mean you could buy everything.
Speaker 2: Like a, like a, a lot of open air shops (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Unclear) flea market, it was the first open air flea market.  You could, you could buy everything, you could buy everything there literally from snakes to suits.  I mean real snakes.  I mean you could buy everything.  People selling, you know, you knew all the spots, it was, hey man I'm looking for a pair of jeans, oh good you go over there and go over there.  You could find whatever you wanted.
Speaker 2: Do you remember the, the, I think I may have asked one other person about this, the brother [Anderson Punch] that had the chicken, you know?
Speaker 1: Oh, yeah.
Speaker 2: Can you tell us about that 'cause this is--
Speaker 1: Well--
Speaker 2: --is just this--
Speaker 1: And, and I (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It's a black man with a chicken.
Speaker 1: I, I just remember, I remember, 'cause I remember the guy who had a chicken who walked around the area with one.  I also remember the guy who had chickens, chickens were, chickens or roosters or whatever, where they would dance, they weren't, so man I'm telling you, it was, it was that, it was, there were all kinds of things.  I mean it was, it was, it was an open air festival is what it was, it was 'cause there would be guys down there playing.  You know (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Playing the drums and stuff.
Speaker 1: --and when, when, when you go, when you go, when I go to festivals and see things now, I mean you think this is just Jew Town.  You know, you, you, can buy T-shirts, you can buy stuff, and then somebody's playing over here, somebody's doing some magic tricks over here, somebody's got a chicken.  (Laughter) You know, somebody's, you know, it just every, everything you wanted was there.  You know you see people, you know, you see people you hadn't seen, just all kinds of things, it was cool.  It was real cool.
Story_ID: 253027
Speaker 1: How would you describe yourself?  What was your personality like when you were a young man?
Speaker 2: I'd ask somebody who knew me.  But I've heard it was, I've always heard, I always remember being, when my parents [Wilma Jean Bledsoe and Abraham Thompson, Sr.] were around especially, a mannerable young boy.  I remember people always telling my brothers and I how cute we were, and I guess we or something because I, I do the same thing to kids now and I, I try to catch myself.  Now we were five boys one right after another, curly hair, you know, my parents kept us dressed nice so this is kind of cute, you know, and they say, oh, yeah.  And somebody say something, you say, yes, ma'am, no, ma'am, yes, or no, so, so we were mannerable because my parents as I said were from the South and that was important.  And we always did things.  You know, we had, you know, chores to do.  I was the oldest I was responsible for my brothers for a lot of things.  So I've, I've always heard from people or at least I still hear from people, that, you know, that knew me as a little boy, oh, you know, you're the same, you're still a nice guy, so I've always heard that.  And I think consequently, I've always tried to be a good person, and a nice person because it's been reinforced, you know, for so long.  And also it's, it's been so rewarding, you know, people don't mind being around you, you know, people.  And people will do things for you and with you if they think you're pleasant, you know, so I remember that.  I also think that it taught me the importance of being a good person and having good relationships with people and I think that's why relationships are so important to me now.
Story_ID: 253028
Speaker 1: Who was the director there [Marillac House; Marillac St. Vincent Family Services, Chicago, Illinois], who were some of the--
Speaker 2: Well it was run by the, by the Catholic church so there were a lot of nuns there.  The only nun I can remember is, is Sister Jane [Breidenbach].  I remember Sister Jane because when I was a kid I wanted to enter the Soap Box Derby, that race, and she helped me get the stuff to enter the Soap Box Derby (laughter).  I never entered 'cause it was too complicated to build a car and I didn't realize how complicated it was.  But she helped me so I remember Sister Jane.  I mean I, I probably would not know her if I saw her but I would love to see her and give her a hug and tell her thank you, even though I did often as a kid but I'd really like to tell her that's she's ingrained in my memory.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That I remember that.
Speaker 1: And so you played basketball there too, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: (Unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) You know, it was a community center, the kids played ball.
Speaker 1: Was somebody in charge of the basketball site over there or--
Speaker 2: Well, yeah but I can't, I can't remember them, any of them.
Speaker 1: (Unclear) Now did you, was music a big part of growing up?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.  I only let my father [Abraham Thompson, Sr.] play and my mother [Wilma Jean Bledsoe] and I liked it, I mean, everything from Ray Charles, Sam Cooke, Dinah Washington, [HistoryMaker] Nancy Wilson, aww, man, you know, The Temps [The Temptations].  You know, those are the ones I remember, everybody.  A lot of jazz.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: You know, [John] Coltrane.
Speaker 1: Now did you pay attention to the radio much when you were growing up?
Speaker 2: Well, yeah, only because my parents played it, but it was not like now, you know, 'cause I was playing and you wanna go out and play and you come inside and, and she played and you played out, you're tired.  You wanna argue about staying up late until you fall asleep (laughter).
Speaker 1: Now was church a big part of growing up?
Speaker 2: Well yes and no.  My grandmother, I remember her going to church all the time, going to church with her and the sermon would be so long, oh my God, you'd be like I don't wanna go.  My father did not go to church that much.  My mother went sometimes, so I would go with my grandmother.  When I got to high school [Calumet High School, Chicago, Illinois], I started going to church with some of my friends and with the girlfriend that I had and I really enjoyed it.  So it, it did become, in high school, I mean I'd get up every Sunday to go to church.
Speaker 1: Where would you go?
Speaker 2: I went to Pilgrim Rest [Missionary] Baptist Church on the West Side [Chicago, Illinois].  And I went to a church around 60, God I can't remember, remember where, my girlfriend lived on 63rd [Street] and Aberdeen [Street], I think it was 63rd and Bishop [Street], I can't remember.  But this was on the South Side [Chicago, Illinois], it was on the South Side.  Pilgrim Rest was on the West Side this was right across the street from where the old Chicago Stadium [Chicago, Illinois] used to be.  Yeah.
Speaker 1: (Unclear) right off Madison [Street].
Speaker 2: Actually it was on Warren [Boulevard].
Speaker 1: It sat on Warren, okay.
Speaker 2: Reverend [Matthew] Thomas was the, was the pastor.  It was right there, uh-huh.
Story_ID: 253029
Speaker 1: Let's see now, grade school, now you went to, what was the name, name of your grade school (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well the grade school--
Speaker 1: You, you went to several ones I guess, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I went to, I went Calhoun [North Elementary School, Chicago, Illinois], well, well, I'm sorry, my first I think was Gladstone [Elementary School, Chicago, Illinois], Gladstone.  My first one was Gladstone.
Speaker 1: Gladstone.  You said, Calhoun.
Speaker 2: Uh-huh, it was one of the, then I went to, I went to Calhoun until sixth grade, through sixth grade.  Seventh grade I went to Tennison [ph.].  It's not there anymore on, it was on California [Avenue] and Fullerton [Avenue].  And Tennison, I think is, T-E-N-N-I-S-O-N.  And then I went to Mason [School, Chicago, Illinois] in eighth grade.  Then I went to, went to Calumet High School [Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now are there any teachers that really stand out in your mind from any of these schools?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, I, I, I had a teacher named Ms. Cummings [ph.] who, who was really just a, and this was in eighth grade, really pushed, or pushed me and all the students to excel.  I had aww man, I can't remember his name, I had another teacher, my physics, who taught physics and chemistry in eighth grade, who always taught, not only taught us academic stuff but tried to give us these life lessons.  He'd always say things like, you know, you should have more than one pair of shoes and when you take your shoes off you should, you know, put 'em so that they air out and like, it was just, just kind of things, you know, like what the hell is he talking about but it made, it made sense as you get older.  I cannot remember his name.  Then I remember a teacher, and I can't remember his name either but we called him Bulldog [ph.] 'cause he looked like a bulldog but he had a Citroen, and that was the first time I ever saw a Citroen and I thought it was so cool 'cause a Citroen looked like something out of 'Flash Gordon' during that time, this, I'm talking about '64 [1964] or '65 [1965].
Speaker 1: That's the French car?
Speaker 2: Yeah, and it, and it, and it would, you know, it was on the hydraulic things where when you start it warms up it, so it's funny when I, when I go to Europe now and I see that Citroen I think about that teacher.  And that was in elementary school.  In high school, I had a great teacher named Mr. Roy Stale [ph.].  Mr. Stale was a history teacher and he was the first teacher that taught me about, he would talk about life too and he would talk about how you owed it to yourself and to the world to be the best person you could be.  He, he was the first teacher that made me get up in front of the class and talk.  He was a, he was just a great man, he was a great teacher, I mean, and it made me wanna, and he was into his class.  I mean, it was just wonderful.  I had another teacher, a math teacher named Ms. Anderson [ph.] who became a principal, I believe.  She was my geometry teacher.
Story_ID: 253030
Speaker 1: And I had a, had another teacher who I'm still friends with today and see often, named Anita Rutsky [ph.].  Miss Rutsky was a music teacher and she still teaches now at Kenwood [Academy High School, Chicago, Illinois], Anita Rutsky.  And I never had her for a class but she would always bring these entertainers and notables to our high school at Calumet [High School, Chicago, Illinois].  And I was the president of the student body so Ms. Rutsky and I worked together, I mean, I was president so she would take me to meet these people.  So, you know, I'd meet opera singers and all these folks and it's funny because I became friends as an adult with some of those same people.
Speaker 2: Who are some of the people (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And so I, and, and in fact, it's, life is strange, some of them ended up working for me.  For example, she brought [HistoryMaker] Herb Kent to the school and I presented Herb Kent with a can of chitterlings and Herb still talks about that today.  I was a kid, Herb Kent was a big radio, and then, then when I'm running GCI [WGCI, Chicago, Illinois] and VON [WVON, Chicago, Illinois], Herb Kent works for me.  Now wow, how strange is that.  I mean Forest, Forest Whitaker, not Forest Whitaker, not Forest Whitaker, Forest the guy who played in, he had a sit, he had a sitcom on, 'F Troop,' Forrest Tucker, it was Forrest Tucker.
Speaker 2: Right, Forrest Tucker.
Speaker 1: (Unclear) you know, he came there.  Felicia Weathers, an opera singer, The Impressions, Lola, the girl who danced on--
Speaker 2: Falana.
Speaker 1: Lola Falana.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Sammy Davis, Jr. And a lot of folks, you know, that were like, you know, like that.  And it was interesting because a lot of time I'd ride with her to pick 'em up and we'd talk.  So it was just interesting.  And to this day I said she still teaches--
Speaker 2: All right.  So--
Speaker 1: --at Kenwood.
Speaker 2: Now that's a, quite a group.
Speaker 1: Oh, yeah.
Speaker 2: Sammy Davis, Jr.
Speaker 1: That's just some of 'em.  I mean she brought, there were always a lot of folks, oh, yeah.
Speaker 2: How was she able to do it, is there--
Speaker 1: Persistence and she would just call 'em up and she knew people.  She'd just call and say listen my students, you know, she did, these are teachers who were in to it man, they were, my students would like to see you Mr. (unclear) and, and she was, she was white, she says and they're black students just like you.  You need to, and then they'd come.  You're gonna be in town at the so and so, she'd come.  William, William Marshall--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Made 'Blacula.'
Speaker 1: Made 'Blacula,' yeah.
Speaker 2: (Unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah.  Just a lot of folks.  Just a, and she was just a, she is, not was, she is just a great lady.
Speaker 2: Okay.  So you must have been a good student, student body president.
Speaker 1: Well, I just learned a long time ago you need to participate and when you participate in anything, it makes that thing ease your life.  If you participate in life, it makes it easier.  Your job, if you participate in something it makes it easier.  Your school, so I participated, I mean I played basketball in high school.  I, I got on the student council and that kind of stuff.  And, and, and it gave you stuff to do, you learned stuff, and it was fun.
Story_ID: 253031
Speaker 1: What did you play in basketball, what position did you play?
Speaker 2: Oh, that's funny.  In high school, I played forward and center, you know.  It, it, it's just strange you think about a kid 6'1", or 6'2", what I was then, playing center.  I mean, that was tall, you know, now, you're a short guard if you're, (laughter) you know, (unclear) it's just strange, you know, when you look at it and you think about sports and the way it's changed.  You know, it's really something.
Speaker 1: So was Calumet [High School, Chicago, Illinois], did Calumet have a good team?
Speaker 2: Yeah, we won City [Chicago Public High School League] one year when I was there, so we always had pretty decent teams, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: You know, it was really great.  Great experience, sports is just, sports is just a great preparer for life, you know.  And it's a great experience to have, you know, being involved in the, in organized sports effort, it's just a great experience to have 'cause it helps prepare you for life.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So now you graduated in '69 [1969] (unclear)?
Speaker 2: From, from Calumet (unclear).
Speaker 1: Yeah, okay.  So, so what were you mainly interested in high school?  What did you think you would do as a career later on?
Speaker 2: (Unclear) main interest in high school, academically, I don't know, I can't, I don't, I don't know what I was, I just liked high school because I was involved in so much.  I just liked it.  I didn't wanna leave it.  I mean it was just great.  So I just liked, I liked all of it.  I liked the school, I liked going to lunch, I liked having lunch with all of my girlfriends and then, by that I mean friends who were girls, female friends.  I, I, you know, I loved going to, having lunch, I loved playing ball.  I loved being part of student government.  I loved the activities.  I just, I was, I loved my friends.  It was just fun, you know, in high school.  It was just great, in fact.
Speaker 1: Okay.  There are so many I, do you have any reflections on, or any thoughts, thoughts about why, you know, it seems as though some of that kind of enthusiasm for high school seems to have vanished or something in some schools, a lot of schools.
Speaker 2: Yeah, well, if you, if you don't, if you don't have, if you don't have a good leadership in anything it comes to a, if the principal's not a good leader, if the teachers are not good leaders, how are the kids gonna be, and if you're a kid and you're not involved in anything and you're not participating, how are you gonna enjoy it.  (Making a sound) it's like that with anything.  If we're friends and you ain't participating in the friendship, of course, you don't like it.  If you're married and you ain't participating in the marriage, of course, you don't like it.  If you're in school and you ain't participating in school, you ain't gone like it especially if you don't have any leadership.  Now if you're married or we're friends and I can show you how to be a better friend, show you how to participate and show you how you participate in school and in a relationship, then you learn to like it.  But if nobody's doing that, if everybody's just wanting to, you know, the teachers or if the teachers and if the principals and if the folks of the administration just getting their checks and going home, and nobody seeing the students and say hey how you doing today, you know, how was so and so, what did you have to tell me about you, nobody does that, you know.  Everybody forgets that.  And I think I was lucky in that I had teachers who participated, I had fellow students who participated, and I participated.  It was fun.
Story_ID: 253032
Speaker 1: When you were a senior in high school were you, I suppose you had all, you had already, you knew you were gonna go to college, I guess.
Speaker 2: Well it's interesting, no I didn't (laughter).  I, I thought about it, you know.  Understanding where my parents [Wilma Jean Bledsoe and Abraham Thompson, Sr.] were, the fact that I finished high school was monumental and did, did okay in it.  I mean I'd go to places and have these lunches, and let, and go to these luncheons, my parents would come hear me speak and say, so I mean, (making a sound).  I was gonna get a job somewhere maybe factory [Pride Container Corporation, Chicago, Illinois] where my father was working that was it.  I went to a college fair in the gym I think at Calumet [High School, Chicago, Illinois] because two guys that I had kind of admired John Butler who's still an, an education coach, great guy, and Ralph Fackler Curly [ph.] we called him, who teaches at Malcolm X [College, Chicago, Illinois] now, math professor.  They played ball and they were ahead of me and they went to Carthage College [Kenosha, Wisconsin] and they said, aww, [HistoryMaker] Abe [Thompson], man you should come to Carthage with us and blah, blah, blah.  So I said, oh, I don't have any money, I don't (unclear) so he said man listen, because I didn't even know what to do.  And, you know, some colleges had talked to me about coming there but I, I didn't know.  And so I went down to the college fair and I saw Carthage College there and I filled out, I got this stuff and filled it out.  And they wrote me back and the coach wrote me and Butler and Curly were there and I'm like aww man, two guys I admire they're there, I'm a go and I'm a meet, and then I, and then I went and visited it, and it was close to Chicago [Illinois], like sixty miles or whatever so I'm like aww man this is great.  And it was on the beach.  Man I went there and you could eat lunch on the beach, you sit in the cafeteria and look out this beautiful window and it's a beach.  The dorms were on the beach, and it was a small campus.  There were about eleven or 1200 students there.  And so I was like aww, and there were about thirty black students and Curly and Butler lived in the dorm.  All the dorms were no taller than four stories, I, I think no taller than four stories.  So Butler and Curly, along with two other athletes lived in the, the lowest level, the basement of the dorm 'cause there were rooms down there and they called it the ghetto, and I thought that was so cool 'cause that was also where the, the community lounge was, you know, for the whole dorm, you know, they have a big room with a TV and everything.  So, what, it was right there outside their, you know, the, the rooms are in here with the door, the door is there to the hallway and the rooms are all in here, and when you go outside that door is where you go to the community room which is supposed to be for the whole building.  But because it was all the brothers down there (laughter) most of the white guys wouldn't come down to the ghetto.  So they had like their own, they had their own like whole world, it was cool man, you know.  I mean, I went there I was like how cool would it be.  So, of course, when I got there I didn't live in the ghetto 'cause they were still there.  And it was just great, you know, just to see that kind of stuff was just a great experience, just a great experience, so.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, so you were at, you were, you--
Speaker 2: So that was, was the point that's how I end up going to college with Butler and them and it just a, a series of fortunate events, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you're at a college at Carthage, at Carthage, how did you like, like it when you got there?
Speaker 2: Oh, I loved it.
Story_ID: 253033
Speaker 1: I left [Carthage College, Kenosha, Wisconsin] because I got mad at the basketball coach.
Speaker 2: What happened?
Speaker 1: He told me I could play varsity, you know, like every kid you just, somebody, you know, thinking they gone play pro basketball, I weren't playing no pro basketball, no (making a sound) now, but you keep hoping and thinking.  And, and, and they were in the, the college division where you could play varsity sports as a freshman, so I was thinking boy if I do that, I, I can get ready, I'll be ready to, to at least try.  And one, and I was better than those guys, when the, when the freshman team played the varsity, I'd kill 'em.  And so I would be like, oh I oughta be playing and the coach wouldn't.  And the coaches, they wouldn't even take me on trips even though Curly [Ralph Fackler] and, and [John] Butler said, coach, you don't have to worry about another room on the trip because [HistoryMaker] Abe [Thompson] can stay with us and blah, blah, blah.  He wouldn't even let me travel.  So I got mad.  So I wrote to schools and I said the first school that I hear from, hear back from that will accept my credits, I'm going to.  And I heard back from Western Illinois [University, Macomb, Illinois], not only did I hear back from them, the coach wrote me a letter.  Then I heard back from admissions and not only did they, did they accept all my credits, I was two credit hours ahead of where I needed to be as a sophomore.  So I was like aww man, this is, this is a message from God that I'm supposed to go here.  So I got on the train once, went down to visit Macomb [Illinois], didn't even know anybody, met a guy, ended up hanging out with him in his dorm room and fell in love with Western, 'cause they got about sixteen thousand students, huge high-rise dormitories.  I mean dormitories that look like luxury apartment buildings.  It was incredible.  And I remember thinking wow, this is incredible and the campus was huge.  And they had book stores and businesses and the student union had hotel rooms, it was like wow this is college.  And you see students streaming out all over the campus.  I was like wow.  So I fell in love with that.  I meet the coach, he says well, we, we can't, we don't have any scholarships but if you come you try out for the team.  So I went and borrowed money.  I got a student loan to go to Western my first semester but I was like oh no I'm sure when I get over there I'm a make the team, I'm a wear them out.  I did, I made the team.  I got, and then I, I did in college what I had done in high school [Calumet High School, Chicago, Illinois] I got involved, got involved in everything.  I became a resident advisor in the dormitory where I lived.  So I not only had a scholarship, I had free room and board.  So the, and then at Western, they didn't do interdepartmental transfers, they gave you the money, they gave you a check.  That was great, to teach you to be responsible.  But when I got my check for my room and board it was made out to me, I can go cash it.  I put it in the bank.  I had money in college.  And then I had jobs, I, I would work during the breaks.  I'm, I'm, I always had a job.  I had, when I graduated from college, I had already paid back, paid off my student loan and I had money.  I had money saved.  You know, and I had money in college.  I worked at the Holiday Inn at night, and then I got to meet people so, and to get in those jobs I knew people in town.  I worked in a onion [ring] factory, so I knew folks there.  And I knew, so you got to know people in town.  Oh, I'd hustle pop bottles, you know.  I had cash when I was in college, yeah, so.  College was great.  It was great too.  And I was like man, this college thing is really cool, (laughter) you know.  You know, it's like your own apartment, can eat as much as you want, all of that, it was wonderful.  It was wonderful.
Story_ID: 253034
Speaker 1: So then Western [Illinois University, Macomb, Illinois] kind of turned you loose, right?
Speaker 2: Well it was just one--
Speaker 1: (Unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) it was just that experience was just like you go here and you got your own room, you know, you can stay out as long you want.  And I said when I became resident advisor, I'm an athlete and, well first of all, everybody, if you're, if you're okay as an athlete, they like you 'cause you, you know, you're playing football, basketball, tennis, whatever, so folks are like yeah, there goes so and so.  But if you're a resident advisor, if you're pretty cool, everybody's like yeah, this guy runs the floor, so I had both of those.  So I was like, oh, you know.  The guys, and here's the thing, I was probably the youngest guy on my floor 'cause I was a resident advisor like as a sophomore, a lot of the guys were juniors and seniors, so I'm their leader.  You know, and I had to keep, I kept 'em in line.  I told 'em I said, listen, I would, I would stretch the rules, I said, you know, fellows, we're not supposed to do such and such but let me tell you this, as long as everything else is done appropriate and it's cool, we can, we can stretch the rules a little bit, you know.  And I said well I don't want the floor messy, you know, guys would have parties, tear up floors, and I'd say as long you don't do that it's cool.  And only one time did I have a run-in and that when I had gone away to a game and I came back and the guys had wrecked the floor and I went off.  I mean, I went off to the fact that it got confrontational.  And then the guys start saying man we ain't never seen [HistoryMaker] Abe [Thompson] mad.  So even the guy, a couple of guys I was about to fight and, and again, I'm the only, out of sixteen thousand students I think there were five hundred black students, so I'm a black guy leading all these other guys, leading, I'm a younger, young black guy leading all these older white guys and I made 'em stay in line.  And, and the, and the great thing about it is that, it got to a point where it didn't matter, the, the, the class rank, the age, the ethnicity, didn't matter and because I made that clear.  You know, I said, you know, that, all that other stuff I, I didn't care what you said, you know, I didn't care, well just, just so you respect each other and respect our floor, didn't tear up our floor.  And one time they, the (unclear) I came back the floor was a wreck, man I went off, there was shaving cream all over everything, they had busted some, some of the light fixtures, I said aww man, I went off.  And when I went off, I'm trying to think what happened.  I think I had to go to practice, 'cause it happened while I was over, while I was on a break, I think I went to, that, that when I came back and found it, that next day I had to go to basketball practice, when I came back the floor was clean, they had cleaned it up.  I'm telling you those guys must have apologized to me for about two weeks.  So college was great for me too.  You know, it was a great, it was a great life experience.
Story_ID: 253035
Speaker 1: What did you major in in college?
Speaker 2: Psychology.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now why did you choose psychology?
Speaker 2: Well, because when I went to college, I didn't know what I was gonna major in.  At Carthage [College, Kenosha, Wisconsin], I majored, I said but again, thinking about this success thing, there were certain things in my mind as a kid that were synonymous with success.  One, was education.  The other one was business.  What's business, I don't know what business is.  So I majored in business administration and at, at, at Carthage, you had to take religion.  And I took a religion course.  Man, and it goes back to church too, I got enthralled by the Bible and religion.  I mean just, I'm, I'm not talking about where, you know, God and he's gonna, and everybody's a sinner and damned.  No, no, I'm talking about just the, the, the Bible as a, as a, as a work.  I mean, it was like everything you, you read it, it's everything you ever thought about in life it's something about it there.  And all these great stories but also the whole thing about religion, you know.  Christianity, Baptist, and I was a Baptist, and but I was going to a Lutheran school and you go but what's the difference?  So there's a difference Baptist, they're all Christians but Baptists and Lutherans and Catholics they all, they all believe differently.  And so but, but that always, that always involved me and interested me.  So I was thinking before I, before I was gonna leave Carthage, I says, you know what I think I'm gonna major in religion.  And not, not that I, I didn't want, not that I was thinking about a minister or anything, I just found it interesting, man.  And so when I left Carthage I, I, I was trying to find, I said, you know, maybe I'll major in business and I took some business courses and some religion courses.  And they didn't have many religion courses at Western [Illinois University, Macomb, Illinois], didn't have any I don't think, I said well I'll take a psychology course.  I fell in love with psychology.  And, and it was, and then when I found out after taking a number of courses and being into it, that I had to take, take a statistics course, I was like, oh my God statistics (making a sound) but in retrospect I'm glad I did.  So I majored in psychology because again, just another series of fortunate events, you know.
Speaker 1: Yeah, statistics seems to be the big hurdle in, for psychology majors.
Speaker 2: Well and it's just more on your mind on anything it's just counting, you know.  But what I learned about statistics well, well before I got into business and into real adult life, is that the great thing about statistics you can maneuver them to say anything you want, yeah.  And it might be you can state the facts and tell the truth and still mislead people (laughter).  That's what you can do with statistics and it's done all the time (laughter), yeah.
Speaker 1: Can you spot it when it's done?
Speaker 2: Well some, oh yeah, sometimes, you just look at surveys, you know, they'll say well, the, this poll shows that 35 percent of the, of Americans, and they've only surveyed ten people, and everybody--but it's and so what you have to look at is you have, what you, with statistics you have look at the sample size and the methodology 'cause in statistics for something to be accurate statistically, it has measure what it's supposed to measure and, and it has to be reliable, you know.  I'll give you an example.  I'm in radio, radio takes your measure, your listening measurements or your listening habits, in a written diary, they ask you write down what you listen to.  Now, and this is, this is a statistical study, so you write down what you listen to in a diary.  It does not, so, so that, Arbitron [Nielsen Audio, Columbia, Maryland], is the company that does it, that Arbitron study statistically is not reliable because it's supposed to measure what you listen to, not what you write down you listen to.  So for example, I do you, I'll give you a booklet and say, now, Larry [Crowe], you write down for me what you listen to today, for this, and today and for this, the rest of this week, and do it every day.  You say, okay, okay man, I'll do that.  So you throw it away in the drawer and on Friday say, God I gotta write it down, you say, oh what did I listen to Monday, oh man, oh yeah, yeah.  So you give it me and I say, now I'm, I'm gonna report what Larry listened to.  No, I'm not, I'm reporting what Larry wrote down he listened to which might not be correct.
Story_ID: 253036
Speaker 1: And then the other thing for a statistical study to be valid, it has to be reliable.  And reliable means if I give you the, if I, if I impose the same methodology on the same sample group, I get the same results, that wouldn't be the case.  And so if I took you and some other people where I did the previous survey to, gave you another survey sheet a month later and said write down what you listen to, it might be something entirely different.  So in statistics I learned things have to be valid, meaning measure what they're supposed to measure, and reliable.  And most folks don't understand that.  They think you just, you know, and you got maybe people who deal with statistics.  That's why things get so screwed up, you know, whether it's media with Arbitron [Nielsen Audio, Columbia, Maryland] or the Nielsen [Company, New York New York] ratings with TV or whether it's a poll for some political thing, you know, you got people, people who use tools, information, and languages and have no idea how to really use them.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: So or the implications of the results.
Speaker 2: Okay.  I, yeah what you said that's really, that is important and, yeah 'cause they change and things could, you know, one factor or another could change the (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Oh, yeah and you gotta look at other variables.  So I mean and, and that's the other thing statistics scientific research on it, that there are variables and you must consider the variables when you're doing something.  You know, the variable, and the variable can be anything from the weather to the condition of the subjects that you're, in the sample group, you know, but (unclear) you don't consider that.
Story_ID: 253037
Speaker 1: Did you have a favorite subject in college or, or a favorite teacher or--
Speaker 2: Man, in college I don't think I had a favorite professor.  And I think my favorite subject, man, was probably religion.  And, and I thought about that retrospectively to because in religion, religion has been blamed, it has been the cause of so many things, I mean, you know, like right now even in our country in Iraq what does the President [George Walker Bush] refer to it as, a crusade.  Crusade by definition is a religious thing, where the Christians are going, really the Christians against the Muslims but, but, you know, it's religion (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: That's what the Muslims react too.
Speaker 2: That's right.  Its, it's a crusade, it's, it's religion.  I mean, what do people fight about?  And I've even had people, you know, say if you're a Christian, yeah what kind of Christian are you, (making a sound) you know, in a way and, and even in Christian, whether you're, whether it's Christianity, Judaism, Buddhism, Islamic faith, no matter what, there are all these different sects, everybody's saying my way is right, you know.  And I think that's why religion excited me so much because it was like if we all believe in God, what difference does it make, you know.  What, you know, we're all saying that we believe in God and most of the, the, the works for our particular religion have, have a, have a common thread, you know, things like love our neighborhood, love our self, honor God.  If we just do that, it don't matter then does it, if you go to church on Saturday or Sunday, if you think Christ was born in December or January or May or whether you celebrate, doesn't matter.  Now all that other stuff is manmade.  And that's, that's why I, I guess religion, religion hit so many hot, hits so many buttons for so many people and so many things, that's why it probably excited me so much but it was just exciting.
Speaker 1: Did, did you every think about being a theologian or, or (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, and I just said no.  I, I mean, but since I've thought about it but, but not because I wanna preach or anything, it's just because it's so interesting.  I mean just find out things.  I mean you find out things for example, I mean just little things I found out, you know.  I remember, remember, found out over the years for example, I don't think there's any mention of a devil in the Hebrew writings about the Bible, then, and then when you consider things like well we talk about the devil all the time.  You know, I'm Pentecostal, we talk about the devil all the time, (unclear) so.  I mean, just those kind of things like wow or just like when you realize the, the Bible wasn't written in English so that, you know, when it goes, whether it was written in Arabic to Hebrew or whatever into whatever to whatever to English, there's a whole lot lost in those translations, you know, and, and in those years.
Story_ID: 253038
Speaker 1: And it's funny that I thought about that when I was in the South selling Bible books door to door as a college student, I sold books in Mississippi as a college student door to door.  And I, I went to sell another book, ended up selling Bible, a line of Bible books and, of course, I sold a lot of 'em because it made sense.  Then you knock on somebody's door, "Hi my name is Abraham [HistoryMaker Abe Thompson, Jr.] and, and I'm selling the Bible (making a sound)."  I'm a college student, you know, I'm saying yes, ma'am, no, ma'am, yes, sir, no, sir, I'm selling books like crazy, you know.  So (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So is that one of those groups where they--
Speaker 1: Yeah, they take college students, right, they take (unclear) right--
Speaker 2: --they form a group and they take a caravan down south or--
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah but even that, I mean that, that to, when I was selling the books I remember the lady, I remember telling a lady this is the King James translated version of the Bible and I remember the lady getting offended, she said I'm not buying no translated version of the Bible, I'm not buying, and I thought wow, wow did she give it, and then I realized, she doesn't even know that the Bible wasn't written in English.  Now (unclear) and I, I think about those kind of things, that I think about, I thought about often with a, but most recently the, the movie 'The Passion,' 'The Passion,' 'The Passion of [the] Christ.'  That's a foreign language film, that's not in English, it's got English subtitles.  So (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, I think it was in Aramaic [Hebrew] or something.
Speaker 1: See, so that's, I mean, so when you think about it, you think about the, the Bible's in, and, and just culturally things, should, things change meaning when they're taken from one culture or language to another, even our subculture.  I mean even now, you get, right here in Chicago [Illinois], you can go use a number of words to a number of different people, a number of different groups and get entirely different reactions and they'll mean entirely different things, the word fat, what does fat mean?
Speaker 2: Its means you're overweight, just too much--
Speaker 1: Or it means it's cool.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: 'Cause that's fat.
Speaker 2: Right.  P-H-A-T (laughter).  What does that mean now, that can be something (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Bad, what is bad, I mean even the word bad, bad (unclear).
Speaker 2: But fat did mean, I don't know, even back in the, back in the early '60s [1960s] in college campuses--
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: --'cause I know, I know my brother and his friends who's seven years older than I am--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --and I'm fifty-five now, they were using the term fat in describing a, a woman who was curvaceous--
Speaker 1: Uh-huh.
Speaker 2: -and what we would consider, I mean, traditionally it was somebody fat.
Speaker 1: Right, right, yeah.  But, but my point is, see phrases, it just, it's subculture, so, you know, when you, so, so even when you read things, and that, that, that interests me about, that's my favorite subject religion, and the Bible because I'm thinking okay, even though this says a certain thing or says something what, what does it really, what did it really mean.  You know, sometimes you, you see things and you wanna go back and you wanna say man, I would really like to know what that, what, what that meant in, in Aramaic, what that meant in Hebrew, you know, what, what that meant.  And then the other thing, you know, there, there (unclear) that I think about, you know, when you think about what interests me, what, what else was interest me about, about the Bible and about things, you know, in Matthew it talks about, it describes Christ and then, you know, I go to church and you see all these pictures of Christ and then I'm wondering really what is it, if you believe, what does it matter what he looked like in there but did you see, and then people will get mad because he was white and I would say well, you know, I think in every church he should be the image of that congregation see, you know, maybe in the, if, if you're a Korean Christians, it should be, Christ should look Korean 'cause that's what, you know, and you're black it's, but it would always be a white guy blond hair and I'm thinking wow, but that didn't, didn't fit, and then if you go to Nazareth [Israel] and you see the color of people you're like whoa but then you also see people who are light and who are white.  And so well my point is, it just, it just intrigues me and it raises so many questions.  And then even when I think, I'm reading about Malcolm X, you know, and Malcolm, Malcolm was following Elijah Muhammad then he went to Mecca [Saudi Arabia] and then there, you know, he was like, you know, brothers and, you know, then he gets there and he sees a Muslim brother with blond hair and blue eyes and he says whoa.  So all of that my, my point is all those things about religion just, man, it intrigued me, that's all.  Yeah, that's all.  So, that's probably why it was my favorite subject.
Speaker 2: So did you take (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) It was a long answer but that's why.
Speaker 2: Did you take more than one course or did you--
Speaker 1: I only took that one course [at Carthage College, Kenosha, Wisconsin].  And then, you know, but well in life you just, things just go, but like at my house now I got all these books about the Bible and I, and I keep saying I've, I've committed though in 2005 I wanna do three things.  I'm a do more Bible study, learn French, and Spanish.  So that's what I wanna do.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Not, and not, not because I wanna convert anybody I just wanna know, it's just good information.
Story_ID: 253039
Speaker 1: When did you graduate from Western Illinois [University, Macomb, Illinois]?
Speaker 2: I think I left Western in, man, it's been a lot of years for a lot of this stuff.  I think I left Western in '73 [1973] or '74 [1974].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Seventy-three [1973] or '74 [1974], I think I left Western, yeah.
Speaker 1: And so well what did you, well what were you gonna do when you left [Western Illinois University, Macomb, Illinois], did you, did you plan to go to graduate school (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, well it's funny.  I majored in psychology also because I thought I wanted to, and, and I was, and I minored, I think, in special education.  I thought I wanted to teach, no I wanted to teach learning and disabled children.  And I was offered a job at a school in Burlington, Iowa for $7400 a year.  And I was also offered a job in sales at the Ryerson steel corporation [Ryerson Holding Corporation, Chicago, Illinois] on the West Side [Chicago, Illinois], came back to the West Side for [$]11,200, the economics won out (laughter).  I forgot about saving the world and went for the money (laughter).  And I worked at Ryerson and then it was at working at Ryerson I met these people in the media because I was mana-, well I called myself a manager of a band that my brothers had.  And I took them around to talent shows and that kind of stuff, and in taking them around that's how I met people in the media.  And I saw these people in the media who were making about, I was making eleven grand that was great, but I saw people who were making much more.  And I didn't own a car, they had a car, they had cars.  I didn't own a suit, they were wearing nice suits and I'm thinking whoa they're making more than I'm making, I'm doing pretty good.  And they get paid to like go to stuff, I'm like (making a sound).  So I went around and interviewed at every record company that was here, every newspaper, every TV station, every radio station and nobody hired me.  So I did it again, nobody hired me.  So I did it a third time, nobody hired me.  And then after the third round, I started, I called up specific stations and one was VON [WVON, Chicago, Illinois].  And I, you know, I learned in the course of those interviews, that you don't just wanna be a friend with the president or the manager or the vice president, you wanna be friends with the secretary, and receptionist, so I got to know 'em.  Man, I knew some of these general managers and stuff would go and be in their offices before they did (laughter) 'cause I got to know their receptionist and stuff.  And, and I ended up getting an interview at VON because the secretary of the general manager, her name was Karen [ph.].  Karen said, "[HistoryMaker] Abe [Thompson, Jr.] he's gonna be (unclear) blah, blah, blah."  She said, "So why don't you come at this time 'cause he'll be going out and you can catch him going out and you can walk out with him."  That's what I did, I came up, he said, "When you wanna start?"  So that's how I got my job in radio at VON, at WVON.
Speaker 1: What year is this around about?
Speaker 2: It was either, it was '74 [1974] or '75 [1975], I, I, man the years, I don't know.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  So, well VON was in like in its heyday then.  (Unclear) (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, yes and no.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Yes, in terms of it was the only one, it was the only station and people were talking about it 'cause it was in Chicago [Illinois], it was the only black station, black formatted station.  But no in terms of it wasn't generating a lot of revenue.  You know, it wasn't generating a lot of revenue.  I mean, relatively speaking, I mean it was (unclear) but it was, you know, at that time it should have been going gangbusters but, but many people in the marketplace didn't think that we could, that, that we, and I mean black folks or the listeners of VON, could afford certain things.  You know, they wouldn't, they didn't think that we could afford Mercedes [Benz], (laughter) you know, big homes and all that kind of stuff, fine jewelry, so.  Just interesting, just real interesting.
Speaker 1: So the advertising dollars would (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, the, the advertising dollars didn't come in, and still don't for most of those stations, black formatted stations like they should.
Speaker 1: Okay.  When I came to Chicago in '77 [1977] black, the VON advertisers were barbeque restaurants and--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --and, you know, bug killers and--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --all that sort of thing.
Story_ID: 253040
Speaker 1: And the station was still the most popular, I think, one of the most popular in towns though it was AM and the signal was very weak and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, well, well, it was one of the most popular for that group.  But still in terms of the, because there weren't that many people who listen to that kind of music, urban music they called it, you had GN [WGN, Chicago, Illinois], BBM [WBBM, Chicago, Illinois], rock stations, 'cause most of the population wasn't, you know, there weren't that many of them, the black population has grown significantly, acceptance of the music has grown significantly since then.  So that's why, you know, the stations like GCI [WGCI, Chicago, Illinois] and the like have garnered so much more revenue but at the time there wasn't, there wasn't nearly the appreciation for WVON as it should have been.
Speaker 1: Now when you had, had the FM station started up in the black FM format, in the black--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --format of FM stations--
Speaker 2: Yep.
Speaker 1: --started up by the time you started at VON [WVON, Chicago, Illinois]?
Speaker 2: No, no, no, they, they came in about, BMX [WBMX, Oak Park, Illinois] came in about '74 [1974], I'd say, maybe even '75 [1975].  Then GCI came in about '76 [1976], uh-huh, yep.  Yeah, about '76 [1976].
Speaker 1: Okay.  So this is just like the beginning of--
Speaker 2: Oh, absolutely.
Speaker 1: --of that--
Speaker 2: Oh, absolutely.
Speaker 1: --that era, I guess--
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.
Speaker 1: --around here anyway, in Chicago [Illinois]?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, oh, yeah.  It was (unclear) all over the country.  That was the beginning.  And (unclear) say it was just an interesting, all I can say it was just an interesting time.  Great time thought, but interesting.
Story_ID: 253041
Speaker 1: Now were you involved in sales mostly at VON [WVON, Chicago, Illinois]?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Is that what you were doing?  Sales, okay.
Speaker 2: I was a salesman.  But again, I got involved.  I went around and met all the disk jockeys, met everybody I could, talked with them, meet the general managers.  I'd just go in and meet 'em and say hi I'm the salesman and oh, no salesman has ever come down here before, you're the first salesperson every come down here.  So what happens?  Somebody calls Bernadine C. Washington and say, "Bern, I wanna get on the air," she say, "oh, you know what, call, call my salesman, [HistoryMaker] Abe Thompson [Jr.]," (laughter) 'cause I got involved.  Somebody's doing something, say we wanna do something Bernadine, call my, somebody says Bernadine we'd like to get one of your executives to come down and talk, could you, she said, oh yeah I got a young man over here call Abe Thompson.  "Abe, so and so is gone call you can you, can you talk to kids?"  "Oh, yeah Bernadine I can do that, you want me to do it for you, yeah," so, I got involved.
Speaker 1: Now who, now, you mentioned that this is the, these are the days that VON had the Good Guys on and that sort of thing.
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: Who, who were some of the, Bernadette C. Washington [sic.] is now--
Speaker 2: Bernadine, Bern, Bernadine is deceased.
Speaker 1: Yeah, Bernadette, yeah.
Speaker 2: Bernadine was on there, Bernadine was an icon, Bernadine, Ed Cook, [HistoryMaker] Pervis Spann, Roy Wood.  In fact, I just met Roy Wood's son, who's a director for Channel 20 TV [WYCC] here in Chicago [Illinois].  I thinks, it's Art, Arthur Wood.  But--
Speaker 1: And [HistoryMaker] Wesley South.
Speaker 2: Wesley was there, Wesley and Pervis owned the station, yeah.  Wesley, Pervis, Herb Kent, Joe Cobb, 'Butterball' [Bill Crane], [HistoryMaker] Cecil Hale, you know, all of those guys were there.  It was incredible.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: [E.] Rodney Jones, it was incredible.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you got involved in all the activities and--
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, everything.  And then even with my clients, I have a client, I say get involved.  I've had clients and they have something to be done, I'd do it.  Jam Productions [Chicago, Illinois], two of my great friendships, Jam, the guy that owns Jam Productions, Arny Granat and Jerry Mickelson.  They started out with their (unclear) company about the time I started in radio, one of my first clients.  I would go to the concerts, I would go to the concerts not, sometimes 'cause I wanted to see an act, but I'd go to the concert 'cause those were my clients, I wanted to know what was happening.  I'd go, I went to one concert, the, the, for first time I'd gone to a concert and the, the MC didn't show up and Arny is a white guy, so he's panicked 'cause it's a black show and he need somebody black he thinks to go on stage and make the announcements.  That's my client, I said, Arny, I'll do it.  He said you ever done this before?  I said no, what you want me to do?  So I went out on stage and I made the announcement.  He said who is that guy, (laughter) I ain't on the radio, I'm a salesman but that's my, I was making twenty percent commission, if Arny spent $10,000, I make two [thousand dollars].  I'm talking about in the '70s [1970s].  So I'm like oh no, you would, you, you, the disk jockey didn't show up, that's what you worried about, you worried about having a black face on stage, I'm here (laughter) so I go out and make the announcement.  But again I got involved.  Arny became a good friend of mine.  Some of the acts, Randy Muller, who had a group called Brass Construction, Randy and I are still great friends.  I mean, D.T. [Dennis Thomas] with Kool, with Kool & the Gang became great friends, Patti LaBelle.  I mean, what I'm saying is just that I got involved.  And, and, and as a salesman I did, another time guy comes into town, he's just got the, the, the jack, the, the Jackson Family Revue, Michael [Jackson] and his brothers are getting ready to do a concert, the guy's name was Leonard Rowe.  He sends in a guy named Cedric Walker, Ricky, 'Ricky' Walker.  Ricky comes in, Ricky just getting in the business, he works for Leonard.  Ricky comes in and says, [HistoryMaker] Abe [Thompson, Jr.], look we're gone buy a time man and I don't know what I'm, and I'm the first time here.  I said, Ricky, what you gotta do?  He said, well I got to get these flyers, I gotta these posters hung on the poles, I said Ricky let's do it.  I went out with Ricky.  Ricky and I today, to this day are great friend, over twenty-five years.  You know what Ricky owns now?  UniverSoul Circus.  I can go to UniverSoul Circus any time, any city that I want to.  In fact, Ricky would be a great person to interview for, for and tell him I, I told you Ricky Walker, Cedric Walker, tell him you want him (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, you have to give us his number at the end of this.
Speaker 2: Okay, I am.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Ricky Walker.  But what, what I'm saying is, I got involved.  And the reward for getting involved were all these great friendships and these great relationships, Arny and I, Arny and I are friends, Ricky and I are friends to this day, you know, because I got involved.  You know, my wife [Launa Thompson], I met my wife in radio, I hired her.  She worked for me as a salesperson and then we dated and got married.
Speaker 1: Now when did you met her?
Speaker 2: I met her--
Speaker 1: Are we getting ahead of ourselves in (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I'm sorry, okay, (unclear).
Speaker 1: Are we (unclear)--
Speaker 2: Well, I met her in 1980.
Speaker 1: Now, okay.
Speaker 2: Okay.  In 1980.
Speaker 1: Well let's get to 19, but, but you, you were at VON how long?
Speaker 2: Well, the, the, the, it's interesting.  I was at VON, I worked at the radio stations here in Chicago until '85 [1985], that includes VON and GCI [WGCI, Chicago, Illinois].  I left in '85 [1985] to go to Detroit [Michigan].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: By then I was married, my wife and I, we left.
Story_ID: 253042
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) You were, were at VON [WVON, Chicago, Illinois] from, at a certain point you went to GCI [WGCI, Chicago, Illinois]?
Speaker 2: Well, no, I didn't go.  It's, see what happened the, the company that owned WVON wanted to give it, it was 1450 on the dial, they wanted to give VON a better dial position, 1390, so they bought an AM station here in Chicago [Illinois], WNUS, which was news, that's what it stood for news.  And W, I think, I think NUS was owned by the McLendons [Gordon McLendon].  They went and said we wanna buy this and what they were gonna do is just move the VON to the better dial position, that is marketing wise and that kind of stuff.  And the people says you can buy the AM but you gotta buy the FM, they said we don't want this, they said you gotta buy it.  So I think they forced them to buy it for a hundred thousand or a couple hundred thousand dollars.  So they bought [W]NUA AM for the, that's what they wanted, and [W]NUA FM.
Speaker 1: Now this sounds incredible today.  I mean, even in those days (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) (unclear).
Speaker 1: --from having been in those, I mean, that somebody--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --wouldn't want a FM signal?
Speaker 2: No, they didn't.  They, this was in the 7, '70 [1970], '74 [1974], or '75 [1975].  FM wasn't--
Speaker 1: They didn't--
Speaker 2: No, nobody cared.  Nobody was listening to FM radio.  You might have been listening to SDM [WSDM, Chicago, Illinois] or something 'cause you like Yvonne Daniels or something because you had a (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) No, but we had a--
Speaker 2: --but cars, but cars did not have FM, a car, a FM radio was not a given in a car like it is now.
Speaker 1: That's true, that's true but in Ohio--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And that's, that, that's what determined--
Speaker 1: --they were selling FM converters.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: So we could pick, pick up WDAO in Dayton [Ohio].
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And it was like--
Speaker 2: Well but again, but that was for a certain group, for black folks.  But they were forced to buy the FM, so they had to buy the FM.  So what the company did is they bought NUS AM and FM, they took VON at 1450 dark, meaning it wasn't on the air, it was just dark, and they owned that too, and then they said, okay we're moving everything, broadcast from 1390, so they brought, they simulcast, they broadcast what they broadcast on the AM on the FM but you, but, but you couldn't, it was the same music but different disk jockeys.  So you had Rodney Jones and everybody on the AM, you know, saying, hey that was James Brown, then you have these news broadcasting guys on the FM saying that was '[Mother] Popcorn' by James Brown.  Or you'd have a song that comes on with The Temptations and they said, then Rodney would say, those are the Temps man singing 'Ain't Too Proud to Beg', then on the FM would say that was The Temptations singing, "I'm not too proud to beg."  You know, (laughter) so it was weird.  So and then what happened is, FM grew.
Story_ID: 253043
Speaker 1: So then people says, whoa this FM thing, so the FM out, overshadowed the AM and the FM became popular.  And so the company that bought the stations was Globetrotter Communications Incorporated.  That's what GC, WGCI [Chicago, Illinois] stood for, Globetrotter Communications Incorporated.  So they changed the FM to GCI and the AM was VON [WVON, Chicago, Illinois].  Then when the FM became bigger, folks forgot about VON so the, the management staff and, and I was opposed to it but, but, but the management staff decided to, to drop the VON call letters on the AM and make it GCI.  So, GCI AM and FM that's how the, that's what, so the VON call letters were relinquished.  Now, by then, the dark, 1450, had been sold to [HistoryMaker] Wesley South and [HistoryMaker] Pervis Spann, and they put, and it was sold to them extremely cheap, like less than a hundred thousand I think, but extremely cheap.  And they had the call letters WXOL which Pervis said stood for excellent soul.  But when, when, when, but by now, the GCI and the VON had been sold to another company and I said they had changed 'em both to GCI AM and GCI FM 'cause GCI was popular now.  When they were relinquished Pervis Spann and Wesley South picked up the WVON call letters and that's how VON got back to 1450.  But it was a mistake to relinquish those call letters, I think, because soon as, but, but it was a blessing for Wesley and Pervis so it was good in that sense because immediately those call letters with that recognition, the value and in terms of advertisers, shot up.
Speaker 2: That's a, that's quite a history of its own.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  And, and what happened, even when Pervis and Wesley bought the station, they were, it was protested against by a Polish group and the Polish group's argument was, there are already stations for black folks in Chicago [Illinois] so why, and they already, there's already one [WGRT; WJPC, Chicago, Illinois] owned by a black man, that was [HistoryMaker John H.] Johnson, so we need a station 'cause, you know, there are, there are, I believe more Polish people here in Chicago than anywhere else except Warsaw, Poland.  And so the, the, the, a judge said, I'll tell you what, we'll give the black group fifteen hours on 1450 and the Polish group nine hours.  So that's why the station, that's why VON is not twenty-four hours.  So, so that's how, that's how the station changed.  And you're right, it, right now, as I said in the '74 [1974], '75 [1975], '76 [1976], a company was forced to buy GCI for what, what was NUS [WNUS, Chicago, Illinois], became GCI for say, $200,000.  Today it's worth $300 million, thirty years later.  So if you could have taken your 200 [thousand dollars] and put, and you'd have $200 million.  So that's tremendous growth (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Unclear) That's incredible to think about.
Speaker 1: It is.  (Unclear)--
Speaker 2: So that was really a period of radical transition in--
Speaker 1: Well, well, well in retrospect--
Speaker 2: --musical patterns and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) yeah but during the time it didn't seem like it.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah, in retrospect, yeah, but at the time it didn't seem like it.
Speaker 2: Okay.  So, so you, you made the transition with, with the company to Globetrotter Communications (unclear) (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, well it was just a change of ownership (unclear).
Speaker 2: Were they associated with the Harlem Globetrotters?
Speaker 1: Yeah, they owned it, they owned the, the Globetrotters, got into to see the Globetrotters.  They had an interest in the Faultless Golf equipment company (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So was Abe Saperstein involved with this at all?
Speaker 1: I believe, I believe he was but, but, but I don't recall the structure.  It was, it was, it was so many businesses, markets, and stations ago but I believe he was.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah, Saperstein was a founder of the old Harlem Globetrotters.
Speaker 1: Um-hm, right, yeah.
Speaker 2: He was, which, which was founded here in, in the Chicago [Illinois] area (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Right, yeah.  I knew his daughter and, and a lot of some other folks who worked for him because, you know, playing ball a lot, you know, you just see folks but, yeah.  Oh, yeah.
Story_ID: 253044
Speaker 1: We were just talking about the big FM transition, here--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --with G, GCI [WGCI, Chicago, Illinois].  So you're at GCI when they make the, when did make that transition?
Speaker 2: I believe it was '75 [1975] or '76 [1976].  Oh yeah, I was at GCI from the beginning.  I was at GCI from the beginning and, and, and VAZ [WVAZ, Oak Park, Illinois].  'Cause I came, when I left there and came, went to Detroit [Michigan] and came back, I came back with the company that bought WBMX [Oak Park, Illinois] and changed it from BMX to WVAZ--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --to adult, adult urban music.
Speaker 1: It, it seems to me now, you, you probably know better than I do being in the thick of it, it was a lot of competition from black radio in those days 'cause as I remember it, [HistoryMaker John H.] Johnson had a station, WJPC, he was FM and AM.  Then you had BMX, GCI, you had like VON [WVON, Chicago, Illinois] was still, I mean came back as XOL [WXOL, Chicago, Illinois]--
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: --then you had like, I think it was BEE [WBEE] in Harvey [Illinois] was playing jazz.
Speaker 2: They was playing jazz.
Speaker 1: And there was another one, one there's another suburban station I thought it was playing AM black music and I don't, I'm not sure.
Speaker 2: Probably was.
Speaker 1: But, but it was like a lot of stations, you know, going on at the same time--
Speaker 2: Yeah, I mean--
Speaker 1: --competing for the same market.
Speaker 2: But, you know, but the thing is, the, the, the marketplace is there.  See because music is such, and it's big, it's, it continues to be proven over and over again, music is such is that, it is not as easy to categorize as we think.  And it's also hard to categorize it as a function of time, I mean time and space, as much as it is the genre, for example, Luther [Vandross], what station was, Luther's heard on smooth jazz stations now.  When Luther first came out he was black.
Speaker 1: He was urban contemporary--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, well think about this--
Speaker 1: --now he's jazz too.
Speaker 2: --think about this, James Brown was a big a rock and roll artist, James Brown.  James Brown was black music, no, no he was rock and roll.  Aretha's [Aretha Franklin] a rock and roll artist.  The Dells, all these folks are in the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame [and Museum, Cleveland, Ohio].
Speaker 1: Yeah, that's what people called it when they were out, rock and roll, right.
Speaker 2: Yeah but, but when the radio came out folks say no, no, this, that's black music.  We, we gone play that on the black station, that's not gone be played on the white station.  But, but again.
Speaker 1: They started calling rock and roll maybe The Rolling Stones.
Speaker 2: Yeah, see rock and roll was considered The Beatles, The Rolling Stones--
Speaker 1: Elvis Presley.
Speaker 2: --or Elvis, Elvis.  Which is interesting again 'cause you don't know, but the Stones, [David] Bowie, all those guys, they listened to guys like Willie Dixon, [HistoryMaker] B.B. King.  Ask Eric Clapton, Eric Clapton who's your favorite artist?  B.B. the Kang, not the King the Kang, B.B.  So, so my point is we, we, as humans try to categorize this stuff but in, some things just, you know, just kind of overflow and they just, they overflow boundaries, and, and containers or containment, and music is one of em, yeah.
Speaker 1: Nowadays, I was surprised my teenage daughter considers, is it B96 [WBBM, Chicago, Illinois] to be a black station in a sense 'cause they play hip hop, you know.
Speaker 2: Well--
Speaker 1: But they play hip hop for all the--
Speaker 2: (Unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) hip hop lovers who are now everybody (unclear).
Speaker 2: But it's, it's every, that's what I'm saying, it's everybody.  What is it, you know, but we keep trying to categorize music in terms of ethnicity and people, other folks say, race but there's only one race, the human race, all the other is, is labels, you know, it's just ethnicity.  But that's how we keep doing in trying to label stuff.
Story_ID: 253045
Speaker 1: A friend of mine was telling me about how he lived in, he's a guy (unclear) so he lived in Italy.  And his friends, he's in television, his friends from all over the world, who had never been to the [United] States, Japan, Korea, UK [United Kingdom], where they at, and they listen to, you know, and and he's from the States but he grew up listening to jazz and that kind of stuff, so he didn't know about Chingy and (unclear) no Chingy, so as you grew up and didn't know the latest records, didn't know Ludacris latest records, that kind of stuff.  So, one of the guys asked him, they're all friends, they're good friends, one of the guys asked him said, Robert [ph.], you gone be at my party?  And Robert says, no man I got do this so and so and so, he said, man, so you ain't gone be there?  And this is what he said, well all my, so and so is gonna be there, so and so, so and so all, all the other guys, buddies of theirs, never been to the States, he said, man all my niggas gone be there.  And Robert said he thought, but that's because, that is, you know, see we think it's an expression that, that, that's derogatory that was referred to, you know, black folks.  You know, they, it's to them, and to a lot of kids it's just a term like you my boy, you know, or like, you're my man.  You know, if I, you know, if, now think about that and it is one of our terms, if I say man, Larry [Crowe], you my man, in another time and space that may have meant we were going together but it don't mean nothing now, it just means you're my partner, or even partner.
Speaker 2: This is, but these are, all these terms have a social context you're saying--
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: That it depends (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Time and space, time and that's right.
Speaker 2: (Unclear).
Speaker 1: Just like you my nigga, you know.  So (laughter) so, you know, so you gotta, you got a white kid from the UK or whatever or yeah, or it could be a black kid in the UK but you got a white kid let's say from the UK who has a friend from, from Korea who and, and who has a friend and they have another friend from Japan, another friend from India, none of them have been to the States, and they all are each other's nigga (laughter).  I think it's great.  Because I mean, you know, big deal.  I mean, it's kind of like calling somebody a MF, you know.  Say that that MF, you know, or, or (unclear) once you take the power from it, you know, you know, it, it, it loses its sting (laughter).
Speaker 2: But some time you're probably a little offended with (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) But, but--
Speaker 2: (Unclear).
Speaker 1: --but it's up to us.  Us, I mean as individuals to decide whether the, I mean, for me I don't care what anybody, you know, you can call me MF, nigga, or whatever, only way it's gone matter, Larry, is if you're important to me, and if I think it's negative.  If you ain't important to me, you know, a white guy in the [Ku Klux] Klan [KKK] calling me a nigga, big deal, that's his problem.  And, and I know people will say but, [HistoryMaker] Abe [Thompson], you know, socially it goes deeper than that.  Yeah, but I ain't, you know, so what I, I, I ain't gone deal with you and your problem, I'm not gone deal with you and your problems and your worries, I, I got other stuff to do that's more important.  So and I think that's what music is showing that if everything is, you know, it's music, it's just, doing it to everything, doing it to everything.
Story_ID: 253046
Speaker 1: At GCI [WGCI, Chicago, Illinois] were you a salesman primarily?
Speaker 2: I was always a salesman, that's all.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So--
Speaker 2: Always a salesman but--
Speaker 1: Right
Speaker 2: --but to me selling meant more than just going out and taking a order and getting it put on the air.  It meant servicing that client, doing whatever, like I said, for Jam [Productions, Chicago, Illinois], I was an MC, for Ricky [Cedric Walker], I was a poster hanger and flier passer outer, it didn't matter, whatever they needed to have done, I was willing to do, you know, to help, help them make their event, their service of their product more successful.  And that's what I, as I said participated, I paid attention.  And the same thing that's how I got into ownership.  I noticed that these stations were growing in value tremendously.  And if, if, if the, if the disk jockeys and the other folks are making X number of dollars, what's the owner making?  So I got interested in ownership.  I start thinking, whoa this ownership thing ain't a bad idea.  So that's how I started pursuing ownership.
Speaker 1: So now you were did, did you become like sales manager at GCI?
Speaker 2: Oh, I eventually became the local sales manager.  Then I was national sales manager.  I became vice president, station manager and then I left and I went to Detroit [Michigan] where I was the general manager (simultaneous)--
Story_ID: 253047
Speaker 1: --[You] met your wife [Launa Thompson] in, in '80 [1980], right?
Speaker 2: In '80 [1980], uh-huh.
Speaker 1: You wanna tell us about that?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  She, we had a job fair, WVON [Chicago, Illinois], it was WVON had a job fair, I think over at the Apparel Center [Chicago, Illinois].  And she came in and approached Bernadine C. Washington.  And again, only because I participated and I knew, Bernadine said, honey, as Bernadine and my wife would tell it, Bernadine said, honey, see that, see that young man over there, go talk to him, he's the sales manager.  So she came by and she talked to me gave me her resume and I took it just like I took everybody else's and said okay, I will, and so she, we talked, and that was it.  She went on around and did whatever she was gonna do.  Later on, she would call and say, you know, I'm still, I say, no we don't have anything right now.  And so sometimes she say, well I'm downtown, I'll come in, I'll, can I talk with you.  So I talk, so I got to know her.  And it was interesting as a salesperson she was real persistent and she knew what she wanted to do.  So and I liked her, I liked her grace, her presence, her professionalism, she was always immaculate, I mean, nails and everything.  And so I said we don't have anything, which is also something I always told people too because if you're a salesperson and if I, if you're, if you're going out for something for you, and all it takes for somebody to say no, we don't have any and you walk away, I know you not be hustling and selling for something, no but she, she did.  And so we had gotten to a point where we were looking for other salespeople.  So I told the consultant that we had, that well, I said, I have a young lady, I want, I want you to interview because that's the way I had to do it, I couldn't hire her, had to go through the consultant and hire, interview and hire.  So I said, I want you to interview her, so she said oh great [HistoryMaker] Abe [Thompson], I'd loved to interview her, I said okay.  So I called her, Launa, I said, Launa we're gonna be interviewing some people, I'd like for you to come in for the interview.  She said, oh great.  So Launa, again smart, Launa when she came, she tells me when she came into, for her interview, the consultant that she was, that we hired, was on the floor with resumes organizing resumes.  And Launa got down on the floor with her helping and they started talking, they were both tall women, attractive, both shopped at certain stores, just had a, and they just hit it off.  They just, they talked for about an hour before they got to the interview.  And then when they finished the girl said, oh Launa, you're, you, you, you're in, you're in, we gone get you in.  And I, when I, when I asked her I said, so how was Launa?  She said, oh she was great.  I said, yeah I know.  I said, I'm a hire her if we can.  So we had to interview a number of folks, we got through the process and Launa was the last one and it was in the evening.  And we had interviewed the last guy, her interview was at 6:30, so by then my two bosses, general manager, general sales manager, they were tired.  In fact, we had interviewed the last guy and we hadn't hired anybody and they liked the last guy, he was a teacher but they liked him.  So we, they said, Abe, we're gonna offer him the job, so they offered him a job.  And I said, when he left, I said wait, we still got one more person and we should, they said Abe look, you interview him and just send him home.  I said that's not fair.  It was Launa.  I said that's not fair.  And I mean I didn't like her, I just think, I was impressed with her.  I said that's not fair.  I said, and why, I said, plus she's the best, I said she's gonna be the best candidate out of all the ones we've had.  They said no, no Joe [ph.], Joe is, Joe is.  So the general manager had gone out in the lobby and fallen asleep on the sofa.  The, the, the general sales manager had gone back to his office.  I was in the conference room, I said oh man, I hope she's not late, I hope she's not late, (unclear) and she wasn't.  She got there about ten minutes early.  She knocked on the glass door, the general manager woke up and he said yes, she says I'm here for an interview.  He opened it up and so I escorted her in, I said Ernest [ph.] come on, you all got to sit in.  I said, Maynard [ph.] you gotta sit in.  They sat in, they wanted to intimidate her, they, we had a long conference table, they sat at each end of the conference table.  Sat her across and so I sat closer to her so she wouldn't feel just, you know, but they were trying to intimidate her.  By the time she finished her presentation they had gotten up to move closer to hear what she was saying.  She blew 'em away.  And when I escorted her out I came back in I said well, they said you gotta call Joe and tell him that we can't hire him.  I said I told you, I told you.  So that's how she got hired.  And she worked for me for about two or three years and one day I saw, I, I, I started noticing my feelings about her and I said, oh man, but at the time I was engaged to somebody else.  And, in fact, I was living with somebody else and but that didn't, that didn't work out, it had nothing to do with Launa 'cause I didn't tell her until about five or six months after that how I felt about her.  And I, I thought she was gonna say, oh yeah, yeah but that's nice, you're my boss and that's cool, ah nice, but she told me she felt the same way.  So it created a dilemma 'cause I'm like, oh my God, and then I'm thinking did she tell me that 'cause she wants better accounts (laughter) but it was wonderful, man.  So I thought well no, we, we can work this out.  So we worked it out.  And so we were married for twenty years, yeah.  And so we had an interesting relationship.  I dated her for over a year.  She worked for me for a few years before we started dating.  We were married for like twenty years.  So it was, it was a rich, it was a rich relationship.
Story_ID: 253048
Speaker 1: Now tell me about Detroit [Michigan].  Now how did you all end up going to Southfield [Michigan]?
Speaker 2: Well I, I speak a lot and I speak a lot at radio conventions and I spoke at a radio convention and a gentleman had just bought a station, or some stations, heard me speak and then when we were on the panel again he says, [HistoryMaker] Abe [Thompson] I'm looking for a general manager for my station in Detroit.  I said yeah, okay.  I'm thinking he's kidding.  So he called me, and the chairman of his company called me, we talked and I had these ridiculous, in retrospect I didn't ask for enough, but these ridiculous requirements the money, the car, the house, and they kept saying yeah, yeah, yeah, okay, okay.  So I told Launa [Thompson], I said Launa, it's a great opportunity because I'm scared to death, I don't know if I'm gonna take it.  And then in my final meeting the, the chairman of the board he said, Abe, we need a sales manager and we got somebody in mind.  I said, well wait 'til I get there, do not hire him.  He said, no, somebody out of Chicago [Illinois], you probably know her, her name is Launa Turner Thompson.  I said, oh.  He says, well, we wanna talk to you about her.  I said, okay.  He said, well let's work out her deal.  I said, no, no, no, she works out her own deal.  So I went home with Launa I said here's what you ask for.  So we ended up having ownership in the station, making more money than we'd ever thought we'd make, moving to Detroit, beautiful house.  She got a chance to hang out with her mother [Daisy Gaines] a lot longer and be with her relatives and stuff.  It was wonderful.
Speaker 1: Now you were, you were married at the time but the, the station didn't know that you were (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, well no.  We, we were married but, but by then Launa had left and she, by, by, but, but at the time this deal came to Detroit she had left and she had gone to work for Gannett Media Sales [Gannett Company], which was a company organization, that they organize and put together to sell all of the Gannett Medias 'cause by now Gannett owned GCI [WGCI, Chicago, Illinois] and VON [WVON, Chicago, Illinois] and they owned USA Today and some other magazines and newspapers.  So she sold all of that.  And then, and then she had left that to go work at CBS as their local sales manager.  So she was a sales manager at CBS.  She had left, she had left the stations.  And so they called her at CBS and talked with her.  And she was like Abe I'm scared, I'm like me too.  I'm like, but this is wonderful, we're making all this money we got, so we had a ball.  We bought houses for folks and cars and all kind of stuff.  It was wonderful.
Speaker 1: So this is 1980, right?
Speaker 2: No, this is, this was--
Speaker 1: Eighty-eight [1988], '5 [1985] (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Eighty-five [1985].
Speaker 1: Eighty-five [1985], okay.
Speaker 2: Eighty-five [1985].
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: Eighty-five [1985].
Speaker 1: So how, how'd it work out?  I mean it was--
Speaker 2: It was wonderful.
Speaker 1: --you're making a lot of money in Detroit--
Speaker 2: It was wonderful.  It was, it was (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) You were living in Southfield, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, it was painful, I mean, the experience was painful but in retrospect it was wonderful, man.  I got to have a great relationship with my mother-in-law, she got to have a, a nice time with her family and stuff.  Made some great friends, man, I got friends that, you know, life is about life, it ain't about money and stuff, you know, life is about moments.  It really is, it's about moments.  When you, when, when, when you sitting around, no matter how much money you got, if you don't have good moments and good memories, it don't matter.  That's what you want the money for, for the moments, for the memories.  You know, you want the money so you can buy that car, to have a good moment where you say yeah, I was riding and so and so saw me when I was riding.  You want it so you can buy the clothes or whatever.  So you want it so you can buy the house so you can have that moment.  You want it so you can take out that guy or that, or that guy, or that woman for that, for the moment, that's why you want it.  It's for the moments.  But we just, we don't, yeah, it's, it's like somebody was telling me, life is not about the breath, the number of breaths you take, it's about the number of times that something takes your breath away, that's what life is about.  And we just had some great moments in Detroit, it was wonderful.  I got some great friends.  I met some great folks.  As I said we just, to me just another series of fortunate events, you know.  Scared me to death.  But just another series of fortunate events.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So how long, how long were you in, in Detroit?
Speaker 2: Probably about two years.  It was short, about two years.  Yeah, about two years.
Speaker 1: And what happened, well why did you--
Speaker 2: It was sold.  In fact, we tried to buy the station [WRIF, Detroit, Michigan], almost had it.  The, the previous owners had bought it for $14 million, we offered them $17 [million] and the, another group came and offered them either eighteen or $19.1 [million].  So they bought it.
Story_ID: 253049
Speaker 1: So what did you do after that?
Speaker 2: Came back to Chicago [Illinois].  We came back to Chicago.  Launa [Thompson] went back to CBS, this time it was national sales manager, then she eventually left there and went to Summit Radio [Summit Communications Group, Inc.] and ran WFYR[-FM, Chicago, Illinois] as a sales manager.  I came back to WBMX [Oak Park, Illinois] and we changed it to WVAZ to all, you know, adult urban music.  And we just stayed, you know, stayed there.  Then I left VAZ and went out, pursued ownership, buying my own station.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now when did you form Partnership Radio [Chicago, Illinois]?
Speaker 2: Well, the first company I had was called, the first company that I owned, radio station that I had formed was called Focus, Focus Radio.  And I, but we, I had a partner with, at Focus, and we owned a station in Kalamazoo, Michigan.
Speaker 1: Okay.  What was it, what were the call, call letters to that?
Speaker 2: WUBU.  So we sold that, we sold--
Speaker 1: Wooboo, (laughter) did, did they call it that?
Speaker 2: Yeah, well, not yet, it seems, no, no, in fact, very few people have referred to it as Wooboo.  Nobody in, in the markets--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --(unclear).  But we, we, we put that station on, we sold it, and then we moved to, we, we bought a station in South Bend, Indiana, same call letters, we just took the call letters with us.  And then I changed partners, my, my current partner bought out my previous partner and we changed the name of the company to Partnership.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, when did you form Partnership Radio?
Speaker 2: Five years ago.  Let me see, what's today?   Probably in '99 [1999].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Ninety-nine [1999], 2000 or something like that.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And, and you've been involved in radio stations mostly in the Midwest, you--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --purchased stations here (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, well I have a small ownership in one, WLOK in Memphis [Tennessee], it's a gospel station.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But most of it is Midwest.
Speaker 1: So, how, how many do you have?
Speaker 2: Just a, just a, well I have a primary interest in South Bend, so one.  I just, a lot of times I even forget about LO, LOK, I get my stuff in the mail and I go to a meeting but so I just really consider it that one 'cause LOK is kind of like, I kind of like consider it just like I own stock in Radio One [Lanham, Maryland], I own stock in, Clear Channel [iHeartMedia Inc.] and in Infinity [Broadcasting Corporation, New York, New York].  So you could say from that standpoint I own thousands of stations but really I own one, you know, one that's mine, my money, free and clear.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So what are your, now are you, still, well you're still young, so you still thinking about acquiring more stations, I guess (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, yeah I'd love to acquire more but I'm patient with it, if it happens fine, if it doesn't fine.  You know, just like kind of, it's like having a great pair of comfortable shoes that never wear out.  If you get another pair, cool, if the deal comes, but you ain't going around just buying shoes so, that's where I am.  I'm a, I, I look with, with a very careful and watchful eye.  But and I, I would like to own some more but I'm not like, God I gotta get some, (unclear).
Speaker 1: Okay (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) If it happens, it happens.
Story_ID: 253050
Speaker 1: Now you experienced, and I think the whole community experienced the sort of a tragic loss when your wife [Launa Thompson] died--
Speaker 2: Uh-huh, yeah.
Speaker 1: --last year.  Can you tell us about that and--
Speaker 2: It was tragic, you said it.  I don't know what, what do you wanna know?  It was, it was extremely painful, I mean, and it was a loss.  I mean, I mean, it just was a loss of so much.  I mean it was a loss of spirit (unclear), friendship, just a tremendous loss, yeah.  And you're right, for the whole community and not just Chicago [Illinois], for the world community.  See my wife was a great, my wife wasn't a great American or a great woman or a great black person or a great black woman, she was just a great citizen of the world.  It was a loss for the world, you know, 'cause she was, she was a great woman.  She was great for people to know.  She inspired so many people, helping out so many people, so, (unclear).  I, I don't know, I don't know what else to, you'll have to ask me some questions for that one.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well, so you got a son, I know you got a son named Phoenix [Thompson]?
Speaker 2: Phoenix, right.
Speaker 1: Yeah, and he, how old is he now?
Speaker 2: Eleven, he'll be twelve March 3rd.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: But he's eleven.
Speaker 1: All right.  So well it has been a lot of publicity about your wife's passing, a lot of--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --outpouring from the community--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --about that in the past year so.
Speaker 2: It's been wonderful.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Oh, it's been great.  I mean, it, it, it was, it surprised me.  And it's funny I think about to what she would say 'cause she would go, she would go to people's services and I didn't like to go, she would go, she say, [HistoryMaker] Abe [Thompson], I went to so and so service and it was just a great homecoming, there were two or three hundred people there and it was just great.  And I would always say, oh man.  And we would say, she would say, I say, yeah, I say I hope when I die a lot of folks come but I don't wanna spend a lot of money, I wanna, that's what I was saying, she said, yeah, she said, you just hope folks will come out for you.  My God, boy did they come out for her.  Hmm, it was thousands of people.  Hmm, people came from all over the world.  Hmm and I, I, I was thinking, man well she'll love this, it would just great, it would be great for her to be able to sit there, you know, at her own service.  I mean, you know, people told her that they loved her and she knew that, how much Phoenix and I loved her but it would be great for her to be able to sit there and for you to be able to say you know, what you think about this.  You know, you, can you believe all these people came and, you know, that people came literally from all over the world, that would have been great.  That would have been really great.  I mean, they came not expecting anything.  I mean people came, I didn't even see 'em.  I mean, there were people who came and they said, man I, you know, they called me and said, Abe, yeah, I was there and I said aww man, I didn't see you.  They said yeah, we were there we came.  You know, whether they came from the United Kingdom [UK] or came from Spain or, or came from Florida, you know.  I mean the, I mean the great thing about it, it was the, I mean from the most famous to the least known and that's how her life was.  And so it was wonderful because it was, I mean it was just absolutely great, you know, to see all those people there.
Story_ID: 253051
Speaker 1: And I was, I was, I was shocked.  I was shocked.  I didn't know, it was amazing too because I've often talked to people and they'll say we went to so and so's funeral and he was a king of, or she was a queen over the, they were the head of, and it was a lot, they didn't come because the radio station, they came because of her.  Some folks didn't even realize what she did, that's deep.  I mean that's real deep.  And I think about that and it was great for my son [Phoenix Thompson] to experience that 'cause they didn't come for the head of something, they came for Launa [Thompson].  They didn't come for the president of, you know, they didn't come, and I'm talking, some people came in private jets, you know.  You know, it's something when somebody buys a plane ticket but I'm telling you some people got their own planes and came in their private planes for that.  That's a hell of a thing, Larry [Crowe].  There were people who, there were people I had not seen in years who came and called me later and said, aww man, I was there and I was like aww man I, and they didn't expect nothing, it wasn't like they came and said, [HistoryMaker] Abe [Thompson], I wanted to see you, I wanted to see your son, how are you doing, they said we just wanted to come and pay our respects.  And they wanted to pay their respects for the person.  It's like well, that's why when you asked me what I am, all that other stuff is not what I am.  You know, you know, my, I'm a father, a friend, and until recently a husband, that's what I am.  That other stuff don't matter, you know.  It don't matter how many radio stations I got, it didn't matter what my wife's title was, they came for her, that's a hell of a thing.  She said when you die, so when people come to you and if they gotta ask you what you do or what you got or what you did, they, they ain't for you, they for what you got, you know.  But it shows a, man, boy does it show the kind of person you are when you, when folks don't even know what, they just say, oh, it was Launa.  I'm telling you, and I had people come, I had people come who travel with security guards usually and told me well I'm coming, not with, and I'm not coming with security guards 'cause ain't no, I'll be safe there, and they knew that.  So can you imagine you used to traveling with security guards but you think the person you're coming to see is so, so I don't even know what the word is, awesome, just so tremendous that people will not dare do anything out of respect for them.  That's a hell of a thing.  When, you know, everywhere you go, no, and kings and queens look for you and wanna, then, you know, but, you know, that you're coming to a place where people are gone be so respectful, they're not, you don't need your bodyguards and not one of 'em were approached by anybody there, I mean, they spoke, folks said hey how you and they spoke, it was just so cool.  It was cool for my son to see it.  It was cool for him to see it.  And it, it was a great lesson.  So, just a great lesson for him.
Story_ID: 253052
Speaker 1: This experience of losing your wife [Launa Thompson] change you in any way?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Any time, any time something significant happens to you in life whether you know it or admit it or not (unclear), of course, it does.  One thing I started cussing again, I had stopped for years but people make me cuss 'cause they.  I, my vision has become sharper.  And by vision I don't mean my eyesight, I mean my vision.
Speaker 1: Perception of people?
Speaker 2: Perception of people, perception of things, perception of moments.  For example, if there is something that I wanna do or think I should do, I do it.  If I think about somebody I'll do it.  I mean, it's really brought home something I believe and that is the smallest gesture is worth more than the biggest intention.  So well why you're intending to do something for your mama or your sister, your wife, your friend, when you get your bonus or when you get the time, forget that, call 'em up right now and tell 'em you love 'em, tell 'em hi.  A small gesture is worth more than your biggest intention 'cause you probably ain't gone get there anywhere.  So that has brought that home more.  It's also made me sharper in terms of understanding and being in the moment.  You know, if I'm here talking to you, Larry [Crowe], I oughta be talking to you, I shouldn't be waiting for my phone to ring.  And I, I mean I was like that before but I really am like that now.  And also I understand that, that really tomorrow is not promised so what you, you better do whatever it is you wanna do.  My son [Phoenix Thompson] likes golf.  A couple, a few weeks ago, a friend of mine did a golf tournament for kids in St. Croix [U.S. Virgin Islands] and my son didn't play in the golf tournament but he wanted to go.  There were kids from all over the world, all ages, playing golf.  We put some shorts and T-shirts in a bag, got his golf, my son's golf club, that's what we traveled with.  We got to St. Croix at 9:00 o'clock p.m. on Friday, went to the golf tournament after having breakfast at our hotel on Saturday, got up at 8:00 o'clock Sunday and came back.  Now folks would say why you do that?  Why not?  You know, Larry, I would come and see you but I don't have enough time to stay and talk to you.  What the hell I need with time?  If I come by and give you a hug and say, hey man good to see you and leave.  You probably don't want me sitting around for two or three hours anyway (laughter) so.
Story_ID: 253053
Speaker 1: It's also made me appreciate God more and made me more thankful.  And it's also made me even more aware of what the true wealth is in life.  See, Larry [Crowe], there's nothing I need and nothing that I want that I can't buy, nothing.  You hear me, nothing.  There's nowhere that I wanna go that I can't go.  There's nothing that I want that I can't afford.  But if I had a choice between that and my wife [Launa Thompson], I'd give it up.  See so, you know, when people tell you money won't buy you everything, it's true.  It's also made me more tolerant of, of other things, I mean, and I don't judge anybody now.  I don't judge anybody about anything.  Serial killers, whatever, you know, that's between them and God, you know.  I, I try to be more understanding now even though that hard sometimes 'cause I've lost a little bit of my patience but I'm, I'm hoping it'll come back.  I have more moments now where I just have to have my moment and be with me, be with me.  And I have more times now when I don't let people put me into things.  I tell people now, I operate from day to day so if you, when they called me for this interview they said, I said I don't know call me.  I said, I think I can.  I said, but you better call me on Monday and remind me.  I don't care what it is I just, I don't put any pressure on me about anything.  So it's changed me about that.  I, I'm more appreciative of, of gifts that are available to us every day that we don't appreciate.  Like one day I was walking to a meeting, Larry, and it was nice and warm outside, a few months ago, and I caught a breeze, you know, man, I mean, I caught a breeze and the breeze felt so good.  I just opened my arms and the breeze got me and I must have stood there for fifteen, twenty minutes, then I had to sit down and, you know, and just take it all in.  So I was late for the meeting.  So when they asked me I said I caught a breeze.  They didn't understand, it didn't matter to me, didn't care.  If I was coming here and I had caught something or something I might have been even later.  But I don't care 'cause no matter how important you think this is to you or whatever, don't nobody really care, I mean I, I mean historically speaking maybe I don't think I got any significance but don't nobody care.  I better take my breeze when I, I better take my sunshine, the sunlight when it hits me.  I better take that hug from that friend when it's given.  I better take that love from my friends and my family and my son [Phoenix Thompson] when it's given.  You know, that's what it made me appreciate.  So somebody can have me wanting to do something, if my son, my mother [Wilma Jean Bledsoe], my friends need something, I'll stop doing it.  The money don't matter, it don't matter how much, it don't what it is, you know.  So it's made it, that's what, that's what I mean when I said it's made my vision keener.  You know, I find I understand even more, you know, what's important.  You know, 'cause most, most folks will never be where I am at this, the station in life, I mean, economically.
Story_ID: 253054
Speaker 1: Most people will never have what I had with my wife [Launa Thompson], never.  You know, most people will never have what I have now with my wife.  So knowing that it's just made me more thoughtful and introspective about a lot of things.
Speaker 2: Is it, it, we're in an age now where there are more divorces than ever.
Speaker 1: Hmm.
Speaker 2: It seem a like a lot of marriages are, are in trouble and do you have any thoughts about, you know, what makes, you're, you're right when you said that most, most people won't make the money that's probably true but also a lot of people are not making the relationship either, you know.
Speaker 1: That's right 'cause they don't make 'em, they think that (unclear) you know, I married you and we just, it's supposed to just happen.  Kind of like driving your car, if you just get in on the seat and don't put the key in, don't put the, step on the accelerator, don't put gas in it, it ain't going nowhere.  You gotta participate.  Most folks don't keep things and value things including relationships 'cause they forget how bad they wanted 'em, and they forget that it takes work.
Speaker 2: Now this (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) (unclear) you know, so it all takes work first.
Speaker 2: That consistent theme in everything you said has been participation in stuff--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --from the time that you were a kid you--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --you've, you've talked about, you know, getting involved--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --and with whatever it was and participating at a higher level and--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --and getting rewarded by that participation has helped.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  Think about it, if you participate in your marriage, by that I mean you know what your wife, or your girlfriend and your husband or your boyfriend what they like.  So why not, what's wrong with buying them flowers?  What's wrong with a woman buying her husband flowers or her boyfriend flowers, vice versa.  What's wrong with a guy saying I love you?  What's wrong with a guy telling his friend, man, I ain't going with you 'cause I'm going with my lady?  You better do it 'cause one of your friends might (laughter).  Yeah, man you go on I'll, it's, you go on, I gotta, I left something at your house (laughter).  So you don't participate.  You participate with your boys, you call 'em, drink with 'em, play call, call for them, play pool with 'em, play ball with 'em, but you don't participate with your wife.  You don't never say baby what you wanna do?  No, no I mean really, what, what do you wanna do?  You ask your wife or your girlfriend, no, no what do you wanna do.  She said I wanna go shopping all day and I want you to wait and carry my coat, carry her coat.  Go shopping with her all day.  Why not?  If you don't show her any affection how do you expect any back?  If you'll making love and you're having sex and you just say baby I'm a lay here, do your thang, if you ain't participating what you gone get back?  So everything is like that.  So, of course, there are divorces people keep forgetting and they keep forgetting their choices, you know life's about choices.  'Cause you married to somebody, date somebody, going with somebody, there, there are gon' be other people you like and wanna be with probably, you make the decision.  You know, you make the decision.  We all make decisions.
Story_ID: 253055
Speaker 1: I always tell people an example, I love Rolls-Royces. Now if I go to the, if I go to the dealership and there's a Rolls-Royce in the driveway with the key in ignition, running, top down, 'cause I like Corniche Rolls-Royces, and I decide to drive off with it, what happens?  They putting my ass in jail.  I stole a car.  It is not an excuse that I liked it, I was overwhelmed and it was just, and everybody knows that [HistoryMaker] Abe [Thompson] likes Rolls-Royces, so he took that one and let him go.  They gone say, well, Mr. Thompson you're going to jail.  You made the decision.  So when you make the decision as a man, as a woman, to be unfaithful to your wife, if you make the decision not to be affectionate and tell your wife or your husband you love 'em, if you make the decision, you make the, the choice not to be giving and patient with your husband or your wife, you choose not to participate, of course, you should be, they should leave you.  You know, if you think it's about you, it ain't, it's about us.  If you ain't trusting, you know.  If, if you marry somebody and you say well, you know, I don't trust you with the money what you marry them for?  I don't trust you with my car.  So I think that's why people forget.  And, and, you know, it ain't fifty, fifty it's a 150, a 110, it's a 190, it's a hundred, sometimes you give more but you, you don't keep, so what, and so what.  If, if you played sports the way people play at their relationships, everybody'd lose.  'Cause you know why?  'Cause the running back will say, man I done ran my 200 yards, I know it's another touchdown I could make but I done did mine already, I ain't running no more, Larry [Crowe] got to run some.  Quarterback say look, I've thrown six passes, y'all done dropped six, I ain't throwing no more.  The rebounder say, listen I've, man I got twenty rebounds, you know what, I ain't getting no more.  I scored thirty-five points, I'm, no more.  What, what, what would happen, if you played on a team and you scored thirty-five points and you open at the basket and you say man I then scored my points, I'm tired, I ain't scoring no more.  They gone kick you off the team.  So why wouldn't that happen in your marriage?  You talking about baby, you know, I done, you know, I cooked dinner for the last six evenings, I ain't cooking no more, so cook again.  If you got the time to do it what difference does it make if you did it all year, you know.  So that, I think that's, that's what happens.  People forget, they don't participate.  And they forget how bad they wanted somebody.  You know, how bad you wanted your wife, your girlfriend, or whatever when you saw her.  You was doing all kinds of stuff.  Messed up your good suit, got your car dirty, forgot a meeting, even loss two or three hundred dollars and don't remember what you did with it.  But after you're with her for a while you're like oh, no baby, I got to go find that $200, you know.  No baby, I can't get my car dirty.  Girl I just got my suit cleaned, I can't get down and look for your stockings under the bed.  You know, no.  Folks forget, don't participate.  And I think because also they don't, they don't understand that when you get married, especially, you don't just make a commitment to that person, you make a commitment to God.  So even if you feel like you wanna, I mean you still got another commitment you made and that was to God, and folks forget that to.  'Cause they don't, 'cause when, usually when people, not usually, often times when people get married they don't even think about those things.  Don't even think about what it means to get married.  I mean it's, it's, dead.  People put, put a lot more thought into what business they gone work, what car they gone buy than getting married, they do.  All the questions they ask.  When they're getting married, when they're buying a car.  They don't ask those questions when they get married.  Well baby, what about religion?  I mean, well how we gonna choose, you don't mind if I go to church, don't go to church, what about sex?  You know.  Well, are we is it gone be once a week like it is now, or is it gone be once a quarter like you, like my boy (laughter) or like my girl.  You know, they always, what about money, how are we gone handle money, you know.  Do, do you mind if I go out and buy clothes or what, what about food who, hey who's gone cook, do you like to cook, do you like to, or, you know, you know, I go out with my boys and drink or go out with my girls and drink and is that, they don't even ask those kind of questions, they make assumptions. So and, and, and if you make, if you made the assumptions, haven't asked the questions, don't participate, and are not real, real, real patient, how, how can it last?  How can anything last.  I mean it can't.  It's just that, it's just not gone happen.  So I think that's what, well that's what happens, you know.  You said hey, you know, I'm out.  And that's what happens, they get out after six months or a year.  I mean in a year, two years, you don't, you don't even know enough, there shouldn't have even been enough stuff that happened to make you wanna get out (laughter) after a year or two years but for a lot of folks hey, they gone, but that's why.  They don't appreciate, they don't, they don't, they don't wanna do the work.
Story_ID: 253056
Speaker 1: Same way with friendships, a lot of folks talk about they ain't got friends, of course, yeah.  And see the other thing about relationships too, in a relationship you have to feed and be fed.  If you are only being fed and you're not feeding the other person, (unclear) whether it's a friendship or a team sport, a marriage, if you're only, if you're only being fed, and you're not feeding anybody, you gone be left alone.  And by that I mean, if somebody's always, if you're always going to somebody saying look, man I'm (unclear) I'm, I'm, I need to talk to somebody, I'm sad, and (unclear), and they always, and you never call and say listen man, I call you all the time, is there anything I can do for you?  If you're always asking people to feed you and you ain't feeding nobody, no matter what it is you gone be left alone and you should be.  See we all need to be fed and we all need to be feeders.  But quite often, there are people that wanna be fed.  The people who wanna take and not give.  If you just, if you just wanna be fed and you wanna take, and they don't think anything of it.  They just think aww, you know.  That's, you know, that's, that's my boy or that's my girl, she can, (unclear), you know, but they never call on you to say, you know, I just wanna see what I can do for you.  It's like literally taking somebody to lunch, it's like somebody calling you every week for a year saying, take me to, let's go to lunch, and you go to lunch and you pay for it and they never call you.  But, but the person who calls you and says let's go to lunch, and then you pay for it then they say let's go to lunch and they say I got it, they say let's go to lunch, they say I got it, and they feeding you, and you, what happens?  You start calling them up saying let's go to lunch (laughter) 'cause, you know, you fed them but they fed you too.  And, and, and even more than that, you know, that they will feed you.  See the problem about somebody who you're always feeding is that you don't even know if they'll feed you, so.
Speaker 2: Yeah, that kind of--
Speaker 1: That's why.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: That's, that's, so that's, that's why they break up.
Story_ID: 253057
Speaker 1: Now you got a book now, 'My Thoughts, Your Journal, Our Book' [Abe Thompson].
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Tell us about this?  This is just published by Third World Press [Chicago, Illinois] recently, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Well recently I, I, and so again, my, my wife and I would often talk and my wife would always say, [HistoryMaker] Abe [Thompson], you should write a book.  And so one day we were driving to, we were driving to Detroit [Michigan] and we were talking and I was telling her about a talk I had given and when, and the topic I talked about was you're a millionaire but somebody else has got your money.  She said Abe that should be a book, you should write it and she wrote down the day and event.  I said okay, I said I'm a write book.  And so I had gone a couple weeks after we got back and a number of people told me I should write a book, some students at Notre Dame [University of Notre Dame, South Bend, Indiana], [HistoryMaker] Melody Spann[-Cooper] at VON [WVON, Chicago, Illinois], Sam Makanu [ph.], a guy named Greg Bunch, all people who didn't, un, unrelated, unrelated, nobody else didn't know it and so I said oh okay.  And I had given another talk after, after all this about messengers.  And it was basically how God sends us messages and messengers but we don't listen.  So in driving back, in driving back from that talk I realized I've been telling people about messengers and listening to messengers and I had eight messengers telling me the same message, you oughta write a book, and one of them was my wife.  So I, I wrote, I, I said, you know what, I'm a write something, I'm gonna write something for my son [Phoenix Thompson], I'm gone write a book for my son, this is gone be my thinking about (unclear).  Just writing it for my son, it's gone be called, my thoughts and so that's what I was gone write and I was gone write something, I, I, I was in my thinking was to write it, take it to Kinkos [FedEx Office], get the cover laminated, and get it typed it up and it would be, get it spiral-bound, it would be, I don't know a hundred or so pages thick.  I'll get fifteen, twenty copies of it made and then give my wife a copy, give my son a, be in a set, in a, in a chest we keep for my son of stuff that we want him to look at about his life, put it in the chest and then I'll be through with it.  That was my idea of a book.  So my thoughts, that's what I was gonna do.  So I went to a friend of mine's art gallery, Sam Makanu, another great person to be interviewed if you all haven't, Sam Makanu.  Sam, said Abe, Launa [Thompson], my wife and I went to the fair he had at his art gallery, he said Launa I've been telling Abe he should write a book, Launa said me to.  He says I got somebody who can help him edit the book and he introduced me to her, so I said okay.  So I, I, I told the girl who Sam introduced, I said yeah I'll do it and here's my plan.  So she said okay.  So we, we did it, and, and I wrote it, she got it typed, edited it and everything.  I said aww, okay, great, we proofed it, I said, this is great.  So Launa says Abe you should get at least ten thousand, oh no, no before that, I had gotten it done, my wife didn't even know.  So one day my wife was laying in the, sitting in the bed, and she was saying she wanted to do something and I said, you know what?  You should do it.  You keep talking about you wanna do something you should do it.  You should go ahead and do it.  And so she said I don't know what you talking about you been saying you gone write a book and you haven't written it.  And I had it finished it.  And she was laying on the bed, I went and got it and I threw it on the bed, I said bam.  And I said now, read that.  So she read it, she said Abe this is wonderful, this is great.  So I said well, here's what I'm gonna get five or ten copies, you'll have one, Phoenix [Thompson], will have one and blah, blah, blah.  She said no.  You should get, you should get at least ten thousand copies of this done.  I said girl is you crazy (laughter).  So after I got it all done and everything, Launa and the young lady who helped me edit it, got the cost for doing a hundred, 200, 500, a thousand, 5,000, 10,000.  So I'm like oh no I'm not spending all that money.  I, I said I'll tell you what, I'll get maybe two hundred done, I says so if I get two hundred done, if I need 'em for, for brunt, for kindling in the fireplace, I said 'cause we got in our homes, we got fireplaces I can throw 'em in the fireplace.  She said, she said, don't, you should do it, it'll sell, it'll sell.  I said no, so they got the cost and about a, a few days after that, they had given me the information, I got a call from a company that owed me some money, that owed me the money for years, I had not talked to them about that money in over a year, they called and said Abe come get your check.  I said what do you mean come get your check?  They said come check your check.  And I said how, how much is it?  And he told me.  It was five hundred dollars more than I needed to get a five thousand books printed.  And I called my wife when I got in the car with the check, no discussion, no nothing they just gave me the check.  I said, I got in the car with the check.  I said hear you Lord.  And I called my wife I said I'm gone get five thousand books and she said oh great.  That's why I five thousand books (unclear).  So I got 'em (unclear), got 'em delivered to my house and everything and so in my mind I got the books for nothing 'cause that money was gone.  I mean, I didn't, so I got the books printed for nothing, didn't cost me much to do all the other stuff, and I did what I wanted to do which was leave something for my son.  So with it being printed and everything the way that it was, it kind of turned out to be a book, it just, once I did it, it took on a life of its own.
Story_ID: 253058
Speaker 1: My first book signing was at Barnes & Noble in the Rockefeller Center in New York [New York].  You know, and that, that, so I did, I self-published the first run.  The second, the second run which is being done by Third World Press [Chicago, Illinois], they called me at Third World Press and said they wanted to do the book.  I'm like this is incredible.  This is the same company that publishes Gwendolyn Brooks and has published stuff by Langston Hughes and, and Don Lee and [HistoryMaker] Haki Madhubuti, and I'm like this is incredible.  So it took on a life of its own.  And, and I've, and I've had a number of book signings now and probably the only reason I hadn't done more is 'cause I won't travel more.  I won't be away from my son [Phoenix Thompson] a long time.  You know, I, I would not be away from my son and wife [Launa Thompson] and but now I really won't be away from my son for a long time.  I'll do some if it takes a day, I'll go to a bookstore here and do a book signing but for the most part, it just took on a life of its own.  It's really the grace the God 'cause I didn't plan to do a book.  I mean it came, and, and so it was gone my thoughts.  And when I was working on it, after I showed it to my wife, I said I'm leaving the margins wide 'cause I want people to write on the side margins, and I'm leaving blank pages after each chapter and I'm asking questions so people can write.  And she says why don't you just put lines on it?  I, she said, and I said, yeah like a journal.  I said but then, she said, I said it'll be a journal, she said so what?  I said okay I see, then I gotta call it, it would be your journal, I said it'll be Phoenix's journal, so it became my thoughts, which is all it is, my thought about everything, love, life, sex, death, my thoughts, your journal, Phoenix or whoever bought it, when it became this book.  And then I thought but you know what?  It's not a complete book the, it's complete once the person who has it, writes in it and puts their input in it, it's an interactive book.  And I said so it's gotta be our book, so that's how the title became 'My Thoughts, Your Journal, Our Book' [Abe Thompson].  So the person who gets it, it's not finished until they write in it.  And that's what, that's why I created it, it's interactive.  Yeah, it's interactive.  So that's how the book was, was, was born.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Now, now do you, do you, do you like still speak a lot at schools and (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, I love, I love, I love talking to students.
Speaker 2: Seem like it would be a great thing for, for students and in school--
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 2: --and, and, you know.
Speaker 1: But I mean everybody reads it, it's not a, it's, it's really not a journal, it's a book but then you write it like a journal.  It's a, it's not a kids book even though I wrote it for my son, and he's read it.  It's not a, I mean it's, in some stores they have it listed under spiritual, some under journal, some under psychological, I mean it's, they have it listed in, in, in a number of different areas in a number of different types of book stores, so it's just interesting.
Story_ID: 253059
Speaker 1: So, tell me, what are, some of your hopes and concerns for the African American community today?
Speaker 2: That we become more understanding.  That it is important to think of things in terms of the world and not just our, the community because there are so many resources available to us in the world and that we're connected to the rest of the world, and that we really begin, I mean really, really begin to, to understand and value our children.  And I'm not talking about just talk about it, I'm talking about really value our children.  You know, I don't care how busy you are, I don't care where you work, how many jobs you got, you can take your kid to get a library card.  You can hug your kid.  You can tell your kid you love 'em.  You can do something with your kid and it don't have to be long, it just has to be often.  I would hope that we really begin to understand that and not just talk about it.  You know, a lot of us talk about what we gone do, you know, we wanna raise a lot of hell about what we gone do but we don't do anything.  So rather than talk about what we need to do in our schools, why don't you go do it.  If you see the school needs to be painted why don't you go buy some paint and paint it.  If you see some kids need some help, you need to, you know, go help 'em.  You know, most things that you, I, I think that have the most impact, are done on an individual scale.  It's good to sit down and pontificate about all the great things you're gonna do but you can start with one child.  You can start with one family.  You know, you can start with one old lady, one old man, you know.  But most of us wanna, and I mean people period, you wanna, you, you wanna do this grand thing, you know.  You can take two kids to the museum.  They can be your kids, (laughter) you know.  But most of us wanna talk and complain about stuff as opposed to doing the work to get stuff done.  And I, I just, I just hope that we do that.  I mean people talk about what's happening in our community, well, of course, it's happening 'cause we ain't paying attention or participating.  The Koreans buying up all our, well, how you, how are you gone come from Korea and buy my stuff when it was here for me to buy, you know.  So and so is doing this, you know, well how are they gone come over here and do all that if you don't let 'em.  You know, if you wanna buy the store, why don't you buy it, you know.  We was talking, you know, the stuff we been talking about for decades and then nothing, nothing, you know what it's the same song just kind of like a different venue.  I mean really and we have to understand that each of us individually have to do something.  Complain less and do more.  I really think that's what we have to do.  You know, do something.
Story_ID: 253060
Speaker 1: When you look back at everything you've done so far, is there anything that, major that you would do differently?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I'd've take better care of my wife [Launa Thompson].  I would have done more and then done it more immediately for my grandfather, my father's [Abraham Thompson, Sr.] father.  And I would have done something for my this was, this was my second marriage, I would have done something, I would have done more for my first mother-in-law.  If I could have looked ahead, you know, just saw when they would all pass away I would have done it, instead of having those great intentions, I would have done the smallest gestures.  But I had great intentions but I would have done the smallest gestures.  So that's what I would have done differently.
Story_ID: 253061
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, likewise when you look back at, at what you've done so far now and you're still, you know, a young man, relatively speaking--
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: --we interview a lot of people in their eighties and nineties.
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: When, when you look back over your life is, what would you consider at this point in time to be your legacy?
Speaker 2: My son [Phoenix Thompson].
Story_ID: 253062
Speaker 1: Your parents [Wilma Jean Bledsoe and Abraham Thompson, Sr.] get a chance to see you become, you know, successful, well your father is still living, right?  (Unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) My father and my mother, my father and mother, and stepmother--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --are still alive.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Not only did they see it but I've been able to do things for them and it's a blessing.  Well they, they, my parents are happy.  I've been able to do that for 'em.  It's a blessing.  My parents know I love 'em, so that's a blessing.  And for me to, to know that my wife [Launa Thompson] knew, knows that I love her.  For my parents to know that I love 'em, it's just a great thing, I mean to know.  So if I drop dead they don't have to say oh my God, I wonder what, I wish I had said, if they drop dead, when my wife passed, it weren't that I, she didn't know I loved her, it weren't that she didn't know I cared about her, she knew it, when she thanked me she, she, I told her.  And I mean it's just a blessing to have done that and to have that kind of, I don't know, closure if you will. So it's, it's, it's because that's been a blessing to have that with my wife and with my parents yeah, to let me know to be, and to have been able to do things for them.  And my, my in-laws, you know, to be able to do stuff for them, for to help them get some stuff, you know too, you know, the house, the house and the cars and that kind of stuff that's been wonderful.  It's been a, it's a blessing man, just a blessing.
Story_ID: 253063
Speaker 1: I know right now you don't seem to have a lot of big business plans for the future but do you have any, do you have a vision of where communications is going in the black community and, you know?
Speaker 2: It's all speculation, nobody knows, you know, even the experts.  Radio was supposed to wipe out newspapers.  Television was supposed to wipe out radio.  Video was supposed to knock out, I mean, the movies, movie theaters were supposed to knock out, no, the movie, the movie theaters were supposed to be knocked out by television 'cause people were staying home.  Then, of course, when videos and video stores and DVDs came out, radio, not radio, the movie theaters and TV was dead 'cause nobody's gonna watch it.  Especially the movie business is dead right, videos became a better revenue stream for movies than the movie theaters, didn't hurt 'em.  So the experts always have their opinions.  You know, radios gonna be, satellite radio is gonna kill, but don't nobody know, you know.  But if you wanna pay me I'll give you an answer (laughter).  You wanna pay me some money, you know, when you say, well we paid [HistoryMaker] Abe Thompson a hundred thousand dollars to analyze it, oh I'll give you, I'll give you an answer with some statistical backup, 'cause, (laughter) you know, but don't nobody know where it's going, you know.  I think we should get more into ownership.  People say well, Abe, I don't have money to go buy a station.  You got money to go buy a new car, go buy you some stock, go buy you some stock in Clear Channel [Media, Inc., San Antonio, Texas], Disney [The Walt Disney Company, Burbank, California].  You know, if you go buy some Disney stock, you own Disney Television, you own Disney Radio, you own Walt Disney World, you can even go to meetings and raise hell 'cause they send you all that if you buy stock.  I don't what it is, I own Disney stock, I don't know what it is a share now sixty dollars.  So you can buy a, a share of Disney stock, two shares a $120, instead of buying your kid them Reeboks or Nikes or whatever it is, buy 'em a pair of, do that right now, so you can own, you can participate, then you'll know.  So instead of the community complaining I don't like what they doing on Disney Television, I'm gone go and say something.  I know when the meeting is, I know where to send a letter, how do I know?  Oh, 'cause I got stock.  I don't like what they saying on GCI [WGCI, Chicago, Illinois] or GN [WGN, Chicago, Illinois] or I own Tribune [Media Company, Chicago, Illinois] stock, I own Clear Channel stock, I know where to go, I know who to write the letter to, as opposed to I don't like this stuff, I don't want, (unclear) I'm going, do something.  So I think in terms of communication in the black community, while you were, none of us will never own a radio station in Chicago [Illinois], we can own a piece of all of 'em by just going to buy some stock.  You and I can buy some stock and instead of us taking a vacation let's wait and see where the next board meeting is, and if it's Florida instead of you going to California for your vacation go to Florida to the board meeting and raise some hell.  Now you can write off your trip, going to California you couldn't 'cause it was vacation, now it's a business trip you're going to see what's happening with your stock and raise some hell.  I don't like what you all are doing in Chicago.  Say who are you, well I'm a shareholder, blah, blah, blah, oh, oh, oh, yes, sir, well tell us what your think, what your thinking is, what your feelings are.  Participate rather than complaining about what's not happening or what, what ain't being done.  That's the way to do that.  You have to learn, you have to get exposed.
Story_ID: 253064
Speaker 1: Sir, how would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: As just somebody that people say I'm glad he was alive, he made a difference. 'Cause he was alive, he made a difference in my life.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And that's why I can die tomorrow, I'm happy 'cause I already know there are people who can say that.  You know, but I mean I can name 'em.  I mean, I can't, I'm hopefully I can't name all of 'em but I, I can name some 'cause they told me.  As I said you oughta tell people because then I've told people who make that kind of difference in my life.  But I'm, some young men and some young women have told me, say, [HistoryMaker] Abe [Thompson], listen if it weren't, if you had not been born I would not be where I am (unclear) for my kids and my wife and I would be with them, my kids and my husband would not be, if you had not been in my life this wouldn't have happened.  That's the way I wanna be remembered.  I don't care about that book ['My Thoughts, Your Journal, Our Book', Abe Thompson], it's already done what it's supposed to do.  My son [Phoenix Thompson] got it.  I don't care if they name a building after me, I don't care if they remember me, I don't care if y'all burn this tape, I don't care about none of that, I care that there's somebody that can say because of Abe my life is better.  And I think that based on that alone, therefore the world is better.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That's how I wanna be remembered.  Don't wanna be remembered for nothing else.
Story_ID: 253065
Speaker 1: Now when you started thinking about ownership, I mean, what was the landscape like, you know?
Speaker 2: Well it, it was, not like it is now, barren.
Speaker 1: Very few black owners.
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) You know, I, I, very, the very, there, there are very few owners of radio stations.
Speaker 1: And you were saying, I think off-camera, that you think that WERD in Florida [sic. Atlanta, Georgia] was the first black music (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) ERD was, was the first one, one of the first.   And I can't remember what the first station was, I think it was E, WERD.
Speaker 1: And that's a gospel station?
Speaker 2: No, no I don't know what it is now--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --but it was, it was just doing black music.  But, I'm, I'm, I'm, I don't want anybody to say I saw that and that guy didn't know, he didn't, that wasn't, I'm saying, I'm just thinking.  But radio station ownership was, and media ownership was unusual period because there's a limited number.  And when the FCC originally, the Federal Communications Commission, was issuing licenses, you had to know somebody.  And then when they started issuing license, you know, you had to know the process for applying.  And a lot of folks, you know, you don't understand that business.  Now how do you make money, you know, in that business.  So, for a lot of folks, period, you don't know about it, especially black folks, how do you make money and how do you, and, and then, if, if you to file, sorry, to file a petition, you have to get an attorney who can do, draw up the documents, an engineer who can to the, the engineering study, you have to put all these things together and then there's still no guarantee.  So a lot of it, by and large people don't have money, you know you don't have hundreds of, now just tens of thousands of dollars to throw at an application when you may not get it.  So that, you know, so it's almost the cost of entry is prohibitive.  Now it's changed even more, you know, you actually bid for it like an auction.  But when I first got in, there were I, I think maybe there were, I believe there were less than two hundred blacks that owned radio stations out of the ten or eleven thousand stations that are owned.  And now, and that, that was when you could only own a limited number of stations, you could only own an AM and an FM in the market.  Now, that you can own as many as eight stations in one market if it's a, if it's the top twenty-five, I believe it is.  I think you can as many as eight.  And, you know, there are companies that own thousands of stations, i.e. Clear Channel [iHeartMedia, Inc., San Antonio, Texas].  So the number of owners has gotten even smaller because you can own more stations.  [HistoryMaker] Cathy Hughes is the largest minority, if you will, or black person and woman, I believe, who owns radio stations.  She owns about seventy.  So it's always been barren so to speak for minorities.  Even when we first started I mean, the politicians allocated the license to broadcast television and radio frequencies and who do you do, to your friends.  If I'm a politician in Washington [D.C.], I know this license is gone be available in your city, and you live in Cleveland [Ohio] and I say, hey man let me call my buddy in Cleveland, you want a radio station, well yeah, what do I do, well just here's how you file it, and you do it.  It wasn't the, you know, we didn't, there were never any ads put in the newspaper that says that radio station is available, here's how you apply, here's what you need to do and here's who you can do it.  No it's not like that.  So people don't know about it.  And then when you get it, you're like well how do you make money?  And folks say well advertising.  So then you buy it, you gotta hire people to advertise, sell advertising, yes you do.  So the call, the cost of entry and the, the experience needed to do it, all, well almost made it prohibitive.
Story_ID: 253066
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, now what role did, now Tom Lewis was a black person here that owned I think the first black station owner in the city or one of them.  (Simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, well see Tom is a good friend of mine and he's a genius.  Tom owned a, owned a bank I believe it's Southside Bank [Chicago, Illinois].  He, was one of the first, to my knowledge, blacks to own multiple stations, he has stations in Cincinnati [Ohio], he's, Louisville [Kentucky], St. Louis [Missouri], New Orleans [Louisiana], you know, he owned that, he owned base, a baseball team, a doughnut, a Dunkin' Donuts, a car rental place.  But (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) A baseball team?
Speaker 2: Yeah, he owned a baseball--
Speaker 1: (Unclear).
Speaker 2: --team in, in the South.  It was a farm team for, for one of the major league teams.  But Tom owned, yeah he owned a number of stations, you know, and, and he sold 'em.  But he owned a number of stations.  And he's from, and he still lives here in Chicago [Illinois].
Speaker 1: Okay.  So he, he owned a station called WIZF, right?
Speaker 2: Uh-huh, in Cincinnati.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: The Wiz [WIZF, Cincinnati, Ohio], sure did.
Story_ID: 253067
Speaker 1: When did you first start thinking about station ownership?
Speaker 2: Well, I started thinking probably about in 1978 or '79 [1979] and I got my first station in like 1989 or 1990.  'Cause, 'cause what it was, it was finding a facility, finding a, finding the right opportunity in the station, finding the money for it, and, and having enough money to sustain myself while I found it.  I started looked before I got married but then when I got married, my wife [Launa Thompson], I told my wife, and she, by then she was in radio and she was like, I said well, would you back me a hundred percent?  She said no I'll back you a thousand percent.  So we took money, after, after trying a number of other ways, we mortgaged some property we had.  And I ended up going to Kalamazoo, Michigan with, with a partner who had the authority to put a station on the air in, Kalamazoo, Michigan, by what was called a construction permit and that's where the FCC [Federal Communications Commission] gives you permission to construct a tower and put up another stake put up a frequency and broadcast a station between two other frequencies in a market 'cause there's room.  So that's how I did my first one [WUBU, Kalamazoo, Michigan].  Then I sold that and end up going to South Bend [Indiana] as I said before.  And but it's, but it's, but it's always been kind of cost prohibitive 'cause they, 'cause everybody's not willing to take the chance on doing that.  You know, if somebody tells you, I mean, this is thirteen, fourteen years ago, somebody tells you oh, yeah, you, let's (unclear) let's try this, and let's try it with your money, let's try it with your $200,000, what would you say?  Well, but that's what I did, you know.  And so, you know, it's like, why don't we try it with your $200,000 (laughter) you know, so, so, it was a little bit less than that I had, that I had to come up with to do it.
Story_ID: 253068
Speaker 1: In the early, see I wanna say the early '70s [1970s] or, or '80s [1980s], a group of broadcasters and attorneys got together and formed an organization called the National Association of Broadcasters.  And with there, the, the mission as I understand it was to promote black ownership in broadcasting and to help garner advertisers for it.  And it's still in existence today.  And, and I believe the mission is still the same but it, you know, but that was necessary because there needed to be some kind of cohesiveness between owners and said maybe a voice, so you can say well, here's how we feel when, when you're going, you know, it was formed I believe in Washington [D.C.] but so when you going, on the Hill [Capitol Hill, Washington, D.C.] and so you can say, we represent the, you know, like that, like the what's the, National Rifle Association [NRA], oh we represent, you know, it's always better when you speak in mass so they formed it to do those kind of things.  And it was interesting too, you talk about, in talking about the landscape, there was organization that was formed oh man, years ago, too called the National Black Media Coalition.  And again it was to like, and they had a gentleman named [HistoryMaker] Pluria Marshall [Jr.] formed that organization.  Now, well he, he was a part of it and he became the chairman, and which he's remained the chairman for a couple decades, but they were there to prompt, to promote, black owned, the ownership of broadcast properties, but also to help get people into broadcasting, students.  They would do conferences for these students to, to introduce them to broadcast, it's teaching them about the industry and that kind of stuff, and help foster greater acceptance of minorities and blacks in the media, whether it was the ownership, the newsroom, on air, whatever.  And they would also form a lot of petitions against stations to broadcast and those were called the petitions to deny.  And that was simply where if you didn't like what a station owner was doing, you could file a petition with the FCC which could tie up their license renewal for, for a long period of time, which cost them money.  'Cause you see none of us own the license.  We don't own any, you're simply entrusted with the license with the understanding that you understand you have a fiduciary responsibility to live up to certain codes and to do certain things to and for the communities which you have been authorized a license to broadcast.
Speaker 2: Now did those, those things were, were, spelled out and were a lot more astringent than in times past, I think it's a, hasn't the FCC kind of relaxed?
Speaker 1: Oh, yeah, I think it's way relaxed.  Oh, yeah, it's relaxed even for ownership.  It used to be you could only own an AM and FM now you can own eight in the market.  You used to have twenty-four stations or whatever it was, now you can own thousands of 'em.  So, of course, it's relaxed, you know.
Speaker 2: What's your feeling about that?  Do you think that's good or bad or--
Speaker 1: I don't think it's, I don't think it's every, well let me ask you this, is it good when any one, two, or three people own all of everything?  Okay.
Speaker 2: Well not for me (laughter).
Speaker 1: (Unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And usually, I mean, I guess--
Speaker 1: (Unclear).
Speaker 2: --when you talk, talk, talk about the black community it's probably not good for us.
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) No, it's not good, I mean probably for anything.  Is it good if you and I own all the cattle because, it's good that you and I, if we own all the phone lines and we own all the desks, no, no.  (Unclear) I mean, I'm, I'm just thinking, just from a, you know, just commonsensical kind of position, no.  So it's, it's, and it's had a, a tremendous impact on the industry and on jobs.  But organizations like Pluria, when he was, when, when he had, when he was strong, oh, the, that organization, the National Black Media Coalition, would strike fear 'cause he could file a petition to deny and, but all he was trying to do is say listen, hire more black folks, hire more women, hire more Hispanics, just, don't treat 'em special, just treat 'em the same.  And that's what he, you know, don't, don't, don't treat me, don't saw aww he's black so I'm a do something special for him.  No, just say he's black, I'm not gone treat him, you know, she's black I'm not gone treat her any, any different, you know.  That's all he was trying to do.
Speaker 2: Pluria Marshall.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: Right.  Okay.  Now what about Syncom [Capital Corporation], I have a note here for that, what is that?
Speaker 1: Oh, Syncom was an organization started by a, a financing organization.  I hope I'm giving it justice, started by a gentleman [HistoryMaker Herbert P. Wilkins, Sr.] and he was investing in a number of things, industries, and including radio broadcast.  He was one of the first people to invest in, in [HistoryMaker] Cathy Hughes, who owns Radio One [Lanham, Maryland], he was one of the first.  And, you know, of course, you know, how that's worked out, she's done absolutely great.
Story_ID: 253069
Speaker 1: So are you looking to be involved in satellite radio soon or--
Speaker 2: I don't know, I mean, yeah I own some stock--
Speaker 1: (Unclear).
Speaker 2: (Laughter) But, you know, I don't have any fear, I mean, a little, I've already made back all the money, any money I put into radio so I mean it's a, you think it's a, well, [HistoryMaker] Abe [Thompson], satellite's gonna take over.  I don't know, you don't know, satellite may be, may, may, in fact, push, I don't even know how, but it may push radio to another, commercial radio to another level.  It's kind of like nobody could have known what the video industry would do for movies, they thought it would kill it.  It's enhanced it.  So now movies do 200 million at the box office and 300 million on video, (laughter) you know.  But they said, oh God, it's gonna kill it, there'll be no more movies.  Then television was supposed to kill the movies too, another revenue source, the movie theater, the television, the video (laughter)
Speaker 1: So we have to wait and see then.
Speaker 2: Wait and see, you don't know.
