Story_ID: 56635
Speaker 1: Okay.  My name is Larry Crowe.  I'm the interviewer today with the HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Matthew Hickey.  Maam, can you please state your full name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: Sure.  It's Jacqueline Elaine Trescott Darden.  And it's J-A-C-Q-U-E-L-I-N-E, Elaine, E-L-A-I-N-E, Trescott, 'T' as in 'Tom'...  R-E-S-C-O-T-T; Darden, 'D' as in 'dog'... A-R-D-E-N.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And Maam, what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: Place of birth is Jersey City, New Jersey.  The date of birth is January 2, 1947.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what is your occupation and title?
Speaker 2: I'm a writer for--for forty two years, I worked as a daily newspaper reporter in Washington, D.C.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Can you be a little bit more specific? (laughter).
Speaker 2: Sure.  I was a newspaper reporter in Washington, D.C. for The Washington Star and The Washington Post.  So, I covered the arts and culture and personality and politics of Washington for that time.
Speaker 1: Okay, alright.  And what is today's date?
Speaker 2: Today is August 29th or August 28th. (laughter).
Speaker 1: Today is the 28th.
Speaker 2: Okay, today is August 28th, (laughter) 2012.
Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time?  And you don't have to give your address.  But, you know--
Speaker 2: We're in Washington, D.C. in my home.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 56636
Speaker 1: Now, before we go into depth, there are five lightweight questions we ask as kind of a warm-up.  And they only require a short answer.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: The first one is do you have a favorite food?
Speaker 2: Well, since I just came back from vacation on Martha's Vineyard [Massachusetts], lobster rolls are my favorite food right now.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: The orange, coral family are my favorites.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you have a favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: The fall.  The fall is definitely my favorite time.  October I think is beautiful.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you have a favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Several.  I love the Jersey Shore [New Jersey], I love Martha's Vineyard, and New York City [New York] and New Orleans [Louisiana].
Speaker 1: Okay.  And the last one is do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: I don't think so.  I mean, I listen to people who use phrases, you know, as sort of pauses in their speech.  You know, I haven't come up with one yet.
Story_ID: 56637
Speaker 1: Okay, alright.  Now, I'm going to ask about your family history.  I'm going to ask about your mother's [Adelaide Miller] side of the family and your father's [Alfred Trescott] side.  But we're going to keep them separate until we get them both, and then we'll put them together.
Speaker 2: Alright.
Speaker 1: So, can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: My mother's name is Adelaide Carolyn Miller Trescott.  It's A-D-E-L-A-I-D-E, Carolyn, C-A-R-O-L-Y-N, Miller, and then Trescott.
Speaker 1: And what is her date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: She was born in Brooklyn, New York in August, 1920.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, what can you tell us about your mother's side of the family?  How far back can you trace them, and what were they doing?  What kind of occupations did they have?
Speaker 2: My mother's family was basically in the Northeast, with some southern connections.  She was born in Brooklyn, and lived both with her mother and her grandmother.  Her mother's name is Isabel Matthews Braaf.  And her grandmother was Josephine Matthews.
Speaker 1: Brathe, B-R-A-T-H-E?
Speaker 2: No, B-R-A-A-F.
Speaker 1: Okay, B-R-A-A-F.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Is that Dutch, or--?
Speaker 2: I don't know.  You know, those New Yorkers, they had names that were a mix of Dutch and another nationality.  So, we've never actually traced that.  She was married three times.  So, Braaf was the name of her last husband, who was West Indian.
Speaker 1: Okay, alright, okay.
Speaker 2: And Isabel Braaf, my maternal grandmother, was a nurse.  She worked at a mental hospital in New York City.
Speaker 1: Okay, alright.
Speaker 2: And her first husband, my mother's father, Charles Miller, was a oil refinery watchman.  He worked all night at a oil refinery in Bayonne, New Jersey.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 56638
Speaker 1: Okay, now, so your mother [Adelaide Tresscott] was born in Brooklyn.  Did she grow up in Brooklyn [New York]?
Speaker 2: She grew up part of the time in Brooklyn.  And then to get a better education, my grandmother [Isabel Braaf] sent her to live with one of my grandmother's uncles [Charles Turner] in Hampton, Virginia.  He was a professor at Hampton College [Hampton Institute, Hampton, Virginia] then.  And there was also at that time, an elementary school at Hampton.  And his name is Charles Turner.  And he was a very active scientist, and an activist in the Catholic Church.  And there's a building named for him at Hampton.  And Catholic University gave him an honorary degree, I think, on his 100th birthday.  And he lived here in Washington [D.C.] in his later years, so I got to know him.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, he was at the Hampton Institute--
Speaker 2: Uh huh.
Speaker 1: --back in the day as a...  What kind of scientist was he?
Speaker 2: He taught biology.
Speaker 1: Okay, biologist.  Do you know where he went to school at all?
Speaker 2: No, I don't.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, your mother then went to Hampton when she was in grade school?
Speaker 2: Yes, she did.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And then she came back to Brooklyn, and then to Jersey City where she lived part-time with another relative, and with her father.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, this was when she was a teenager, or...?
Speaker 2: Yes, when she graduated from high school in Jersey City, New Jersey.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  Are there any stories that your mother shared with you about Hampton, or--?
Speaker 2: She really loved Hampton.  She loved the freedom and the sort of immersion, you know, into black history.  You know, because the campus was very much about producing, you know, children and adults who would make some contributions.  And of course, she was the relative of a famous professor (laughter).  So, she really liked it.  She had lots of privileges and excitement.  And she kept up with a lot of the people from Hampton, throughout her life.  You know, Hampton is such a beautiful setting.  It's part of the reason she loved the water, because Hampton was right there, you know, on the river.  And she was a person who really, you know, couldn't stay away from the ocean or a lake for long periods of time.
Story_ID: 56639
Speaker 1: Okay, alright.  Now, are there any stories on your mother's [Adelaide Tresscott] side about the 19th Century, or the end of slavery or emancipation, or any of that?
Speaker 2: No.  I think one of the stories is about my great-grandmother, Josephine Matthews, that she was one of the first people that anyone knew in the family who had gotten a divorce.  And so, that was unusual for that time.  And she actually got on either the bus or the train, and went from Brooklyn [New York] to Las Vegas [Nevada] to get this divorce (laughter).  And so, that was sort of her, you know, favorite story, you know--that she had that courage and gumption, you know, to do that at that point and time.  She was a very tiny person.  She lived right downtown in Brooklyn in the sections that are now very chic.  And she was a domestic.  And she lived with us in the later years of her life.  So, I also got to know her very well.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Did she tell you any good stories or experiences?
Speaker 2: No, she wasn't that talkative, as I recall.  I'm sure there are stories that are now lost.  But I don't recall her, you know, putting the spotlight on herself.
Speaker 1: Did she talk about the people she worked for?
Speaker 2: No.  She talked more about, you know, the various churches that she went to.  Because there were some, you know, famous black churches in New York.  And she would, you know, visit--you know, the one that, you know, Paul Robeson's father founded and preached at--and you know, others of that kind.
Speaker 1: Okay, alright.  Okay, so your mother finished high school in New Jersey?
Speaker 2: Uh huh.
Speaker 1: Alright, okay.  And did she, do you know what she aspired to do with her education?
Speaker 2: Well, she went right into the factories, because the factories were opening up to women at that time.  So, she went right to a job at Western Electric [New York City, New York], which was making war supplies.  And then from that, she went to the telephone company, to Ma Bell [Bell Telephone Company].  And she worked for the telephone company for the next thirty years, both in New York City [New York] and in Jersey City [New Jersey].
Speaker 1: Okay.  Yeah, I figured it was a war effort, you know, that--get you right in a factory job.
Speaker 2: Right after high school, they went right into those factories around New York and Jersey City.
Story_ID: 56640
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, let me go to your father's [Alfred Trescott] side.  Then we'll put them together.  Can you give me your father's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: Alfred, A-L-F-R-E-D, Paul Trescott.
Speaker 1: And what is his date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: He was born in Charleston, South Carolina, July 25, 1910.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, how far back can you trace his family, and what were they doing?
Speaker 2: Well, his parents were Leon and Jessie, J-E-S-S-I-E, Trescott.  And their occupations were more kind of sales clerks--clerks, that sort of thing.  And, but they were, it was a large family.  They had five or six children, most of whom survived to adulthood.  And, but they struggled.  They also, you know, struggled.  They worked, but they also struggled, because the children were split up at one point and sent to various other relatives, and even orphanages, you know, to be raised.
Speaker 1: So, they were living in the city of Charleston?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And they were both working in retail?
Speaker 2: Yes, some sort of clerkships and delivery people.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, alright.  Now, are there any stories on that side of the family about the end of slavery or--?
Speaker 2: None that I ever heard.  The stories from that side were more about some adventures that my father, Alfred, and his brother Charles, and his brother Leon had as they left Charleston as very young teenagers.  And they all moved here for awhile.  My Uncle Leon went a little further, and went to Brooklyn.  But my father and his brother, Charles, ended up working at Catholic University sort of as handymen, and cleaning, you know, the rooms and stuff.  Because they used to take me over there as a kid and show me the buildings that they had worked on, and so forth.  It was a very strong Catholic family.  So, most of their education and jobs they had--and people who helped them out early on, were Catholics.
Story_ID: 56641
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, alright.  Let's see.  Okay, so, now did your dad [Alfred Trescott] get a chance to finish high school?
Speaker 2: He finished high school when he was in the [U.S.] Army.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, he went to the war?
Speaker 2: He did, very early.  He worked--he moved to New York [New York], and then worked at the WPA [Works Progress Administration].  For a time, he was a lifeguard at Coney Island [Brooklyn, New York].  And then he went into the service.  And then he stayed in the service for thirty years.  He finished high school in the service.
Speaker 1: So, thirty years, that's quite a stint.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Did he do most of his service here in this country?
Speaker 2: No.  I mean, he was active in World War II and in the Korean War.  He served in Italy and he served in North Africa.  And then in the Korean War, he was naturally in Korea.  When he came back after the Korean War, he lived in a couple of other bases.  He lived in Tyler, Texas and then in Aberdeen, Maryland.  So, he came home on the weekends.  You know, it was quite an event, getting ready for his Friday night arrival (laughter) every week.  Because he was a master sergeant, and he expected everything to be polished (laughter) and ready for him.  So he came home every Friday night, and then he left late every Sunday night, for years.
Speaker 1: I didn't know they had that kind of a schedule for--
Speaker 2: Uh huh.
Speaker 1: --servicemen in those days.
Speaker 2: Well, he was so close.  I mean, Aberdeen, Maryland was not that far from Jersey City.  So, he could get home, you know, in three or so hours.  And he came home every weekend just, you know, to see what we were doing.  And, you know, to help my mother out with, you know, heavier things--grocery shopping or that sort of thing, because she worked, you know, all week.
Story_ID: 56642
Speaker 1: And also, he [Alfred Trescott] was very attached to the black Catholic church that we went to.  And on the weekends, he would help them get ready for Sundays--and cutting the grass, maybe planting some new flowers, that sort of thing.
Speaker 2: What was the name of your church?
Speaker 1: It's Christ the King Catholic Church, in Jersey City, New Jersey.
Speaker 2: Okay.  You said this was a black Catholic church?
Speaker 1: It was a black Catholic church.  It still is (laughter).
Speaker 2: Okay, meaning that the priest and the congregation, or--
Speaker 1: No.  The congregation is--
Speaker 2: The congregation.
Speaker 1: The congregation was black.  Most of the priests that I remember were Caucasian.  And when there was a black priest who came to visit, I mean, it was a celebration.  It was something, you know.  You knew about--you knew what was happening.  And, you know, people just rejoiced at this person--you know, even if they weren't from the neighborhood, who had become a priest.
Story_ID: 56643
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  So, now, is there a story about how your parents met?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: They met--my mother [Adelaide Miller] had another relative who lived here in Washington, D.C.  And my father [Alfred Trescott] was visiting his brother who lived in Washington, D.C.  And they met on the Greyhound Bus.  They were both going to visit people, and they met on the Greyhound Bus.  And my mother, you know, was introduced to the Trescott side of the family--I guess passed their inspection (laughter).  And they were married in the rectory of Christ the King Church in, let's see, December of 1945.  And at that time, when one of the couple was not Catholic, they had to get married in the rectory.  So, my father was in his dress uniform, my mother was in a Navy blue suit.  And they got married in the rectory of Christ the King Church.
Story_ID: 56644
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, did your mother [Adelaide Trescott] ever convert to Catholicism?
Speaker 2: She didn't convert formally, but she was a big supporter of Catholicism.  You know, we went to Catholic grammar schools and high schools.  And she became a participant in many of the activities--of not only Christ the King Church (Jersey City, New Jersey)--there was another church about a block away called Our Lady of Sorrows.  And she became, as an adult woman, a participant in their Bingo games and their fundraisers and their trips and stuff.  And her funeral was at that church.
Story_ID: 56645
Speaker 1: Okay, alright.  Now, when you think of your parents' personalities and their talents; their dispositions; habits; the way they look--who do you think you take after the most?
Speaker 2: Well, my mother [Adelaide Trescott] was very creative.  She was a generation that had really loved to do a lot of things with her hands.  She made beautiful crocheted tablecloths and napkins.  And I still have a lot of them here.  And she knitted, she sewed.  You know, she had a little Singer sewing machine right in her bedroom.  She made all of our clothes until a certain age.  So, I wish I had had that talent, you know, with my hands.  I mean, I know how to do it, but I don't do it sort of thing.  And of course, she was very disciplined, which I am, too.  Because she worked a split shift at the telephone company--which meant she worked three or four hours in the morning, came home and then went back at night and worked three or four other hours--which they allowed, you know, married women with children, you know, to do, so they could be home around the dinner hour.  And also, you got paid a little more for working, you know, twice during the day.  So, she, you know, was very dedicated to upholding that kind of schedule.  And I'm very disciplined, too.  But my father [Alfred Trescott] was also extremely disciplined.  Not only because of the [U.S.] Army, you know, routine, but I think because of just his personality.  You know, he liked to get things done.  And both of them were great supporters of the arts.  We went to Broadway shows and concerts and dance recitals from a very, very, early age.  Reading was a big thing for both of them--you know, going to the library, getting into the habit of reading a lot of different kinds of books.  You know, they both enjoyed that.  And I do today, too.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, you take after them both, I guess?
Speaker 2: I think so, I think so.
Story_ID: 56646
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, tell us about your siblings.  You have a, I know you have a brother, right?
Speaker 2: I have one brother who is deceased.  His name is Paul Alfred Trescott, just the flipside of my father's name.  And he died a few years ago from cancer.  But he, he's four years younger than I am.  And we both went to the same elementary schools and churches and stuff. And he went to St. Peter's Prep, which is a big Catholic boys' school in northern New Jersey.  And I went to the big Catholic girls' school in Hoboken, New Jersey--Sacred Heart Academy.  And after, he went to Boston College.  And then after that he got into banking, then personal ownership of grocery stores (laughter).  He did a lot of things.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, it was just the two of you--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --growing up?  Okay.  So, your household growing up consisted basically of your parents and you and your brother.  And now, did your grand--you said once your grandmother lived with you, right?
Speaker 2: Yes.  We had a two-family house.  And on one side of the house, for awhile, it was rented.  And then my grandfather moved in.  So, he lived in the unit that was essentially upstairs.  But my great-grandmother [Josephine Matthews] lived with us.  She just lived in one of the rooms, you know, of the main part of the house.
Story_ID: 56647
Speaker 1: Okay, alright.  Now, do you have an earliest childhood memory?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, lots, lots.
Speaker 1: "An" earliest childhood.  (laughter).
Speaker 2: (laughter).
Speaker 1: "An" earliest.
Speaker 2: Well, you know, connected with the family?  Well, I think just going to New York City.  My grand--my maternal grandmother [Isabel Braaf] lived in the Bronx [New York].  And just going to, getting on the subway and going to her apartment in the Bronx.  And then just, you know, walking to the Bronx Zoo or Prospect Park, and all those places.  At that time it was, you know, it was a family event.  You know, we did that a lot.  And then when I was maybe seven or eight--I didn't go on the subway alone, but when I got to the Bronx, I could stay with my grandmother alone.
Speaker 1: I was trying to get at something--the earliest thing that you remember--
Speaker 2: Oh.
Speaker 1: --as a person, you know, in a period.  Not so much as incidents.
Speaker 2: Oh.
Speaker 1: We're going to get into the travels, and all that sort of thing, but--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: But, I just wondered if you had a...  If you don't have one, that's okay.
Speaker 2: No, I can't think of one right now.
Speaker 1: Some people can remember the first thing that they--
Speaker 2: I do remember--
Speaker 1: --the first time they were conscious of being themselves.
Speaker 2: I do remember the night my father [Alfred Trescott] came home from Korea.  And I was still in a crib, so I remember standing up when he came, you know, into my view--you know, and seeing him.  So, that's a really early memory.
Speaker 1: Yeah, that's the kind of thing--
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Do you want me to describe that?  (laughter).  The room I was in at that point, was right off the living room.  And so, when he came in, I could, you know, see that he had arrived.  And I just remember standing, holding on to the crib and just waiting for him, you know, to say something, you know, to me.  You know, because I must have been about three, because my brother hadn't been born then.  So, that's a very early memory.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Yeah, that's the kind of thing, yeah.
Speaker 2: (laughter).  Okay.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 56648
Speaker 1: Now, can you describe--now, you grew up in Jersey City [New Jersey], was it?
Speaker 2: Uh huh.
Speaker 1: In the same place?  Did you live in the same place the whole time?
Speaker 2: Yes, the whole time, in the same house on Carteret Avenue in Jersey City.  It was, the section is called Greenville.  And there was a, two or three major streets, commercial streets, that were within you know, a minute or two.  And from our porch on a clear day, you could see the Statue of Liberty.  You know, because of the shape of that part of New Jersey and the shape of Manhattan, you could see Manhattan, you know, very very clearly.  And the neighborhood at that point was very mixed, as far as occupations and nationalities.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And we could walk everywhere.  I mean, we walked to school.  Yeah, elementary school.  And we didn't walk to high school, but we walked to elementary school.
Speaker 1: Was the neighborhood predominantly Catholic, would you say?
Speaker 2: I don't think so.  No, it just happened that it was anchored by several churches, two which were very large Catholic congregations.  But in the neighborhood, there were AME Zion churches [African Methodist Episcopal Zion Church] and Baptist churches.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And so, it was called Greenville?
Speaker 2: Greenville, the Greenville section of Jersey City.
Story_ID: 56649
Speaker 1: Okay.  Let's see.  Now, we always ask this question.  Can you describe the home you grew up in?  And tell us, what were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up?
Speaker 2: The house is a two-family structure.  It had a very small porch, and it had a basement and a backyard.  But the backyards in the neighborhood were postage-stamp sized.  And the other neighbors were very close.  It was an attached house.  My father [Alfred Trescott] took great pride in making this small yard a showplace for roses and gladiolas, and for cooking.  He was a good griller and stuff.  So, the house--you would walk in into a small foyer and then on--past our door was another small hallway.  And then it had three bedrooms on one side, and a dining room, living room, kitchen, bathroom.  And then in the back, was a set of stairs that went to the upstairs unit.  And there was also a set of stairs that went into the unit from the front.  And then it had the same configuration of rooms.  So, my grandfather lived there maybe for ten years, until he died in July, 1976.  And I remember that because it was the Bicentennial Week, and the tall ships had come into the New York Harbor.  And he had really been looking forward to seeing that.  He read a lot of magazines about yachting and travel, (laughter) even though, you know, he never went past maybe Niagara Falls.  And so, he had really been looking forward to that.  But he didn't--he had a heart attack, and he didn't get to see that.  So, that's why I remember that date.  And you know, we had a lot of company.  I would say every Christmas Eve after Midnight Mass, my parents had an Open House, which I thought was really unusual (laughter), for all the people to be arriving, you know, so late, you know, in the day.  But that was one of their traditions.  And then in the basement, you know, as teenagers, we had parties.
Story_ID: 56650
Speaker 1: Well you were about to describe the basement with the blue lights, so--
Speaker 2: I was about to describe that (laughter), yeah.  Not everybody in my friends had a basement.  But we had a basement which my father [Alfred Trescott] used for creating, you know, utilitarian things.  He would restore lamps.  You know, he would make shelves, and all that.  So, that was in one part of the basement.  But there was a clear part of the basement where we sat up a record player, and we would have, you know, parties--you know, record player--we were playing the latest 45's.  And at that point, records were released on Fridays.  So, it was really great to have new music every Friday.  And so, we would all just gather in the basement and dance, and find out what the latest dances were, teach each other the latest dances.  So, it was a great function of that basement.  And people still remember (laughter), you know, doing that.  You know, it was something that the whole group of friends really looked forward to, and enjoyed.
Story_ID: 56651
Speaker 1: Now, that's a culture that's really changed over the years.  You said, new records would be in the record store--
Speaker 2: Exactly.
Speaker 1: --on Friday.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So, you would go the store, and then--
Speaker 2: We walked to the record stores on Jackson Avenue in Jersey City [New Jersey].  And we would, you know, all chip in and buy, you know, two or three new records, and then just wear them out (laughter) over the weekend.
Speaker 1: How did you know, you know, what records you wanted?
Speaker 2: Well, because the radio station in Newark [New Jersey] and the one in New York City [New York] broadcast top ten records.  One station was R&B, and one station was general.
Speaker 1: The top 40?
Speaker 2: The top 40, sort of, yeah.  And Cousin Brucie, he was the big DJ in New York.  So, we knew what was new.  We knew what was new, and we knew what was going to be available, you know, every Friday.  So, that's what we did, you know.  We were looking forward to whatever, you know, new Motown 45 was coming out (laughter).  And we just went and got it, you know, and just danced all weekend, after we did our homework.  (laughter).
Story_ID: 56652
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  Now, when you were a little kid, what did you spend your time doing?
Speaker 2: Well, the church was the center of a lot of our activities.  You know, after school was over, we went to, you know, meetings there for Girl Scouts.  We had, you know, like a talent club, that sort of thing.  You know, we didn't go to the church for religious--you know, Catechism training and all that, because we did get that at school, since we went to a parochial school, St. Patrick's Parochial School.  So, the church and its activities for Boy Scouts and Girl Scouts was really the center of what we did when we were very, very young.  And the Girl Scout leader, Henrietta--Miss Henrietta, was a great supporter of Broadway.  And so, she would take us to see the new Broadway shows, you know, once or twice a year.  You know, so we were exposed to--what we didn't know then, but we know now--was the golden age of Broadway musicals.  So, we saw all those famous musicals when we were--
Speaker 1: What did you see?  I mean, what--
Speaker 2: We saw, you know, "The King and I." We saw "My Fair Lady," "West Side Story."  You know, we saw, you know, most of the original casts of all of them (laughter).  You know, so, that was quite a treat.  We knew it was important then, but now we know how important it was to be exposed to that.  She also liked museums.  So, we did go to the Met [Metropolitan Museum of Art] and other museums to see, you know, shows that she had read about.  And then that was expanded, you know, by my parents and grandparents who also enjoyed, you know, the same sort of things.  So, we spent a lot of time in New York [New York], soaking up the culture.
Story_ID: 56653
Speaker 1: And you said earlier that your parents took you to see some Broadway shows, too.
Speaker 2: They did.
Speaker 1: Which ones did they take you to?
Speaker 2: My mother [Adelaide Trescott] was very keen on all shows that had a black personality in them.  So, I saw, you know, "The Amen Corner," you know, "Purlie," the black version of "Hello Dolly," you know, all of those.
Speaker 1: That's the one with Pearl Bailey in it.
Speaker 2: Yes, "Hello Dolly" with Pearl Bailey.
Speaker 1: And little did we know that Carol Channing was actually black, too.
Speaker 2: (laughter).  We didn't know it at that point, right.  But all the--you know, "Raisin in the Sun."  And I can remember very, very vividly waiting outside the stage door, in hopes that Sidney Poitier, you know, would come out.  And he did come out.  And we were so frozen, you know, that we were actually looking (laughter) at this guy who had just been on the stage, that we didn't say anything to him.  We just, you know, sat there.  We stood there, you know, just you know, "God, this is really him, you know."  So, we did see Sidney in those early shows.  But that was a habit that both my maternal grandmother [Isabel Braaf] and mother and father [Alfred Trescott] had.  And my mother belonged to a club at the phone company that had discounted tickets.  You know, it was some sort of theater club.  So, even if she didn't take me, she went, you know, to a lot more shows than I've just mentioned.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, what about museums?  Did you go to museums when you were--?
Speaker 2: We went to museums, both with the school and with the Girl Scouts, and with family.  I particularly remember, you know, going to the Met [Metropolitan Museum of Art], because it was so huge, you know, and it seemed like it would never end.  You know, so that was quite a treat.  I'm pretty sure we went to the Museum of Modern Art [MoMA], you know, around that period of time.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  Do you remember any specific shows that you--?
Speaker 2: No, I was trying to think of shows at the museums.  No, I think it was just the plenty that those new museums had, that you remember.  You know you remember, you know, that there were statues and jewelry and Rembrandts, and all of that.  But I don't remember any specific museum shows.
Story_ID: 56654
Speaker 1: Now, you might be in a unique position to actually have known, or been aware of, some black artists--your mother [Adelaide Trescott] having gone to Hampton [University, Hampton, Virginia]?
Speaker 2: Uh huh, uh huh.
Speaker 1: They have an excellent, you know, museum.
Speaker 2: But also, not only the Hampton experience, but just through what they read.  They read the black popular magazines.  So, you know, 'Ebony' and 'Jet.'  And my father [Alfred Trescott] also had a friend who was a chef on the railroad.  And he would bring all the newspapers that he had gathered, home.  So, we saw the 'Chicago Defender' and the 'Pittsburgh Courier' and 'The Washington Bee' I think it was called.  We saw all those newspapers which had features about the athletes and the musicians and the artists.  So, I was very aware of who James Baldwin was--and aware of Gordon Parks and other people, you know, like that.  But the other thing that my family really supported and was active in was sports--as spectators, (laughter), and not as participants.  But my mother was an avid baseball fan, I mean throughout her whole life.  You know, she had seen Jackie Robinson in the Minor Leagues, and then followed, you know, his career.  And she loved to go to the baseball park, even if she wasn't rooting for any of the teams.  And her brother, William Braaf, was an avid [New York] Yankees fan.  And so was my maternal grandmother [Isabel Braff].  And they made me into a Yankees fan.  But my mother always rooted against them (laughter).  But she still enjoyed going to Yankee Stadium and all that, you know, just to, you know, watch the game.
Speaker 1: Now, was she a fan of another team?
Speaker 2: Oh, she was a [New York] Mets fan.  She was a [Brooklyn] Dodgers and a Mets fan (laughter).
Speaker 1: The Dodgers because of Jackie Robinson, I guess?
Speaker 2: Yes.  And then she switched to the Mets, you know.  She even had a little Mets credit card (laughter), you know.  So, she was really into it, you know.  I would call her, and I would say, "What are you doing?"  She says, "Well, it's Senior Day (laughter) at the stadium.  So, I'm going, you know."  No matter which stadium it was--Shea Stadium or Yankee stadium, you know. So, that was one of her activities.  And another thing besides being introduced to baseball at a real early age, was just going to the ocean.  You know, everyone in the family just loved being at the beach.  And so, you know, during the summer we would go, you know, to Coney Island [Brooklyn, New York].  And there was a beach in Staten Island [New York] called South Beach.  We would go there.  You know, once or twice a year, we would go to Atlantic City [New Jersey].  So, that--so it was sort of a busy kind of childhood, doing all those things.
Story_ID: 56655
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, where did you start school?  What was the name of your first school?
Speaker 2: Well, I went to the kindergarten at Christ the King Church [Jersey City, New Jersey].  And then I went to St. Patrick's Grammar School which is in the same neighborhood, you know, two blocks away, and finished the eighth grade there.  And then I went to Sacred Heart Academy, which was an all-girls' school in Hoboken, New Jersey which was maybe a fifteen minute bus ride.  And then after that, I went to St. Bonaventure University [St. Bonaventure, New York] which is in upstate New York.  There was a train that went to Olean, New York, straight from the Hoboken railroad terminal.  So, it wasn't a strain, you know, to get there.  And--
Speaker 1: When you went to college, did you commute, or--
Speaker 2: No, no, it was a residential--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --place, yeah.
Speaker 1: Well, I'm going to get to college later.  But in terms of grade school, did you have a favorite subject in grade school?
Speaker 2: Well, certainly writing.  I enjoyed the writing exercises and the books, you know, that we were exposed to.  The earliest books I remember being assigned in school were all about saints, because we were taught by nuns.  (laughter).  And so, the nuns' reading list was all about, you know, St. Joan or, you know, someone else like that--Bernadette of Lourdes.  So, that's what we read, basically.  So, that was supplemented by my trips to the library to read other things.  This particular period at school, they were really into plays.  We did a lot of plays.  And I can remember being Rumpelstiltskin in an elementary school play.
Speaker 1: Sounds like a fun part.
Speaker 2: (laughter), yeah.
Speaker 1: Well, that's a lead role.
Speaker 2: Yeah, it was the lead role, right.  But I didn't think acting, you know, was for me.  But it was fun.  We did a lot of pageants.  This particular elementary school had a huge auditorium, you know, just very classic, almost like one of those art deco theaters.  And now, in its present state, it's still an elementary school, but the auditorium is often rented out for scenes in movies and stuff.  That's how they're making a little bit of money these days.
Speaker 1: This is at St. Patrick's?
Speaker 2: Yes, yeah.
Story_ID: 56656
Speaker 1: So, it was--so they [St. Patrick's Grammar School, Jersey City, New Jersey] had this, you know, theater tradition--this acting tradition, reading tradition.  But it was, you know, it was your rigorous Catholic school curriculum.  You know, they didn't go too far from whatever, you know, the Archdiocese told them, you know, they had to do.  So, we went through, you know, confirmation and all the big, you know, religious step stones that you needed to do at that time.
Speaker 2: Now, did you ever consider being a nun or something--
Speaker 1: Everybody was told they should be a nun--(laughter), everybody.  I mean, that was part of--I guess the mission was to, you know, try to get these young boys and girls into the priesthood, or to become a nun and stuff.  But it didn't--you know, even though all these women did seem very happy--I mean, there weren't a lot of sad, you know people around--it just didn't seem like there were that many opportunities, you know, to go off whatever the rigid structure was.  So, everybody thought about it, and everybody got a little booklet, you know, telling them about what that life would be like.  And I have a cousin who was a nun.  She was an Oblate, which was a black order out of Baltimore.  And she, you know, she was one of the happiest people I knew.  And she would come and visit once or twice a year.  And you know, but that still didn't, you know, influence me to, you know, want to do that.
Story_ID: 56657
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, what did you--who were your heroes growing up, and what did you want to be?  What did you project?  Did you have any one thing that you wanted to do?
Speaker 2: Well, I don't think I focused in on people who had, you know, accomplished things, in reality.  I mean, think everybody looked at, you know, the stars--you know, like Lena Horne, (laughter) and said, you know, "Wow, it would be wonderful to have talent and to be that pretty, and to be that famous."  But I don't think anybody really wanted to be Lena Horne.  I think they, you know, just admired her.  I have a couple of cousins who certainly, you know, I admired.  You know, they lived in Washington [D.C.], they still live in Washington.  Dr. Taswell Banks who's a cardiologist and his wife who's my first cousin, Myrtle Banks, she went to Catholic University and was a nurse.  You know, so that role model for, you know, education and achievement is certainly something that I absorbed.
Story_ID: 56658
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  So, high school--you went to high school at Sacred Heart Academy, right?
Speaker 2: Uh huh.
Speaker 1: In Hoboken [New Jersey].  This is an all-girls' high school, right?
Speaker 2: It was an all-girls' high school.  And they had been, you know, recruiting among the elementary schools.  And a very close friend of mine, Helena Miller, whose father was the chef on the railroad--she was recruited, and she accepted.  And then she just insisted (laughter) that I come along to keep her company on the bus and at school and all that.  And I did, and it was a great experience.  It was a very small school.  It couldn't have been more than, you know, three hundred students overall--you know, four classes.  And the school was set in a very old mansion, right on the main street of Hoboken.  And I would say 98 percent of the faculty were nuns.  And you know, they were preparing us for, you know, college and stuff.  It was very much a college preparatory atmosphere.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, you would have been in high school, I guess 1960 or '61 [1961]?
Speaker 2: Nineteen-Sixty [1960] to '64 [1964].
Speaker 1: Sixty [1960] to '64 [1964], okay.
Story_ID: 56659
Speaker 1: Okay, so you were, you started high school when John Kennedy [President John F. Kennedy] was elected president.
Speaker 2: Uh huh.
Speaker 1: So that--I know he was popular in the Catholic church.
Speaker 2: Exactly.  Oh, well, he was the hero of all the people who, you know, taught us and who were around us all the time, certainly.  Yeah.  And the day he was shot, we were in gym class and, you know, the loudspeaker came on and said, "Everybody has to, you know, get down, you know, and start praying."  And we did.  And then, you know, the loudspeaker, you know, came on again and said, "We're sorry to report, you know, the President, he's been shot, and died."  And everyone was so stunned, you know, that this could happen.  I mean you know, everyone was crying--you know, the nuns and all the students and stuff.  And then they dismissed us.  And when we were going home, everyone on the bus was crying.  And so, it's just one of those things that you really remember--how, you know, people were united in this grief.  And of course, you know, in my household as in, you know, most households--that weekend, that's all we did was, you know, watch television.  And you saw your parents crying and your friends coming by and stopping by and saying, you know, how awful this was, and they were crying.  And it was just quite an emotionally draining experience.  You know, I guess for all--for many of us, that was the first person outside our families, you know, that had died like that.  And so... who had died.  So, it was a really traumatic time.
Speaker 1: I think it was the first time in history that an event like that was--had television coverage.
Speaker 2: Yes, exactly.
Speaker 1: So--
Speaker 2: And I--we were, you know, just sitting there the whole weekend, you know, watching all the, you know, the process of getting ready and then the funeral and all that.  You know, because I'm sure the schools were closed that day.  We didn't have to go to school the day of the funeral.
Speaker 1: Right.  I think the NFL [National Football League] was still criticized for having games on that Sunday.
Speaker 2: Uh huh, uh huh, probably, yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah, they had a game on that Sunday between the--
Speaker 2: This was November.
Speaker 1: --assassination and the funeral.  And you know, I think they regret doing it.
Speaker 2: Probably, in retrospect, yeah.
Speaker 1: Of course, John F. Kennedy meant a lot to black people.  Do you have an analysis of maybe--or a reflection about why he was so important to the black community?
Speaker 2: Well, I think, you know--first of all I think it was his youth.  And also, he wasn't afraid to talk about certain issues, you know, though he was certainly a reluctant civil rights supporter.  But when the black community saw those pictures of him, you know, talking to Martin Luther King [Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] and Roy Wilkins and A. Philip Randolph, there were some view that, "Well, let's give him a little more room than we've given others, you know, to see what could happen and stuff."
Speaker 1: So, we're talking about the JFK [President John F. Kennedy] assassination and the...  So, did the--were you in school actually when the funeral took place on that day?
Speaker 2: I actually think that we didn't have school.  I mean, since it was a Catholic school and there was, you know, so much attention to John Kennedy [President John F. Kennedy] as the first Catholic president and stuff, I'm pretty sure that everything was shut down.  I don't think we went back to school... until after the funeral was over.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  Now, this is, so you would have been--this is your junior year in school, I guess?
Speaker 2: Yeah, it was November of 1963.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: So, I was a senior.
Speaker 1: Okay, right, that's true.  That would have been the fall of your senior year.
Speaker 2: Uh huh, fall.
Story_ID: 56660
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, well, when you were a senior in high school [Sacred Heart Academy, Hoboken, New Jersey], how were your grades?
Speaker 2: Oh, great.  You know, I was, you know, at the top ten percent, you know, of the class.  And I had started my quote, unquote "newspaper career" in high school by working for the high school newspaper.  And I developed a column that talked about what people were doing--you know, what they had done on the weekends, you know, what achievements different people had had.  And we called it "WASH," "The World Around Sacred Heart."  So, I was encouraged, you know, to look for some sort of college curriculum that included journalism and some, you know, form of writing and stuff.  So that was fun.  Those were my first publications, so to speak.
Speaker 1: Now in those days, were you conscious of any black journalists, or black women in--?
Speaker 2: I was, because of the black newspapers that my parents read.  So, I knew that there were, you know, black people, you know, like Ted Posten, you know, who were out there working for the Amsterdam News.  And I'm pretty sure I knew that Ethel Payne existed, because we did read the Chicago Defender.  So, there were a few, but not a lot.  And I didn't know at that point any of the pioneers who had been in the white mainstream media.  I didn't know their names until I got to Washington [D.C.].
Story_ID: 56661
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  So, now, did you have counseling about college?
Speaker 2: Sure.  The school [Sacred Heart Academy, Hoboken, New Jersey], you know had a very fine kind of counseling service that directed people to all, you know, sorts of schools, you know, depending on what they wanted, you know, to study.  My father [Alfred Trescott] thought, you know that I should really, you know, continue a Catholic education.  One of the main episodes in his life was when he had been in a Catholic orphanage and sort of training school.  And he had continued his allegiance to Catholic education and stuff.  So, when it came time to select a college, or select the ones that I would at least apply to, he had a--he had researched which Catholic schools had journalism, you know, courses.  So, I applied to Marquette [Marquette University, Milwaukee, Wisconsin] and St. Bonaventure [St. Bonaventure University, St. Bonaventure, New York].  And then I slipped in Penn State [Pennsylvania State University, State College, Pennsylvania] and the University of Hawaii [Honolulu, Hawaii] (laughter) on the list, just to give it a little--you know, balance there.  And I guess Duquesne [Duquesne University, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania], too, was another one.  So, I got into all of them.  So, when it came time to decide where to go, St. Bonaventure was recruiting very heavily in that northern New Jersey area.  And also, you know, recruiting and offering money and stuff.  So, that's how we decided on that.  You know, it was far.  I mean, it was a ten-hour ride on the train, because it's in that corner of New York State, where you're almost in Pennsylvania.  So, it was about an hour south of Buffalo [New York].  So, you know, even though they hid from me all the weather conditions, (laughter) that I would face, you know, during my first winter there, you know, it sounded convenient.  You know, it had a great reputation.  Even then, the journalism school had a great reputation.  So, that's where I ended up.
Speaker 1: Okay.  St. Bonaventure is--yeah, so, yeah it's an hour south of Buffalo.  I didn't realize that.
Speaker 2: Uh huh, it's in the snow belt.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I thought it was closer to New Jersey.
Speaker 2: No.
Story_ID: 56662
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, before you leave high school [Sacred Heart Academy, Hoboken, New Jersey], are there any particular teachers in high school that were mentors or role models for you?
Speaker 2: We had a great French teacher whose name was Sister Jude.  And she would make contests while we were learning the vocabulary and stuff.  And, you know, she would, you know, have competitions, you know, between groups within the classroom.  So, she made the learning lots of fun.  And I remember her in particular.  But I actually don't remember the names of other teachers.  But she really stood out, because she was personable.  And she, you know, made everything into a game and fun, you know, while we got the message that we were also learning French at the time.
Story_ID: 56663
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, St. Bonaventure University [St. Bonaventure, New York]...  Now, what--I guess--what did you make of it?  What was it like?  You said it was a snowy like area.
Speaker 2: (laughter).  Well, it's very isolated.  It's--you know, the nearest town is a very, very small town.  And so, at that time, you know, your life really revolved around the college.  And the women students, who at that point were just growing in number--they had just started letting women into the school--were separated by a little road from the main campus, for the first year I was there.  And then they built a dorm, because they were admitting more women.  And then we were on the main campus.  But the journalism school was very, very active.  They would do interviews of, you know, people who came to campus to speak or to perform.  I interviewed one of the Four Tops, you know, who came for a concert.  I think that was my first celebrity (laughter) interview.
Speaker 1: Was it Levi Stubbs?
Speaker 2: It was Levi. (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It was Levi.  And so, I worked for the newspaper.  So, that was one of my main activities.  I also worked to earn money in the library, which was fun, because a lot of people at that point in time used the library.  It was the center of, you know, activity.  And so, I met a lot of different students from doing that job.  And you know, we had religious services.  We were required to attend, you know, church once a week.  But the main activity for everybody was the basketball season when, you know, they would compete in the NIT [National Invitation Tournament] and all the other, you know, tournaments.  And you know, we would all get on a bus and go, you know, to Philadelphia or Buffalo or somewhere--Providence--and, you know, and go to the games and stuff.  So, that was really sort of the center of that winter social life when we were snowed in.  We were snowed in from October to May.  I mean, it was just how we had to live, you know (laughter).  So, you get an appreciation for how people can survive under those kinds of conditions, you know, because it snowed all the time.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And you were saying the basketball team was a major feature of St. Bonaventure?
Speaker 2: Uh huh.
Story_ID: 56664
Speaker 1: In terms of journalism, are there any professors--any of the professors that you were particularly close to, or--?
Speaker 2: Yes.  Dr. Russell Jandoli was the major dean of the journalism school [St. Bonaventure University, St. Bonaventure, New York].
Speaker 1: And how do you spell his last name?
Speaker 2: J-A-N-D-O-L-I.  He's now deceased. But he really encouraged us to, you know, go out and find internships and, you know, to think of journalism, you know, as a career.  Because it still--you know you only thought of the cream of the crop as the ones who had been able to succeed.  You know, but he always emphasized that there were all different kinds of jobs, you know, to have in the field.  You didn't have to be a TV anchor (laughter), or something like that.  In fact, that even shouldn't be your ambition.  Your ambition should be, you know, just to do a good job covering courts or, you know, covering schools, and that sort of thing.  So, he was very much a, you know, a kind of broadminded mentor.
Story_ID: 56665
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, you started school [St. Bonaventure University, St. Bonaventure, New York] in 1964?
Speaker 2: Uh huh.
Speaker 1: And that was the--that summer before you started school was the Democratic National Convention and the culmination of Freedom Summer in Mississippi [1964].
Speaker 2: Well, that's what I remember.  I remember Freedom Summer, you know, again because of just the exposure to television news and to the black newspapers.  And you know, and one of the things, you know, that you really remember from childhood at that time if you were looking at black newspapers and magazines, was Emmett Till.  You know, that was just a bombshell, you know, for so many families in the North, you know, to see those pictures of his open casket and stuff that they published in Jet Magazine.
Speaker 1: Now, I know they re-published them in '64 [1964] right after Goodwin [Andrew Goodwin], Schwerner [Michael Schwerner] and Chaney [James Early Chaney] were murdered.
Speaker 2: They published them originally, because Mrs. Till--
Speaker 1: In the fifties, though.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Did you see them back in the fifties?
Speaker 2: Yes.  Oh, because my parents made sure that I saw them.  Even though we didn't have that tradition of going to the South much, you know, during the summer, we still had relations in Charleston [South Carolina] and North Carolina.  So, that was one of those teachable moments I think for any black child, you know, who was growing up in the fifties--you know, this is what can happen.  Yeah, I do remember the original photos though, you know, I've seen them many times, you know, since then.  But the summer of '63 [1963], the Freedom Summer, I can remember, you know, reading about that and the good and bad things, you know, that were happening.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And that was--yeah, the summer of '64 [1964].  Goodwin, Schwerner and Chaney disappeared first.  Then SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee] organizes in Mississippi and takes a delegation to the Democratic National Convention.
Speaker 2: I remember more of that from just, you know, reporting over the years rather than remembering that as it happened.  But certainly by that point I was, you know, reading the New York Times and the other New York newspapers, so I was aware of it.  But it just, you know, was certainly of interest.  But I didn't feel like I was living, you know, through it.
Speaker 1: Okay.  You were more than likely in school, because the convention was in Atlantic City [New Jersey] which was...  I believe it was.  Yeah, it was in Atlantic City.
Speaker 2: In 1964, yeah, with Fannie Lou Hamer and the people protesting, yeah.
Story_ID: 56666
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, at any rate, so did you...  I'm just trying to...  I'm thinking about the other items in the news in those days and what was going on.  So, you're reading the New York Times now?
Speaker 2: Uh huh.
Speaker 1: And--
Speaker 2: So, I'm aware of, you know, national politics and the, you know, conventions and you know some of the achievements, you know, in different fields.  I was trying to...  You know, the Malcolm X memories are connected to the Audubon Ballroom [Manhattan, New York City, New York].  My grandmother [Isabel Braaf], my maternal grandmother, belonged to a club that used the Audubon Ballroom as a, you know, a dancing, you know, facility.  And even though we were very young, we dressed up (laughter) and we went to some of these, you know, dances with her.  So, I can remember going to the Audubon Ballroom.  So, when Malcolm X was shot there, it was shocking on several levels, you know.  First of all, I had, you know, been in that room.  And then it was him, you know, that was killed.  And certainly we were exposed to his, you know, speeches and stuff through television and other media.  You know, people just talked about him, you know, who had actually seen him, you know, preaching in Harlem [New York] and stuff.
Story_ID: 56667
Speaker 1: Did your family have a particular spin on the Civil Rights Movement that--?
Speaker 2: Well, I think in general, you know, they felt that anyone who was fighting, you know, for black rights in the Civil Rights Movement was someone to be admired.  So, they certainly admired Roy Wilkins and Walter White and A. Philip Randolph...all the early, you know, people.  And of course when, you know, Rosa Parks and Fannie Lou Hamer, you know, had made such an impact, they talked about that, too.  They talked about, you know, how brave they were, you know, how much they had sacrificed, you know, to do these things.  I don't remember going to any speeches before the March on Washington [March on Washington for Jobs and Freedom, 1963].  I think that was the first, you know, big event I was allowed to go to.  And I went through the local NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] youth group that, you know, organized a bus and stuff to go to the March.  And my parents didn't go.  But I can remember my father [Alfred Trescott] walking me in the middle of the night (laughter) to the bus, because we must have left like at five a.m. or something.  And you know, it was just all--you know there was a whole group of fathers who just all stood there and said, you know, "We're glad you're doing this."  You know, "Come back safely," you know, all that.  But that was the first time I'd heard that sort of speaking, you know, and had actually been in that large a crowd.  You know, I don't think I had ever, you know, been exposed to, you know, hundreds of thousands of people, you know, surrounding you, all doing the same, you know, thing.  So, it was quite exciting.
Speaker 1: Did you think at the time that Dr. King's speech was going to be played over and over again in history?
Speaker 2: No, but almost immediately on the television--you know, by the time we got home and, you know, saw, you know, the re-runs of the speeches and stuff, we knew that it had been very, very important.  But no, sitting there listening, you know, it was just more the--that it was him, that we were finally (laughter), you know, seeing him, hearing him.  And then--and just the power of how he spoke.  I think that was more we remembered that day than actually the words.
Story_ID: 56668
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  Now, so, now did St. Bonaventure [University, St. Bonaventure, New York] have a paper that you worked on?
Speaker 2: Yes, uh huh.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It was a weekly paper.  So, we had a lot of meetings and, you know, planning sessions and reporting sessions and re-writing sessions and editing sessions that went on.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It was quite an active part of the campus.  All the media outlets at that time--I worked at the radio station as well as the newspaper.  I mean we were sort of a pulse, you know, of the campus.  You know, we were always, you know, talking about what was going on or, you know, sneaking in some new music (laughter) over the radio network, which was just campus.  It wasn't like one of those stations now that colleges have that reach, you know, miles and miles and miles.  This was just, you know, a key to the campus.
Story_ID: 56669
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  So, now you were talking about Dr. Russell Jandoli--
Speaker 2: Uh huh.
Speaker 1: --and some of the internships they would give to students.  Now did you do some--what internships did you--?
Speaker 2: Well, during the summer--I worked three summers at the Newark Evening News, but not as a reporter.  I worked in the proofreading department, which read all the classified ads to make sure they were accurate, and that they were in a particular order.  The classified ads were arranged according to counties in New Jersey.  We had to make sure the information was for that county.  But, you know, Dr. Jandoli had said whatever job you can get, it's going to teach you something, you know.  And so, proofreading, you know, of course, comes in handy, you know, even to this day in whatever you're writing and editing.  So, that was--I did that for three summers.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  Now, anything significant happen in any of those summers?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.  The [1967] Newark Riots [Newark, New Jersey] were during one of those summers.  I guess it was actually the last summer, because it was the summer of '67 [1967].  And that summer, I worked in a department store.  I had won some sort of contest for college girls, and getting into retail or something.  I was fooling around with that.  And so, I worked at a department store in downtown Newark in the luggage department.  And there was a big back-to-school kind of effort there.  And so, they had a lot of college students helping out in that department.  And the Newark riots happened.  And the first night, we were locked in the department store.  You know, we weren't allowed to leave.  And the next two nights there were still, you know, federal marshals and the National Guard out in the streets.  And my father [Alfred Trescott] came over from Jersey City [New Jersey] to Newark to escort me and some of the other, you know, young salespeople, you know, to the bus stops and stuff so, you know, we could get home, you know, safely.  So, there was someone to, you know, watch over us.  But it was terrifying, you know, because I don't remember the exact number of people who were killed, but it was, you know, a major, you know, urban riot.  And you could see things burning, and you could see where things had been looted and stuff.  So, to see something that you were so familiar with as a, you know, bustling commercial area all of a sudden to be destroyed, you know, really opens your mind to, you know, what people were angry about, you know, and why they were fighting like that.
Story_ID: 56670
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, this is a lot of focus on Newark [New Jersey] in those days.  I think it's--was this just before Kenneth Gibson was elected Mayor?
Speaker 2: It had to be before that.
Speaker 1: Yeah, they wouldn't have rioted when he was the Mayor.  Yeah, I think Kenneth Gibson was elected in '68 [1968] or '69 [1969]?
Speaker 2: He may have been elected within the next two years.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Right.  I think there was a big turnover in a lot of cities like Gary and Newark to minority mayors, or at least minority dominant city councils and stuff.
Speaker 1: Right.  I know Cleveland [Ohio] was first, with Carl--
Speaker 2: Stokes.
Speaker 1: --Stokes, yeah in '68 [1968].  But Gibson was right behind him.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  And the sad thing is that Newark has never really recovered.  You know, there's just acres in Newark that have not been touched, you know, since, you know, 1967.
Speaker 1: Do you remember what sparked the uprising?
Speaker 2: I don't remember the specifics.  No, I don't remember that.  I don't remember who was--you know, some sort of killing or whether it was, you know, news or something that was happening in Detroit [Michigan] or, you know, or somewhere else.  Because there was a whole, you know, outburst of violence in those summers of '67 [1967] and '68 [1968].
Story_ID: 56671
Speaker 1: Now, you were--you were a senior, I guess, in college [St. Bonaventure University, St. Bonaventure, New York]--?
Speaker 2: Uh huh.
Speaker 1: --when...  You were a senior or junior when Dr. King [Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] was assassinated?
Speaker 2: Uh huh, uh huh.  Yeah, I was a senior in college, and it was one of those really awful years.  My father [Alfred Trescott] had a heart attack and died in November of '67 [1967].  And he had just gone to the VA [Veteran's Administration] Hospital for a checkup, and he died while he was there.  So, I was, you know, sort of in this, you know, period of mourning.  And then it was April [1968], you know, that King was killed.  And I was in, you know, college.  I was only watching what had happened through, you know, the television.  But, you know, I just remember everyone, you know, just sitting around, you know, saying we can't believe this and, you know, how did this happen, and that sort of thing.  And then Robert Kennedy was killed, you know, that June.  You know, we were already out of school.  I was home, and had gone to volunteer at his headquarters like the week before, you know, he was killed.  So... knowing the job that we had was handing out flyers (laughter) on the streets of New York [New York].  But you know it was just that, you know, loss, you know, once again.  You know, I can remember standing outside St. Patrick's Cathedral, you know, the day of the funeral, you know, like fifty back from the steps of the cathedral but just wanting to, you know, be part of, you know, saying farewell and all of that.  So, that was a very rough year.
Story_ID: 56672
Speaker 1: Yeah, I would say so.  So, when you come out of St. Bonaventure [University, St. Bonaventure, New York]--I mean did you--I mean '68 [1968] was a time of like, you know, radical social change in people's perspective.  Seems like it was a turning point.  So, in your own family your father had passed away, who had been such a strong person in the family.  And Dr. King [Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] and Robert Kennedy [Senator Robert F. Kennedy] died [1968], and the Vietnam War going on.  So, how did you feel as a young graduate?
Speaker 2: Well, I thought that I would, you know, have some opportunities because I was in the New York [New York] area--so, you know, job wise.  I went and started working in a publishing house right away.
Speaker 1: So, which one was it?
Speaker 2: It was called Western Publishing.  And one of their main publishing lines were stamp books.  If anyone remembers how we used to have stamp books... (laughter).
Speaker 1: For stamp collectors?
Speaker 2: Well, no.  These were like books on certain subjects.  So, you would get flowers, you'd get a book with little drawings of flowers.  And then you get these stamps attached to it, and then you would match the stamp to the drawing (laughter), you know, so it covered everything.  You know, flowers, sports, cities, you know, activities--and this was very popular at that time.  They were very successful.  And the other part of their business was science fiction.  So, they published a lot of science fiction.  And the job I had was opening the mail which included tons of manuscripts, because everyone, you know, was trying to write science fiction.  And judging whether, you know, it had a good story or not and then passing it down the line, you know, to a junior editor and stuff.  But as far as, you know, feeling that I should be involved in, you know, some of the, you know, political action, you know, that was going on--I didn't feel that in a general sense.  When I got into the newspaper business, you know, I felt that one of the big fights was for diversity in the media.  But that, you know, was a couple years down the road.
Speaker 1: Okay, alright.  So, you're working at Western Publishing?
Speaker 2: Uh huh.
Speaker 1: And then--so how long did you stay there?
Speaker 2: Well, it must have been from September of '68 [1968] to December of '69 [1969].
Story_ID: 56673
Speaker 1: Because then I applied for a fellowship at the Washington Journalism Center and was accepted, and then moved to Washington [D.C.] in January, 1970.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Now, what is the Washington Journalism Center?
Speaker 1: It was a fellowship program.  They included eight people who had no newspaper or media experience, and then eight people who did.  And they mixed us up.
Speaker 2: Okay.  So, you're taking a fellowship at the Washington Journalism Center?
Speaker 1: Uh huh.  And it was run by two men, Julius DuShay and Clarence Hunter.  And Clarence Hunter had been a reporter at The Washington Star.  He had been one of the first blacks on the staff.  And it was through him that I met this first generation of people who had integrated the media at all, you know, sorts of levels.  And then he--this program lasted from January to May.  And what we did was we went to events.  You know, we went to the Capitol Press Gallery, we went to press conferences.  We had meetings with, you know, working journalists like Bill Raspberry, you know, who was one of the people we met during that time.  And you know, we would just talk, we'd have seminars and stuff.  So, this mix of journalists who had some experience and non-journalists was, you know, very good because you could hear some of the early challenges, you know, that people had had, you know, working in television newsrooms and newspapers.  So, Clarence Hunter suggested that I get a job at the Washington Star.  And so, I met with him and I was hired.  So, that was my first real reporting job.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Clarence Hunter, okay.  Is he still alive?
Speaker 1: I don't think so, but I'd have to check that for you.
Speaker 2: Okay, alright.  So, he had been a reporter at The Washington Star--?
Speaker 1: Uh huh.
Speaker 2: One of the first black reporters?
Speaker 1: Yeah, uh huh.
Speaker 2: If not--well, was he the first?
Speaker 1: I don't think so.  I think there were a couple of other people.
Story_ID: 56674
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, Washington Star.  Now, describe what The Washington Star was like in 19--
Speaker 2: Seventy [1970].
Speaker 1: Alright.
Speaker 2: Well, it was still an afternoon newspaper.  So, and its, you know, main competitors were The Washington Daily News and The Washington Post.  And the work routine was to get there around five in the morning and, you know, work on whatever story--you know, what was happening, whether it was a fire or a police action.  Or whether you were doing, you know, an early morning feature--and to have all the work done by 12 o'clock.  And then the paper came out around 2:00 or 3:00.  And it was both a street sale and a home delivery sale.  Now, the atmosphere in the newsroom was very electric because, you know, everybody was, you know, hustling to get everything done, you know, in a short, you know, period of time.  And that first summer, they had an effort to recruit a number of minorities.  So, I think there were about six African Americans who were hired during that period of time.  And I think I'm the only one who actually made a long career in newspapers.  They all, you know, worked, you know, for at least two or three years.  And some, you know, went off to decide to be a lawyer or decided to work in the human rights field, or whatever.  I'm pretty sure I'm the only one who made a real long career of it.
Speaker 1: Okay.  What do you attribute that to, just, I mean, just reflecting on it now?  Do you think they were really best suited to do something else?
Speaker 2: Well, they all were extremely smart, and they all had been very, very well, you know, educated.  I think there were just other opportunities.  At the same period of time, Washington [D.C.] was getting home rule, and there were jobs with black politicians.  And a lot of people, you know, wanted to try that out and do that.  And so, you know, at least two of them did that.  One just decided she really wanted to be a lawyer.  So, she left, you know, to go to law school.  So, I mean it was various different reasons.  I think that I stuck with it...  I worked there for five years, and after a short time on the metropolitan news desk, I went to the culture section.  So, I began, you know, building a reputation for doing interviews with literary figures and singers and looking at the, you know, black social life, black historical life in Washington [D.C.].  And so then I was recruited by The Washington Post.
Story_ID: 56675
Speaker 1: Now, before we take you to the [Washington] Post, I just want to find out what was your first professional, I guess, article of any substance?  Was that at, during the internship or at the--?
Speaker 2: No, it would have been at The Washington Star.
Speaker 1: The Star, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, right.  And I can remember I was very interested in church history and just local history, and doing some early pieces on that, on the Metropolitan AME [African Methodist Episcopal] Church which is on "M" Street.  And that was the church where Frederick Douglass had worshipped.  And it was still standing, and it's still standing.  So, you know, just that kind of subject area, you know, really fascinated me.  And we were building up to the [U.S.] Bicentennial, so there was a lot of interest in history pieces.  So, I did that with the other mix.  I had to do the social life of Washington [D.C.], the general social life--the diplomatic core of the White House, and all that mixed in with, you know, the things that were my main interest.
Story_ID: 56676
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, The Washington Star...  Now, The Washington Star today is known as a conservative right-wing kind of a paper.
Speaker 2: Well, The Washington Star does not exist anymore.
Speaker 1: Okay.  What is the one I'm talking about then?
Speaker 2: You're talking about The Washington Times.
Speaker 1: Times, yeah, that's right.  You're right.
Speaker 2: But The Washington Star folded in [1981]--now I've forgotten the year, because we just had an anniversary.  It's been twenty-five years--because we do get together, The Washington Star alums.  And so, I'm thinking it was 1981, but I need to check that for you.  But no, it was, you know, a vigorous competitive newspaper until...  It had been family-owned for a century.  And then it went through a series of other ownerships at the end.  And then it just, you know, couldn't make it.
Speaker 1: And those are the days when most of the major cities had two or three or four or five--
Speaker 2: Two or three papers.
Speaker 1: --maybe six papers.
Speaker 2: Right.  Well, Washington had at least three when I, you know, moved here in 1970 as well as a very active African American newspaper.  The Afro-American Chain had a big newspaper here.  So, it was lots of competition.  And the local TV stations then had money to spend on covering a lot of different things.  So, there was competition also from the TV side.
Speaker 1: They even had mandates to do public affairs.
Speaker 2: (laughter).  Exactly, exactly, lots of public affairs programs.
Story_ID: 56677
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, with The Washington Star...  Now, so your first articles were about historical--you said you did one on the Metropolitan AME [African Methodist Episcopal] Church and--
Speaker 2: Uh huh.  Yeah, I was very interested in--so, of the personalities and the architecture and just the stories of many of the historical sites in Washington [D.C.].  You know, mainly concentrating on black history, not the general history, which was pretty, you know, well-known.  I guess I was trying to uncover, you know, some of those stories that the mainstream media hadn't reported on.
Speaker 1: Now, did you have--you were coming out of school, college, at a pivotal time when black history was seen as something that probably should be taught in the public schools, and curricula were being written in major cities.  Did you have any black history at St. Bonaventure [University, Allegany, New York]?
Speaker 2: Oh, no, not at all.  I mean, all the black history knowledge I had picked up was, you know, outside of the formal education.  You know, it was through, you know, families' interest; it was through, you know, newspaper stories and books, you know.  But at that time, around 1970, this was another influence on how I began to, you know, cover black culture--that the publishing houses in response to people wanting to know more about black history began publishing more books.  So, there were more authors out there circulating and talking about their materials.  I mean, even at that point Toni Morrison had done almost a scrapbook about black life.  And so, you know, she was someone, you know, you would interview and talk about that trend within the publishing world.
Speaker 1: It was called "The Black Book" [1974].
Speaker 2: I think that was the title.
Speaker 1: I've got one at home.  Langston Hughes published a pictorial history of the Negro ["A Pictorial History of the Negro in America"] I think in '68 [1968], with Nelson [sic, Milton Meltzer].  And there are all these, these types of things are coming out... "Before the Mayflower" [Lerone Bennett, Jr., 1962] in the late sixties, and--
Speaker 2: Well, and also the--more of the poets and fiction writers were getting a chance, you know, to be heard and to be published.  I mean, Nikki Giovanni was a major, you know, force at that time.  And not only getting her own work published but, you know, turning around and saying to her editor, "Well, I have a friend who's just done this.  You know, we should publish this book, too."  So, there was a lot going on.
Story_ID: 56678
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, would you consider yourself to be, to have been a part of the black cultural movement, I guess, in that period of time?  Or is this a black arts movement, or--?
Speaker 2: Well, certainly I was, you know, very deeply interested in the black arts movement, and did a lot of reporting, you know, on it.  But I think there was a separation between, you know, those who were reporting on what was happening--reporting on, you know, poets and their work--you know, from, you know, Sterling Brown, who was certainly was an established figure at Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.] at that point.  He was an elder, you know, of the movement.  But the younger people in the movement loved him, and made sure that some of his work was again re-issued and stuff.  But I think the role of the reporter was to sort of explain, you know, what was happening.  But I don't think many of us considered ourselves part, you know, of the movement.  We were a part of a different kind of journalism movement.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  So, yeah.  So, you mentioned, like Sterling Brown.  Washington, D.C. was like, was one of the, I guess, places where a lot of the black artists and poets worked, were celebrated and housed and--
Speaker 2: Well, the--first of all there were people who were actually teaching in the classrooms at Howard who were famous.  You know they were famous for, you know, all sorts of achievements.  And it was a real, you know, privilege to, you know to go to their classrooms and you know, to do stories about what they were talking about, and talk about their own achievements.  And this went across a lot of fields.  Besides, you know, Sterling Brown, there was Montague Cobb who was a doctor, and also was very much a force in recording the history of blacks in medicine and stuff.  So, he was someone I interviewed.  And then Dorothy Porter was a librarian at Howard at the Moorland-Spingarn Collection.  And that had been her job for years, just to document this black history, and to make sure that the Howard library was a leader in research, and you know, people could come and they could read Alain Locke's papers and other, you know, documents of important people.  So, she was someone I profiled also, you know, just to have this unique role in black culture.  You know, as well as, you know, talking to, you know, the people who were just, you know, getting started.  You know, Jeff Donaldson was an artist who had started in Chicago and came to Howard.  And he was, you know, one of the people who helped define what the Black Arts Movement [BAM, Black Aesthetics movement]--as far as painting and realistic portrayals of blacks... were.  You know, so it was a very exciting time, because there was the growth of black theatre and the people who came through, you know, those kinds of programs.  You know, the Howard theater department itself, you know, had produced Phylicia Rashad and Debbie Allen, and other people.  And, you know, so they were around, you know, to talk to.  And then there were--there was a black book store which was very influential, the Drum & Spear Bookstore [Washington, D.C.].  And all these people who were writing these new books that were being published, would come there to give a talk.  So, you had, you know, an opportunity to connect, you know, with a lot of people and to meet people, maybe even if you didn't write a story about them.  But you knew who they were, and they became part of the arts vocabulary.
Story_ID: 56679
Speaker 1: Okay.  This is, yeah, so this is an exciting time to be in D.C. [Washington, D.C.]
Speaker 2: It was.
Speaker 1: And--
Speaker 2: It was, yeah.
Speaker 1: --lots of activities.  Now, you were at the [Washington] Star until--now, what did--what's the, I guess, the highlight of your stay with The Washington Star?
Speaker 2: Well, I did get to interview Nina Simone, you know, which was interesting (laughter).  You know, she was quite a character.  But she was someone who had certainly helped define my generation's... you know, self-awareness.  You know through music, but through, you know, what she had to say about the country and stuff.  So, you know, that was certainly exciting.
Speaker 1: What was that like?  What was--is this--she was...  Well, kind of give us some more details of this.
Speaker 2: Well, you know, of course everyone understood, you know, that she would say, you know, whatever she wanted to say.  You know, she didn't self-edit a lot (laughter).  And then she was difficult.  So, the person who arranged for me to talk to her is a woman whose name is Eleanor Traylor.  She was a dean at Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.], and she's a theatrical person and an artistic person.  And her field is the humanities.  So, she touched on a lot of different careers and trends.  But she introduced me to Nina Simone.  So, that sort of eased the, whatever tension Nina Simone had with reporters (laughter).  You know, I had this friend who was, you know, sort of my opener.  And so, you know, we just sat, you know, and just, you know, talked about her career.  She was very--in person her voice was much lower than it was, you know, on the stage.  You know, so you, you know, you had the feeling that she was, you know, really thinking and talking, you know, as she described different things.  But you know it was, you know, talk about her career, and that sort of thing.  And I'm pretty sure we talked about, you know, her stage presence and what an impact that had made on people--to see a woman of her skin tone, her dark skin tone, and with the short Afro hair--you know, just to be such a celebrity.  You know, and that had had a real impact on people.  You know, they wanted that Nina Simone haircut (laughter), you know, kind of thing.  You know, so that was, you know, that's a good, you know, memory of that time.  I also interviewed Marvin Gaye around that time.  It was--they had an activity in Washington [D.C.] called "Human Kindness Day."  And they would focus on a particular, you know, entertainer.  And there would be a weekend of events along with a concert and stuff.  And so, I interviewed Marvin Gaye during that period of time.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, this is "Human Kindness Day?"
Speaker 2: Uh huh.
Speaker 1: Now, who sponsored that event?
Speaker 2: It was just a community group.  And they would have a rally down on the mall, you know, with a concert.  And would talk about, you know, peace and brotherhood and other, you know, kind of things you had to do to, you know, to keep your community cohesive and stuff.  And Roberta Flack and Stevie Wonder and Marvin Gaye were all participants, you know, at various years and stuff.  And I don't remember how many years the concerts themselves lasted, but it was quite an event.
Speaker 1: Okay.  This was an event sponsored by the black community?
Speaker 2: Yes.  Well, no.  Actually, the partnership that sponsored it was an inter-racial partnership.  It wasn't just an all-black organizing event.
Story_ID: 56680
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, alright.  So, you were at the Star [the Washington Star] until 1975, right?
Speaker 2: Right, the end of 1975.
Speaker 1: There from 1970 to '75 [1975], end of '75 [1975].  And now, tell us how you transitioned to The Washington Post.
Speaker 2: At the Star, a reporter whose name was Donnie Radcliffe had covered the White House.  And you know, we were, you know, good colleagues.  And when she left the Star to go to the Post, after she had been there, you know a little while she and another reporter at the Post, Dorothy Gilliam, said--or cooked up--a scheme to recruit me to work with them.  And I had met Dorothy through the Black Journalism Association, you know.
Speaker 1: Okay.  This is the National Association of Black Journalists?
Speaker 2: Right, right.
Speaker 1: Okay.  The local chapter, or the--?
Speaker 2: Well, I guess, you know, it was only the local chapter at that point.  Because I don't remember going to any of the big conventions before that time.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, this is the local.
Speaker 2: Right, it's probably just the local organization.  But the NABJ [National Association of Black Journalists] had been organized in Washington [D.C.], so it was sort of mix of the people who went on to, you know, start the national chapters as well as the local people.  But Dorothy Gilliam and Donnie Radcliffe were the people who recruited me for the Post and specifically for the style section.  So, that was my first and only job at the Post, was working in the style section, which is the daily cultural section.
Speaker 1: Okay, the style section covers style, probably, correct?
Speaker 2: Well, it covers all cultural events.  It covers politics, you know, from political profiles.  It covers the White House, radio, TV, all the museums, and just all the non-hard news things that happen in Washington.
Speaker 1: So, this is sort of the magazine section of--
Speaker 2: Exactly.
Speaker 1: --The Washington Post.
Speaker 2: Exactly.  It was a daily magazine, right.  As well, they do have a Sunday magazine.  But this was the daily kind of section for that kind of news.
Story_ID: 56681
Speaker 1: So, in terms of writing for the style section, you have--would you have...?  Well, I'm asking because I don't know.  Would you have more time and latitude to develop a story, you know--
Speaker 2: Well, it really depended.  In my first years there, I did a variety of things.  You know, I covered black culture and personalities.  I covered black politicians.  You know, I did, you know, some White House, you know, coverage.  So, it depended on whether you were doing a deadline story or not.  You might have, you know, three or four weeks to do something, and then you might have three hours.  It just depended on what it was.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  So, it depended on I guess the access to that personality maybe?
Speaker 2: Uh huh, uh huh.
Speaker 1: Or, let's say if someone came into town who was big and they were only here today, you'd have to cover them?
Speaker 2: Right, cover them; do a spot story just on that event.  If you were covering the White House State Dinner, you know, you had to have it done within an hour or two, because that's what people wanted to read the next morning.  Because the Post [the Washington Post] has always been a morning newspaper.  So, you had overnight deadlines and stuff.
Speaker 1: Okay.  If you were covering Frederick Douglass, you could take your time. (laughter).
Speaker 2: (laughter).  Right, yeah.
Speaker 1: Unless there was an event on him, you know.
Speaker 2: Right, right, exactly, no.   Well, if you were--like, one of the stories I did during this period of time was that Alice Walker had made it her business to re-discover Zora Neal Hurston and to bring all of her writings back into print and stuff.  So, just--and there were several pieces to that that had to be, you know, put together.  You know, talking to Alice Walker; talking to the, you know, Zora Neal Hurston Estate; talking to, you know, book club people who also, you know, were looking for Zora Neal Hurston materials.  So, I mean that sort of story would take, you know, a few days, you know, to pull together.
Speaker 1: Okay, alright.  So, you were contributing stories to the style section at this point.  You didn't have a column or anything, right?
Speaker 2: No, no.  The first column I had was in, it was in the eighties.  I had covered a financial crisis at National Public Radio [NPR] at the Corporation for Public Broadcasting.  I did the news about those developments and stuff.  And after that, someone decided they wanted a radio column--that there was this huge community, like fifty businesses, that you know, weren't being covered.  So, for a part of my week, that's what I did.  And then wrote a column of radio news, you know, that was published, you know, once a week.  I just mixed that in with the other, you know, things I was doing, you know.  So, that was the first column.  And then it was sometime later before we started an arts blog which related to the beat I was covering at the time of the museums and performing art centers.
Story_ID: 56682
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  So, and I guess in--well, what were some of your favorite stories, I guess, in the seventies?  Now, in the seventies you mentioned the National Endowment for the Arts [(NEA) Washington, D.C.], which was relatively new.  It had been just a decade old, I guess.
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.  The Endowment had been founded around '68 [1968], '69 [1969], you know, through a Congressional legislation.  And then I didn't start covering the National Endowment as a, you know, daily beat until 1991.  It was, if that was the Clinton administration (laughter).  Whatever day the Clinton administration started [1993], I started covering the National Endowment for the Arts and the Endowment for the Humanities and the Smithsonian [Washington, D.C.] and the Kennedy Center [Washington, D.C.] as a regular beat.  You know, I became that beat reporter.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But leading up to that point, I had dipped in and out of, you know, some of those stories because they were part of, you know, the Washington [D.C.] cultural scene.
Speaker 1: Yeah, a lot of local--just looking from the outside at D.C., some of the local figures in D.C. become part of the national--
Speaker 2: They do.  Conversation about those issues, right.
Speaker 1: Right, right.  Vantile Whitfield goes from D.C. Black Rep [D.C. Black Repertory] to the National Endowment for the Arts.  And A.B. Spellman and other people--
Speaker 2: A.B. Spellman, sure.
Speaker 1: --start working for the national.  And then, you start seeing, you know, those connections.
Speaker 2: Yeah, there was a transition.  A lot of people who worked in, you know, community groups, you know, saw that there was a need for similar organizations across the country to be part of the--not only conversation about, you know, arts funding and where arts, you know, were going--but to be part of the money train, too.  So, there were special grants programs set up to help not only minority--but small, you know, arts organizations, you know, around the country.  And so, A.B. Spellman did head up an expanded arts program at the NEA [National Endowment for the Arts].
Speaker 1: Right, right.  So, that--I think they got... that probably started in the mid-seventies.  Am I right?
Speaker 2: I would think so, but I don't remember those exact dates.
Story_ID: 56683
Speaker 1: Okay.  I know Lady Bird [Johnson] founded the Endowment [National Endowment for the Arts, (NEA), Washington, D.C.] initially.  And then as it grew, you know, other people were involved--Jessie Wood from Chicago [Illinois] was one.  But, okay--so in the seventies...  Now, did you cover the D.C. Black Repertory Company?
Speaker 2: Oh, definitely, definitely.  So, I got to know Robert Hooks and Vantile Whitfield.  And Bernice Reagon was part of a singing workshop, you know, then.  And there were several dancers who were just, you know, spectacular, who were part of the dance unit of the D.C. Black Rep [D.C. Black Repertory Company].  They were, you know, a company that not only broke ground here, but there were people from all over the country who would come, you know, to see their performances, yeah.  They were following the path of the Negro Ensemble Company, you know, in New York.  And so, the material that they did was not only new material, but they did some of the classics, too.  So, people were very, very excited, you know, about that.  They had a home on Georgia Avenue, you know, which was sort of a center of cultural life for a while.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And I was surprised a few years to find out it doesn't exist anymore.
Speaker 2: It doesn't exist.  I mean, you know, the economy changed.  People you know, just had other opportunities.  You know, there was a big question about the financial support from the black community here.  Where were people giving their money, and why they were not giving it to some of the arts groups?  But the black community here has always supported education first and maybe churches, you know, second.  And then the arts were pretty far down on the list.
Speaker 1: Okay.  You mentioned Drum & Spear [Bookstore, Washington, D.C.], which was one of the major bookstores and cultural organizations in the country.  Now, that doesn't exist anymore either.
Speaker 2: No, it doesn't.  You know, but those founders went on to different things also.  And I think for a brief time, there was more attention from the other, you know, mainstream bookstores on black materials, you know.  And now we've seen the death of many of those other bookstores.  So, you know, again, there's you know, a need for a real strong black bookstore.
Story_ID: 56684
Speaker 1: Right.  So, let's see.  So, in--okay...  From--well, I guess I should ask you a question about the Bicentennial [1976], too.  I mean you started on the Bicentennial year.  What was that like, and what did you focus on?
Speaker 2: Well, I think--well, it was exciting, because there were so many groups who were trying to highlight local history, I mean in the broadest sense.  So, people were re-discovering, you know, the history of Georgetown [Washington, D.C.]; the history of Anacostia [Washington, D.C.].  You know, what had downtown looked like before all the federal buildings were constructed?  So, it was exciting that people were, you know, interested in that again.  And I did a story about the community in Anacostia that's called Union Town, which had been just below where the Frederick Douglass home is.  And how that had been a vibrant business community and education and church-based, you know, community for years.  And it had been an integrated community, even in the days of segregation.  And its physical placement gave it a spectacular view of back into Washington [D.C.] and all the monuments and stuff.  So, you know, we did that.  We did pieces on, you know, black architects and their--you know, what they had to build the Capitol and all these other buildings.  You know, some just pieces on historians.  You know, so it was an opportunity, you know--without having to fight for it--to say this is the time, you know, to do these kinds of stories.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Did you think that more of those kind of stories were done in that period because of the--
Speaker 2: Oh, I think so.
Speaker 1: --black agenda?
Speaker 2: I think there was a flood of those kinds of stories--looking at history and people's achievements and stuff.
Speaker 1: Okay.  I need to probably follow a chronology.  So, I don't want to--I don't know if--I don't have much of an outline here in terms of a chronology.  I just have a period of '76 [1976] to 2012.  So, we may have to jump around a little bit.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Story_ID: 56685
Speaker 1: Just to--there's a lot of things that we can talk about.  So, typically do you focus on any one particular area of the arts or, say, museums or theater or--?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, in the--since the early nineties I focused on mainly the news side, the administration side--fundraising and sort of the business side of the museums and performing arts centers.  Because in Washington [D.C.], they are an important part of the regular economy and the tourist economy.  And tourism is Washington's number one business.  So, how the Kennedy Center [Washington, D.C.] is being run--you know, where it's getting it's, you know, private money from?  What they're offering, you know, on the stage.  What does that say about, you know, their new programs and new initiatives they're doing?  And part of that is also because all of them get money from the federal government.  Part of that is covering the Congressional hearings and the oversight hearings on the Smithsonian [Washington, D.C.] and the other--the National Gallery of Art [Washington, D.C.] and other federal museums, like the Holocaust Museum [United States Holocaust Memorial Museum, Washington, D.C.].  So, looking at, you know, how they're managed, what the accountability is and so forth, has been my main focus.  And there's someone else who will do reviews (laughter) of whether this play and this musical and whatever, you know, is worth going to see.  You know, that was not my job.  My job was to look at how they were run, and who was running them.
Story_ID: 56686
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, in terms of black people in the arts and culture here in D.C. [Washington, D.C.], there are several things that have been developed in the last twenty years.  There's a [National] Museum of African Art on the [National] Mall.
Speaker 2: Yes, uh huh.
Speaker 1: And I guess it's about twenty years old, isn't it about?  I think it was developed in the eighties, the late eighties?
Speaker 2: Well, it had a history as a museum before the Smithsonian took it over.  It was just a private museum, and it was housed in a townhouse on Capitol Hill--the townhouse that actually Frederick Douglass had lived in.  And it was founded and then run by a former Foreign Service officer, Warren Robbins.  And then at some point, the Smithsonian took the collection and put it under their umbrella of museums.  And they were developing two underground museums.  And one of them became the Museum of African Art.  And the other is an Asian art museum [Freer Gallery of Art].  But they're right in the center of the National Mall.  So, now that museum is run by [Dr.] Johnnetta Cole, the former president of Spelman College [Atlanta, Georgia].  And she's an anthropologist and art collector.  And she runs the National Museum of African Art now.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  And the Frederick Douglass house in Anacostia [Washington, D.C.], that's the one--that's on the southeast of town, right there--
Speaker 2: Yes, it's called Cedar Hill.  That was the, I think that was the name he gave the house.  But it's a modest mansion that is now run by the National Park Service.  And, you know, it has been restored and painted to the original colors and stuff.  And you know, it's open daily for tours and stuff.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now there was a, there was a major African American exhibit within the confines of the Smithsonian.  And I know years ago Eleanor Traylor wrote most of the literature that defined the exhibits, and that sort of thing.
Speaker 2: Well, they've had a committee for years that looked at how they could incorporate more African American and other ethnic groups into the Smithsonian.  And there were several large exhibits at the American History Museum, which looked at this kind of subject matter.  One was all about 19th century communities, which included black communities from different geographical areas.  And there have been some solo shows of black art at the Smithsonian American Art Museum.  They have a large collection of William H. Johnson's paintings.  And they've done solo shows, you know, on his work.  More recently, they did a solo show--not a solo show--but a group show, about sort of hip-hop artists and their representation of people from the hip-hop field.  So, and that was lots of fun, because a lot of people, you know, hadn't seen that work outside of New York [New York].  You know, so they've made that kind of intermittent, you know, progress.  And of course the architects that they selected for the National Museum of African American History and Culture, the main people on that team are black architects--David Adjaye who was British, though he was born in East Africa, I believe.  And then Philip Freelon, who's the main architect based in North Carolina, who's done several museums in other facilities around the country.
Story_ID: 56687
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well, I guess I may as well just go on and ask about the museum.  (laughter).  The Museum of African American...  What's the official name for the African--?
Speaker 2: The National Museum of African American History and Culture [NMAAHC].
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, alluding to these other features like the Moorland Spingarn; the Smithsonian exhibit; the Museum of African Art; the museum that was in Anacostia [Washington, D.C.] and Frederick Douglass' house; and all these different bits and pieces...  You know, out of that milieu, in this city of Washington with so many black people, how did the idea for the National Museum germinate?  Who came up with the idea?  I mean it seems like it's a good idea, but--
Speaker 2: Well, people would be surprised, but there were a group of Civil War veterans who first started petitioning Congress to have some sort of black memorial and black museum.  And so--
Speaker 1: This would have been back in the--
Speaker 2: The turn of the 19th century.
Speaker 1: The 20th Century.
Speaker 2: The 20th century, right. (laughter).  And so, the idea has been around, you know, for that long a period of time.  And you know, it ebbed and flowed, and there were sponsors and then there weren't sponsors.  And then in, I guess in the mid-eighties--whenever John Lewis was first elected to Congress, he took that on as one of the things he wanted to see happen--that there would be a national museum that talked about black history and black cultural people and black achievements.  So, he had various, you know, co-sponsors over the years.  But at the end, the bill was defeated a couple of times because Jesse Helms wouldn't, you know, allow a vote to go forward on it.  But then there was a, you know, a meeting I guess.  And John Lewis and the senator from Kansas, Sam Brownback--he's now the governor--came together and they, you know, refined the legislation and finally it was passed and then signed by George Bush [President George W. Bush, Jr.].  And from then on it had this momentum of, you know, people giving, you know, major donations, because they have to raise fifty percent of the money by themselves.  Fifty percent will come from Congress, and fifty percent from private fundraising.  So, they've been able to get donations--private donations, and you know, corporate donations.  So, they're very satisfied that they are well on their way to reaching their financial goals.  There was a competition for the building design, and the Freelon Group and David Adjaye won that.  And the groundbreaking was earlier this year.  And so now, you know, they're starting to construct the site, which is just south of the Washington Monument [Washington, D.C.], across the street.  So, it's adjacent to the American History Museum [National Museum of American History, Washington, D.C.], but within the sight lines of the Washington Monument.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, it hasn't--the museum broke ground in March of this year?
Speaker 2: Well, it was earlier this year.  I think it was March.  I'm pretty sure it was around March, you know.  And you know, leading up to that, as far as newspaper coverage, you know, there were stories on the architect's story on the design--on the, you know, the history of the struggle, you know, to get to that point and stuff.  You know, features on, you know, some of the principal people like Lonnie Bunch.
Story_ID: 56688
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, Lonnie Bunch is the man who's going to be the--he's the director?
Speaker 2: He's the director, right, yeah.
Speaker 1: Someone we interviewed some years ago in Chicago [Illinois] when he was the director of the Chicago Historical Society.
Speaker 2: Right, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, what do people see as being--what would be the--I guess would make this [National Museum of African American History and Culture] unique I guess in terms of black museums around the country, the new national museum?
Speaker 2: Well, certainly its location.  It's going to be a national museum, and it's on the National Mall [Washington, D.C.] where, you know, there are millions of people who go through those museums, you know, every year.  I mean, Smithsonian attendance is near thirty million a year for, you know, all their museums.  So, they expect it to be a real destination.  One of their, you know, challenges is collecting.  Because the Smithsonian has a sizeable collection of African American history from, you know, the arts and sports and science fields.  But they, the people who are starting the museum, you know, wanted to go out and get unique materials.  And so far, they've gotten some, you know, very interesting things.  Emmett Till's family gave them Emmett Till's casket.  A collector of Harriet Tubman material in Philadelphia gave them his collection which included a shawl that Queen Victoria had given Harriet Tubman on one of her speaking tours.  They have Chuck Berry's Cadillac--or one of Chuck Berry's Cadillacs, (laughter) you know.  And they got a copy--not a copy, the original Nat Turner Bible.  And all these things I wrote stories about as they came into the collection.  But Nat Turner's Bible had been preserved in the courthouse in Virginia where the trial was--or quote, unquote, "trial."
Speaker 1: In Southhampton?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes, down there in Southampton, Virginia.  And the family that received it from the courthouse when they were restoring the courthouse, they gave it back to the family that had been one of the targets of Nat Turner.  So, they decided that they shouldn't be keeping it in their living room anymore, that they would give it to the museum.  So, I went out to a huge warehouse that the Smithsonian has in the suburbs, and actually looked at the Bible, and talked to the person who had to authenticate it.  Though they knew whose hands it had been it all these years, they still have to go through a process to authenticate all these things.  So, you know, that was interesting, to be able to just look at the science part of it as well as the, you know, historic meaning of the Bible.
Story_ID: 56689
Speaker 1: How would they authenticate something like that?  Someone says this is Nat Turner's Bible, or my Bible, or whoever--
Speaker 2: "Yeah, we've had it in the family a hundred years, and we want you to have it."  So then they, they looked at the paper.  They can tell through research when this paper was made.  They actually had a picture of the Bible from when the family first received it that had been taken by a photographer for Duke University [Durham, North Carolina].  So, they could match what he had taken to what they seeing in front of him to authenticate it, you know, in that way.  And the ink--you know, certain inks aren't used anymore.  So, they could study the ink.  The stains on the pages, you know, the watermarks and all that.  So, they were very confident that this family had been keeping, you know, this Bible all these years.
Story_ID: 56690
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  So, you mentioned Jesse Helms trying to block the development of the museum.  It just reminded me of an ongoing struggle it seems in Congress, around funding for arts and culture.  There's a faction that does not believe that the public--that public funds should be used to support arts and culture.
Speaker 2: Well, in the mid-nineties when the Republicans took over Congress, everyone thought that was the death knell for all arts funding for the humanities funding, because it was just part of what Newt Gingrich called the contract for America and, you know, we're going to zero all this out.  And so this, you know, it was about two years of just debates and having to, you know, go up to the Capitol and listen to debates in the middle of the night, you know.  Because a lot of people were trying to sneak whatever legislation there was, you know, through--after midnight.  And they were zeroing out things, you know, left and right.  But that activity was concentrated in the House of Representatives.  So, when it got--the same bills would get to the Senate--there were more people who supported, you know, the arts.  We had Ted Kennedy, who was an arch supporter of both the humanities and the arts endowment.  And he and people, you know, who worked with them, you know, helped save those agencies.  You know, but there are always people who pick on the arts funding, because it gets a lot of publicity even though it's a miniscule amount of the federal budget, you know.  And it's never been increased back to its pre-1995 levels, you know, even though they've had some very aggressive chairmen of both endowments who, you know, just spent most of their time, you know, trying to convince people on Capitol Hill and across the country that this was worthy, you know.  And it was money that was going everywhere.  It just wasn't going in the pockets of, you know, some famous artist.
Speaker 1: Right.  Now, there's a--in terms of the economics of art, I know there's been--back in Illinois I know we had a lot of discussions about the amount of revenue that's generated by money invested in art.  And it seems to far exceed even the money invested in the Bears or the Bulls in Chicago [Illinois].  It almost doubles.  You know, the dollar you invest in art seems to--
Speaker 2: Yeah, because there's a reciprocal thing.  When people go to Chicago [Illinois] to see a big show at the Art Institute [of Chciago], they can factor in the fact of the admission to the Art Institute as well as, you know, what money they spent in nearby restaurants; if they stayed overnight, you know, what hotels they stayed in; the transportation back and forth.  And they can show how much money is just generated, you know, by a museum show.  You know, and I guess there are figures that exist too for, you know, what impact Broadway has on the New York City [New York] economy.  And certainly there are cultural events in Washington [D.C.] such as the Cherry Blossom Festival, where you get a million people who come, you know, to walk through the Cherry Blossom areas.  And then they eat in the restaurants; they stay in the hotels and, you know, it's a tremendous impact.  So, the arts, even in, you know, the smallest cities can have a real impact on the downtown development.
Story_ID: 56691
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  So, as a reporter who's covered this for a number of years, what do you think the trajectory is in the country?  Is the country more inclined to de-fund the arts now, or to increase funding for the arts, or--?  What do you think?
Speaker 2: Well, I think with the mayors looking at the economic impact...  And there is a group within the Conference of Mayors who studies this--you know, studies from, you know, small cities like Anniston, Alabama, to places like Miami [Florida].  You know, they go out of New York [New York] and Chicago [Illinois] and San Francisco [California] and look at, you know, other places.  Charleston [South Carolina] is, you know, a prime example of, you know, the economic impact of heritage tourism and arts; arts and crafts and stuff.  So, at that level, you know, the mayors make a very good argument to people that, you know, your tax money is being well-spent.  And some places like Denver have a dedicated portion of the tax money that goes to the arts.  So, there are different plans all around the country that help this arts economy.  And to make the argument that we're just not donating money to them...  They're generating money that comes back, and helps different things in the city.  So, I think more people are convinced that, you know, art is necessary and that art institutions add to the quality of life.  You know you want to go someplace and live someplace, you know, where there is activity.  You know, even if it's in a place, you know a small place like Sarasota, Florida which has a museum--you know, a couple of museums...  You know, an active theater, you know, community.  And the people gravitate towards that.
Story_ID: 56692
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, you've been involved in some investigative reporting, too.  So, what have been some of the investigations that you have delved into, in terms of the arts?
Speaker 2: Well, one of the top officials at the Smithsonian [Washington, D.C.] was recruited from the business world.  And there was a sort of a cultural clash between, you know, the permanent staff at the Smithsonian and the, you know, new... They call the top official the secretary of the Smithsonian.  So there--so, from the very beginning there was a lot of tension between those.  And he went on to, you know, make trips and have, you know, travel expenses, you know, that were very much out of line with how previous top officials, you know, had worked.  And so, we did FOIA [Freedom of Information Act] requests.  You can--when someone receives public money, you can request looking at those records.  And so, that's what we did.  We got his expense accounts and found out that, you know, that they were excessive, and that he had been doing repairs in his house to--and then using the house as an entertainment, you know, facility for, you know, people who were interested in Smithsonian business.  He also had a collection of birds and feathers.  And then through another FOIA, you know, we found out that some of these birds and feathers were endangered species.  And you know, it looked bad, at least, for the secretary of the Smithsonian to, you know, have these in his possession.  So it was, so the investigations, you know, covered like personal collections.  It covered expenses and, you know, kind of misuse of, you know, public funds.  So, that was the first kind of group of investigations that I did with a member of the investigative team, James Grimaldi.  And then a guy contacted us and said that his doctor had told him that he had an asbestos-related disease.  And he wondered if it was because of the work he had been doing at the Smithsonian.  He was a designer, you know, who worked with tearing down walls and putting up new exhibits, and all of that.  And we found that, yes, there was asbestos in that particular facility he had been working in.  And you know, eventually he received an award from the courts, you know, for that kind of misery he had been through.  And for our use of the FOIA rule and stuff, we received an award from the Investigative Reporters and Editors conference, you know, a few years ago.  So, yes there was plenty of opportunity to do, you know, other kinds of stories, you know, besides, you know, just whatever recent huge million dollar gift (laughter) they had received, or what new hall was being renovated.  There were, you know, there was, you know, lots of different kinds of approaches to that beat.
Story_ID: 56693
Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite story?
Speaker 2: There were a lot from the Smithsonian [Washington, D.C.].  There is a curator who's in charge of all the gems and minerals.  So, he's in charge of the geological rocks (laughter) and stuff.  But he's also in charge of the Hope Diamond, and all the other, you know, priceless gems that come into the Smithsonian--and it's mainly gifts.  And he--before he would put things on public display he would take me back to the vault, so I could see these things outside of the cases and stuff.  So, it was always fun to go with him and look at some rare ruby or (laughter) whatever, you know--diamonds or whatever, you know, was coming in.  The, you know, American History Museum [National Museum of American History, Washington, D.C.] had a huge renovation a few years ago with a...  They actually closed for two years.  And one of the main projects was the restoration of the Star-Spangled Banner flag.  And there were a group of people who worked behind a glass window.  And you could go and watch them, you know, just sort of cleaning the most tiniest bit of thread, you know, and removing the linen backing that had been put on in, you know, 1814 and stuff.  You know, so those, you know, kind of behind the scenes stories, you know, were always fun to do because you got to focus on some of the people who did the work, you know, as well as just the public, you know, presentation and stuff.  So, those were fun--
Story_ID: 56694
Speaker 1: --The Kennedy Center [Washington, D.C.] each year has a big event called the Kennedy Center Honors, in which they honor five people who have, you know, built a legacy in some part of the performing arts.  And one of the ways the story is announced--and they would, you know, give it to me first--the names of those.  And then they would give me the phone numbers of people and say, "Well, try to get so-and-so on the phone and see if they can, you know, react, you know, to getting this award."  You know, so I mean these are actually really famous (laughter) people.  So, you just call, and you say, "May I speak to Barbra Streisand?"  You know, "This is who I am."  You know, "May I speak to George Jones?"  "May I speak to Ossie Davis?"  (laughter).  You know, that sort of thing.  And then as it gets closer to the event, The Post [the Washington Post] would do profiles on all five.  And so, over the years, you know, I would, you know, sit down with Stevie Wonder or Chita Rivera or Quincy Jones and do the long form stories about their careers.  So, that's always interesting, you know, to get to talk to someone who's more famous than anybody you've ever met (laughter), and just chat with them.
Story_ID: 56695
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, one of the big stories the last couple of years was the Martin Luther King [Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] statue on the Mall [the National Mall, Washington, D.C.].  Can you tell us about some of the, I guess the ups and downs of that project, which is now considered a success?
Speaker 2: Well, the coverage of the story of getting the statue on the Mall was divided between the metropolitan section and the style section, because the statue is on federal land.  And the metropolitan section covers the park service, and all that.  So, we sort of divided up, you know, all the, you know, steps leading up to, you know, the arguments--you know, the fundraising, the selection of the sculptor and all that.  So, we all, you know, had a piece of that.  As it got closer to the first date for the dedication, what I did...  By then, we had a blog, an arts blog.  So, I decided that we would do sort of a countdown of civil rights songs leading up to the day it was dedicated, and to include songs that had been sung at the 1963 March on Washington.  So, to wrap that all together, I did an interview with Bernice Reagon, the folklorist and singer and founder of Sweet Honey in the Rock, who had been a principal person in the development of the freedom songs.  And she--
Speaker 1: Yeah, she was one of the original freedom singers.
Speaker 2: One of the original freedom singers.  And so, she had that history of how these songs have come to be part of that repertory.  So, what we did was we--I think we did about a month of just countdown.  I found the songs.  I found some of the, you know, YouTube videos of, you know, Joan Baez and Bob Dylan and everybody, you know, singing--Harry Belafonte, and all that.  And each day we would just publish, you know, one of the songs and tell a little history of, you know, why "Wade in the Water"--you know, how this developed, and how this developed, you know, over a couple of centuries; what it was used for and stuff.  And you know, the Pete Seeger story about you know, how this was a labor union song and was adopted by the Civil Rights Movement and, you know.  So, here's a clip, you know.  (laughter).  And so, you know that, you know, it was certainly time-consuming.  But it was fun, you know, and got a lot of response because, you know, it would lead up to...  You know, I think Aretha Franklin had said she had picked out the song she was going to sing.  So we found, you know, a YouTube video of her singing it.  So, we were able to, you know, use that.
Story_ID: 56696
Speaker 1: Okay, so the Dr. King statue... [Martin Luther King, Jr. Memorial, Washington, D.C.]  Now, the song countdown--what were some of the songs besides "We Shall Overcome?"  Now, we know about that one--that's gotta be in there.  But what were some of the other songs?
Speaker 2: Now, I've just drawn a blank.
Speaker 1: I know it's sketchy. (laughter).
Speaker 2: (laughter).  Now, I'm trying to think if we did "Abraham, Martin and John."  You know, Mahalia Jackson did "Precious Lord."
Speaker 1: They probably did "Oh, Freedom," I guess.
Speaker 2: "Oh, Freedom..."  Well, the Freedom Singers--we had several songs from the Freedom Singers.  Because at some point, the Smithsonian [Washington, D.C.] archives had put together a CD of freedom songs.  So, they were very accessible in finding them.  And there were also YouTube films of workshops that the Freedom Singers had done in the years, you know, since the sixties.  So, we had some of those songs.  But right now I just can't (laughter) think of the titles.
Speaker 1: There's a CD that I got over at the King Center in Atlanta [Georgia] with some of those original songs sung by them.  And I think Reverend James Bevel was singing some of them, and some of the other people--I mean as they were actually sung in churches and stuff.
Speaker 2: Uh huh, right.  Yeah, that's the kind of material...
Speaker 1: And on the trail, on the trail of these marches over the years.  But that's interesting.
Speaker 2: I think "Blowing in the Wind."  But I should remember more, but I'm not remembering the titles right now.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  And the, so the statue was actually dedicated last summer, right?
Speaker 2: No, it was--the hurricane came through, and the earthquake.  They happened within a week of one another.  So, they postponed the formal dedication to October [2011].  So, there weren't the crowds they had been expecting, you know, for the first time.  But you know, the weather was pretty dangerous.  So, you know, they postponed it.  But you know, during the spring--during the Cherry Blossom Festival, and then during the height of the school tours and family reunions, it has been, you know, packed around the statue, even into the evening when it has a much different look than it has, you know, during the day.  But there have been crowds around there, you know, all the time.
Speaker 1: How does it look different in the evening?
Speaker 2: Well, it looks a little softer, because of the shadows and stuff.  And it looks a little more contemplative.  In the daytime, there's a rigidness, you know, that puts a lot of people off--in his face.  But in the twilight and later, and with the lighting around it, it looks much softer.
Story_ID: 56697
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  Now, you did a story--I believe you did a major story on Charlottesville--on Monticello [Charlottesville, Virginia], right? On [Thomas] Jefferson's--?
Speaker 2: Well, this year the people from Monticello and the developers of the African American Museum got together and decided they would do a joint show about the families of Monticello.  And, you know, not only focusing on the slave labor, but also on the history of those families.  And they were able to, you know, do pretty full histories on about five of those families, you know, who had really interesting jobs around Monticello.  You know, carpeting and blacksmithing.  And, you know, there was one family that was in charge of driving, you know, all the Jeffersons from place to place (laughter) and stuff.  So, there was, there was certainly the rigors of slavery.  But there were also some options that people could do different jobs and then be able to see the world, you know, outside of Monticello.  So, you know, they did this joint history exhibit which has been really, really popular.  And some of the descendents of the slave families of Monticello actually came, you know, to the opening, you know, and added more, you know, to the history.  But Monticello is probably the most researched plantation in the country.  And they have not only done the white side of Monticello, they've been very diligent about getting the black side right, too, you know, through oral histories, through architectural digs and stuff like that.  So, yes, that was a groundbreaking exhibit.  You know, and a lot of people's, you know, eyes were open to, you know, the humanization of, you know, that period of history.  Because sometimes we don't know, even know people's names.  So, it was important to have a human story.  "Here's the guy who made the nails," you know.
Speaker 1: Right.  I can remember the nail story, for some reason.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: A nailery, they called it.
Speaker 2: Right, yeah.  It was just, you know, fascinating, you know.  And then there's been a lot written about the Hemings.  And so there were a couple of, you know, descendants of--not Sally Hemings' line, but her--it's her brother's line.  Her brother was actually an employee of Jefferson's for years.  He went to France with him and he paid--Jefferson paid for him to go to culinary school.
Speaker 1: Yeah, James Henry Jefferson?
Speaker 2: Uh huh, uh huh.  So, you know, just interesting to know those facts and to hear some of the stories, you know, from the descendants themselves.
Story_ID: 56698
Speaker 1: Now, earlier in the interview I was asking if you had black history at St. Bonaventure or in high school.  You said no.  But your job really--you have to, you picked up a lot of knowledge on black history and culture and crafts.  And not only black history culture, but a lot of history and culture in this area.  So, how have you--have there been major guides along the way, or people that introduced you to certain phases of art or the answer--?
Speaker 2: Oh, sure.  There is, there was an historian whose name is Letitia Woods Brown.  And she was at either Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.] or G.W. [George Washington University, Washington, D.C.] when she published a book about the free black community in the early 1800's in Washington [D.C.].  And so, I went and interviewed her.  And it was just this whole world of people who were trades people and who owned markets, you know, down where the National Archives, you know, building is now.  And you know, she brought that kind of--those decades, to life.  And she was teaching history.  Her husband had been a chief of staff for A. Philip Randolph.  And so, they brought me...  You know, after the interview she invited me, you know, to her house.  And so, I began to hear all these, you know, stories of this accomplishment of that era.  And then her daughter and I became best friends, and we still are.  You know, so she was certainly a guide to the history.  You know, just being able to sit and listen to Sterling Brown certainly opened my eyes to a whole generation of poets and stuff, though I certainly knew their names.   You know, to hear him recite his own poetry, and to hear him recite other poems...  Another guide was Maya Angelou, who's always been very generous with younger people, you know, that she meets.  And she--I did, you know, one of those first, you know, interviews--"When the Caged Bird", you know, comes out--and talked to her.  And we kept in touch, you know, over the years.  And when she was living in Oakland, I was in San Francisco, and I went to some reading she was doing.  And she invited me to her house and, you know that, was just a marvelous kind of day, you know, to be around her.  And she was cooking and, you know, and just talking and stuff.  And so, when she was selected by President Clinton [President Bill Clinton] to write his Inaugural poem--and I heard about it through, you know, a source on the Inaugural Committee--I called her, you know, and said, you know, "Can we talk about this?  You know, what are your thoughts?  What are you thinking about writing?"  And stuff like that.  You know, and I think that ended up being a front page story, you know, just having, you know, her talk about how she was feeling at that, you know, moment in time as this prominent voice, you know, for a lot of people, not just for African Americans.  So, she certainly was, you know, someone, you know, just through her personality and her own writing, you know, exposed me, you know, to a lot.  I have a very close friend, Peggy Cooper Cafritz, who is an art collector and is a former chairman of the D.C. Arts Commission.  So, she has certainly introduced me to, you know, new contemporary artists.  And some of the people that she has discovered early on, you know, now have museum shows and stuff.  You know, Carol Walker, you know, who had a one-person show at the Whitney [Whitney Museum of American Art] in New York [New York].
Story_ID: 56699
Speaker 1: Now you mentioned Eleanor Traylor--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --earlier, too, as--
Speaker 2: Well, Eleanor--
Speaker 1: --as the person who introduced you to--
Speaker 2: Eleanor is a good friend.  And yes, we talk.  And you know, she knew the other corner of black history and black culture.  She knew it within the theater world.  So, she did introduce me to, you know, a lot of not only the names, but the people themselves--of history.  And she was great friends with James Baldwin.  And that was the only time that I met James Baldwin was, you know, in her house and stuff.  So, but I've become friends with James Baldwin's sister.  He has a younger sister who lives in Baltimore who--Paula Whaley.  And she makes dolls and angels and stuff.  And so, I have a small collection of her work.  And when we go over to, you know, sit in her studio she, you know, shares her family's stories and stuff.  You know, so, as an introduction into the crafts side of things, you know, she's been really influential.  And then there, you know, have been people who were just, you know, curators, you know, in the field who, you know, introduced you to different things.  Lori Stokes Sims at the Museum of Art and Design in New York--she has, she was at the Met before.  You know, she's been, you know, a real influence in looking at things and stuff, you know.  But I have a few friends who are, you know, artists and just minor collectors like myself.  So, we talk about stuff.
Story_ID: 56700
Speaker 1: You have quite a collection here.  And tell us about, you know, how you started collecting and what you've collected.
Speaker 2: Well, what I wanted to do was to first collect paintings from places I went to.  So, I went to Haiti in the mid-seventies and bought some, you know, real paintings there, you know, instead of posters or anything.  And so, that was sort of the basis of that.  And then I do a lot of like craft shows and, you know, just sidewalk sales and stuff.  So, I've begun to, you know, build, you know, from that.  And then also--what I also collect are photographs of black men--you know, just sort of historical photographs.  And on a trip I took to Tuskegee [Alabama]--and this was also in the seventies--I met P.H. Polk, the famous photographer.  So, I have a print of George Washington Carver that P.H. Polk pulled himself, printed himself.  So, I mean that's really precious.  But I do look for photographs of black men.  And then I, you know, I do have friends who are artists.  Starmanda Bullock, she just retired from Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.] after forty-two years.  And she does more contemporary abstract painting, you know.  So, one of the pieces that she gave me on the occasion of my being a godmother of her daughter, I had to give back to Howard for her retrospective (laughter) last year, but it didn't make its way back.  And besides Paula Whaley's angels, I do collect black angels.  And most of them are packed away during the year, but I do keep about 12 out.  But I have about a hundred and fifty, you know, black angels.  You know, and some of them are just, you know, you walk into a church basement and they're having a Christmas craft show and you buy something there.  And then some of them are much more, you know, done with an artistic point of view and stuff.  So, you know, that's been fun.
Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite piece of artwork--one that you think is your absolute favorite?
Speaker 2: Well, I guess 'Stars.'  This is 'Stars' right here.  And, you know, that's one of my favorites, though I do have some--I have one Sam Gilliam original that he did in memory of a mutual, you know, friend of ours.  So, I have some Sam Gilliam.  I have some Lou Stovall, you know, who's a famous printmaker.  And you know, then I just, you know, collect...  There's a guy in Maryland, Curtis Woodley, who does sort of collages with photographs of black people, and then sayings and stuff, and he pulls it all together.  So, I do have one of his.
Story_ID: 56701
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, we always ask this question.  You retired in what, 19--, I mean two thousand and--?
Speaker 2: Twelve [2012].
Speaker 1: Twelve, right.  That's just a couple of months ago.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  It's been eight weeks, I think.  (laughter).
Speaker 1: Right.  So, what are--do you plan to--
Speaker 2: Work again?  Yes. (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I do plan to work again.  But in the meantime, I've been just organizing stuff.  And a good friend of mine, Karen DeWitt, and I are working on some book proposals.  So, and one of them ties back to my interest in local history--sort of a guide to all the downtown churches.  Because I frequently get asked this question from people who are planning family reunions.  "You know, we've been to the Smithsonian five times, you know, we've been to the Spy Museum, we've been--you know, and my family wants to, you know, to see something, you know, a little bit different."  And I started suggesting going to the churches.  They said, "Well, how do we find them, you know, besides the Washington Cathedral?"  You know, so, we're working on this sort of guide to downtown churches, places concentrating on Georgetown [Washington, D.C.] and downtown [Wasington, D.C.], because that's where most of the tourists, you know, would go.
Speaker 1: Just a quick...  What would be the oldest black church in D.C. [Washington, D.C.]?  Is that--
Speaker 2: Well, I think it's still Metropolitan AME [African Methodist Episcopal].  The 16th--the 19th Street Baptist Church on 16th Street...  But the--when it was just the 19th Street Baptist Church was way downtown, almost in Foggy Bottom [Washington, D.C.].  And it may have been founded before Metropolitan.  But they had to move, so they're right up here on 16th Street, and they've been there for years now.  But there were a cluster of black churches in Georgetown [Washington, D.C.] and a cluster downtown.  But this--what we're doing is including everything, you know--the Catholic church, Christian Science church, and everything--St. John's the Episcopal Church for the presidents and stuff.  So, that's one thing, you know, I'm working on.
Story_ID: 56702
Speaker 1: Okay.  What are some of your hopes and concerns for the African American community today?
Speaker 2: Well, certainly that people, you know, when they're inspired by something--you know, whether it's the Obama [President Barack Obama] election or it's Gabby Douglas's triumphs in the Olympics [2012]--that that is just not a passing concern; that people can stay excited about other people's achievements and try to adopt some of that in their own lives, you know.  It's really interesting that we have these breakthroughs, and then we keep describing the next thing as a breakthrough, you know, when we should have moved, you know, past, you know, that point and stuff--even though I'm still the first in whatever, you know, field it is.  But I hope that kind of temporary excitement and stuff, you know, can continue.  And I hope that we can reverse this trend of young black males not going to college, and not seeing opportunities to move, you know, through the ranks of corporations or education facilities or human rights, you know, groups.  They seemed to be turned off by that.  And you know, the numbers of African-American women who are in college are very, very exciting.  But they still struggle when they get out.  So--even though they have that education footing to, you know, try to find some way to, you know, push people into whatever they want to do, you know, to keep their own, you know, dreams and stuff.
Story_ID: 56703
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now when you look back on everything you've done to this point, is there--what today would you consider to be your legacy?
Speaker 2: Well, I think, you know, coming through with that generation of people who did make an impact in the newsroom, in numbers.  And the numbers were very good in the seventies and eighties.  And I was part of sort of a diversity, you know, movement.  I joined, you know, Bob Maynard's Institute for Journalism Education [Oakland, California] in the late seventies, and taught for four summers during their summer institute, and directed it for two summers at UC-Berkeley [University of California, Berkeley, California].  And you know, just to see what, you know, those people who were extremely diverse--from Native Americans to Latinos to African-Americans--have been able to accomplish, you know, in the field.  You know, now many of them are, you know, editors and managing editors at different places and, you know, just good reporters who bring a different perspective to their writing.  That was certainly, you know, an achievement, and something I'm very proud of.  And just, you know, mentoring the other people who, you know, come through The Post [the Washington Post] and who, you know, have gone on, you know, to work within The Post and within those ranks--or go outside and have different kinds of achievements, you know.  That's also very satisfying, you know.  But, you know, now we still have the struggle to maintain those numbers.  A lot of people, you know, are leaving, and a lot of people, you know, just were burned out and decided they needed to do other things.  Just to replenish those numbers would be important.
Story_ID: 56704
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now when you look back over it again, I mean, is there any major activity or thing that you would change if you could back and change it?
Speaker 2: I don't know.  No, I was pretty consistent in, you know, what I did and what I decided, you know, to report on and so forth.  I guess maybe I should have gotten started a little bit earlier in the book business (laughter), instead of starting now when all the publishing houses are disappearing, and we may end up self-publishing, you know, things.  You know, so you know, over the years everybody would say well, you have to write a book, you have to do this, you know, you have to do that.  And I always, you know, put it aside.  You know, so, I guess doing that sort of thing earlier would have been beneficial and satisfying.
Story_ID: 56705
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well, can you tell us something about your family?  Now, you've got a couple of--
Speaker 2: Children.
Speaker 1: Yes, a couple of sons.
Speaker 2: They're adults (laughter).
Speaker 1: Right, yeah.
Speaker 2: They're adults.  My oldest child is Douglass Darden.  You're not surprised he's named Douglass.
Speaker 1: With two 'esses', right.
Speaker 2: With two 'esses', yeah.  (laughter).  Just black folks--you know, it's two 'esses.'  Got to get those two 'esses' at the end.  And he's twenty six.  And he works in the security industry.  So, he has all sorts of odd hours.  And then my daughter, Diedre, who's twenty-two.  Yes, she's twenty two, and she lives in New York, she lives in Brooklyn [New York].  She's a hipster (laughter).  So, she lives in Brooklyn and works part-time at the Rubin Museum, which is the Himalayan Art Museum in New York.  And she got interested in that just because a couple of her friends work there and stuff.  And so, that's where she got her, you know, first museum job.  So, and she's an art history major.  So, she's interested in being in that world of curating and stuff.  So, and my husband, Edward Darden, has retired from the government.  He worked for the U.S. Civil Rights Commission for many years.
Story_ID: 56706
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, is there anything we need to talk about that we haven't mentioned, before I ask my last question?
Speaker 2: No.  We talked about art collecting and stuff.  We talked about...  Well, one hobby that I have that people are always teasing me about this is, I love to go to live concerts.  So, you know, I will go to Atlantic City [New Jersey], you know, on a whim (laughter), just to see a live concert and stuff.  And I mean there's just something about--you know, you're not close to any of these people because it's a huge venue.  But you know, just that intimacy which you can develop, you know, at a live concert.  So, I had a checklist.  And so, I did get to see Bruce Springsteen at the Meadowlands [Sports Complex, East Rutherford, New Jersey] before they tore it down (laughter).  And I do a lot of Aretha [Franklin] concerts.  And you know, Smokey Robinson and Stevie [Wonder].  But Betty Levette was one of my people I've gone to see a lot of recently.  You know, as she's been re-discovered, I've re-discovered her too, you know.  (laughter).  So, that's one of my passions, is going to live concerts and New York Yankees baseball games.  I will jump on the bus and go to the stadium and go to a one o'clock game, and get back on the bus and come home.
Speaker 1: So, you share your mother's enthusiasm for baseball?
Speaker 2: Yes, exactly, except she was never rooting for the Yankees.  (laughter).  But she would go with me, and just root for the other team, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But, yeah I'm going a week from today to the--the Yankees will be in Baltimore [Maryland].  So, I'm going up to Camden Yards [Baltimore, Maryland] to see a game.  So, those are sort of my other passions--concerts and baseball games.
Story_ID: 56707
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, the last question is similar to legacy, but a little bit different.  Maam, how would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: Well, first of all, as just a good friend to my friends.  You know, to the people I know.  You know, being a good parent and spouse, being a good family, you know, person.  And then, you know, as far as, you know, my career--being a productive, you know, enlightening, good reporter, you know, who was always fair, you know, as well as sometimes a little lyrical and stuff.  You know, and to be remembered as part of the people who did try to make a difference in how minority communities, you know, were covered, you know, at certain points in time.  And that the coverage was not only fair and inclusive but, you know, non-stereotypical.  You know, I broke the ground by telling stories, you know, that were different and didn't reinforce any kind of stereotype or, you know, misguided psychology or anything like that.  You know, that were very honest stories.
Story_ID: 56708
Speaker 1: Okay.  Can you tell us about the photo that we're looking at?  Go ahead.
Speaker 2: Okay.  This is a photo of my mother, Adelaide Trescott on her 80th birthday.  She was born in Brooklyn, so we went to the River Cafe, which is right near the Brooklyn Bridge.  And as a teenager, she had been part of the crowd that went to the Brooklyn Paramount to see Frank Sinatra--or the new York Paramount--one of those Paramount theaters.  And Frank Sinatra had been her favorite singer, you know, along with Billy Eckstine and Ella Fitzgerald and Sarah Vaughn.  So, I gave her, for her 80th birthday I gave her 80 songs by Frank Sinatra.  And so, there she is, holding a cassette (laughter);  This is a photo of myself, my mother and my husband, Edward Darden, eating at Windows on the World, which was on the top floor of the World Trade Center, about 1983, '84 [1984].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: This is myself, my father, Alfred Trescott, and my brother, Paul in the backyard of our house on Carteret Avenue in Jersey City, New Jersey.  And this is my brother and myself, probably, you know, going to church, coming from church, in the backyard of that house on Carteret Avenue;  This is my grandmother, my maternal grandmother, Isabel Matthews Braaf, holding me, and also in the backyard;  This picture was taken about 1992 here in my house in Washington, D.C. with my husband, myself, my stepdaughter Cecily, my mother, my friend Daisy Voight and my son, Douglass, and daughter, Deidre.  It was someone's birthday (laughter).  That's my father, probably taken in the late 1930's.  That's my mother and her mother.
Speaker 1: Can you name them for us?
Speaker 2: Sure.  That's my mother, Adelaide Trescott and my grandmother, Isabel Braaf, in the backyard of our house in Jersey City.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Could you name your father, too?
Speaker 2: Sure, Alfred Trescott.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Because somebody's going to listen to the video and--
Speaker 2: Oh, okay.
Speaker 1: --and then come up with a caption.
Speaker 2: Oh, okay.  And this is my daughter, Deidre, my mother Adelaide, and me in the yard here in Washington, D.C.; This is another photo of my father, Alfred Trescott, probably taken in the late thirties;  That's my mother, Adelaide Trescott, standing beneath the Brooklyn Bridge [New York, New York] on her 80th birthday;  This is the wedding photo of my mother, Adelaide Trescott and my father, Alfred Trescott, who were married in the rectory of Christ the King Church in Jersey City;  This is a beach shot at South Beach in Staten Island, my mother and my brother.  My mother, Adelaide Trescott and my brother, Paul Trescott; This is a picture of me that was used in an ad for The Washington Post, probably in the early eighties, 1980's;  This is a picture of me at work interviewing Richard Roundtree and Leslie Uggams.  And the other reporter in the picture is Roy Betts, who worked for Ebony and Jet;  This is a picture of me, Jacqueline, interviewing Ossie Davis; This is a picture of myself, Jacqueline, interviewing Walter Mondale in his office at the White House.
Speaker 1: I think that would work better if you held it sideways.  Okay, next.
Speaker 2: This is a newsprint that the staff made up as I was leaving The Washington Post in June, 2012.  And because I had covered the arts, they were making a connection to the monuments;  And this is a continuation of the newsprint page that they organized, with quotes from different editors and people I had covered, and some excerpts from stories I had written.
