Story_ID: 210214
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe.  I'm interviewer today for The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is [Edgar] Carey Lane.  Sir, can you give us your full name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: Sterling Tucker, S-T-E-R-L-I-N-G, T-U-C-K-E-R.
Speaker 1: And do you have a middle name?
Speaker 2: I don't--or initial, I don't.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  And what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: December 21st, 1923--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Akron, Ohio.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION).
Speaker 2: Okay, all right.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So, and what is today's date?
Speaker 1: Today is August 2, 2004.
Speaker 2: And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 1: Washington, D.C.
Speaker 2: And sir, what is your occupation?
Speaker 1: I'm a management consultant.  I own a consulting firm, Sterling Tucker [&] Associates [Washington, D.C.].
Speaker 2: Okay.  And you were for many years director of the Urban League?
Speaker 1: I had a one career in the Urban League, Akron, Ohio, Canton, Ohio--well, Washington Urban League, National Urban League, so I spent time there.  Then, I had a kind of career as an elected official, city council, first appointed by the president, then elected.  Then in government, federal government, I was an administration and assistant secretary as the presidential appointee in the [U.S.] Department of Housing and Urban Development with President [James Earl "Jimmy"] Carter [Jr.].  And I spent other times in the government and various assignments with different presidents.
Speaker 2: Peace Corps and--
Speaker 1: It's helping to develop the Peace Corps, and help develop the War on Poverty, and help design programs of that kind, served on a number of presidential commissions of one kind, election tourism, many countries abroad, many parts of the world.  And I got involved in the diabetes movement--became the first black chairman of the board of the American Diabetes Association.  Then I was with the International Diabetes Federation where we put in a strategic plan across the world working with the World Health Organizations [sic. World Health Organization (WHO)].
Speaker 2: Because you've been in public service basically your whole life.
Speaker 1: I had been and then I--
Speaker 2: Okay.  I just wanted to establish that and it was beyond, just a consultant so that's--
Speaker 1: Yes.  All my life, I've been involved in, yes-
Speaker 2: Okay, now-
Speaker 1: --in public life--
Story_ID: 210215
Speaker 1: Before we go into depth, there are five lightweight questions we always ask, and just bear with me on these, and give me a lightweight answer (laughter).
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: The first one is, sir, what is your favorite food?
Speaker 2: I like soul food, of all kinds.  I have to be careful that I don't get too much grease, but I do like soul food.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: I think it's probably blue.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I think so.
Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: I believe it's summer, although some people think it's hot, but I like, I like summer, I think, best.  I'm a tennis player.  I get a chance to play more in the summer than any other time during the year.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you have a favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: I think probably the Caribbean.  I think I like the country of the Caribbean.  I like the water and kind of the lifestyle and can kind of control what I do.  But I don't want to be in the big cities and doing things that I do the year around.  I don't want to go do a lot of sightseeing.  I just like the loafing that is very nice in the Caribbean.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And, lastly, do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: No, I can't think of any favorite saying or thing.  I have a favorite belief.  I do believe that--I really believe most things are possible, and I live that way.
Story_ID: 210216
Speaker 1: Now, I'm going to ask you about your family history.  I'm going to ask about your mother's side of the family and your father's [John Tucker] side of the family, but we're going to start with your mother's side.  Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: Una Mae Vinson Tucker.  That's U-N-A, M-A-E, V-I-N-S-O-N, Tucker, T-U-C-K-E-R.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what is her date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: You know, I can't say her date of birth.  My mother died in 1960 at the age of sixty-five.  She was born in Georgia, either in Fort Valley [Georgia] or Macon [Georgia].
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, she was born in 1895, I guess, then.
Speaker 2: That must have been the year.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  So, Fort Valley or Macon, Georgia?
Speaker 2: Yes, um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And, well, tell us what you know about her side of the family.
Speaker 2: Well, I know her side of the family best because I grew up with them.  I knew her parents and her father and her mother [Alice Stembridge Vinson].  Her father, Columbus Vinson, was--I think, the wisest man I've ever known--not highly educated, but very, very brilliant.  He was greatly learned, particularly of the Bible, but of events and history.  I loved to sit at his feet, and other people did also.  Her mother was a very religious woman because they all were very religious about my family.  Her mother was quite religious.  As a matter of fact, her mother almost died once because she didn't believe in that she should see a physician.  And everybody was trying to persuade her--it wasn't a, it wasn't a matter of her religion.  She's Pentecostal, but they didn't suggest you not use physicians.  But her faith was so great, and her faith was so deep in the healing powers of God that he relied pretty much on that, until, to her utter disappointment, her family probably made her eventually see a physician.  I knew my--I met my great-grandparents--that is the parents of my mother, my grandparents of my mother.  I met them when I was very, very small.  And, of course, they'd been in slavery and, but I hardly knew them, but I do remember having met them.  I grew up with my mother's side of the family because they came to Akron [Ohio].  And her brothers and her sisters, and all of them--we grew up with them and their family.  So, I knew them very well, and there still is a reunion of that side of the family called the Vinson-Stembridge reunion.  That's the family of my grandmother and my grandfather.  And, matter of fact, they'll be in--this summer, in Texas.  They meet generally in Akron every summer.  And so, I know them quite well.  I've been very, very close to them all of our lives--my brothers and sisters, and I.  And we grew up and my parents were deeply religious also.  And my parents had always been--elders and grandparents, leaders in the church, which is almost like a family, almost like a family church.  And so, I knew them very well.  My father's side of the family, I never learned quite as well.  I never met my grandparents [Aaron Tucker] on my father's side of the family--
Story_ID: 210217
Speaker 1: On your mother's [Una Vinson Tucker] side, how far back can you take them?  Is there any--
Speaker 2: Well, in terms of my life, I can take back to my childhood.
Speaker 1: Well, in terms of the family, how far back do you know? Do you know like how--I mean, how far back can you document your mother's family or how far back does it go?
Speaker 2: Well, as I say, from the point of it being same with my great-grandparents, with her grandmother and her grandfather and whom I, as I said, knew as a small child.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And just a little about them, but not very much about them.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And tell us more about [maternal grandfather] Columbus Vinson.  You said he was a very learned man and--
Speaker 2: Yes, he was a kind of a student to the Bible.  I would say that he was kind of a lay expert on the Bible, from my point of view.  He'd turn around--I loved to watch him as I was a kid with men who were ministers, clergy people.  He was not, but--and the discussions of the Bible, I should listen to those great discussions of the Bible.  He knew it backwards and forwards, but he understood it so deeply and so completely, and could articulate so well.  But he was a man who also read and he would, in the matter of current events, and I can see him now--a very jovial man.  You could see--throw back his head and laugh.  I never saw him angry, even in those discussions of the Bible and very intense discussions with his friends when they'd sit around, but I never saw him as an angry man.  But I considered himself a very learned man, but more than learned, I considered him very wise.  I mean, in his thoughts and his counsel, and things he said and the knowledge that seemed to have, that was beyond book learning.  It was out of experiences and insights is the way I knew him.
Story_ID: 210218
Speaker 1: Tell us about your mother [Una Vinson Tucker].  What kind of personality did she have, and what did she do for a living?
Speaker 2: Well, let me just say that I can't imagine anybody more than blessed than I with the parents I had.  My mother was a homemaker most of our lives, although she at one point, as I remember, that she did day work about one day a week.  But we grew up with our mother at home, you know.  We had a hot breakfast every morning before going off to school.  And, and she was just a good, good homemaker--quiet, beautiful woman, from my point of view, physically and mentally.  She was quiet and the kind of a woman who's kind of set back, and my father [John Tucker] took the lead, although he was a very quiet man.  But she made a very good home for us, and the way I remember her, she was not of--she was not of ill temper, very steady, didn't talk an awful lot--just a good, just a good woman.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now did she go to school in Georgia or--
Speaker 2: Uh-hum.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: (Unclear), whatever it was.  I don't know how much it was, but it was in Georgia.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: When she came to Ohio, my parents had two children at the time who were born in Georgia.  And the rest of us were born in Akron [Ohio].
Story_ID: 210219
Speaker 1: Do they [Tucker's parents, Una Vinson Tucker and John Tucker] tell a story as to why they moved from Georgia to [Akron] Ohio?
Speaker 2: You know, in my later years, I've been more interested in that kind of thing.  In growing up, I just kind of accepted it that there we were.  I was always a contemporary person in my living and thoughts, in the main.  That's why I have no idea.  I don't know who came first, but you know how some members of the family come, and others will follow and, but I don't know which ones came first.  But I think they came looking for jobs in the rubber industry at that time.  I think that's how the migration of my family got started to Ohio.
Story_ID: 210220
Speaker 1: Are there any interesting stories from your mother's [Una Vinson Tucker] side of the family you can share with us?
Speaker 2: Let me see--not particularly.  I remember a couple times when I got a whipping and those things, I guess, you kind of remember.  And once I came in from school, and I'd had a fight that day with a kid, and I didn't have many fights in school with kids.  I can remember only a couple, but there was this kid.  It had to be a Jewish kid, bigger than I, and I'm not sure what the source of the fight was.  But I came in, and I heard his mother was there, and I didn't know that was his mother.  She was talking to my mother, and she was talking about how I beat up on her Isidore [ph.].  I remember his name was Isidore that day.  And she was explaining to my mother why--that I'd beat up on Isidore.  And I recall that, that evening--so, she left; nothing was said to me that evening.  My older brother--we had a truck.  My father [John Tucker] did extra work with a truck, and my older brother helped with it, and he'd often take the kids for a ride at night.  And that night, he's getting ready to take the kids riding.  It was a late spring evening, and I guess it had been fear of rain with my dad, with him, because--I didn't know (unclear) whether to take our kids out for a ride--because I was going to get a whipping.  I didn't know that because I got ready to go, too, when I heard everybody going for a ride in the truck.  And my father--I remember my father saying very quiet, and said, say, "Son, you stay here."  And I stayed back, you know, he--I got a whipping for fighting Isidore.  And my family would not--those who said that, you know, "Protect yourself."  You never thought in those terms--you shouldn't fight.  Let--you know, kind of, and I don't know whether they tried to determine who was right and who was wrong--the fact that I had a fight and had beat up on this kid.
Speaker 1: So they just didn't approve of fighting, period?
Speaker 2: They didn't approve of fighting.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I remember that one.  I kind of felt that, I think that was one time that I kind of felt that my dad was--my parents weren't fair to me.  And--but I didn't--but they were such good parents that I did not complain.  I remember once my mother--there was something on the stove, and after dinner, it was a late evening and after, and something's left on the stove.  And I went to get some of it off, and my mother said, "Eat it all, eat it all."  And what she really meant was don't eat it all.  I thought she meant--eat it all.  So, I got all of it.  And I remember her smacking my hands, so you're so smart and I--it took me a while to figure that out.  But, you know, how old folks used to talk, you know, "You go and do it, go ahead and do that," and I did it and I thought about that.  I've had many chuckles in my life later about that, and I've told my children about that.  But that's how people used to talk--I guess at some degree.  But that was her saying of, "You'd better not eat it all," you know.  But, you see that our life was so good that I can't even pick out anything major that was right where I had a disagreement with my parents.  My parents were very quietly supportive, very supportive.  They provided a good home.
Story_ID: 210221
Speaker 1: Now, can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us.
Speaker 2: John Clifford Tucker, J-O-H-N, C-L-I-F-F-O-R-D, Tucker, T-U-C-K-E-R.
Speaker 1: Now, what is his date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: Let's see, his, he was--let me see.  He died at the age of seventy-four in 1964.  And he was born in either--I meant to check with my sister [Angenelle Tucker Saulsberry] on this--either Fort Valley [Georgia] or Macon, Georgia.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, he was born around, roughly 1890, I guess.
Speaker 2: Yes, around that, um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay, around 1890.  And, well, how much do you know about his side of the family?  How far back can you trace him?
Speaker 2: Not, not very far.  I know two brothers that I met when we were kids.  I remember that we knew of one in Detroit [Michigan] whom we knew of to be a very nice man.  And I remember one night--it seem like it was over Labor Day weekend at night.  There was a knock on our door and my parents were at church.  And we opened the door, and he introduced himself as our Uncle David [ph.].  We'd never met him and we didn't know he was coming.  I'm not sure that my parents knew he was coming.  And we were so delighted to see him--Uncle David.  And then, we got to know him, and he took us all out for ice cream a couple of times when he was there.  It was a big thing and after that sometimes in the summertime, we'd go and visit with Uncle David and his wife.  They had no children in Detroit.  And there was a younger brother, Aaron, Uncle Aaron [ph.] that we met.  My brother--my father and his brothers all looked something alike, very much alike.  I understand I look very much like my father.  And they were all built about--pretty much the same.  They were men who were quiet, and very thoughtful men, very quiet and very thoughtful.  And then, and I knew them and their wives.  But I don't--this Uncle David had no children--and I, so I've not met many people from my father's side.  I remember that once my father was sitting in the kitchen of our house, and he was in deep thought, and in mourning.  And I didn't know why, as a kid, but I learned that my mother [Una Vinson Tucker] had--one of his parents had died, and he felt that he couldn't afford to go to the funeral.  And yet, we grew up.  I never lived in a rented house in my whole life as I was growing up.  And my father always managed to save a little bit, and I never felt I was poor.
Speaker 1: What did he do for a living, sir?
Speaker 2: Well, he worked for the City of Akron [Ohio]--ended up pretty much as a foreman in the street cleaning department and--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --and so, he worked there all of his life.  That's the only job he had.  He did, as I say, he had this pickup truck.  He would do extra work and, you know, to help make ends meet in the family, for the family.  And, but we, as children, never suffered in things that we needed and always felt protected and comforted, and comfortable--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --even though what we had was meager, but I didn't think of it as poverty.
Story_ID: 210222
Speaker 1: How many brothers and sisters do you have?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I have to think each time I'm asked that.  I had four brothers--one died as an infant--and three sisters.  There were eight of us altogether--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --including me.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Is there a story that's been passed down about how your parents [Una Vinson Tucker and John Tucker] met?
Speaker 2: You know, I should have learned all these things.  And I'd better--my sisters probably have some of this history and I need to get it, so I can pass it on, but I don't have the slightest idea.
Speaker 1: Sorry, they never talked about it how they met or anything?
Speaker 2: Not, not to my knowledge.
Speaker 1: Do you suppose they met in Georgia rather than Ohio?
Speaker 2: Oh, I'm sure they met in Georgia--
Speaker 1: Well, you, yeah, because you were--other people.
Speaker 2: --because they were married there.
Speaker 1: You have other brothers and sisters born in Georgia, yeah, right, that's right.
Speaker 2: And the families must have been--lived in proximity of each other.
Story_ID: 210223
Speaker 1: Can you describe the neighborhood you lived in, and some of the sights and sounds and the smells of growing up?
Speaker 2: The neighborhood that I first remember living in--there was one that I lived in before, that I don't remember, where I was born, on [East] Bowery Street [Akron, Ohio].  But I lived on Euclid Avenue most of my life.  I mean, but we used to have--before, I lived on Warner Street.  It was a small dead end street, which eventually that whole block was bought up by the city, and became a part of a housing development that was put there, and public housing it became, in that area.  So, when our house was bought by the city, then we moved into a higher grade neighborhood, and where I spent my years in high school [West High School, Akron, Ohio], most of my high school years and college years [at University of Akron, Akron, Ohio], and on Euclid Avenue, which we still have a family home there.  But so that, that's pretty much where we lived.  And I was very active as a kid.  I was not a--I didn't care a great deal for organized activity.  I didn't care much for being in organized baseball or organized games.  I liked sandlot things, somehow better, because I guess it didn't commit me to any time and long periods.  I enjoyed sports as a kid.  I could run fast, but I wasn't a particularly good athlete.  So, I was never in sports that were--where I'd compete particularly. Only one, that I remember, a softball team, which my cousin was a coach, and I--and a lot of good players on that team, and I think I was on because my cousin was the coach of that team.  So, I could run fast, enjoyed sports, but not really good competitively in sports.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And the--but enjoyed playing like other kids.  So I was always pretty studious.  And a friend of my sister's used to say to my sister--I learned as I became older.  And she said she never saw me as a kid that's been without a tie, even as a kid, going to school, often I wore a tie--
Speaker 1: Now, was that your--
Speaker 2: --in elementary school [Samuel A. Lane School, Akron, Ohio].
Speaker 1: Was that your own doing or your own idea?
Speaker 2: Yeah, that was just, that was my own doing--would wear a tie and come home, take off my school clothes.  We had school clothes and play clothes.  But I wore a tie a lot when I was in, even in elementary grades, and then, and in high school, and since.
Story_ID: 210224
Speaker 1: Would you describe yourself as a serious young man or?
Speaker 2: I was serious at study, and I was serious at play, so I enjoyed my--I had friends, and I enjoyed them.  And I lived as a child in a neighborhood of some bullies.  When I moved to the last neighborhood that I was there before Euclid Avenue [Akron, Ohio], that wasn't quite when I was a junior in high school [West High School, Akron, Ohio] by then, but I remember there was one bully.  I still remember his name, Posey Foster [Sr.], who was--kind of bullied all the kids.  And he was from a large family.  And everybody was afraid of him, including me, and Posey would find a way to pick fights.  And the--and so eventually, he got around to most kids so he can fight them.  I remember this one day, Easter Monday, we were--there had been an egg hunt at Perkins Wood [sic. Perkins Woods Park, Akron, Ohio].  It's a park--we were coming from the park.  And Posey picked a fight with me.  For about two blocks, he would--want to make me fight, you know, and I'm trying to avoid it.  But the whole--kids are out and egging us on, and I was afraid of him.  But then, all of a sudden, I got real--I got angry. He made me angry.  And he was standing up in my face--you know, kid get up in your face and talk and (unclear).  Nobody wants to move, and at that point, somehow all fear was gone, and I was hoping he would hit me, and he did--a terrible blow.  And I went crazy practically--beat him up, got him down on the ground, and after that, I never had a problem with Posey Foster.  Now, it's interesting--I don't know if my parents [Una Vinson Tucker and John Tucker] heard about that or not, but I didn't get a whipping about it.  If they'd known Posey Foster, they would have known that I had--would have had to fight, and I remember that very well.  But, so I played and--
Speaker 1: I guess he remembered it, too.
Speaker 2: I'm sorry?
Speaker 1: He remembered it, too, after--
Speaker 2: Yeah, I'm sure he did--never had a problem with him after that ever again.  And he was--I think he was more, more shocked than anything else because I took advantage of his shock, that is, to get on top of him.  Otherwise, I probably wouldn't have had a chance.
Story_ID: 210225
Speaker 1: But, I was studious. I studied, and I, as a student, I loved learning.  I always have, then and now.  And I was a leader as a young guy.  And many people in my family--I think my grandfather [Columbus Vinson] thought that I was going to be a preacher because I would--weekends often in our church, we would have--and I remember a large bedroom we had where the boys slept, in my family.  And we have kids come in and sit on the beds in the bedroom, and I would--we'd have church, and I'd be the preacher.  And I loved--I was, I loved reading the Bible, and then I knew the books of the Bible.  And I taught Sunday school, a Sunday school class, and then so I was involved.  I enjoyed going to, enjoyed going to church.
Speaker 2: Now, what denomination were you?
Speaker 1: My--I grew up in the Pentecostal church, although I never actually was a member of the church.  Isn't that strange?  That is, I wasn't--the Pentecostal  church, you're baptized, you speak in tongues, you go speak the Holy Ghost, you know, and while I felt I was in the Pentecostal church,  I never became a member then because at that time, you couldn't dance and you couldn't go to movies.  And, as a young man, I wanted to go to movies and I wanted to dance, and I didn't want to be hypocritical.  And so, my parents [Una Vinson Tucker and John Tucker] never--they encouraged me to go to church, and we had to go to Sunday school, and I enjoyed going to Sunday school and everything.  So, I was raised in the church and like--I was raised like I was a member of the church.  But, technically, I never became a member.  And because of those things, you know, I thought, well, if I joined the church knowing that I'm going to go to movies and knowing I'm going--I'm joining it as a hypocrite.
Speaker 2: Now, what was the name of your church?
Speaker 1: The Friendship Apostolic Church of Christ [Akron, Ohio] (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) okay.
Story_ID: 210226
Speaker 1: Tell us what school you attended.  What was the name of your school?
Speaker 2: Okay.  I went to [Samuel A.] Lane School, L-A-N-E School in Akron [Ohio], elementary school, and West High [School, Akron, Ohio].  At the time that I went to school, they didn't have the junior high system.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So did you go to junior high at West High or at Lane?
Speaker 2: There was no junior high.  You went from grade one--kindergarten through eight, and nine through twelve.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, you went through eighth grade at Lane and then--
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: All right.  Well, what was your favorite subject at school?
Speaker 2: The social sciences pretty much, pretty much all the way through: history, current events-type things, subjects which--economics, philosophy, those kinds of subjects--not the physical sciences.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Not math or biology, those subjects, although I did well in biology, but physical sciences were not my long suit in terms of interest.  I was a pretty decent student all the way around, but some subjects I was--liked better than others.
Story_ID: 210227
Speaker 1: Now did you have a favorite teacher in grade school [Samuel A. Lane School, Akron, Ohio]?
Speaker 2: Yes.  I have a favorite story about that.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I was in the eighth grade.  And I remember the teacher who was my homeroom teacher who was considered by some to be rather severe and rather strict.  And in her class each day when--she would stand by her door when kids would come into the class, and when they'd leave, she'd stand by the door as we left the class.  She'd just stand there until all the class was out.  On this particular day, as we were leaving class--my seat happened to be right in front of her desk--and as I came out to walk out of the class, she came out and put her arms around me and walked to the door--wasn't talking, wasn't saying a word--just put her arms around me.  Got to the door and stopped as she always did.  When I got down the hall, I hadn't gotten my nerve enough to look back, and she was looking at me, and she winked.  And I really knew I was somebody and remembered that I'm a person, you know.  Not just a number of a student in her class--I'm a person.  Years later, after I came to Washington [D.C.], I was making a talk to a teachers' convention here, and I'd been invited to speak.  And I told of this experience when I was made to feel like somebody by this teacher.  And I told them--I gave her name, and there was wild applause.  I didn't know what about.  At the end of the meeting, when I--people came up to speak to me there, she was in the group (laughter).  And there she was--just as pretty and young looking to me as she was, these many years later.  But--so I remembered that experience all those years, and I told those teachers how important it is to let individuals, people know they're individuals, and that each one has worth as an individual, and that they're appreciated, and have something to offer, because I never knew that she knew I existed, except as a member of a class--not as a person, you know.  But she demonstrated to me something that I thought was very important.
Speaker 1: So, that silent gesture, you know, meant a whole lot to you.
Speaker 2: Meant a whole lot; said a whole lot.
Story_ID: 210228
Speaker 1: Well, tell us about West High School [Akron, Ohio].  I mean, what were you like in high school?
Speaker 2: I was a student, a good student, and reasonably popular. I was popular only as a student.  I wasn't popular because I stood out in any way especially.  I was in student organizations, and I was a leader of student organizations in high school.  I wrote for the sports writer for the newspaper, high school newspaper.  And most of my involvement were in things that fairly good students would be involved with or people interested in current events.  Those kind of things, I was involved with primarily. I was in student council, of course, in high school, and then also in the University [of Akron, Akron, Ohio].  I was the first African American student member of the student council back in the university.  My wife [Alloyce Robinson Tucker] was the second.
Speaker 1: Now, tell me this now.  Were your schools all integrated in Akron [Ohio]?
Speaker 2: Yeah, all the way through.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, they didn't have segregated schools in Akron at that time?
Speaker 2: No, they didn't.  Yeah.  You know, as a matter of fact, I've never had a black teacher anywhere along the way.  I only thought about that recently.  We were talking to my children about that.
Speaker 1: Were there any black teachers in the Akron public school system then?
Speaker 2: Uh-uh, not then, they came after.  I know those who came after I left, but at that time they weren't any.  First of all, there was a person named Herbert [R.] Bracken and, eventually, there were a number of them.  My wife taught in the Akron school system, and her sister taught in the Akron school system.  But as students, there weren't any at the time we were--that I was in the elementary school [Samuel A. Lane School, Akron, Ohio] and high school.
Story_ID: 210229
Speaker 1: When we were in Akron [Ohio], we were just impressed by all of the stories of these strong families, you know, in Akron.
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.
Speaker 1: I mean, I don't think I've ever been to a town where the stories about the family life were so strong.
Speaker 2: Strong family life, strong family life in Akron, yes.  It was kind of a hallmark of the city.
Speaker 1: Yeah, it was--
Speaker 2: And a lot extended family relationships that were strong, yeah.
Speaker 1: Right, right, I mean all the stories I heard is [HistoryMaker] Art Minson, [HistoryMaker] Dorothy Jackson, [HistoryMaker] Janet Purnell--they all told of the strong family life.  Yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  And when you think of those people you know, you think in terms--not just individual, you think of terms of families.  And I'm sure that's what people thought of us as the Tuckers and the Vinsons, strong Vinson family.  And I went back to speak about three years ago.  My family--that is the Vinson-Stembridge family reunion--invited me to speak at a--what they would have almost annually, I think, was a, what they called a seniors' dinner, senior members of the family.  And I was invited there to speak a few years ago, and I went and, much to my pleasure, and I'd not been before.  I didn't even know there was such an event.  And I walked into the room in this restaurant, and it must have been a hundred family members, you know, several generations--all of them who are still in Akron there, and it was a great Sunday afternoon for me just going to find out, "Who's your father?" and "Who's your mother?"  And you see what part of the family they're from, and people I didn't know.  And I've gone back in the last twenty years, mainly for funerals, you know.  And so I--but I was so proud of so many members of the family that I met and that I didn't know, and some that I had not seen for a long time.
Story_ID: 210230
Speaker 1: You said you were the sports reporter for the [West] High School [Akron, Ohio] paper but--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --and you also are a real fast runner.  Did you play any sports at all in high school?
Speaker 2: Nothing, no organized sports, I didn't.
Speaker 1: Okay, didn't run track or anything?
Speaker 2: Uh-uh, I, I didn't run track.
Speaker 1: Now, were black students allowed to participate on the teams and--
Speaker 2: Yes, yeah, they were.  Like today, there were some of the better members of the team and--but they did.  I remember Ed Feeney [ph.]--well, football player and a basketball player, but they didn't--I was a sports reporter, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  You know, that part of the country is big football country, I know.
Speaker 2: Big football country, and basketball to a lesser extent, but more football.
Speaker 1: I think it was--
Speaker 2: It was then.
Speaker 1: Yeah, the most famous basketball--well, the most exciting young player to come out of school in a long time is from Akron [Ohio] now, LeBron James--
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, right now, yeah.
Speaker 1: --yeah, Akron ball player but yeah.
Speaker 2: He seemed to be quite a fine young man, too.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  People are real excited about his career.  And I mean the football thing--I'm figuring with Canton [Ohio] and Massillon [Ohio] and Akron and Cleveland [Ohio], you know, so.
Story_ID: 210231
Speaker 1: You were interested in social sciences and student government.  What were your career aspirations in high school [West High School, Akron, Ohio]?  Did you have any?  Did you have any idea of what you wanted to be?
Speaker 2: I knew that I wanted to do something that was involved with people in some way or another.  Like a lot of kids, you know, you thought in terms of professions you knew about.  There weren't any black teachers so it, but you know that people, black people taught, you know that.  All over the South, you knew that was the case.  But I--you know, you think about noble careers, like medicine, I thought I might be a doctor.  I might be a lawyer.  You think about those things.  I thought I might be a clergyman.  There weren't people in public life then, but I know I was interested in public affairs, and those kind of things.  I remember back in those days that when I'd have to mow the lawn, and in my early college years [at University of Akron, Akron, Ohio], and mow the lawn.  And, in mowing the lawn, you had hand mowers, not electric mowers.  I used to save up things to talk about, so I wouldn't be bored--I mean, things to think about, so I wouldn't be bored.  And I would think about things that I wanted to do in life, and I'd think about things in faraway places with strange-sounding names, and I'm going to try to help save the world, and leadership I'm going to play.  And I thought about all those things, and dreamed about lots of different kinds of things that I wanted to do in life and just daydreaming, and sometimes so much so that when I finished mowing the lawn, I didn't want to be finished because I wasn't through daydreaming yet.  And I spoke to a group about two months ago of young people and I would--I was telling them--my theme in my speech was seek adventure and not security, you know. I was thinking that; I was thinking about all these great adventures.  And I was going to do things in life.  And I said, you know, I says, "As I look back on what I've done, it's much of what I thought about, dreamed about"--I was talking about how you need to kind of dream true, how to make your dreams come true after you dream.  But my dreams were a way of having adventure and, but I really have lived out some of my dreams.  So, I used to do that; I used to think that way--
Story_ID: 210232
Speaker 1: I would read a lot, and I read a lot of black history--what we call black history now.  There wasn't an awful lot of books, but I knew them.  I became familiar with Howard University [Washington, D.C.] and I--Thurgood Marshall, and that whole--all those people I came to love and know of them.  And when I came to Washington [D.C.], it was my good fortune to meet many of them, and to be, have friends with them.  Thurgood Marshall was a friend.  A lot of people--Sterling Brown, some others from Howard University--I knew were my, became my friends.  Todd Duncan, I came to know.  And his son was, and I were--well, our families were close friends.  And so, I came to know a lot of people I used to read about and know.  And so, life became real, you know, on many, many fronts.
Speaker 2: Did you read a lot newspapers--
Speaker 1: All the time.
Speaker 2: --or the black papers then?
Speaker 1: Yeah, because I sold them, peddled them, Pittsburgh Courier [New Pittsburgh Courier] and [Baltimore] Afro-American [Afro-American Newspapers], and some of the papers I sold, I read, and I loved reading them very much so.
Speaker 2: What are some of the history books that you--I mean, did you--
Speaker 1: Well, you know, I read, you know, 'Up From Slavery' [Booker T. Washington], and some books of that kind, and Frederick Douglass, and about the--all those books, those things I'm reading that whatever I get my hands on back through that time.  So, I always had this interest in this subject.  And I knew something related to changing life, changing--I think saying the world--that seemed like--seems so ridiculous, but those were the kind of thoughts that I had.
Speaker 2: Okay.  And did you ever have a chance to meet any of the major black leaders of those days, Paul Robeson, or I don't know--
Speaker 1: I never met Paul Robeson.  Back in those days when, in a place like Ohio, you wouldn't get much chance to meet.  They didn't come through places like, you know, like Akron [Ohio].  After I came to Washington, of course, and there are a lot of people and became involved with.  I met [Reverend Dr.] Martin Luther King [Jr.] back before I came to Washington.  He and I--and got to know him rather well, but he were contemporaries in terms of age.  But some of the other people, I didn't--were older, like, as I say, Thurgood Marshall, and Sterling Brown, and others whose names don't come to mind--come to mind right now, but I got to know, after coming to Washington.  They were in their later years, their waning years.  They'd made major contribution by that time.  I was just beginning to get started, really good.
Story_ID: 210233
Speaker 1: You said you were--were you president of the student council?  Did you say that, or was it or you were--
Speaker 2: I was a member of student council.
Speaker 1: Member, okay.
Speaker 2: I was never president of student council coming up.
Speaker 1: And when you say your wife [Alloyce Robinson Tucker] was on student council, too?
Speaker 2: Yes, in Akron [Ohio], uh-hum.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: I was her manager, campaign, of student council.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So, you met her in [West] High School [Akron, Ohio] then, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I--well, this was in college [University of Akron, Akron, Ohio].  We were in student council together.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: But she was--I met her when she was about a junior in high school, however.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, we started dating when she was a senior--had just finished her senior year.
Story_ID: 210234
Speaker 1: Now, how was Akron [Ohio] set up?  Did--was there a separate black community in Akron, or did they live in different pockets around the city?
Speaker 2: They lived in different pockets around the city.  We organized--we had what we call, through the Urban League then, Akron Urban League--[Akron] Community Service Center [Akron, Ohio].  We organized what we call the youth forum of which I was president.  These were students in high school and college who were interested in urban affairs.  And I remember then, what you call the executive director of the Washington Urban League--Akron Urban League Community Service Center, called the community center then, was named by the name of George [W.] Thompson.  He--a gentleman of some Indian [Native American] blood, and he'd been an Olympian, tall, slender.  He looked like he was made for running, elegant and eloquent.  And I remember that we met in the community center, Urban League, this group of students from the various high schools.  We all came from different high schools.  We were all interested in community affairs.  And at that time, there was some discussion about whether to have a black YMCA [Young Men's Christian Association (Y)], or whether to have a new Urban League building and that kind of thing.  And, and so, we had some discussions and we talked about it among ourselves and community.  And we had some concerns.  One, we were opposed to having a separate black YMCA building in Akron.  We felt that it ought be an integrated YMCA program in Akron.  Now, we were young people just constantly giving this voice in these things publicly.
Speaker 1: Now, that implies that the Y in Akron was not integrated.  Is that, was that true?
Speaker 2: It was not.  There were some YMCA activities, but not a real YMCA program, and why, blacks were not, to my knowledge, members of the YMCA building.  Going to that building, going to their programs there, and so, they would talk of establishing a branch.  They had some branch Ys but they really, they were in suburbs mainly.  They were organized--so talking about building a YMCA for blacks, and which they did.  And we eventually said, "Well, we do need YMCA activities."  They never built a building.  They built a YMCA program.  I think they might have gotten building later on.  But we also felt that the Urban League building would--many of us--and I came to work in the Urban League as right out of college [at University of Akron, Akron, Ohio]--but we felt that the Urban League was not as aggressive and as progressive, and it needed to be.  We loved George Thompson who was executive, but we felt that there was not the push that needed to be.  And so, we started--I guess, I start saying these things and the youth forum took positions on these things, and we were in the newspaper.  I remember that George Thompson became ill.  He was ill about that time.  And there were these stories in the paper.  And he invited me--he was in the hospital and asked me come to the hospital to see him and I did, as a gentleman whom I respected greatly.  And he wanted to know why I was opposed to him.  I said to him, "Well, I'm not opposed to you," and, "I just think that we needed a more aggressive and more progressive program.  We need to be moving more to open up jobs and to have a full Urban League type program, and not with an emphasis on recreation to the extent that it was, but in jobs, and job development, and housing, and some of these other things.  And so, we needed to be more aggressive in our program."  He was trying--he was a wise man.  And I respected him greatly, but I felt that perhaps he was a man whose time had passed, and he died in the midst of those discussions.  And, but we continued to push and then, I was later hired by the Urban League when I finished college.
Speaker 1: Now, you said that George Thompson had been an Olympian or--
Speaker 2: Yeah, he'd, to my knowledge, said Olympian as I knew him, but I understood that he'd--I'm trying to remember which school he had attended.  He had--he'd not gone to a--his school had not been a black college, I don't believe.
Story_ID: 210235
Speaker 1: So in those days, we were--we had a newspaper.  We published a newspaper, and I remember I was--
Speaker 2: So, the [Akron Urban League, Akron, Ohio] youth council formed, yeah?
Speaker 1: Youth form--published a newspaper.  Then, I remember one day--and something I kind of regretted.  I remember that I--the--what--there was a fellow in town, lived on the same block I did, only a few blocks from us--I mean, a few houses from us, because we went to the stop, the same bus stop.  But Akron Beacon Journal wrote a big story about him.  He had a shoeshine stand in the back building, and they wrote a big story about him, about what a role model he was, and how he had, he bought his home, and middle class living, and this, and how much loved he was by people, the business people in town that got their shoes shined at his stand.  And I was asked about it by the paper.  And I'm president of the youth forum and I said, I pulled out how nice it was and how good it was for Bob [ph.].  I can't--his name was Bob--how good it was for him and for his family.  I said, "But that was not the kind of role model we were seeking for our young people because we wanted their aspirations to be higher in terms of their achievements."  And that was in the paper.  And, boy, I saw his wife one day.  I was at this bus stop.  She came and had me--asked me to come into her house.  When I came in, she told me how crushed she was, and how crushed the family was, at how I put her husband down, I put the family down.  And I was trying to explain to her--that wasn't was that was about.  But what we were trying to do is to get young people to look to the future, to plan for our future, and plan for the brightest future that could be available to them.  And so, in that sense, he was not a role model in terms of what he did and to--and in terms of accomplishments for him, that was great.  In terms of being a role model for young people, that we're trying to--want their aspirations to be higher.  And she said that, but what troubled me was that she said, "You don't, you really don't care who you hurt, do you?"  And I said, "No, I guess maybe I don't."  And that was a wrong statement to say because I did, but that isn't what I meant.  I mean, what I meant was that I saw a larger responsibility.  And in that process, some people might become offended, and I know they were offended, but what I said, I thought was right.
Speaker 2: And I--
Speaker 1: So, I meant hurt, being in terms of offending people.  That's what I meant.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Now, that's a story, that's a debate.  I think it was in Cleveland [Ohio] actually in 18-, I believe it was 1848 or 1853 where Martin Delany, at a convention, said something similar, and Frederick Douglass and others took exception to it.  Delany was saying that black people, free black people in the North, should aspire to do something other than become maids and porters and waiters, and so forth.  He said, "Let's start," you know, "let's even--let's just stop being those things," you know.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: And he was misconstrued--said, "Well, you're saying we shouldn't have ample work.  I mean, that's nothing wrong with doing--."  He says, "But that's not what I'm saying. We ought to aim higher."  I mean, he said that (unclear) got the same kind of response.  People who saw, but you know, I think we can, you know, we understand where you're coming from, he said, you know.  And here, the Beacon Journal puts the shoeshine man as a role model.
Speaker 1: Yeah, that's that, and so that's where my thinking was, but I didn't express myself appropriately, I don't think to her.  But I felt terrible about the way I made her feel, but I felt that was right.  But I was pushing for things like that back then--
Story_ID: 210236
Speaker 1: --I remember, at University of Akron [Akron, Ohio], on the debate team, we went to a debate tournament in colleges from across the state, and we were on traveling.  And we were on this Friday, and we stopped for lunch and we're--I was the only black member of the debate team.  We stopped for lunch and they wouldn't, they don't want to serve me, although in Ohio, there was a law, an anti-discrimination law in public accommodations.  But, you know, they have ways of discouraging you, and they wouldn't serve me.  They weren't going to serve--they said they'd serve the other members, or they could bring my lunch out to me.  Well, of course, they didn't--I mean, my colleagues, my friends and classmates didn't--wouldn't accept that.  And so, we had to move on.  I remember once we did a--well, we had the university singers, sixteen voices, and I was one of those who was giving a concert one night, and the head of the group, he was taking us all out; we were going to go out and have fun at a place where they had beer and dancing and so forth.  We went, and they were going to let others in, but there were three blacks in that group.  They weren't going to let us in.  So that's in Ohio where they had public accommodations.
Speaker 2: Yeah, this is all the way up near Lake Erie--
Speaker 1: Oh, yeah.
Speaker 2: --northern Ohio, as far as you can go without getting in the lake.
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: And in 1941 or so, we're talking about--
Speaker 1: So, we're organizing--
Speaker 2: --nineteen forty [1940]--
Speaker 1: Yeah, that was, yeah, yes, right back in there.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: So, we'd organized them.  To young people, we would say, we organized demonstrations, you know, to challenge the law and so forth.  I said, but don't, but don't settle--because people count on you settling out of court.  They give you fifty dollars or twenty-five dollars from the settle [settlement].  I said, don't settle out of court.  Stan Kelly [ph.] was a friend of mine, who's in Washington [D.C.] now, who we grew up together on the same block.  His father was a lawyer, a civil rights lawyer, fierce fighter.  But Stan Kelly and I were busboys at what then was the Garden Grille Restaurant in Akron [Ohio], what then was a five-star type restaurant for that community.  And they were going to--now, I remember one Sunday we were there, and we were going to have--we saw them turning blacks away from the restaurant, there, as busboys.  And we were the first black busboys.  Isn't that something to talk about, being the first black busboy?  And we saw them turning people away.  They had the--people could sit on the counter and different levels of--I guess, expenses really, which required different forms of dress.  We saw them.  They would say, people--they'd turn them away by saying, do you have a reservation?  Well, they didn't require reservations.  Or you have to have a shirt and tie.  Well, they didn't require ties.  We knew that.  We'd see this going on.  So, we decided that we were going to come.  So, with our dates, and my girlfriend, who later became my wife [Alloyce Robinson Tucker], and Stan's girlfriend, we, we made reservations to come to the Garden Grille Restaurant on a Sunday.  We really couldn't afford it. We knew it.  We were busboys.  We got there and the hostess said, "Stanley, [HistoryMaker] Sterling [Tucker], what are you doing here?"  We said, "We have reservations.  We've come to dinner." She said, "You know you can't eat here."  And we insisted upon eating because we were going to, we were going to take them to court.  We're not settling.  So we were fired, you know, but we ate, and so, we end up with that.
Speaker 2: So, they served you?
Speaker 1: Oh, yeah, they served us.
Speaker 2: Because they knew if they didn't, they'd have a suit.
Speaker 1: And they knew there was going to be a suit on their hands, and they--and so, they served us.  But they found a way to fire us soon thereafter.  But so, I was--what I'm saying is, you know, all my life, I was fighting, you know, injustice in that way.  It always pained me, and I couldn't imagine how people in the South could live under those conditions. At that time, none of those kitchens are legal segregation.
Speaker 2: Did your parents [Una Vinson Tucker and John Tucker] condone what you were doing?
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: Or did it make them a little afraid or what?
Speaker 1: No, they were very supportive.  They knew what I was doing and they supported it, and they didn't necessarily encourage it or discourage it, but they supported me, yeah, in what I was doing.
Speaker 2: Did you have--is there anyone you can think of or any--I mean, that really like pushed you out ahead, or were you just out there by yourself?
Speaker 1: Yeah.  It was my human spirit that carried me.  It wasn't that--it wasn't anybody in particular.  It was just where--it's just my makeup, you know.  But when I became a member of the staff at the Urban League, I just--I don't want to get too far ahead, but this one instance.
Speaker 2: Well, if it's a story, we should probably save it for the next reel because we're about to run out.
Speaker 1: Okay, very well then.  I--
Speaker 2: But that's something you've, you know, as a young man, you're really stepping out in front.
Speaker 1: I just believe in all this--I mean, to my soul, I mean.  It was just me.
Story_ID: 210237
Speaker 1: --I mentioned George [W.] Thompson earlier and, like I said, he's a wonderful man, a wise man, and he was a great speaker.  They were having what you call "Race Relations Sunday" at this Congregational church, a white church.  And that's, you know, people invited in a black speaker, and that kind of thing, and so, they were having this service, and George Thompson was the speaker.  And some of us were there from--[Akron Urban League, Akron, Ohio] youth forum was in the audience.  And he made a wonderful speech on race relations.  I remember a white couple sitting next to us, and the lady said to her husband, next to him.  When he's finished speaking, she said, "Boy, wasn't that a great speech--too bad he's a nigger."  Yeah, too, too bad he's a nigger (laughter). Isn't that something?
Speaker 2: That's amazing.  I mean, not--now people look at it now--
Speaker 1: Talking about race relation--we're talking about race relations--"Too bad he's a nigger," (laughter).  Oh, and I remember the--in the University [of Akron, Akron, Ohio] (unclear), at this all university contest--Ashton Speech Contest, somebody left money to the university to give a contest every year on--students could select any subject to be in this contest, on some contemporary subject.  And I wanted to enter this contest, and I selected a subject.  And the judges were people, business people and lawyers from out in the city, and to be, come to the university and judge the contest.  And I gave this speech--that time was in the World War II [WWII] and at the end, about the end of that, you know, that period, and they're saying, "What are Negroes fighting for?"  It was my subject, and I developed the subject, "What are Negroes fighting for?"  And I was saying that, that [Benito] Mussolini and [Adolf] Hitler and Hirothito [Emperor Showa] are saying, asking black soldiers, "What are you fighting for?"  Says, "Why are you over here fighting us, you know?"  And they said, "Well, back in your own country"--said, "in the southern part of your country, you are lynched and burned at the stake, and your southern tormenters march away singing, 'My Country, 'Tis of Thee.'  What are Negroes fighting for?"  You know, I gave this speech.  And I went on to say why we were fighting, that we are fighting enemies abroad, and when the war is over, we'll be fighting just as hard--the enemies at home.  We're fighting to preserve the opportunity to become free at home and we would--so it was a good speech in that regard.  But that stuff was too harsh.  I knew I'm going to win--I came in third.  And the lady, girl student, came to me and said, "[HistoryMaker] Sterling [Tucker], everybody knows you won that contest."  But I wanted to win the Ashton, so next year, I got in it again.  And I gave a nice safe speech about vocational guidance (unclear). Vocational rehabilitation was my subject.  And I won the contest--I wanted to win it.  And I coached my wife [Alloyce Robinson Tucker] and she won that contest, too, later on.  But I wanted to win the contest with the university, so I gave a kind of speech that would allow me to win if they thought I was good enough.  So, all through that, you know, we had to work our way through all those kinds of problems and all those kind of issues.  So, even in Ohio, where--which was a free state, and had good laws, but people found all kind of ways to violate them.  And so, we had to work to, even then, to try to get them enforced.
Story_ID: 210238
Speaker 1: When you were on the verge of graduation from [West] High School [Akron, Ohio], did you know where you were going to go to college and--
Speaker 2: Well, I knew, I figured it was going to be an Ohio college because money situation, you know.  And, and like most of my fellow students, many of them black students, were thinking about Akron University [sic. University of Akron, Akron, Ohio] or Kent State University [Kent, Ohio].  And some were going to Kent State University because it was a state.  Akron was a municipal university at the time.  State universities took students without entrance exams, because, if they graduated from high school with a bona fide diploma, you had to--it let them enter college, although you could flunk them out in nine weeks at state university.  The University of Akron, you had to take an entrance exam to get in.  And so, if you didn't pass the entrance exam, you couldn't enter the University of Akron, so you didn't--you never got to the nine weeks.  So, some went to Kent, because they wanted to go to a state university first of all, and there was perhaps wider options, and some went because they thought it would be easier entrance, and once they got in, to stay in.  And relative to the University of Akron, I was able to get in.  I worked, and I would--very happy to be able to go to college.  And I worked at Firestone Tire and Rubber Company [Akron, Ohio].  And I worked full shift from three to eleven, sometimes longer.  I'd go to school in the day and go to, from there to the, to Firestone.  And I was active in things on campus and things.  Like I said, I was on the student council, and I was in other organizations on campus.  I was working as a student volunteer in the Urban League at [Akron] Community Service Center [Akron, Ohio], and I was, and I worked a full shift at the factory.
Speaker 1: Now, you graduated from high school in '41 [1941], was it? In '41 [1951].
Speaker 2: I finished in '42 [1942].
Speaker 1: Forty-two [1942], okay.
Story_ID: 210239
Speaker 1: That's a lot of activity though.  You worked full shift at a tire and rubber company [Firestone Tire and Rubber Company, Akron, Ohio] which ,it can be--
Speaker 2: I had a full shift.
Speaker 1: --hot and draining in a tire factory, yeah.
Speaker 2: Well, the lucky part about it was I worked in the office areas of the--what they call the fourth and fifth floors and I--and so I picked up paper.  I was kind of an office boy after work and did--but did some cleaning in those offices.  I was not in the factory part.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I had a foreman who had been a high school principal.  And he was my foreman and he liked the idea that I was in college [University of Akron, Akron, Ohio], and the work that I'd have to do--I'd come in and get my assignments for the night, and I'd get four or five things I needed.  There was a routine, I went through and I'd finish it--I'd go back for more work.  He'd give me more work, and I'd go back.  And sometimes, he'd say, "Now, [HistoryMaker Sterling] Tucker," he says, "I'm going to give you this assignment.  I don't want to see you the rest of the night."  So, I'd go study.  And, but other people were stretching out their work to last all evening.  I would do mine in a few hours, but they stretched out for the whole night, and he knew that, you know.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: So, he would--I later said to Harvey Firestone, Jr., who was the president of the company at the time, because they were active in the Urban League--once I became involved in the Urban League and was on the staff at Urban League, he'd--sometimes I'd study in his office at night.  And he thought--they had a great paternalistic attitude, so he liked that.  He thought that he would tell that story about I used to study in his office and, now, I did.  I had some of the best typed papers.  The secretaries in those offices would type my papers and, on school and everything, so it was a blessing to me.  You know, I'd get weekend work.  I could work seven days a week and I'd get my work done--be able to do some studying.  And so, it was a great blessing to me.  And I used to walk those halls, and work those big offices, and see all the big executives and those big halls, and those wide corridors in the executive dining room.  And I used to think, boy, I'd give my right arm to work here, you know.  And then, and after I left HUD [U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development] when I was in Washington [D.C.], a member of the Firestone family was on a board with me at the National Theatre [Washington, D.C.] board, of which I now still serve.  And he asked me once about going back to Fire-, he never lived in Firestone--in Akron [Ohio] himself.  He was from one of the Firestones in California somewhere, but came to Washington, but he was a member of that family.  And he knew that I'd worked in the Firestone Company.  And he'd talked about me to the family--wanted to know if I'd be interested in working at, back at Firestone someday.  And so, I was, as I said, secretary at HUD at that time, but I was not going to be in the second administration, thinking that [President James Earl "Jimmy"] Carter [Jr.] was going to be re-elected.  And so, I'd gone to see the president, gone in to see the president, to say that I was not going to be in the second term, but he may want to appoint somebody in my place as assistant secretary who would--were to give him some advantage in the campaign by having named somebody.  And he's like me, and told me he'd like me to serve out, you know, the rest of the administration, but it would be okay for me to look around.  So, I went to Firestone--Firestone invited me.  I went back there for a visit.  And I went back, and I had this lunch with big executives of the company.  And they were talking about the opportunities there, and offered--talking about the vice presidency for me.  And, but you know, I tell people--I say, I went, and I went through the offices.  They didn't seem so large anymore.  Those corridors didn't seem so wide.  The executives dining room didn't seem so fancy any more.  It didn't seem like the same Firestone.  It was mainly because I've seen much of the world, you know.  By that time, my horizon was so much broader, but so that was a whole new world, and Firestone was a very small part of the world for me by that time.  But then, that's what I was saying--if you seek adventure, not security, don't--some people want to grab the first ring they come to--the brass ring.  Let me get this job, and then you hold it for life, you know, thinking that there may not be anything--and the people feel insecure and, and they're made to feel insecure.  I understand why they do that, but I tell young people to prepare yourself, you know, for life, then you can take risks, and you'll--greater adventure.  There will be great opportunity, but preparation is the key.
Story_ID: 210240
Speaker 1: So in college, you're pretty busy.  You're working on all these things.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Are there any other college stories that you have for us?  How was the University of Akron [Akron, Ohio]?
Speaker 2: Akron.
Speaker 1: I mean in terms of--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: I take it because of what you said about the admission policy at Kent State [University, Kent, Ohio].  There weren't that many black students at Akron University.
Speaker 2: There were not an awful lot with--and I didn't mean to put down Kent State.  I was just saying, some students went there, and some went to the, went the other places.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  I know the state university system in Ohio.  I mean, Kent State is one of many state universities.
Speaker 2: Yeah, wasn't many, yeah, and--
Speaker 1: Many, many--
Speaker 2: --and now Akron is a part of the state system.  Yeah, the university is now a state university.  But, you know, blacks were finding their way in the university.  My wife [Alloyce Robinson Tucker] was on the queen's court--she was the first black on the queen's court.  That's, you know, that, not, nothing major, but it--what I'm saying that, that was the first time anybody had been part of the queen's court, May queen's court, you know, those kind of things are important in, kind of in college.  And--but my wife was active in college.  She was a bright student, probably brighter than me.  The--I used to make her father feel good by saying, "You know, Alloyce is, you know, she has three degrees.  I only have two."  And he used to very proud when I would say that, but I let him know that she was a very bright and wonderful, wonderful person, in addition to being a very attractive woman.  But, but people--one thing, students did then, as they do a lot today--blacks, you go to student union, you know, where blacks were located pretty much, you know, and they ate together pretty much and et cetera, although I studied with, with a lot of kids all over, and you sit around campus, little study groups you had.  And I had--I guess more whites were in study groups I were in than blacks.  We had three or four students sitting, studying together--different subject areas, you'd have different students studying together, makes it work in those study groups in college.  But I felt that I could be a part of whatever I wanted to be a part of.  Being on the student council, one was elected, I was in the contest where I--a contest where had the students been voting, I'd have won that contest.  The students would have, you know, embraced me.  I never felt, among students or the faculty, I never felt like I was an outsider to the university, and I felt that my scholarship was recognized by students and by faculty.  And students did participate in things, maybe not as much as they might have, but not because I was aware that they were--they weren't saying we were legally barred or officially barred from anything to my knowledge.  I just--they hadn't become a part of university life in quite the way they had become later--they, the way they are now, I understand.
Speaker 1: So, you took a kind of, like aggressive approach about being involved?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, yes, I wanted to be, you know. These are things I wanted to experience.  These are things I wanted to be a part of.  And it's interesting because I could've, you know, I mean, like most of them say, went to college and went to work [at Firestone Tire and Rubber Company, Akron, Ohio] because that was enough.  Most students were working at that time because there were-jobs were available, and students had to work, you know, as they do now.  And so, I was grateful for the opportunity to work and grateful for the opportunity to go to college.  But I did want to be a part of college life.  And so, I actively engaged and involved myself, and I was encouraged in doing so by my classmates.
Story_ID: 210241
Speaker 1: What was your major [at University of Akron, Akron, Ohio]?
Speaker 2: I was a sociology major, a subject (unclear) didn't like very much (laughter), but I was a sociology major, and I loved it, and my master's degree was in psychology, social psychology, but my undergraduate degree was in sociology.
Speaker 1: And what was, as social- what was sociology like in those days?  Has it changed substantially since those days or is it basically the same?
Speaker 2: Probably, probably it--well, I'm sure it has changed substantially because it's probably a broader subject than it used to be.  And, but it was interesting.  I had a professor, first name, Harmon O. DeGraff.  I still remember his name all these many years, wh- I learned a lot. I remember some of the concepts that he taught, that I still remember.  But I do also remember that he taught a subject on the family, and many students objected to his teaching that subject because he was single, and my wife [Alloyce Robinson Tucker] particularly, I recall, thought that he wasn't qualified to teach a subject on family.  And, but she also felt that he didn't like her.  I didn't realize that.  She told me years later, and she's said this up until recently, off and on, when I would challenge her.  She said he didn't like her.  But her undergraduate degree was in sociology also.  And she got a degree in education, and she got a master's [degree] in education, but she said he didn't like her because I was a--he considered me a prize student.  And he felt that by our dating, I'm going to get--she was holding me back, you know, from being what he thought I could become.  And the--so she felt that he, if he didn't like her for that reason, I never had that sense at all.  But he probably just didn't make--pay much attention to women particularly, and probably preferred male students.
Speaker 1: Yeah, in those days--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --especially women had a rougher time in school, I guess--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --in terms of being recognized.
Story_ID: 210242
Speaker 1: Any other significant things from college [University of Akron, Akron, Ohio] before we graduate you and move on to--
Speaker 2: Yeah.  No, let me see.  Those were wonderful days and wonderful times, and I'm glad I didn't try to rush, just rush though them.  I'm glad that I enjoyed it and experienced it, and I still maintain some connections and reestablished some connections later.
Speaker 1: Now, did you have to worry about the draft at all when you were in college?
Speaker 2: No, well, when I was in college, I was--had an interesting experience at the time of the draft.  I went down because everybody had to be registered, and I went down to be drafted for the draft board.  And they--and I wasn't called up.  I was deferred, and I wasn't quite sure why.  I'd had pneumonia earlier, but I didn't think that was enough to be deferred.  And so, but I wasn't called up, and I didn't know why, so I remember most of my friends had gone off into [U.S. military] service.  And I felt a--guilty because I was not serving my country, and they were.  And so, I went down to my draft board on a weekend before Thanksgiving, I recall, before that weekend, before that next weekend.  And I asked my draft board, you know, why I hadn't been called.  And they went looking for my papers.  And they found them way back in the pile somewhere, out--they, you know, out of the mainstream of the papers.  And they found them.  They said, well, we got a group going up on next Tuesday up to--you go up to Cleveland [Ohio], you go out from Cleveland.  I said--"Well, maybe"-or--"well, maybe we'll put you in that group."  I said, "Wait, wait a minute, it's too close to the holiday."  I said, "Let me stay on for the holidays, and let me go up after Christmas, and call me after Christmas."  Well, Christmas never came.  I was never called.  So, the very inefficient draft board.
Speaker 1: So, do you think it was just a bungle basically and--
Speaker 2: You know, I think it was just bungled.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I think, basically, bungled.
Speaker 1: Well, I don't--
Speaker 2: After--by that time, I'd gotten used to feeling guilt.  My guilt had passed about going to the service (unclear).
Speaker 1: Well, this is an era, this is--World War II [WWII] is going on, not while you're in college and--
Speaker 2: Yeah, and everybody is feeling great, patriotic, and everybody is gone.  All the young men were off where--and not off on the campus.  And I had been ill, and it was noted, but my draft was merely delayed, but I wasn't deferred yet.  And I just think that they either got the papers mixed up, or they just didn't get back to me.  I think they just didn't get back to me.  You know, everything was moving swiftly and swiftly and swiftly, and I didn't get caught up at the time that my maitre got caught up.  And so, I think I just got left behind is what I think really happened.
Speaker 1: So, you don't think your activism had anything to do with it or anything?
Speaker 2: Oh, no.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: No.  I, I think that although I do believe, I do know that one of my--that Stan Kelly [ph.], my friend, who I mentioned at the Garden Grille [Restaurant, Akron, Ohio], he later came to Washington [D.C.].  And when he first--he had a hard time getting into government at one--he was in government, but then that, all that [Joseph] McCarthy stuff came up, and so forth.  And then, he had a hard time because he wondered, "What was [Akron Urban League] youth forum?"  It sounded like a communist organization, and he had to try to explain to them.  I had to send some material there, you know, here, down to Washington, about what the youth forum was all about because he did have some, as I recall.  I'm not sure how extensive, but I recall vaguely now, that Stan Kelly had a little problem about the youth forum.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But he did work in government.
Story_ID: 210243
Speaker 1: Did you graduate [from University of Akron, Akron, Ohio] with any particular honors or anything when you--
Speaker 2: Yes, I received some honors.  I was not Phi Beta Kappa or anything like that.  I didn't work that hard.  I--because I did all these other things, but I was an honor student all the way through school.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you graduated in 1946, was it?
Speaker 2: In 1946.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what, did you start working for the Urban League right away?
Speaker 2: It's--right, I started working.  I came on the staff at the Urban League at graduation.  And, and let me see, I started full time in youth services and worked there.  And then I went to graduate school and also to Akron U [University of Akron], and got my master's [degree] in 1950, and the same night that I marched for my graduate degree--I got married in 1948, and that's when my wife [Alloyce Robinson Tucker] got her undergraduate degree in '48 [1948].  Then, she went back to school to get a degree in education.  And, and the night of our graduation, she was marching for her bachelor's [degree] in education.  I was marching for my master's.  And she was pregnant, and she'd been trying to decide for a couple of days whether to go to the commencement or not, because she was due.  And we were concerned the whole night at--during the commencement that she would got to the hospital.  And we went home that night from the commencement.  We never went to sleep because during the course of the night, she went to the hospital, and the baby was born.  My daughter [Michele Tucker Jeffrey] was born the next afternoon.  So, the next day, the [Akron] Beacon Journal had in the headline--not a major story, but the headline, heading of the story was, "Mother--Degree First, Then Motherhood," and told about how, how we almost didn't make it to the--she almost didn't make it to graduation--this nice little story about that.  And I went to work for the Urban League and I became what was called industrial secretary in the Urban League, and that's where you try to create jobs.  I worked in job creation programs and those issues.  And I recall there was the union and the bus drivers were having--there's a big issue.  And the union was seeking the support of the public to back them up in this fight to get in their contract, you know, for the bus company.  And so, they had this public meeting, which was being aired, and the media was all there.  And they had this roaming microphone that public speak--and, you know, support the bus drivers, support the bus drivers, support the union.  And I raised my hand for the microphone, and so they were anxious to get me, because I'm in the Urban League, and I'm there, and industrial secretary, and I supported them.  And I made comments of support, you know, of the union effort and why bus drivers needed a raise, and why they needed better accommodations, et cetera.  And I went on to say--"And I would hope there'd be another issue considered also at this time, and that is the issue of a black driver because there aren't any black bus drivers in, you know, in Akron [Ohio].  And I do think that that ought be issued, that ought to be negotiated, also a part of this contract."  Boy, they rushed that microphone away from me and, tell you, and I had a hard time for several weeks.  They tried to get me fired.  And my boss, Ray Brown [Raymond R. Brown]--God bless his soul--was a man who--Ray Brown didn't stick his neck out, but he supported me in sticking my neck out.  And so, they had to try to get my board to fire me, tried to get Ray Brown to fire me.  And because of my disposition, I took--I learned a lesson out of that.  In those early years, I thought being right enough--my anger was so great, and my desire for justice was so strong that I thought being right was enough.  But I learned that being on the right side of an issue is not enough.  You got to have the right strategy also to win your issue.  And I learned how to strategize from that point.
Story_ID: 210244
Speaker 1: How did you learn how to strategize?  I mean, did you consult with anybody or did you--
Speaker 2: Well, I became--I think I became kind of a master strategist in the whole Civil Rights Movement.  In the March on Washington and all that, I was one of the strategists for that.  For many of the citizens, I became a strategist for that.  In the Washington Urban League, when I came to Washington [D.C.], blacks didn't sell in department stores.  You couldn't--they had no sales people--blacks.  And so, when the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] organized a hundred ministers and when the NAACP and the Urban League, we decided to have what we call a day of abstinence because boycotting was illegal.  And so, we said that on a Wednesday before Easter, which is a big shopping day--used to be a big shopping day because people were getting their Easter bonnets and getting already for the Easter holiday--we decided to have a campaign, because we've been trying to get blacks, and the store owners were telling us that blacks couldn't--their white customers wouldn't accept it.  They wouldn't buy from black salespeople.  And so we had stickers to campaign for a long time to have people for--we support the black people selling in department stores.  And that was--only got so far.  We came to strategy that nobody would shop in the stores on that day before Easter--that Wednesday before Easter, as a matter of strategy of--not by protest, but we are registering support for blacks selling in department stores.  We got white clergy and black clergy who were willing to organize, and we, in the churches, we got out material and things for two or three Sundays before that.  On Easter then, we situated all the entrance to department stores--clergy people with their collars and their clerical garb and others.  And as people would come to go into the stores, white and black, they said, "You forgot--this is the day of abstinence," say, "you--on this day, we're trying to do this."  And people would get embarrassed, and they'd go away, you know.  Some hadn't thought about it, or even hadn't heard about it, but they knew they weren't going to shop in the store that day, you know.  And so, about six o'clock that evening, Bernie Bergunder (ph.), the head of one of the department stores--calling, said, "[HistoryMaker] Sterling [Tucker], you win," he says, "our store has been bare."  Well, I knew it because I'd been walking through all of them, all day long, and people were not shopping in the stores.  So, those kind of strategies, we would design.  In the Civil Rights Movement, my job was not to go to jail, but my job was to be--to develop the strategies, and to get people out.
Story_ID: 210245
Speaker 1: You had come to the conclusion that you must strategize.
Speaker 2: Yes, um-hm.
Speaker 1: And so, how did you, you know, how did you get--I mean, I know to strategize, you got to get other people involved. And get a buy-in and that sort of thing and--did you have any mentors in terms of becoming a strategist or did, or how did you really develop your technique as a strategist?
Speaker 2: Well, first, in the Urban League--well, in the Akron Urban League [Akron, Ohio], like I started doing things.  I kind of developed a reputation in the Akron Urban League for being innovative in programming.  I come up with program ideas and getting them done, and I went to Canton Urban League [Canton, Ohio], a very conservative town. I developed a reputation for getting things done with whites and blacks working together, but moving things along, having the ability to sell ideas, and ways of getting ideas done that, how to make an omelet without cracking the egg kind of thing almost.  And so, and I found among conservatives who wanted to be progressive--get things done, want things to be better.  I found that sometimes--easier to get them to do things than to get liberals frankly, because liberals often felt they knew--they had the answers, you know, and something seems so elementary to them, which are elementary things that need to get done.  And liberals like to pontificate, you know, and work in the stratospheres of ideas.  When there are day-to-day things to be done, you know, it--and, but you can get other people to do these kinds of things because they understood them.  And so I found that ability to make--get people to work together, and to see the possibility, and still do accomplish something without turning society upside down.  We started and I would do--get projects going like that, and I learned to do that, and to kind of develop that talent.  And then in--and I developed that reputation in the National Urban League.  The way I came to Washington [D.C.] was that--because Canton [Ohio] is a very small town.  Then you come to Washington, D.C.  It was a huge difference, but I'd been in Canton four years.  And the executive here of the Washington Urban League was leaving--Lisle Carter [Jr.].  He was a lawyer out of New York--very good man.  And I'd been invited by the Washington Urban League [Washington, D.C.] to come for an interview.  On a Saturday night, I was going to come on Sunday, be interviewed on Monday.  On Saturday night, we had a fundraiser in Akron [Ohio] where the number two man in the National Urban League was in Akron to speak at this fundraiser we had.  And I told him I was coming to Washington the next day to be interviewed by--that next Monday, by the board of the Washington Urban League.  And he said to me, "I wasn't aware of that," he said, "because they've already selected somebody."  And so, I called Lisle Carter, the executive here.  I said, "Lisle, I was talking to Maurice [ph.].  He was in Washington last night, and he told me that Washington's already selected somebody.  He's in Akron last night, talked to some Canton--," and I says, "why am I coming?"  And he said, "Well," he said, "there is somebody that they've tentatively decided to hire, but I wanted them to interview--he said he doesn't have an Urban League background.  And I wanted them to interview somebody in the Urban League whom I think they ought to interview.  And I wanted them to interview you, so I'd like very much for you to come."  I said, "Well, is the deal sealed?"  He says, he tried to say, "Not quite," but I think pretty much it had almost.  They just hadn't notified the guy--they made the decision, I think, but hadn't notified him.
Story_ID: 210246
Speaker 1: So, I came down that Sunday night, and had dinner with Lisle [Carter, Jr.] and his family, and was interviewed that next morning by the board.  And--but they started asking me about things--how to do, how I did this, and how I did that, and things we did in Akron [Ohio] and Canton [Ohio].  And, I'd already been on leave from Akron Urban League [Akron, Ohio] to do something in New York--the National Urban League, and I was a very young guy to have been selected to have done that, because the assignment, naturally, the Urban League asked me to do.  And so they, and after I talked to them, and they started talking about salary, and so forth.  And I indicated to them--they said--because Canton, well, was paying me about much as Washington [D.C.] was going to pay me.  And, and they talking about percentage of money you raise, and that kind of stuff.  I said, "We don't do that in the Urban League," and I says, "that isn't fair."  I said, "I'd be embarrassed to accept that because I want to raise so much money that I'd be embarrassed to accept it"--the percentage, you know.  But I was serious about that in terms of the potential of a Washington [Urban League, Washington, D.C.], as compared to Canton [Urban League].  So, I went back to my hotel, to have lunch with a friend from Akron, who was a student at Howard [University, Washington, D.C.] here.  And Urban League called me before--while I was still there.  They offered me the job and wanted to get me to take it on the spot.  Well, I couldn't.  I had to have--told them I had to go back and talk to my wife about it, et cetera, and so forth.
Story_ID: 210247
Speaker 1: So I had the reputation of being innovative and getting things done, and so I didn't--I'd learned that, I know, by learning, by reading, by doing, by being a problem solver.  Here's a problem and I, and I started working that way.  I developed a concept in the Urban League movement, a strategy throughout the Urban League.  And the whole concept was this.  And Whitney Young [Jr.] was smart enough to see that we had tried to move forward.  Was it--the Urban League had been playing an honest broker role between the white community and the black community--really kind of being criticized for it because--it was NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] who said, "You are leaders, but you're not making much progress."  And we tried to move the black community, white community forward, and bring the black community along and making modest progress, but not what was needed.  And I said to the Urban League, what we need to do is to step out of the way of being the broker, and bring the white community together, and we need to get around some of these issues.  So, the black--I said, we're buffeting the white community from the anger of the black community.  They need to sense some of this.  They need to know how challenging these times are.  They need to feel the depth of these problems.  And we can negotiate that relationship, but don't try to protect them from those feelings, you see, because we're taking the blows, you know, for it, you know.  Let's get out of the way.  Let them fight.  We can moderate the fight and referee it, and kind of orchestrate it, but let's, don't be taking the blows here in effect.  So, they brought up that "New Thrust" concept, and I designed ways to do that.  And, well, we had some, we had several national board meetings.  We brought leadership to the Urban League together in New York for several days.  I designed, developed this paper, the "New Thrust," about fifty pages, and walked them through the whole thing--walked them through the concepts and the areas of things, how we might do things, and how to implement that concept.  Yeah, which was very new to them, but they kind of liked it during that period because we were being called Uncle Toms and everything, you know.  And so, we raised a lot of money for it, and I took a leave of absence to run the "New Thrust" in the National Urban League--took a leave of absence from Washington [Urban League, Washington, D.C.].
Speaker 2: This is called the "New Thrust?"
Speaker 1: Called the "New Thrust."
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And we got lots of media, national media out of it, and Whitney got a lots of mileage out of it and things, and we had federal administration interest in what we were doing and so forth.  And so, I did that for several years for the National Urban League, and then Whitney died--was drowned.
Story_ID: 210248
Speaker 1: Nineteen fifty-six [1956], when you came to the [Washington] Urban League [Washington, D.C.] was, you know, a time when the whole country was focused on Montgomery Bus Boycott basically.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And there were things going on everywhere, but still, but it was, you know, there's a national focus on the bus boycott, being dramatic and the news coverage and all that.  What did you think about that at the time, and what were you, you know, how did that affect your strategies and, or did it at all?
Speaker 2: Well, that was a great time for my strategies, you know, that was a great time to be alive.  That's--I was in the middle of all this, right in the middle of these times, you know, working with the organizations on those kind of issues, too.  And so, and so, we connected the Urban League with all of that, connected the Urban League with all that was going on in that time.  It--they became a part of it with the other organizations, and so, but that was a great time to be alive.  I mean, that was a great time to be involved.
Speaker 1: Now, in--well, during the same period of time, I guess, in the early, in the late--well, in the '50s [1950s] and in the early '60s [1960s], people started doing--I mean, the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] youth chapter started doing direct action stuff where they would do a sit-in or--at a counter or something, and which is, which is countered through the National Urb- I mean, the National NAACPs, yeah.
Speaker 2: They were, they were ahead of the NAACP.  They had a national organization, yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah, the youth--and I see a pattern developing here because here you are in the--coming out of the Urban League youth forum, you know, taking like an aggressive lead on stuff, and then you got the NAACP.  Now, what can you tell us maybe about the generation that you represent, and the people that they kind of stepped out of the mold there, you know?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Well, I--well, I'd come, I'd been the Urban League assistant executive in Akron [Ohio], been the Urban League executive in Canton [Ohio].  I'd done some National Urban League projects, but I was still young.  I was still, I was seasoned and my leadership, therefore, was respected.  I had established myself as a leader in the Urban League movement.  And so, when Whitney [Young, Jr.] brought all these people together and we're talking about these new strategies, I presented the paper ["New Thrust"].  They knew I designed the paper.  I designed the whole plan, and took the leave of absence.  We raised money for it and all that.  And, but at the same time, I was working with [Reverend Dr.] Martin Luther King [Jr.] and [HistoryMaker Reverend] Walter Fauntroy, and others.  SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee], I was working with the CORE [Congress of Racial Equality], people in CORE.  I was working--working with all those people at the same time, you know, around the issues.  There were, like I was bashed on the head in Mississippi.  And so, I was down in those demonstrations, and I was involved in them to the extent greater than most Urban Leaguers were.  But I got involved in the national movement--not just the Urban League, but the Civil Rights Movement, you know, I became very much involved with it.  And was accepted and recognized, as I say, kind of a strategist, helped these--sitting around at night figuring out how to do things, how to get things done, how to get the support of people, you know, how to deal with the government.  I was one who did a lot with relations with the government--keeping the government off, getting the government support, and these kind of things, you know, and keeping in touch with the White House [Washington, D.C.], in touch with this, the Justice Department [sic. U.S. Department of Justice]--Ramsey Clark and those people.  And so, I would--did lots of those kind of strategizing with them, and also interpreting what we were doing, and why it had to be done.
Story_ID: 210249
Speaker 1: The Urban League chapters of the South actually were--what were they--were they doing--well, let's put it this way.  Urban League in the North is--seems to have a reputation for doing a lot of research and then, you know--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --and delivering, "These are the discrepancies,"--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --and then trying to bring people together to solve them.  In the South, was the goal any different in the South?  I mean, from the southern (simultaneous) Urban League?
Speaker 2: Well, Urban Leagues everywhere were working to improve job opportunities.  They just did it differently.  They were working to improve educational opportunity and--but they worked with different kinds of techniques and different kind of strategies at times.  They were working on lots of issues--what we now call value issues and family values, and those kind of things, trying to think--family life and these kind of things they were doing.  They weren't working in the South on breaking down barriers and legislation, but neither were the Urban Leagues in the North doing it.  That was kind of the legal end.  That was the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] end of it.  That was the community organization planning, community organization development, job creation, vocational education kind of issues, Urban League working with community development type issues, and never see primarily the legal kind of issues.  So, the Urban League worked differently.  In some places, more research-oriented than others, but research was a base.  Information was a base for all that we tried to do and, and still is.  I mean, they have an information base and a planning base--information and planning are, you know, so that when--demonstrations were not the Urban League thing generally.  The negotiation, the consultation; but confrontation was not--the Urban League didn't take the lead in those things for the most part, as organizations.  Individual people did, but the Urban League organizations did not.  So, the kind of things we designed was how to use existing laws or public policy to advance the cause of job opportunity, for example.  I mean, how to make the public policy, how to create public policy, and then how to make that policy work for us, is the kind of things we were doing.
Story_ID: 210250
Speaker 1: We knew that by that time [1960s], for instance, that restrictive covenants were illegal, but they were being applied.
Speaker 2: Those are those--
Speaker 1: Getting housing--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: It was said, the fact that this housing cannot be sold to niggers and youths, for example.  And yet, they were--the house I live in Washington [D.C.] had a restrict- that kind of restrictive covenant on it when I bought it, you see.  Though no longer legal, they still had such covenants and they were being honored.
Speaker 2: Yeah, people these days are amazed sometimes when they do research on their house to find that their house did have a restrictive covenant--
Speaker 1: Sure.
Speaker 2: --you know, to specifically designate who couldn't buy in that neighborhood--
Speaker 1: Exactly right--
Speaker 2: --couldn't buy that house--
Speaker 1: --exactly right.
Speaker 2: --which is, you know, it will shock people now--say, "Whoa," you know. Racism was really like a way of life, right?
Speaker 1: Oh, boy.  It just expressed itself and everywhere--not the subtle ways--in some ways, not so subtle.  And so, we had in Washington--one thing we did was to fight those with the realtors.  In Washington, they had realtors and realtists. A black person couldn't be a member of the real estate association because they're called realtors.  And you had to a member of that association in order to be called a realtor because they had it copyrighted.  Blacks could, therefore, be a realtist.  So, whites controlled all those housing with restrictive covenants on them. To broke those barriers down to get blacks--real estate people in that circle to start dealing with some of these getting in, get some of these houses so they can sell to black people.
Story_ID: 210251
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) In 1957, I've read, is the year that the black population in Washington, D.C. exceeded the white population, making it the first major city--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --with a predominantly black population.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Later, it would grow to about 80/85 percent in the '60s [1960s].
Speaker 2: Yeah, it was, yeah.
Speaker 1: And, you know, now 'cause it's going down--
Speaker 2: The thing about it, it's being reversed--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --going backwards; not--still majority.
Speaker 1: But as you were coming into office, you know, here you're in the city with--you have a city here with the largest black population.  I mean, proportionately in the--
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, I mean the--
Speaker 1: --in the--
Speaker 2: When I came to Washington, as I said, "Where are all these black folks coming from?  I've never seen so many black people in my life."  Everywhere you turned, you'd see them.  Going down to these government buildings, and you'd see all these black folks.  You go to the government cafeteria, you go down to the streets--most neighbors, you'd go into it--say, "Lord, where all these people coming from?"  You've never seen so many black people.  But so many wonderful black people with so much talent and doing so many wonderful things, it was just such a great rich experience to see, and be a part of all that.  But so, I saw so much raw material to work with in Washington, you know.  So much law and public policy, and energy and talent to work with--I saw this was a great place to work.
Story_ID: 210252
Speaker 1: I have a note here about March to the Ballot Box.  Now, what is that about?
Speaker 2: Well, we, in the 1960--I believe the 1964 campaign, I think that Barry Goldwater was running for president.
Speaker 1: Right, that's right--'64 [1964].
Speaker 2: And there was grave concern about which way the country would be led.  And in the Urban League also, and this was considered a critical election.  And so, we organized in urban--what we called a March to the Ballot Box campaign that, again, I took a leave of absence to organize this nationally in the Urban League and all of our affiliates and around the country.  We raised a lot of money for this campaign from--we raised it from political parties--both of them, and outside foundations put most of the money into this campaign.  And now, we, as a 501(c)(3), can't tell people, couldn't tell people how to vote, nor could we take positions on candidates.  We take position on issues, but not candidates.  And so, we talked about issues, but not candidates.  So, we registered people to vote in, all over across the country, hundreds of thousands of people we worked to register to vote in that campaign.  The national office had a team of lawyers approving, reviewing every piece of material we developed, all the arguments we developed, all the strategies we employed to review all of them, make sure that the government couldn't come back at us, at our incomes, at our non-profit status and things, because they had to review all that, so had to conduct a very, very careful campaign.  So, we did this campaign, and then linked it with one that [Reverend Dr.] Martin Luther King [Jr.] was doing.  [HistoryMaker Reverend] Walter Fauntroy ran that one out of Washington [D.C.] for the Southern [Christian] Leadership Conference [SCLC]--
Story_ID: 210253
Speaker 1: You had talked about when you met [Reverend] Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.].
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And can you remember when you first met Dr. King?
Speaker 2: Let me see, I cannot--let me see.  The first time I met Dr. King was in one of the boycotts, one of the movements in the South.  I don't--it seemed like I always knew him from the times involved.  I can't remember when I first met him.  It was long before the March on Washington, long--
Speaker 1: Did you know him prior to the Montgomery Bus Boycott--
Speaker 2: Uh-hum.
Speaker 1: --or had you--
Speaker 2: I knew him about the time they're talking about this young man who was--yeah, about the time they're about to bring him into the movement is when I first met him, in one of the kind of meetings around those issues before he got involved, and his name came up.  So, I knew him then.  We became very close friends.  And so, and [HistoryMaker Reverend] Walter Fauntroy, who headed, in fact, the Washington [D.C.] office, he and I were very close friends and worked close together, and still do on whole lots of things.  And, so, we kind of linked up on a lot of things together.  And so, with it--but I, so I worked closely with them all, whole lots of issues.  I got some stories I could tell there, too.  There were times that we're--I know, we got moving along here.
Speaker 1: Okay.  But you were telling us about Dr. King, about the Fauntroy--I mean, and Reverend Fauntroy--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --and you were getting ready to tell us a story about them when I asked you when you first met Dr. King (laughter).
Speaker 2: Well, it was in the--on, on the March of the Ballot Box [sic. March to the Ballot Box] we were doing.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And as I say, this was this major, major effort and to register blacks--first, to educate blacks, registered blacks, and get them to the polls.  And we got a major campaign in each of those areas, to do all those things.  Sometimes people registered.  We tried to get people registered, but didn't get them out to vote.  And so, always often a big fall-off, you know, there as we're trying to prevent that fall-off.  So, I ran that nationally, for the National Urban League, that March to the Ballot Box.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: The effort was, of course, to make sure that [Barry] Goldwater was defeated and, and the country considered that--people who were actually right-thinking considered critically important.  It's--in ways, parallels this election because if we just think that in this next four years, there are probably going to be two or three people leaving the [U.S.] Supreme Court.  And whoever is president is going to name the next Supreme Court for the next thirty or forty years.  So, it is crucial--if people could just understand that, the magnitude of that decision, significance of that decision for the vote, it ought to get people out, because at least two people are going to be leaving the Supreme Court in the next four years.
Story_ID: 210254
Speaker 1: Just let me go back again to '63 [1963].  Now, you--what--you participated in the March on Washington, right?  You were instrumental--
Speaker 2: Yeah, I was vice chair of the March on Washington.
Speaker 1: Vice chair, yeah.
Speaker 2: We planned all night, and worked the next day to do the plans that we had for the March on Washington.  And I remember, during the course of that planning the March on Washington, that my daughter, Lauren [Tucker Cross], like we'd come home all night, and I was all just dead tired.  We were all dead tired trying to put together in about four months--what would take normally a year to do.  But you ought to have maybe close to a year to do it--put that kind of a campaign together, and with all those parts, with all those organizations, all those pieces, put all that together.  I remember I came home one night and my little daughter, Lauren, was kind of half-awake in her crib.  I went in there to look at her and she was humming, 'We Shall Overcome,' you know, in her sleep.  And I said, that's was this is about.
Speaker 1: How old was she then?
Speaker 2: Lauren was about two years old.
Speaker 1: That's quite a story.  That's something, that's (unclear).
Speaker 2: About two, about two and a half years old, was humming 'We Shall Overcome' in her sleep as she was tossing and turning.
Speaker 1: Well, people remember, you know, the march really brought that song in national prominence, because it was sung so well on the march--I mean at the event.  And I remember in high school when I saw it, I was just, you know, I walked around humming it myself but it was, yeah.
Speaker 2: It was powerful; powerful song.
Speaker 1: Right, a powerful event.  I mean, something that we had never seen before.  I think A. Philip Randolph threatened to march.  It never took place in the '40s [1940s] and--
Speaker 2: Yep.
Speaker 1: --really, we really had never had a march on Washington [D.C.].  Now, I've heard--one of the people interviewed [HistoryMaker] Reverend James Bevel said that, that was his idea to have a march.  But, you know--
Speaker 2: Well--(laughter).
Speaker 1: Yeah, back in the, yeah.
Speaker 2: That Jim Bevel, yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 2: That wouldn't--I wouldn't be surprised--
Story_ID: 210255
Speaker 1: But it was lots of work putting that [March on Washington] together and vetting those speeches, and making sure that the right message came through, a kind of a single message would come through by all these organizations who had to put their egos aside--enough to do this planning.  And, again, there was some internal squabbles that were large. They were huge.
Speaker 2: Do you remember the fight over the SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee] speech--
Speaker 1: Uh-hum.
Speaker 2: --was going to present?
Speaker 1: Oh, yeah, oh, yes, indeed, yes, I, yes, I do.
Speaker 2: Do you have any thoughts about that you want to share with us or--
Speaker 1: I'm sorry?
Speaker 2: Do you have any thoughts about that you want to share with us?
Speaker 1: No, I mean in the whole matter, it was--this whole idea of vetting speeches were kind of new to me and in that whole process, involved in that whole process of trying to get people to understand why certain things, you know.  If you're going to lead with a common front, if you're going to lead with the common message and--now, what is it, this is designed to do?  What--it's designed to get a civil rights act through.  And we got to get as much of the country on our side, and this is that opportunity.  And so, we got to sound like we're together.  We got to be together, and we got to be in one voice, so that people can't say--well, that was all over the place.  We don't know what they really want.  Let's make it very clear what this march is all about--what we're trying to accomplish here.  And so, we've got to leave a certain kind of atmosphere, just like Democrats that leave on their convention.  Republicans got to do the same thing.  And but--and most of them understood it.  [Reverend Dr.] Martin Luther King [Jr.] understood it very well.  And the others understood it very well.  But arguing over who's going to speak in what order and that kind of stuff, yeah, whether Martin Luther King should speak first or last, and, "We got to make sure that Martin Luther King doesn't take over this--not Martin Luther King's march."  You know, "He doesn't take over the planning of it," but Martin didn't want to take over the planning of it.  And, "We got to make sure the young people involved and they got to have a voice."  Well, of course, young people got to have a voice, got to be involved.  But as some would determine to kind of fight all the way to it, but in the end, it worked out fine.  Then, what happened was--trying to think of the name--CORE [Congress of Racial Equality], he went and got arrested.  He had to, he had--he went and got arrested beforehand.
Speaker 2: [HistoryMaker] James Forman.
Speaker 1: James Forman, uh, [James] Farmer.
Speaker 2: Farmer, right, Farmer, okay.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  And so, Jim Farmer got--had to get arrested.  Then, Roy Wilkins thought he had to go arrested.  He hadn't been arrested yet (laughter).
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: Oh, I'm telling you.
Speaker 2: So, the commentation [sic.] take--the competition takes different twists, you know, I guess--
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: --what you would never expect, you know.
Speaker 1: Yes.  But they were very, very good men, very good. These were all good and honorable people, those people working in the leadership of these organizations.  We were very blessed--a black community in America is very blessed that people like that are heading these organizations and working that kind of effort.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: These people are greatly missed.
Story_ID: 210256
Speaker 1: When did you first get involved with presidential administrations?  And were you involved in the [President Dwight David "Ike"] Eisenhower administration at all?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  A number of things. One is that I was--well, all the time by virtue of my location in Washington [D.C.] and the organization [Washington Urban League], I had identification with the federal administrations.  I remember when I first came here at that time, [Richard Milhous] Nixon was vice president, when I first came to Washington.  And I remember the--my family had not yet moved here, and I had occasion to be photographed with him and the vice president.  And I took that photograph back to Ohio.  At that time, my family was in Canton [Ohio].  And my daughter, Shelly [Michele Tucker Jeffrey], was in the lower grades.  And she took the picture to school to show to her classmates of the vice president and myself.  And they said to her, "That's a nice picture, Michele. Which one is your daddy?"  And so, they just saw two men and they knew one was Michele's father.  Color didn't register with them.  Now, these were all these white children in the main.  And so, that was a wonderful story of color blindness.  So, when I next saw the vice president, I mentioned that to him.  And he thought it was a great story, and he told it everywhere--used that story over and over again.  When my family moved to Washington, he invited to the White House [Washington, D.C.], my daughter and some of her classmates at that time to meet with him, and they were photographed with him.  But, so that was it.  But I--then I became the Washington representative of the National Urban League--I said the Washington Urban League.  And then I became the first national representative in Washington of the Urban League--kind of a dual role I carried for a while here.  And then after that, I did represent the National Urban League on lots of things with the government.
Story_ID: 210257
Speaker 1: There's a story here about Roy Wilkins, the--
Speaker 2: Yes, the--
Speaker 1: --in Gettysburg [Pennsylvania].  What happened?  What's that about?
Speaker 2: When in--well, during the period after [President Dwight David "Ike"] Eisenhower left the White House [Washington, D.C.], the--and he was still, you know, he'd been a very popular president, and he had his office in Gettysburg, Pennsylvania.  And, and Roy Wilkins and I went to, out there--Roy for the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People], and I was asked to go for the Urban League to meet with President Eisenhower to talk about--to try to get some support for the Civil Rights Act, help him to get some Republicans to support it, although Eisenhower was not a great, you know, a civil rights advocate.  He had lots of prestige.  We went out to meet with him, and he invited us to come to lunch at Gettysburg, and Roy Wilkins and I went there, and we were talking, and lots of conversation.  And Eisenhower was pretty upset about something: that Sherman Adams, who had been his chief of staff, had just written a book ['Firsthand Report: The Story of the Eisenhower Administration,' Sherman Adams] about the Eisenhower days.  And in the book, Sherman Adams said that the most difficult decision that the president had to make was when he sent troops into Little Rock [Arkansas].  And Eisenhower was upset about that.  He said, "I don't know why Sherman said that."  He said, "That was not a difficult decision at all."  He said, "I may not have agreed with it, but it was the law of the land.  And my job, as commander in chief, as president, will carry out the law of the--carry out the law, so that wasn't a big decision at all.  I don't know why Sherm said that."  And I thought, "Well, and that's why we need the law of the land," because while he did not necessarily favor that civil rights act on school desegregation [Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka, 1954], though he may not have thought that was the way to have done it, he recognized his duty, and that he was willing to carry out his duty.  So, he didn't see carrying out his duty as a great challenge, you know, as a great decision.  There was no decision there as far as he was concerned.  And I thought that was very interesting.  And right, I had many times, back in those days, employers said to me, "I wish we had an act that we eliminate discrimination in employment.  Then, I wouldn't have to try to defend my actions.  I could just simply--'it's the law.'  We integrate our plant because we have to," you know.  He says, "I don't mind--I would support such legislation, I," he said quietly, because he can't say that publicly, but, "I would support such legislation because I wouldn't have to have all these arguments, all these fights.  It's the law, it's--if I have to do it, I don't have to explain why I'm doing it."
Speaker 1: You're giving testimony to this--the strength of the culture of racism, I guess.  It was just everywhere, I guess.
Speaker 2: Oh, it was absolutely, absolutely everywhere.  People who would want to do things, you know, but they didn't want to seem like an activist, you know, or a trailblazer, you know.  "If I have to do it, then I will do it.  I don't have to explain that.  I'm doing--I'm being a good citizen then," you see, "but if I'm doing it, and I'm not required to do it, then I'm somehow a traitor to white supremacy," in effect, really.
Speaker 1: Yes, yes, indeed, yeah.
Speaker 2: The--so that was a very good experience.  And that was interesting that, what said, that pretty much summed up Eisenhower, you know, on these issues as pretty--
Speaker 1: Did he have a sense that he really wasn't in favor of the integration of schools?
Speaker 2: I had a feeling that he was not in favor of the [U.S.] Supreme Court decision in that way.  He never said it, but, and he never dealt with that part of it.  That wasn't important because that was done.  I mean, what did--"My job, as president, was to enforce it," he said, "because," he said, "I might not have done it quite that way.  It might not have been my decision."  He didn't say it wasn't, but what he was saying was that, "It was not hard for me to enforce the law, so sending troops there was not a big decision."  And I thought that--and he was very upset with Sherman Adams about that.
Story_ID: 210258
Speaker 1: But I became--Whitney Young [Jr.] then came to the head of the Urban League in nineteen--and Whitney came 1961, I believe it was, Whitney came to Urban League.  And, and he and I--we worked on lots of stuff together.  And he was really liked by both the [President John Fitzgerald] Kennedy and, especially, the [President Lyndon Baines] Johnson administration and they--and [President Richard Milhous] Nixon.  The presidents really loved Whitney Young and, yet, he was a real fighter, and a real pusher of things.  And the--but I, at that time, I was involved very much with the Kennedy family and the Kennedy administration.  And I would go play touch football on Saturday afternoon.  We'd go play touch football at [Robert F.] Bobby Kennedy's house [Hickory Hill, McLean, Virginia] and we'd go swimming.  And, and Ethel Kennedy would fix lunch, and it was just wonderful times.  I was invited to work on the Peace Corps, help think through the Peace Corps, help develop, kind of planning for the Peace Corps.  Then I went around the country, kind of testing their recruiting methods, and those kind of things for the Peace Corps.  So, I worked with all that, and that was lots of fun with a lot of great people, you know, kind of a new concept, the great, wonderful concept of showing America in a different kind of a way to the world, and great patriotic thing to do, and wonderful young people, so--I met so many wonderful young people around the country who-- good people wanted to become involved, and I was very pleased. A lot--an awful lot of African Americans who also worked in the Peace Corps.  So, I enjoyed that--going to the college campuses and working with recruiting, working with governments abroad, talking about how to develop programs and projects for people to come into the Peace Corps, identifying the policy, developing the strategies, developing administrative processes in Washington [D.C.].  I worked with all of that.  So, that was a wonderful opportunity and a wonderful, challenging time.
Speaker 2: Yeah, it seemed like a golden era for volunteerism, yeah, for some reason, yeah.
Speaker 1: Oh, boy, the best, probably in our history.
Speaker 2: Right.  I know in the meantime, people were volunteering in Mississippi around the same--'63 [1963], '64 [1964], especially the summer of '64 [1964], there were like--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --hundreds of volunteers went into Mississippi--
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: --white and black college students, you know.
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: And--
Speaker 1: Yeah, they were, oh, lots of volunteers in the South.
Speaker 2: Right, right.
Speaker 1: And interestingly enough, going to poor countries in Africa--a lot of them.  And many whites getting their first experience in that kind of a setting where, in effect, they were the subordinate group.  And those, but, you had lots of good white young people from the South back in those days who wanted things to change and wanted America to change, as well as the rest of the world.
Story_ID: 210259
Speaker 1: --Well, the War on Poverty came along about that time.  And Whitney Young [Jr.] had been meeting with the President [Lyndon Baines Johnson] one day and the president wanted--was--they were discussing the War on Poverty and how to work with some issues of poverty.  They weren't talking about the War on Poverty as such, but tried to work with some of those issues.  And so, the president wanted to pull together a group.  And he appointed G. Mennen Williams, "Soapy" Williams, who had been the governor of Michigan at one point, then been an assistant secretary of state, I think, and but had a kind of a civil rights image.  And Soapy Williams, while he had no role in government relating to civil rights necessarily, was appointed by Johnson to head this little task force of about a dozen people to talk about the war, and how to deal with the issue of poverty in America.  And out of those discussions, I remember way into the night were those discussions about--but how to approach this problem, what to do about it, and out of those discussion group, the War on Poverty.
Speaker 2: Now, did the War on Poverty precede the Poor People's Campaign, or come after the Poor People's Campaign?
Speaker 1: It came after the Poor People's--let me see, Lyndon Johnson came after [President] John [Fitzgerald] Kennedy, yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah, '64 [1964].
Speaker 1: So, it came after the Poor People's Campaign.
Speaker 2: The Poor People's Campaign was like sixty--
Speaker 1: Sixty-three [1963], August, say six, August 19th, I think, '63 [1963], August 23rd, I think, 1963 [sic.].
Speaker 2: Okay, okay.  You know, the Poor People's Campaign--I mean, the--
Speaker 1: War on Poverty--
Speaker 2: Yeah, the--
Speaker 1: --for Poor People's Campaign came in 1968.
Speaker 2: Yeah, right.  It reached its big--
Speaker 1: Yeah--
Speaker 2: --with Resurrection City [National Mall, Washington, D.C.].
Speaker 1: Campaign, the March on Washington--I mean, the, the Poor People's Campaign march came in 1968.
Speaker 2: Right
Speaker 1: [Reverend Dr.] Martin Luther King [Jr.] was shot in spring--April.  [Robert F.] Bobby Kennedy, that was in June--both assassinated in the same year.
Speaker 2: Right, right.
Speaker 1: And the Poor People's Campaign came at the end (unclear) because we were in the middle of planning for the campaign when Bobby Kennedy was shot.
Speaker 2: Right.  Well, Lyndon Johnson's War on Poverty--I'm just trying to establish.  It--was it before the Poor People's, Dr. King's Poor People's Campaign, or afterwards?
Speaker 1: It was before the Poor People's Campaign.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: All right, okay, because I know you talked about the Great Society and--
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: --all that before, but I wasn't sure about the War on Poverty being before that--
Story_ID: 210260
Speaker 1: Tell us about [President] Lyndon [Baines] Johnson.  I mean, what was your relationship like with Lyndon Johnson?
Speaker 2: You know, I liked him, but I must say that I liked all the presidents I knew--even [President Richard Milhous] Nixon.  But Lyndon Johnson was a guy who really wanted to do right.  He really wanted to prove that even though he was from Texas that he wasn't a bigot.  And he really wanted to do, he really wanted to--he not only wanted to make a name for himself, but he really wanted to do some good, and he thought hard about it, worked hard about it, talked to people hard about it, very sincerely about it.  But he felt that he--in one way, he felt he had to outdo [President John Fitzgerald] Kennedy, and that he felt that he was on the ticket only because for (unclear) representative.  He thought that Kennedy--I'm sure he felt the Kennedys didn't have a great deal of respect for him, and that they you know, they were regarded as the, the arm- the white armor, and, you know, armor on a white, on a shining white horse.
Speaker 1: Yeah, the Camelot and all that.
Speaker 2: Camelot--and here was he, you know, so he wanted to show that he was concerned about these same kind of issues, but he felt he was deeply committed.  And, and I thought he was.  I felt Jack--I felt that [Robert F.] Bobby Kennedy was, but I wasn't sure about Jack Kennedy [John Fitzgerald Kennedy].  And remember on the night, and the night of the March on Washington, at the end of it, those of us who helped plan it were invited to the White House [Washington, D.C.].  And that evening, we went to the White House.  And the president [John Fitzgerald Kennedy] said, "Okay, I watched the march on the television all afternoon, and it went very well, and I'm very pleased about the way the march went."  And while we were really ready to talk about what a great day it was, and wanted to revel in it a little bit, he said, "Now, here's what we got to do."  He wanted to get right down to business.  "Here are the votes we got to go for in the [U.S.] Senate--this, we got to get this person.  We got to plan the strategy."  I appreciated the fact that he wanted us to take the next step.  But he did the things he thought was right because they're right, not because he was committed to them.  Kennedy had a passion--Bobby had a passion for these things.
Speaker 1: And Bobby had to be converted, didn't he, and sort of--
Speaker 2: Yeah, he, he did, but when he was converted, when he was converted, he was really converted.  I mean, he really--and he kind of brought his brother along after that.
Speaker 1: I've read--I was reading in Taylor Branch's 'Parting the Waters[: America in the King Years, 1954-1963]' about meetings where Bobby Kennedy was--would run interference for his brother with the Civil Rights Movement as attorney general.  And he had a couple of meetings with SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee] volunteers and other civil rights leaders, or some of them got kind of tense, you know, and Bobby got--would blow his stack, you know.
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, well--
Speaker 1: That, but--
Speaker 2: --I've been in meetings like that with him.  One is--well, you know, Bobby Kennedy was not the most likeable of the Kennedys.  He's the most sincere of them, but not the most likeable.  He had a temper.  He thought he had the answers very often.  He felt like he wanted to tell you what to do a lot.  That was a lot about him, you know what I mean?  So, he would not be the most--he would not be the best partner, you know, to get things done.  Although if he were committed, he would work hard to follow through on what he say he's going to try to do.  And, you know, he would do that, but, you know, you could argue with him; you could debate him, and he didn't know as much as he thought he knew.  But he had the position and the authority and the resources, you know.  And, and so, Bobby Kennedy was brash in everything he did--no matter what the subject was, you know, and impatient.  And sometimes that impatient was very good, and sometimes it was destructive, but always impatient.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And he sometimes, he wanted short quick answers to very complex issues, you know.  And sometimes, he was a little bit too simplistic about his approach to things--the way he wanted to see things done.  And they couldn't get done successfully in his simplistic ways very often.
Story_ID: 210261
Speaker 1: I had a sense, from what I read, that he [Robert F. "Bobby" Kennedy] really had little understanding for the depth of the problems of the South that he just--
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.
Speaker 1: --he didn't know how deep this racism was in the South and Ohio.
Speaker 2: He definitely did not know, did not understand how deep it was, and how difficult, and how intractable some of these issues were.  He just did not understand that.  You know, I guess he would, he had the same kind of naivete that his brother [President John Fitzgerald Kennedy] had when he said, "When you go to the whites, we get the wiped out by the stroke of the pen.  He's going to end--" you know, this and that, but he discovered that wasn't the case.  I heard somewhere that President Kennedy--someone asked him one time, "What was the most difficult thing you had to learn when you became president?"  He said, "Well, when I became president, I discovered that, that every time I wanted to get ready to do something, there's somebody holding the government Bible showing me why I can't get it done."  He found things much more difficult.  "I thought, as the president of the United States, I could just say, do it, and it could get done.  There was always somebody to show me, somewhere in the government Bible, where it can't be done, Mr. President," or "it can't be done that way," or, "you don't have that authority, Mr. President," or, "you share that authority, Mr. President," or, "here are these problems that you got to deal with."  He said he'd discovered that, that was the most frustrating thing about being the president--
Story_ID: 210262
Speaker 1: Now what about [President] Richard [Milhous] Nixon?  What are your reflections on, because you worked on the Minority Business Development [Agency, MBDA] which I think was his greatest contribution, probably to the black community (unclear)?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  And he, and I would say he believed in it.  That was one of his, his greatest contributions.  I remember once I was sitting in the White House [Washington, D.C.] in Ehrlichman's.  Ehrlichman was one of his deputies, one of his assistants.
Speaker 1: And John Ehrlichman.
Speaker 2: And that was in the campaign when for, in his second term, and George Wallace was running against him for the president.  And he came into the offices.  I was sitting there with Ehrlichman and he came and sat on a desk.  He says, "I know the Urban League is probably very impatient with me, that I'm not doing and saying some of the things I might be doing and saying.  But I want the Urban League to know that, once I get rid of that little son of a bitch"--those were his words-"then, I'll be in better position to do the things I need to do."  And soon after that, Wallace got shot.  It had nothing to do with that, I'm sure (laughter)--in [Laurel] Maryland, of all places, right next door to Washington [D.C.].  But in saying that, he said, "You," said, "just let them know that when I get rid of that little son of a bitch, and then I'll do what I have to do."  Nixon had a meeting of the whole cabinet that--and we had identified--Betty Wheeler [ph.] and I for the Urban League--had identified ways in which the government could help advance through government programs.  And Whitney Young [Jr.] had talked about the Marshall--we had a Marshall Plan for Europe, Germany.  Why not have one for the United States?  And so, Nixon called together his whole cabinet--I never heard of a meeting like there before or since--where Whitney Young laid out what he thought the government ought to do, and Nixon listened.  And then he directed each department to work with us in identifying programs that the government could make available to the black community though the Urban League, and I mean he was sincere about it.  He said, "Identify somebody in every agency or department of government to work with us in doing that."  So, we identified and--then, in his administration--I'm not sure this story is really well-known.  He considered making--asking Whitney to become a special assistant--Whitney Young.  And, and I was surprised that Whitney was willing to entertain consideration.  And Len [Leonard] Garment, who was on the White House staff, and I went out to Whitney's home on a Saturday--spent a day with him, walking his lawn, having lunch, talking out the possibility of his being a special assistant to the president.  We talked it out, and Whitney was willing to consider it.  Whitney, what--then I went on the plane out there together and came back together.  And after a while, nothing developed, and then, talked to Len about him, this.  Garment says, you know, "Where did this thing go?  What happened to it?"  He said, the president decided that if he asked Whitney Young to become his assistant to him, that Whitney Young was the person he'd have to listen to, that his credit and his prestige, and credibility was such that he would be the kind of person who would resign, if he thought the president was not doing what he should do.  And he thought he couldn't afford to have a Whitney Young resign.  Isn't that interesting?
Speaker 1: It was a testament to Whitney Young's integrity, yeah.
Speaker 2: Said he could not afford to have a Whitney Young resign.  They had put a lot of assistants on, you know--black--and it wouldn't make a difference.  But if Whitney Young resigned, that would be major, and he felt he couldn't.
Story_ID: 210263
Speaker 1: When Whitney [Young, Jr.] died, the president [President Richard Milhous]--Nixon was president then--
Speaker 2: Whitney Young drowned off the coast of--
Speaker 1: I went to bring his body back.
Speaker 2: Was it Liberia or--
Speaker 1: Liberia--Nigeria.
Speaker 2: Nigeria, okay.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I went to bring his body back.  Well, the president came down to [Lexington] Kentucky where Whitney was buried, first buried, to do a eulogy down there.  He had a funeral in New York.  The president was not there, but he came to Kentucky.
Speaker 2: Because that's his ancestral home is in Louisville [Kentucky], right [sic. Lincoln Ridge, Kentucky]?
Speaker 1: Louisville.  And was buried there.  His wife [Margaret B. Young], his wife later, had his body brought to New York--reburied in [Hartsdale] New York [at Ferncliff Cemetery and Mausoleum].  She said when she saw that graveyard down there, it was unkempt, uncared for.  They tried to get it ready for the funeral for a burial, but she saw what it--she said, she said she couldn't leave Whitney there.  So, that's how close, that's what they thought--he thought of Whitney Young.  The Kennedys, [President Lyndon Baines] Johnson, Nixon that, and yet, Whitney was fighting them every step of the way, you know, in his way, talked about them.  And so, those are some good--I have lots of insight into the various White Houses, you know, back through that period working with them in many ways.
Speaker 2: Any interaction with [President Gerald Rudolph] Ford [Jr.]?
Speaker 1: I didn't have any special role with Gerald Ford.  I was in meetings where, you know, where Gerald Ford was, but I had no special role with him.
Story_ID: 210264
Speaker 1: Now, with [President James Earl] Jimmy Carter [Jr.], you had, you became an assistant secretary for [U.S. Department of] Housing and Urban Development [HUD].
Speaker 2: I became assistant secretary in his administration and that administration.  That was after I left the [Washington] D.C. government on the night that I lost the election to [HistoryMaker] Marion Barry for mayor [of Washington, D.C.]--
Speaker 1: Now, we should probably just go back and do that.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Now, before we get to this, I'm sorry, we're getting jumping ahead but--
Speaker 2: Very well then.
Speaker 1: --I guess from, in 1974, now this is the same year that [President Richard Milhous] Nixon resigns.  I mean, you're elected to--you were appointed first to D.C. city government, right, city council [Council of the District of Columbia].
Speaker 2: Was appointed first as, first appointed to the city council--when Lyndon [Baines] Johnson tried to get elected to city council and [U.S.] Congress turned him down.
Speaker 1: Now, this is just one chapter in a protracted struggle--
Speaker 2: Absolutely--
Speaker 1: --that goes back a couple hundred years--
Speaker 2: --absolutely.
Speaker 1: --of, to trying to achieve some kind of sovereignty for the people of the State of the District of Columbia [Washington, D.C.], right?
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: And in the black community fight was led by--is it [HistoryMaker] Chuck Stone, Julius Hobson, and other--
Speaker 2: Yeah, and Chuck Stone was a newsman at that time here--for after--and Hobson was one, and I was chairman of a coalition for self-determination.
Speaker 1: I think Doug Moore had something--
Speaker 2: Doug Moore was involved.
Speaker 1: Douglas [E.] Moore, right.
Speaker 2: He was in--member of the city council.
Speaker 1: And probably many others were, yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah, awful lot of people were involved with that--the effort to get home rule, and a lot of white people involved in that effort, and it was amazing that--
Speaker 1: Joseph [L.] Rauh [Jr.], I think was even involved.
Speaker 2: Joe Rauh, yeah, Joe Rauh was a great civil rights attorney, a lawyer for the--well, for the labor union, labor, auto workers mainly, and other things.  He worked very well with Clarence [M.] Mitchell, Jr. who was--many regarded as the 101st Senator, they used to call him.
Speaker 1: Right.  And even with SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee], I think Rauh worked with SNCC in '64 [1964] when they--the Mississippi Freedom Democratic Party [MFDP] (unclear) (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: Yes, he represented them on some things and other things.  Joe was a great liberal and very active in a lot of things.  So, a lot of people involved in the Home Rule Movement and the business community of Washington [D.C.] was opposed to it.  The board of trade and all of them were opposed to it.  And they were living back in the 17th century--not even the 18th century.  And so, it was an uphill fight, and the people who controlled the congress were--controlled the district were committees of the congress--were from the South.  And so, they could prove to their constituents who's back home how to hold black folks down, and that's what they did in Washington.  And we had a commissioner form of government--three commissioners appointed by the president.  And so, people would go around the local government commissioners, to go to the [Capitol] Hill [Washington, D.C.] to these congress people who were from the South to get them to do things and keep--prevent the government from doing things.  And so, they were their overlords.  And nobody paid much attention in the congress, you know, this was domain to--and all these southerners wanted to serve on these committees, you know, chair these committee.  These are minor committees of the congress-[U.S.] House [of Representatives] committee and the [U.S.] Senate committee, and this, were minor committees in the house because they had no national visibility and no national recognition of those committees.  So, southerners wanted those committees because they wanted to control, so they controlled the purse strings of Washington.  So, Lyndon Johnson tried to get home rule elected government, and he couldn't.  But when he didn't, he got his reorganization--used his reorganization powers.  In other words, very clever--since the D.C. government was a--in effect--a department of the federal government, and he had the authority to reorganize the federal government, hence he had the authority to reorganize--so they couldn't call that a city council because that's an elected type of government.  So, he just called the Council of the District of Columbia--not the city council.  And then, he appointed people.  He said, "I want you to behave as though you were elected."  In other words, act like you were elected, govern like you were elected.  And so, I served in that city council, but not by his appointment.  That first group, I didn't serve in--Lyndon Johnson, he soon went out of office.  Nixon came in and that group came in '69 [1969], '71 [1971].  I was appointed vice chair of that council.  Nixon appointed a Republican chair.  I was appointed vice chair of that council, and then we got home rule in '74 [1974].  And I must say under Nixon government, Nixon supported it, that effort to get home rule and he signed the papers--the [District of Columbia] Home Rule [Act of 1973], and so we took over January 2, 1969--I mean, 1975.
Story_ID: 210265
Speaker 1: We left with your election to the D.C. City Council [sic. Council of the District of Columbia] of '74 [1974].
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.  We, in '74 [1974], we had this election.  And we took office on January 2nd, 1950, 19-, what, 1975, which was a glorious day, glorious day in the history of this city [Washington, D.C.].  And so, we took office with gusto. Walter Washington was the first elected mayor.  And we had this city council full of a bunch of activists.  [HistoryMaker] Marion Barry was on it, who later became mayor.  Douglas [E.] Moore, a very bright preacher.  And another preacher, I don't--I better not cite a name because I'll miss some, but these are some of the better known, but a very strong group of people.
Speaker 1: Julius Hobson was (unclear) (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: Julius Hobson would have been head of CORE [Congress of Racial Equality], and who would have been a strong activist.  And Willie [J.] Hardy and some names, who were very much deeply involved at that time.  And some white--not, but majority black.  The--I remember, you know, I--when we organized, but we were determined to organize that first day that we were installed.  On that same day of the inauguration, we're going, we formed--have the government entirely formed because people felt--well, they don't know how do that.  They don't know how to put together a government.  We were elected in September--November, taking office in January, so we had time to have informal meetings to put the government together.  And I appointed committees and everything to--so on the day that we were sworn in, we went from there to have our first meeting where we named our committees, named our structure, and named our chairs, and did a few things.  And people on the [Capitol] Hill [Washington, D.C.] were very surprised that we were that organized.  Well, I remember, and we had a lot of hearings.  I remember one of the hearings--people were testifying and they were saying, talking about the government needed to do this, and the government needed to do that, and talking about criticizing the government, criticizing the government.  They had some big guys like Marion Barry, and Julius Hobson, and Doug Moore say, yeah, that's right, that's right.  And I leaned over and say, "Hey, you're the government now."  They're talking about you (laughter) because they'd been the ones sitting out there testifying in years gone by.  So, they're talking about--you are now the government, you know.  And so, your role is very different the way you look at these issues and the way--so, we had to work through that how you make that adjustment from being that kind of an activist to being a legislator.
Speaker 1: That's easier said than done, isn't it--I mean, to be an agitator trying to make somebody else do something--
Speaker 2: Oh, much easier (laughter)--
Speaker 1: --and then trying to do it yourself, you know.
Speaker 2: --much easier, much easier.  You got a whole different set of--new set of parameters, you know, that, that you got to live by and got to work with, and work through, and a set of responsibilities that you got to deal with and then work through.  So, it's a whole, it's a sea change, it's a sea change.  So, we had to work through that, and I had lots of meetings in my council.  I say the council because I never want anybody to get embarrassed on the stand and go in a meeting, so let's try to get some of those issues worked out, worked out in advance.  I remember before--we were trying to organize a government.  And the, and Marion Barry and a few of them were trying to figure out how me, as chairman, how I could not have a vote.  This--we were putting together initial structure of the government.  And so, they were designing some strategy, whereby the chairman of the council would not have a vote.  Well, the chair on some city councils don't have a vote.  In Detroit [Michigan], at that time, they didn't have one.  Charlie Diggs [Charles C. Diggs, Jr.], who's chairman of the House District Committee, who is overseeing the organization in the government didn't have it.  And so, and I said to Marion, I said, "Look, Marion, I could wait until we got in a council meeting when we're talking about organization of the government.  And I can embarrass you, but I don't want to do that.  I said, the Home Rule Acts give everybody a vote in the council, including the chair.  You can't change the Home Rule Act unless you go back to [U.S.] Congress.  So, you can't take away the vote of the chairman of the city council.  Well, he thanked me for that because he'd looked like a fool."  I said, "Look, there's a man in new government that he doesn't understand the act under which he's operating," you see.  I said, "The Home Rule Act gives me a vote--nothing you can do about that unless you can write it down--get the congress to change it."  So, the city council can't decide not to give me a vote, you know.  So, I--we worked all the time with issues of that kind, you know.  And I would do this outside of the regular meetings, you know, and on issues of things that they wanted to do that we didn't have the authority to do.  We'd have to talk about the--well, we worked through all of that.
Story_ID: 210266
Speaker 1: I decided that I was going to run for mayor [of Washington, D.C.].  Walter Washington had been--
Speaker 2: This is 1978, right?
Speaker 1: This is 1978.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Walter Washington had been the appointed mayor for six years, and he'd been the elected mayor, and it was going to be for four years, so ten years as mayor.  And he'd done a lot for the city; he'd done a lot for the city.  And, but I'd felt that Walter Washington--his administration was tired, and should be retired.  And, and he and I were--had been good friends, even before either of us got into elected government.  We were--he was on our board of the Urban League, was chairman of the board of the Urban League at one point.  So, he and I were good personal friends.  But one night, we got together.  I went to his office after work, and I explained to him that I was going to run for mayor.  I told him the polls show that he probably could not win and that, and that I was going to run.  And he's--he thanked me for letting me know.  And so, then we--it was hard running against him because he was such a decent guy and we were very good friends, you know.  But I'm thinking in terms of the government--moving it forward at this point.  And so, there were four or five candidates, but only three major ones--Walter Washington, [HistoryMaker] Marion Barry, and me.  And so, and since the Washington Post supported Marion Barry, they thought that he might take more risks that I would take, although they thought I'd be a good mayor.  And I was kind of happy that they weren't supporting me because I going to win the election without the endorsement of the Washington Post, so nobody could say that the Washington Post got me elected.  And the--as it turned out, I lost the election by half a percentage point.  And, but on that night, the--about the time that people were leaving, somebody who worked in the White House [Washington, D.C.] said to me as he was leaving, "You'll get a call from the president tomorrow."  I had no idea what about.  And, and so, I did get a call to come over and see the--that morning, next morning--to see the president in the afternoon.  I went to see President [James Earl "Jimmy"] Carter [Jr.].  And he said, "[HistoryMaker] Sterling [Tucker], you were our candidate for mayor."  He said, "We were all pulling for you, and we wanted you to be the mayor"--said, "but you never know what happens in politics, so we've been holding a spot in HUD [U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development].  Everybody said you'd be just right for it, just in case."
Story_ID: 210267
Speaker 1: And so, he [President James Earl "Jimmy" Carter, Jr.] offered--asked me to become assistant secretary at HUD [U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development].  It was a wonderful thing--something I would have wanted to do in life at some point, and so I did.  And, well, I wanted to be mayor [of Washington, D.C.], and I thought that I was destined to be the mayor.  It didn't happen.
Speaker 2: Okay.  So, this is 1978?
Speaker 1: Nineteen seventy-eight [1978].  This is the fall of '78 [1978].
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: So, I went there.  And on January, I went in, went in '79 [1979].  It'd been the Carter administration at HUD and, and enjoyed that thoroughly.  I was there at the time that Carter had to fire [HistoryMaker] Andy Young as UN [United Nations] ambassador and there'd be--
Speaker 2: That seems to be--I mean, I--it makes me reflect on the situation with [President Richard Milhous] Nixon and Whitney Young [Jr.], you know.  They want to fire someone of that stature kind of takes--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --some luster away, doesn't it?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: I mean to--
Speaker 1: And, and I say fire--that is what happened, but Andy resigned--but he had to resign.
Speaker 2: What were your reflections on that?  I mean, can you give us some insight into that?
Speaker 1: Well, you know, what, what happened was Andy Young met with the Palestinians quietly--in secret.  And in that period, we weren't supposed to be having any dealings with the Palestinians at all.  This was a surreptitious meeting, and it was--got revealed--and he got fired.  Well, the president called all of his presidential appointees together at the White House [Washington, D.C.]--I mean all the black appointees, together in the White House, to explain to us what had happened, because men say, "What's this--you're firing Andy Young?  You're making him leave the administration?" and all this is going around.  And Andy was there, and they explained--and Andy explained it, "Look, I have to leave the government because it's government policy that we don't deal with the Arabs, and that I violated that policy.  And if I didn't, the president would be in deep trouble if I didn't leave the administration, you know, the Jews would be all over him, you know.  And so, I've got to leave and so--" and so, they--what they didn't quite say to us was the president knew that Andy was meeting with them--but didn't know, but the president couldn't really know that this was going on.  But they decided to take this risk because they needed to open up lines of communication with the Palestinians, you see.  And it did open up the lines of communication with the Palestinians, but he had to fire Andy, you know.  Andy had to be sacrificed, you know, in that process.  And Andy knew that when he did this--that if he got caught, you know, there would be a problem about it.
Speaker 2: Well, it's a sensitive issue.  A lot of people felt that Jimmy Carter betrayed Andy Young--
Speaker 1: Yeah (laughter).
Speaker 2: --or that Andy Young betrayed Jimmy Carter or vice versa, you know, yeah, so--
Speaker 1: Yeah, I'm--yeah, and I'm sure that feeling is widely held still--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --that people think about that period.  And each way, it looked, it looked like a betrayal either way you look at--it looks that way.  But the government--the president had to be--stand by government, behind government policy.  So, he didn't fire Andy; Andy resigned.
Story_ID: 210268
Speaker 1: [President] Ronald [Wilson] Reagan is elected in 1980 so--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --you know, [President James Earl] Jimmy Carter [Jr.] doesn't serve another term, and then your job is over, at this point, with HUD [U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development].
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: So what did you do during the '80s [1980s] until the--I guess from '80 [1980] to '88 [1988]?
Speaker 2: Well, first thing I did was--I think I mentioned earlier, that about the last six months of Jimmy Carter's term, then I expected he's going to be re-elected is when I went in to speak with him about resigning, you know, in the event that he wanted to get--bring somebody else in because I didn't have plans for remaining in the administration in the second term.  That's when I went to Firestone [Tire and Rubber Company, Akron, Ohio] and talked to some other people.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But then thinking Jimmy Carter is going to be reelected, so, but I was making other plans.  I decided then not to take a position anywhere.  I decided that I wanted to go out and see what I was worth on the open market in the marketplace.  And so, I decided to organize Sterling Tucker Associates [Washington, D.C.].  So, I left my office in one day out of the federal government of the--and came to my--I had my office already set up the next day on Connecticut Avenue where I am now--not in this building, but on a different floor, and opened up Sterling Tucker Associates.  And with--I had some clients.  IBM was one, and had several clients already lined up when I opened my company.
Story_ID: 210269
Speaker 1: What type of consultation do you do for these companies [through Sterling Tucker Associates, Washington, D.C.]?
Speaker 2: Well, several kinds of things.  With IBM, for five years, I worked on several issues--one, the South Africa issue, but the governments are federal government, and with local governments and state governments.  One with IBM, firstly, in formulating a policy within the company on South Africa.  And we worked with a whole range of issues regarding that.  And then, their decision to sell, to come out of South Africa, there are a lot of pressure on them to come out of South Africa, and what--then, and so, they were going to eventually come out of South Africa.  And what I was trying to do with government--it's a federal government and state government, it's the city council.  Everybody was saying, "Get out, get out, get out."  I'm saying to them, "If IBM cuts and runs, like a lot of other companies are doing, countries in Europe, companies in Europe was going to pick up these pieces of these companies, take over that business as they were doing, and continuing with the same apartheid policies.  We simply have U.S. companies coming out.  We haven't changed apartheid in South Africa"--you see.  I said, "If IBM is going to come out," I said, "give us time to do certain things--to get some blacks and coloreds on the board of a new company.  To change the company, get some blacks and coloreds on the board, to set up some programs in South Africa, set up a foundation in South Africa for housing and education," and some other things I was trying to get done.  I said, "Give us time to get those things set up first, you know, then let us pull out."  And, you know, a city councilman or a state legislator said, "Either vote--we got a resolution, ask IBM and all companies to come out of South Africa."  That's an easy, cheap vote, you know, everybody could vote, "Yeah, let's get out of South Africa."  But, so, as I explained to legislators, they understood what I was saying.  Some of them didn't feel like they could do it.  They-"I got to support this resolution," was the attitude of many of them, "but I know you're right."  And I get them to hold up, get the government to hold up its policy in some way.  "Let's try to persuade our companies to make a change in South Africa, try to change it--get blacks and coloreds in positions of some responsibility before they leave, wait until I get some new policies established in some of those companies before they leave."  We were able to do that with IBM.  We got that done.  And they came out and say that, "We have a sixty million dollar program we set up in there for housing, some other thing to do.  We got blacks and coloreds in the board of a new company that's going to take over in, in South Africa.  But that's what I did with them.  I also did some other things with them.  We worked in some plant closings.  How do you close some plants, so that people don't lose their jobs--minorities particularly?  And so, we did some reintegration types of programs with people in other parts of the company.  At one time, IBM didn't fire anybody, or it's going to find ways to--they had a policy of not firing.  But it was a very difficult policy to implement, so I worked with the implementation of that policy in IBM, so I did lots of things.  They were an excellent company to work for.  I worked with them--I did that.  I did some things with [The] Coca-Cola [Company, Atlanta, Georgia] along the same kind--public policy issue lines.  I worked with corporations on that.
Story_ID: 210270
Speaker 1: I worked with a company, a little organization out of--a client, which is mine to this day: Indiana Black Expo [Inc., Indianapolis, Indiana].  I was running an executive training program for the National Urban League for new Urban League executives for a couple of weeks in New York.  The person was in that program named Charles Williams, Reverend Charles Williams, who had worked in the mayor's office in Indianapolis [Indiana], and had just--Indiana Black Expo was going to be--he was going to be the first paid executive of Indiana Black Expo.  And I knew he--the guy was, had a lot of energy and creativity by--because being in that executive program for the Urban--for only Urban League executives.  So, I said, "Charles got in this program."  So, they asked me to come to dinner with him one night and I did.  And asked me after some discussion, if I could come and help them develop Indiana Black Expo.  They had a huge board--unmanageable.  They had no staff, no paid staff--been run by volunteers.  Had been doing a wonderful job in ways they were doing it.  They needed lots of money; they needed some staff, and they needed business principles and practices, and whole lots of things they needed.  So, the Lilly Endowment [Inc., Indianapolis, Indiana]--I met with the Lilly Endowment, and they asked me to come to do a strategic plan that they were paying for.  And so, I worked with the community and governor and the state, people around the state, and the chapters of the Indiana Black Expo, and a strategic plan, a five-year plan.  And we did a second five-year plan.  And, boy, they worked it very hard--that plan.  The Lilly Endowment also engaged me to help implement the plans.  There were so many people, develop five-year plans--they put them on the shelf.  But wanted me to push the expo, and guide the expo, and push the community, and guide the community, and so I did them.  So, I started that in 1983, and I've been with them ever since.  Charles Williams died two weeks ago, that person, and they had the funeral last--two weeks ago, last Monday. Three weeks ago, he died.  But a quarter of a million people come to that program every year.  And now, they got strong chapters across the whole, across the state.  They've got a budget.  They, they got--they're pretty well-funded, got about eighteen staff people at Indiana Black Expo.  They filled the stadium for this--they have a game, Circle City Classic [Indianapolis, Indiana], every fall.  They fill that stadium--sometimes when the [Indianapolis] Colts couldn't fill it.  It's amazing that the black folks in a city, which is not predominantly black, with no [historically] black colleges [and universities (HBCUs)], you know, can bring two black colleges there, and fill up that stadium, and have three or four days of major activity.  I wish they'd get fifty thousand dollars' worth of scholarships--the black kids out of Indiana every year.  So that's kind of a labor of love with me that I've been doing.  I think this is probably my last year with Indiana Black Expo.  I think then, my plan is to be out of that by the end of the year.  I got to now work with them to find a new president.  That's not going to be easy to do yet--kind of president who could bring to that organization what it needs, so I've been doing that.
Story_ID: 210271
Speaker 1: I got involved in diabetes.  I have a daughter with diabetes and became very active with it, and on the local board, and I became chairman of the local board.  I got on the national board, and I became chairman of the national board--first black person to serve as chairman of the national board of [American] Diabetes [Association].  And I started working them to get lots of things going in diabetes, in the American Diabetes Association.  And I went on the board of International Diabetes Federation.  I created what we called in the region, a what we called the Declaration of Americans on Diabetes working with Canada, U.S., and the countries of the Caribbean, and that in America, in a unified way, I raised money with a foundation, it was pharmaceuticals, to create that organization to get that program staffed.  I developed a strategic plan for the International Diabetes Federation, to work with the 147 chapters in 141 countries, working with medical societies and governments and citizens' groups on issues of diabetes and problems that are just major around the world.  But working with different culture and different languages, we created staff and set them up, and raised money with pharmaceuticals to get that program going across the world.  And, but they engaged my company [Sterling Tucker Associates, Washington, D.C.] to do the strategic plan.  Although I was a member of the board, I said, "I don't know that's a--." They said, "Look, [HistoryMaker] Sterling [Tucker], you know more about this than anybody else.  Your company does strategic planning.  You know how to implement these plans.  You know these people.  You have the competent.  We're going to hire somebody to--some company to help implement this plan that you've developed."  So, I said, "Okay, I will do it, but I will not personally benefit.  My contract will not personally benefit me.  The staff that I engaged, the expenses that I have--that's what the contract will pay, but Sterling Tucker will not personally benefit from this contract," and that's why I wrote the contract.  And we did that for five years with them--International Diabetes Federation.  I now, with the--I do have a contract now with the American Diabetes Association.  I established what we call the Diabetes Epidemic Action Council.  In this council, I have scientists, black scientists; medical doctors; heads of organizations like the medical society, you know, these black medical societies, National Medical Association [NMA]; and people who are former members of the congress, [HistoryMaker] Louis Stokes, and a couple of people like that; and the heads of a couple of other national major black organizations.  And, did I say some scientific people in the field who are recognized as dia- pathologists and endocrinologists.  We look at public policy issues affecting African Americans.  Our whole focus is African Americans.  Legislation is pending proposing legislature, public policy issues on diabetes, how to implement it, what they ought to do, how to influence the public policy development.  And we've worked with the [U.S.] Congress and so, I head that organization.  I chair that now--critically an important organization.  Diabetes is a growing disease and I do that as a--
Speaker 2: It really affects the black community, too, and it's (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Oh yeah, so those are the kinds of--so, I work with some public policy issues of that kind in my business.  And so I have, so I have a number of different clients as well--I have excellent (unclear).  I've cut back a couple of years.  My wife [Alloyce Robinson Tucker] is--was ill about the last five years, and I cut back on my international work.  I cut back on my civic work to some degree.  I've been doing a lot of work in my church.  And I do some things in the community and nationally still.  Politically, I do some things with the Democratic Party, but I cut back, deliberately cut down on my business a couple of years ago--limit it to a few clients now.  But I want to cut out my evening work, so I could be home with my wife who passed two months ago.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Now, you have--is it three children or--
Speaker 1: I have two children [Michele Tucker Jeffrey and Lauren Tucker Cross] and--
Speaker 2: Two, all right.
Speaker 1: --and, see, three grandchildren--boys.
Speaker 2: Okay.  So, your children are grown now basically, two daughters and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Two daughters; two daughters and three boys.
Story_ID: 210272
Speaker 1: What are some of your hopes and concerns for the African American community today?
Speaker 2: Well, I hope that we won't lose sight of the struggle because it will never end, and my hope is that we don't become comfortable.  We're getting, we got a growing middle class, but we have a growing impoverished class, and the distance is becoming greater between the two.  And the poor people cannot solve their problems, and middle class people still have problems, too, you know, all of them.  I mean, I look at these blacks who are partners in law firms--they--white law firms, they couldn't be that at one point, but they got to still be involved in the struggle.  I hate to put it quite in those terms, but that's what it is.  So, I hope they will see a responsibility and seize it.  We're in better position now than we were before to deal with some of our issues.  We got to put energy and money behind it.  I hope that we can--the age of [Reverend Dr.] Martin Luther King [Jr.] may not come back in that way, and probably will not because the issues aren't as quite as divisible by color as they once were.  The discrimination is more sophisticated now.  It comes in Brooks Brothers suits, you know, and policies that are camouflaged, you know, and, "We ought to become color blind," and things of this kind, and hiding the issue and, but we're in better shape, I think, to solve some of our problems now than we were.  We have more resources to work with, both in terms of personnel and money.  And I'm concerned that we don't see that, that we don't, that we don't, in other words, we got to keep people involved, and then keep white people involved.  And blacks got to stay involved, you know, or we're going to miss this opportunity--or just be middle class people and poor people and the--and poor will stay poor, and maybe get poorer.  And middle class of blacks will be middle class, but they will still miss out on some of the opportunities.  It could be theirs, you know, even greater, you know.  And I have that hope and that aspiration, you know, and I--to keep it alive.  I started writing books.  The reason I started writing books, and I published--published author on several books.  I started writing books, so that, because a lot of books about us were not being written by us.  And I start, and I wrote some books because of that.  And I--one time, a prolific writer, I taught at Howard University [Washington, D.C.] for a number of years.  I wanted to teach, taught the graduate school of social work [Howard University School of Social Work, Washington, D.C.].  And I lectured at the [John F.] Kennedy School [of Government, Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] for one semester, Kennedy School of Government.  And I've done teaching and writing and lecturing, and these things because I--we got to do these things.  We got to keep our message out there.  And we got to give leadership to our causes, as we seek the support of others.  So, I feel deeply about this because I think there are some great opportunities that we have that are unrealized, that I think we could very well miss because things are better for a lot of us, but they're not good for most of us, still.  And I think that we can't lose sight of that--
Story_ID: 210273
Speaker 1: One thing we didn't talk about was the period of time in the late '80s [1980s] when you were drug czar for the City of Washington, D.C. amidst the biggest, probably drug crisis in the country, you know.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: [HistoryMaker] Marion Barry was mayor, and D.C. was known as the murder capital of America--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --and which, I know he responded to the National Press Club that these were not murders--just some killings, I think he told the National Press Club, which was--remarkably got around the country.  I heard it on public radio myself.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: But, but what was your--how did you feel in the position of being--and why did you accept that position--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --at that point of time?  And what kind of pressure was on you, and how did it turn out?
Speaker 2: Well, the drugs were a real problem.  Most of the killings--well, a large percentage of the killings seem to be related to drugs in some way or another, and that there were more--there was a lot of much more stealing going on, and much more burglaries and murders.  And we didn't know much about gangs in Washington before that.  But then, few gangs started to be formed, you know, and gangs fighting, and people getting killed.  And it was a major problem.  It had been a problem for a couple of years.  And Marion Barry had been suspected of using drugs.  And he was almost caught a couple of times, I understand.  And I told him once--I remember once on New Year's Eve, we met after he was in the paper; that he'd--was nearly caught that night before or something like that, and we had a long meeting and he swore that he was not using drugs.  And I told him a couple of things that, where I felt that people were going to try to set him up and that--and he said, well, he swore to me that he was not using drugs.  Then later, the--they, they had, they appointed a federal drug czar.  They wanted a drug czar for Washington.  And the--and I, and I was called in to--by meet with, you know, Bennett--Bob--Bill Bennett--
Speaker 1: William [J.] Bennett, right.
Speaker 2: --who was a drug czar.  We went in--I want to go and see the president.  We went in to see the first president and we--
Speaker 1: The first President [George Hebert Walker] Bush, right?
Speaker 2: Bush, yeah, President Bush.  And we talked about it and they talked about it.  And then, I went to--and he asked me to be the drug czar--Bush did.  He said that we needed a drug czar for Washington, D.C. because we believe that the mayor is involved.  And we're not going to give to Washington to fight the drugs if it's got to go to the hands of Marion Barry.  And so, they talked to me about it.  They asked--when we go to the [Capitol] Hill [Washington, D.C.] to talk to the people in the [U.S.] House [of Representatives] and the [U.S.] Senate, and they told me the same thing.  And, well, the authority to make the appointment was really on Marion Barry but--technically, it was.  And so, then Marion Barry met with me, and I told him, you know, about the meeting with these guys.  And he said, well, he says that, that, "I--my position was that that I'm not going to let appoint a drug czar," he said, "but I'd like for you to take it,"--said, "but if you don't take it, I won't appoint because I'll fight the federal government.  But if you take it, then I would--I'd have a drug czar."  Well, I said, I told them all, "I don't see how I can do this," I said, "I got a small business [Sterling Tucker Associates, Washington, D.C.].  I mean, I'd got to give up my business.  I'd got to give up my clients--give up my clients, you know, and like would take a huge hit, you know, money-wise, you know, and I, you know, and I don't see how I can really do that."  But the pressure was really on me.  And so, I finally said to them, "Let me see what I can work.  Let me talk to a lawyers and everybody.  Let me see what I can work, see what I can do with my business, see if I can save part of it in some way or another.  Let's see what I can do and see if I can take this job."  But over the weekend, Marion Barry announced that the job had been offered me and so, and it's up to me whether or not we have a drug czar.  In effect, that's what it said in the paper.  Well, it looked like if I'm--don't take the job, like I don't, I'm, you know, I'm unpatriotic almost.  And so, I became--that's how I became drug czar.
Story_ID: 210274
Speaker 1: Police met with me.  They reinforced my house in different ways.  They put guards in the community.  My driver, they was telling him which way to go, and take me to and from work--not the same way every day, because drug lords were killing anybody if they get in their way.  You could have a drug czar, you know, you're a real target, you know, so my family, you know, and all that safety issues for my family, all this business about go, go to work a different way, put an extra lighting around my house, and all that.  You know, this was serious business.  And I took it, and we worked.  We had--it was tough because I was fighting [HistoryMaker] Marion Barry although he--I said to Marion Barry and his cabinet--I said, "Look."  Barry was still denying, in denial.  And I said, "Why don't we: all your cabinet, and me, and you, and the deputy mayor [Carol Thompson Cole]; why don't we all take random drug tests so that we--to lead the way in this?"  And he's what--and so, he says, "I'm willing, I'm willing, I'm willing to do that," you know.  The deputy mayor, who's a woman, a lawyer [sic.], highly responsible, and highly person of principle.  She saw problems with that.  She felt that even she would not do it because of violation of a certain kind of rights and so forth, et cetera.  I said, "Well, we're not requiring anybody."  She said, "Well, it's the same kind of pressure, you know, if the mayor says he's going to do it," so.  The mayor said, "Well, you see, I would do if Carol would say it's okay--well, even if she wasn't going to say it was okay."  So, he got out of it.  So, I said then, "Well, let's you and I do it, so let's you and I do it.  You're the mayor, and I'm the drug czar, so we ought to show that we're clean."  Yeah.  And so, he felt that he couldn't do it that way.  And so, I kept telling him--I says, "Look," you know, "something's going to be coming down," you know, "something's going to be coming down."  I didn't know exactly what and when because I didn't know.  The chief of police didn't know.  I didn't want to know; I didn't want to know.  And, but I kept telling him, you know, "If you're not clean, you'd better get clean," I said, "because this is--I mean, you're a target here, you're a target here," you know.  And you got to tell me--he swore that he was clean.  He wasn't involved in any drugs in any way.  We'd sit in the meetings.  His eyes would be glazed over, but he still was able to function in a lot of ways very well.  I admired the fact the way he was able to function.  But, so the night when the deal came down, he was arrested.  I wasn't surprised.  I came--it was on a Thursday night, I believe, and I--Thursday or Friday--I think it was a Thursday.  I'd just come in for dinner about ten o'clock, and I was sitting down at dinner, and a flash came on the television.  And then, Barry was arrested--didn't surprise me at all.  It was--but it made my top.  But my job the whole time was very difficult.  I'd go to meetings.  I--we'd go to a meeting of his cabinet.  And I would talk to them about what they've got to say to their staffs about drugs.  And some of them were using drugs with him, you know.  So, it's kind of a hard thing, you know, you got to try to work through this bureaucracy.  And he's fighting [William J.] Bill Bennett every step of the way.  And I'm trying to negotiate that relationship, and negotiating the race between the federal government and the District [of Columbia] government.  It was a very challenging job--trying to maintain a good relation with all these parties myself--I needed to maintain this relationship.  He had a lot of things done, putting through government, but all the time everything I was doing was putting the noose closer around Marion Barry's neck, too, because it's forcing the issue of drugs in the District.  But that's what my job was--to try to clean it up.  And so, we did, we did a lot of things--worked with, called the banks in, talking about money laundering, you know.  We, we called, constantly, new car salesmen in about how people buying cars, help identify, you know, we had, those are--this had--a many-faceted operation that we were dealing with.  A lot of people making money out of drugs, you know.  And so, you're up against all of this, you know, trying to deal with it.  And people trying to discredit everybody all the way around, and so mainly, I maintained my credibility through all of that.
Story_ID: 210275
Speaker 1: How did your family get through this period, and how did they feel?
Speaker 2: My family has always supported me in anything that I've done.  They've--I must say, always supported me in anything I've done and took a lot of hits.  I remember when in--but I remember my wife [Alloyce Robinson Tucker] took one of my daughters, my daughter, first daughter [Michele Tucker Jeffrey] out of public school because she was getting good grades, but she, and didn't--but my wife didn't feel like she was learning the way she should.  So, took her out, so we got to put her in a private school.  And I did, and so I'm running for public office, and people complain and said "You, you're a--" and I'd done lots of projects for school--a whole lot of things I've done for school.  But it might have be--came out of--and my company [Sterling Tucker Associates, Washington, D.C.] is a volunteer.  I organized a program for first and second and third graders to--for reading and other thing.  So, everybody knew I did, was doing a lot for public education, in and out of office.  Well, but when I was in office and my opponents tried to use it against me in the political campaign--said, "You're in public school, you got the kid in private school," and, "all these problems in public schools, how can you have your kid in private school when you're a public official?"  And I said to them in one of this--said, "You know, as a public official, I do everything I can for our children in education, every other way.  I do the best I can as a public official on issues of public education.  And as a parent, I do the best I can for my children."  And so, the newspaper people who were pushing that didn't--dropped it after that.  The answer seemed to satisfy them, and they stopped the public pressure on me on that.  I said, "As a parent, I do the best I can for my children."  And that's why I answered that and I got--they got beyond that issue.
Speaker 1: Now, you were for school vouchers and you spoke about (unclear) (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: I, yes, I--and even though I worked for public schools, and I did lots of things with the public schools, I came to the conclusion that the--that was a political--it had become a political issue mainly between the teachers' unions, you know, and that.  And then, I felt we had to--every--we have to give kids every opportunity.  We can't wait for another generation.  That doesn't mean we still didn't fight for public schools, but I did support vouchers and do support vouchers.
Story_ID: 210276
Speaker 1: What did your parents [Una Vinson Tucker and John Tucker] think of your success with Urban League and so forth?  Did they live to see you become successful in the Urban League?
Speaker 2: Yeah, they lived in--I was here in Washington [D.C.], so through Akron [Ohio] and Canton [Ohio] and Washington.  My parents were very proud of me, but they were proud of all the children.  I was more successful by some standards than the others, but they were all successful.  And they were modestly proud of me--not braggingly proud, but modestly proud, quietly proud of me.
Story_ID: 210277
Speaker 1: When you look back on all the things you've done--you've done so many things--what do you really focus on as your legacy?
Speaker 2: You know, I really have not thought about it.  But I do know that I have really tried my best to change society for the better.  And I think every place I've been, and all the activities I've worked with, I think I've done that to some degree.  And I think I've--then I don't especially want to be, or think about being recognized for anything.  I have always had the satisfaction of feeling good about what I was doing and what I've done.  And, and so, I don't, you know, I've gotten many, many awards, hundreds of hundreds of awards which have never meant anything to me particularly.  And, but, but I have the feeling that my life is not been in vain up to this point.
Story_ID: 210278
Speaker 1: Is there anything that you would differently if you look, when you look back on everything you did?  Is there--
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Yeah, there'd be some things that I would do differently.  Some of them, I was--things I was growing up.  I mean, not things--I made mistakes because I was growing.  And I've had some disappointments, you know.  I wanted to be mayor [of Washington, D.C.]--I was not.  And I've--other things I've been interested in, but--and I'm sure that I've made mistakes, but nothing that--I can't say I would have done anything differently.  If I thought about it, I could probably think about a number of things I would have done differently--things that I've said that I might not have said, things that I've done that I might not have done.  And I made strategic errors, I'm sure, and I didn't spend as much time with my children [Michele Tucker Jeffrey and Lauren Tucker Cross].  In a way, I was glad that I had girls, and not boys, because I could make the argument that my wife [Alloyce Robinson Tucker] did an excellent job, and she did.  I've come to be a better father as an adult with my children than I was in time spent with them when they were growing.  I'm not making that mistake with my grandchildren.  And I don't think my children missed me.  They had good wonderful full lives and I was always there, you know, but I've come to learn more about them as they've grown older than I knew sometimes when they were smaller.  I didn't second-guess my wife on how to raise them.  And I always felt that she would be much better, do that much better than I would do it.  I didn't--never second-guessed my wife about things around the house or about the house.  When she said the kids had to go to private school, they had to go to private school; I didn't know how I was going to pay for it initially, but I knew that was going to be the case--whatever price I had to pay also in terms of political price I had to pay, I was prepared to pay it because that was her domain, and she'd made that decision and I supported her in that decision.  It was mine, it was hers.  I supported her in that decision.  So, but I wish I had spent a little more time.  I'm saying that a lot of people say--things that a lot of people say, but I don't think my children were any worse off because of it.  But had I had sons in that period, I think I would have felt more guilt about not being available to them.  But those civil rights days in the '50s [1950s] and the '60s [1960s] and the '70s [1970s], there was so much to be done and so much going on and, you know, so many things, too.  And I had several careers going on at the same time--the Washington Urban League [Washington, D.C.], the National Urban League at the same time; teaching; involved in the Civil Rights Movement locally; travelling abroad for the country; and all over the world on missions of one kind and lectures/tours of one kind; on problem-solving expeditions of one kind.  And they're all over the world, doing those kinds of things--writing, teaching, lecturing, and always, you have seven days a week jam-packed with a whole lots of activities.  That's the way it was.  You know, I says, I couldn't understand how people could work only eight hours.
Story_ID: 210279
Speaker 1: How would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: Probably, as one who could be trusted and, in what he did, in the public's interest, and one who never betrayed public trust and one who, who put the public interest above personal interest always, and who really enjoyed, you know, all that he had an opportunity to do in life.
Story_ID: 210280
Speaker 1: This is a photo of my grandson--of his confirmation in the Episcopal church.  He became of age.  Next to him in the--is the bishop, who at that time, who confirmed him, and his mother and aunt are standing on either side of him.  My wife [Alloyce Robinson Tucker] is--and I are standing next to them.  The importance of that is that the bishop was a teacher--I mean, was a parent of a child who was in my daughter's class at the Sidwell Friends School [Washington, D.C.] here in the second grade.  At the time that my daughter was married and she said she'd happened to--my daughter invited the whole class to the ceremony.  The robe that the bishop was wearing there, she said, is the same robe that a predecessor, a black bishop, wore when he presided over the marriage of my daughter.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  About what year is that?
Speaker 1: That was in--let me see, 1979--
Speaker 2: OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 1: Seventy-eight [1978], 1970--, let me see now, let me think of it.  I--that must have been, must have been '77 [1977], I think.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Yeah, here's another--okay.
Speaker 1: Seventy-seven [1977], I believe.  Oh, this one is the International Diabetes Federation board in one of our meetings in Brussels [Belgium].  And these are people there from all over the world representing that organization.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  So, you're in there, right?
Speaker 1: Yes, I'm standing up on the steps in the back there.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.  And (unclear) year is this one?
Speaker 1: This would have been about in 19--, let me say about 1996.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 1: Ninety-six [1996] or '97 [1997].
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.  (Unclear).
Speaker 1: Yeah, there's some--cloudy--
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Yeah, I got to move it up like this (unclear).
Speaker 1: Yeah.  They're--and that picture of my wife and I, and that's a picture of my family.  That's my wife and I and my two daughters [Michele Tucker Jeffrey and Lauren Tucker Cross].  And the one gentleman standing next to is the husband of one of my daughters.  He happens to be--we're very proud of him.  He's with the Metropolitan Opera in New York [New York].
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, okay, about what year is that?
Speaker 1: Let me see.  That was probably in about 19--, could have been 19--, about '99 [1999] or 2000.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.  Here's one here (unclear).
Speaker 1: This was in Egypt where we just put a program, a diabetes program in Egypt, and this was a banquet with some of the leaders of government, then otherwise in the country.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 1: That was a part of the strategic, the international strategic plan that we developed.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 1: That's nothing there to--
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 1: Again, again, that's my wife and I, and my grandson and his mother.  Jason [ph.] was the youngest grandson.  That's my daughter, Shelly [Michele Tucker Jeffrey].  She's the eldest of my daughters.  The school administrator.  This picture that you see, yeah, that's a meeting--sitting there, presiding and speaking there at that, oh--
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  That's Charles [C.] Diggs [Jr.].
Speaker 1: Charles Diggs who would--that--was former member of the [U.S.] Congress who was chairman of the House District Committee at the time.  And we were sitting there--
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  (Unclear).
Speaker 1: There we have a lot of people involved in the Home Rule Movement.  And there's a meeting of which I was presiding over.  We were discussing the legislation which established the first local government in over a hundred years, elected government, first local elected government [in Washington, D.C.] in over a hundred years.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, all right.  Go right ahead.
Speaker 1: That is a picture of Walter Washington, our first elected mayor there, and I'm behind a podium.  The--shaking hands with a member there of the White House [Washington, D.C.] staff.  We'd just been meeting on an issue of the transit system [Washington Metro].
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  And what year was that?
Speaker 1: That would have been about 1970, before, before the home rule, that was--at the time of the appointed governments, it would be about 1972.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 1: There, I'm pictured with, with President [James Earl "Jimmy"] Carter [Jr.], Jimmy Carter.  That was at the time that I was a member of his administration, assistant secretary in the [U.S.] Department of Housing and Urban Development [HUD].
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.  That's between '70 [1970]--
Speaker 1: That would have been in 1970--about '79 [1979].
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.  (Unclear).
Speaker 1: Yeah, okay.  There I'm pictured with the, at the time, that was a year ago, I was in office as, as the chairman of the American Diabetes Association, the national board.  Pictured with me is a--now a very good friend--became very good friends, who was the president of the board.  And we were co-leaders of the diabetes association, nationally, at that, that time.
Speaker 2: That is a picture again of a meeting in the White House with--in a conference room with President Carter, and talking about some proposed fair housing legislature which I was shepherding for the government through the [U.S.] Congress.  Sitting next to the president there is Clarence [M.] Mitchell [Jr.] who--wonderful gentleman, who was so active on the [Capitol] Hill [Washington, D.C.] and so effective in legislature--affecting legislature, he was regarded--affectionately called the 101st Senator.  And the round of--lots of important leadership and Civil Rights Movement at that time were sitting around that table.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 2: Again, there I am in a picture with Jimmy Carter.  And I believe this was at the time he was about to leave office, but we were pictured there in the White House.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.  (Unclear).
Speaker 2: I mentioned during the course of the, or discussion, that President [Richard Milhous] Nixon have this meeting in the White House where he brought all of his cabinet together, where Whitney Young [Jr.] talked about the Marshall Plan.  You can see that Whitney Young is seated.  I'm seated next to Whitney Young--I'm on one side there.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  (Unclear) to the right up (unclear).
Speaker 2: To, yeah, to the right of Nixon, yes.  That's Whitney Young, who at that time, was the executive director and presidency of the National Urban League.  But that's me in the White House where Nixon had called the whole cabinet together to talk about--listen to Whitney talk about the Marshall Plan, how the government sent Marshall resources to our cities, through the Urban League, to work with these problems.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 2: That picture is where--we were in the Home Rule Movement at that time--where we just made some gains with--got some legislation passed in the congress.  And I was chairman of the coalition for self-determination [Self-Determination for D.C. Coalition], and we were celebrating a victory--
Story_ID: 210281
Speaker 1: That was in 1979.
Speaker 2: This is the same event.
Speaker 1: It's the same event, just a different picture of the same event.  That's where I'm actually taking the oath of office.  I had my hand raised and my wife [Alloyce Robinson Tucker] was holding a Bible there.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Here's a different one here (unclear).
Speaker 1: This would have been a time when I was chairman of the Metropolitan Washington Council of Governments.  We were celebrating an anniversary of that group, and there was the birthday cake there.  That was about in 19-, it would have been about 1976 or '7 [1977].
Speaker 2: You said you were a fast runner (unclear).
Speaker 1: (Laughing) Yeah.
Speaker 2: You only had (unclear).
Speaker 1: Yeah.  This was after we'd gotten Home Rule.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  You could stand it straight.  (Unclear) since it's a square.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  All right, hold it right there (unclear).
Speaker 1: This was where [John A.] Jack Nevius, who was the last appointed chairman of the city council [Council of the District of Columbia], handing out the gavel to me and racing with the new guy when I was first elected government.  So, I guess--it was showing, I guess, the weakness of the old government with Jack Nevius looking kind of anemic there with me with the government with some power and some muscles now finally done by Washington Post editorialist, cartoonist at--and I think it serves well what this exchange handoff was all about.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  These are all big ones, too.
Speaker 1: Yes.  This was the actual swearing-in ceremony where I was being sworn in as chairman of the first elected council.  As you can see, it can be seen that I'm being sworn in by the late and wonderful Honorable Thurgood Marshall, who is a good friend, personally, and a good friend to the District [of Columbia, Washington, D.C.].  Standing between Thurgood Marshall, Judge Marshall, and myself, a person named John [B.] Duncan who was--got a--won the first black district commissioner.  At the time we had three home rule commissioners who was presiding over that event.  And I'm standing there with my wife and one daughter behind [Michele Tucker Jeffrey], and the youngest daughter [Lauren Tucker Cross] behind her.  The person behind her, a gentleman holding the commission, is the secretary of the governor of the District of Columbia standing on. Lots of Washington dignitaries of that time or that period.
Speaker 2: Here, I'm pictured with the [HistoryMaker Reverend] Walter Fauntroy who was principal lieutenant to [Reverend Dr.] Martin Luther King [Jr.] who represented him on national affairs in Washington.  And next to him is the bishop of the Catholic church, and then seated next to him is Walter Washington--the mayor at that time appointed.  And next to them is the cardinal who, at that time, was the bishop of Washington in the area, who had invited me later to--this is a Labor Day ceremony honoring the working man, and honoring those who worked in the Civil Rights Movement.  The cardinal was kind enough to invite me on his plane to Rome [Italy] at the time that he was to be--become a cardinal.  He had said that I was responsible in getting that cap, that red cap as cardinal because of--I helped to be--get the Catholic church in this area active in the leadership of the Civil Rights Movement during that period in the late '60s [1960s].
Speaker 1: And that is a likeness of me which I treasure, done as a memento from the time of my chairmanship to the board of the American Diabetes Association.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  And (unclear).
Speaker 1: That was 1989.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  (Unclear).
Speaker 1: This is a picture in the White House [Washington, D.C.] where [President] Lyndon [Baines] Johnson--I'm shaking hands with the then-president.  Lady Bird [Johnson], you can see, is standing behind, and Walter Washington, the mayor, standing at a distance.  This is at a time when Lyndon Johnson was congratulating those who were part of the appointed government.  And he was holding a reception in the White House.  That would have been in 1967.
