Story_ID: 289640
Speaker 1: We are rolling with--I'm Shawn Wilson with The HistoryMakers, the interviewer.  Neculai Burghelea you've met also is the videographer, and we're here with Dr. Taylor [HistoryMaker Billy Taylor] today to complete the oral history of your life.
Speaker 2: Well, I'm excited (laughter).
Speaker 1: I'm excited as well.  And we'll start with some very preliminary questions.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Just the part of the process just to get us warmed up.  We will talk about your mother's [Antoinette Bacon Taylor] side of the family.  I'll speak about your mother and father, but separately so that we have their histories separately as you remember them (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay, okay.
Speaker 1: And then we'll talk about your early years, your school and then your professional life.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: But we'll start with your name, you could just state it for me and spell it out.  And I'll ask you to spell a lot of name--proper names.
Speaker 2: That will be difficult for me (laughter).
Speaker 1: Well what you can.
Speaker 2: All right.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So we'll start with yours.
Speaker 2: William Edward Taylor, Jr., is my name and the--it's always nice to remember that because I--my father was Bill, Sr. [William Taylor, Sr.].  And so I never got to be Billy until oh, I guess I was a man already. I was out of college [Virginia State College for Negroes; Virginia State University, Petersburg, Virginia] and somebody remembered at least mistakenly thought that--because I was from Washington, D.C., that I was the son of the bassist, Duke Ellington and--whose name was Billy Taylor.  And so they'd say, "What's your name?"  I said, "Bill Taylor."  And the guy who--this was when I was working at the--on 52nd Street [New York, New York] and they put your name out in front.  So I came in the next day it said Billy Taylor with a Y.  I never lost it since (laughter).
Speaker 1: So what was your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: I was born on July 24th, 1921, and I was born in Greenville, North Carolina.  And it was kind of interesting to me to find out that my mother was from Washington, D.C., and she met my father when he was a student at Howard University [Washington, D.C.] when he was studying dentistry there.  And he married her and took her to the South, where he was from, where he was--he was actually from North Carolina, and his best friend was a doctor, and they had joint offices in Greenville.  And so that was you know--I knew nothing about the reasons for being born there or anything until much later.  And I found out from my mother that we stayed in Greenville for, oh I guess about three or four years.  But just about the time was--I was supposed to go to school she left and she said, "No.  The schools down here are terrible."  She--by that time we had moved from Greenville to Raleigh [North Carolina] and--to try to get better schooling and so forth, said no, so back to Washington.  She decided we all were going, and that's where I grew up.
Speaker 1: So today's date?
Speaker 2: Today is the--what is today the--what?
Speaker 1: Twenty-ninth [29th].
Speaker 2: Twenty-ninth [29th], the 29th.  The 29th of September [sic. August 29, 2005].
Speaker 1: The location of this interview?
Speaker 2: This is 555 Kappock Street.  This is Riverdale, New York, and this is where I live.
Speaker 1: And the--your occupation?  How do you describe yourself, your occupation?  When people ask your occupation, you say?
Speaker 2: Well it's, sometimes it's difficult because I do a lot of different things.  And sometimes I'm--it depends on where I am and, and to whom I'm speaking.  The--I may be a composer.  I might be--if, for instance when I was doing many commercials and things I was the composer.  I wasn't the player.  But best, I'm best known as a pianist composer.
Story_ID: 289641
Speaker 1: The next few questions are also preliminary questions.  Do you have a favorite food?
Speaker 2: Not now.  I used to--I had an uncle--I had an aunt who was a wonderful cook, and she and my mother [Antoinette Bacon Taylor] used to sort of, as sisters, would try to make sure that their offsprings thought that whatever they cooked was the best.  And for a long time, southern cooking just, name it whatever it was.  I--that was for me.  And I always thought of myself as being from the South but that was because my--though my mother was born in Washington, D.C., she was of a Virginian and Maryland family and they were--that's as about as far south as that part of the family got.  But the cooking came from much further south (laughter) (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Deep South.  What about your favorite time of year?
Speaker 2: Well oddly enough for me the fall and winter for no reason.  I just seem to gravitate, to come alive during those, the fall and winter just--I don't know.  I feel alive.  And Washington, D.C. when, in the summertime, was abominable.  I mean it was very humid and it was not the--you could swim and you could do a lot of things.  But boy it, it was hot and it was not fun, you know.  I can't recall--I recall going to the beach and doing a lot of things that one does in the summer.  But it was much more fun when you had more clothes on, and you were out doing things.
Speaker 1: What about a vacation destination?  Do you have a favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Well over the years I've tried to take my wife [Theodora Castion Taylor] to different places that we didn't go when I was touring.  And so consequently we went to Africa.  We went to places--went to South America and went to oh, any, any number of places that, that were a little further away from where I might be called on to play the piano (laughter).
Story_ID: 289642
Speaker 1: And the very last of these preliminary questions, which is my favorite, is: do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: Probably the one I've used most is that jazz is America's classical music.  So I, I--if I have a favorite phrase, it's probably that one (laughter) (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And can you just elaborate on that a little bit for me?
Speaker 2: Sure.  Well jazz is America's classical music cause it takes all of the elements that makes jazz a unit, a university--well, a universal way of performing.  It takes all of those elements that are part of our culture.  It takes the things that makes us, us being African Americans, unique in terms of people who are creative and, and do things to say something to someone else, to express something to someone else.  I'm very proud of the fact that African Americans have done some of that in a context which has influenced music all over the world and which has done something unique.  When we say we are American, all of the things that are expressed in music are pretty much summed by the various aspects of music we call jazz.  And so even though some things like rock-n-roll or some of the things that have sprung from the source and seem to be quite different, they really aren't.
Speaker 1: So do--and we're going to start with the interview.  We start with talking about your mother [Antoinette Bacon Taylor] and father [William Edward Taylor, Sr.].  But I want to ask you one more question about jazz and--being America's classical music.  Do you feel or do--just, I mean I guess what I want to--do you see it as, as black the essence of it as being sort of cultivated, it's black music, or--
Speaker 2: Jazz was created by African Americans because we had to be able to say something musical that, in music that expressed who we were and how we felt with what was going on all around us.  Now at the time jazz was really beginning to develop, there were many things that were contributing to, to who we were and, and what we were about.  So many people who came upon the blues, many people who came up on certain kinds of dance music, many people who felt a certain way when they heard certain kinds of music felt that way because it reached across the ethnic barriers and just said this is music that grabs you here or makes you feel something special.  And that was one of the qualities that made it so important to people who were not African Americans because the same thing happened even for different reasons.  They said, well yeah I feel something.  You know, I don't know what it is but I can feel it (laughter) (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) But you feel it (laughter).
Story_ID: 289643
Speaker 1: So tell me about your mother.  Your--what was your mother's name?
Speaker 2: My mother's name was Antoinette [Bacon] Taylor, and she was really a very special woman because she's really the reason that I stuck with playing the piano because I thought that I could go to the piano and do like my uncle did and, and just ultimately start playing very easily.  I had to study and I had to work at it and everything and she was the one that, that used to come out of the kitchen sometimes when I was practicing.  And I was playing five finger exercises or whatever I was assigned to do.  And she said, "Doesn't sound like music yet."  And it didn't (laughter).
Speaker 1: Now where was she born, you said in Washington, D.C.?
Speaker 2: My mother was born in Washington, D.C., yes.  And she, her early life was--Washington was a unique community.  It was very intellectual in the black community.  She was surrounded by people who wanted to do something with their lives.  So she, both she and her sister became teachers because they wanted to have that kind of profession.  My mother married a dentist, and so we had lots of different people doing different things in the family.  For instance, my father's father [William A. Taylor] was the pastor of the Florida Avenue Baptist Church [Washington, D.C.].  He was one of the founders of that church.  So (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Before we get to your father [William Taylor, Sr.], I want to just ask you a couple more questions about your mother.
Speaker 2: My mother? Yeah.
Speaker 1: Keep it to--so your mother, where did your mother go to school?
Speaker 2: She went to school, high school in Washington, D.C., and then she went to Miner Teachers College [University of the District of Columbia, Washington, D.C.] and--where she studied to be a teacher.
Speaker 1: And what year did she start teaching, do you know?
Speaker 2: I would imagine it was a couple of years before I was born because, yeah 'cause that was during the, during the war, the First World War [World War I, WWI].
Story_ID: 289644
Speaker 1: So she [Taylor's mother, Antoinette Bacon Taylor] met your father, she married.  And what was your father's name?
Speaker 2: My father's name was William Edward Taylor [Sr.], and he was a dentist.  And he, he studied dentistry at Howard University [Washington, D.C.] and practiced first in North Carolina and then brought the family back to Washington, D.C. where he practiced for the rest of his--he was a good dentist (laughter). He was--you know he, I never realized how good a dentist he was until he passed away I mean because I never had any problems with my teeth 'til I didn't have him as a dentist, you know (laughter).
Speaker 1: So what do you remember about your fam- you have two siblings.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: What are their names, in what order are they?
Speaker 2: I have a younger brother whose name is Rudolph Antoine Taylor and the--his--
Speaker 1: What's his middle name?
Speaker 2: Antoine.
Speaker 1: Antoine.  Rudolph Antoine (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I don't know why.  My mother liked that name for some reason.
Speaker 1: A-N-T-O-N [sic.]?
Speaker 2: Yeah, right (laughter).  And, and so that's, that's his middle name.  And--
Speaker 1: And your sister is the oldest?
Speaker 2: She, no she's the youngest.  She, she, she--
Speaker 1: So you're the oldest, okay.
Speaker 2: She is my half-sister.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And she comes from another man, marriage.  And Joyce is her name and, and she was--her married name.  She's married now.  Joyce Hynes is her name and she's a lovely lady and very--done a lot of things.  Bringing up a couple of kids and really is--I'm very proud of her. She's just a very special lady.
Story_ID: 289645
Speaker 1: So let's talk about--some, before we get into your early years, about your grandparents, your--what, let's start with your mother's [Antoinette Bacon Taylor] parents.  Do you know their names?
Speaker 2: My mother's mother's name was Mary [E. Bacon].  Her, my mother's--my [maternal] grandfather, it was Nathaniel [Bacon].  And she had a couple of brothers and a couple of--I'm trying to think of who else was on that side of the family.  She had an older brother and a younger brother and an older sister.  She was the baby of the family.
Speaker 1: And so it was how many of them, three (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) She had an older brother who was a dentist.  She had a younger brother that was--oh yeah and her older sister, her older sister yeah.  So the chronological was my aunt, Alcindor [ph.]--no.  My, no wait, wait, wait.  The--her brother was the oldest one.  This is one of the problems when you have a stroke, you can't pull up the kind of facts that you would like to have as quickly as you'd like.
Speaker 1: That's okay.
Speaker 2: I haven't--
Speaker 1: Is this the--are these the names that are--this is just your father's [William Taylor, Sr.] side?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  No, we're talking--
Speaker 1: We're talking about your mother's side?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: And do we have names there?
Speaker 1: The names on these pictures are Annie [ph.]--
Speaker 2: No, that's my father.
Speaker 1: That's your father's side, okay.
Speaker 2: There should be something on my mom, mother's brother.  That's my grandmother, yeah.
Speaker 1: That's your grandmother.  You want to look at these pictures?
Speaker 2: Alcindor--I, I'll know, I'm--ah, now Walker [ph.] is my uncle's name.  He is the oldest.  He was the oldest of my mother's brothers.  So Walker was the oldest.  Alcindor, her sister, was the next.  Nathaniel [Bacon, Jr.], her brother, was the next and my mother.
Story_ID: 289646
Speaker 1: And then on your father's side, your father, your father's father's was the first, was the pastor?
Speaker 2: Yeah, William [A. Taylor], William Al--I think his first name was, his middle name was Albert.  I know it was William A.  (laughter) I can't remember now.  I think it was William Albert [sic. Andrew].  But his children were my father, William [Taylor, Sr.], Julian [Taylor] who was the next in line, next oldest, Clint, Clinton [Taylor] who was next, Robert [Taylor] and Percy [Taylor].
Speaker 1: So what do you, do you remember your grandfather?
Speaker 2: Yeah, very, very well, yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay. What do you remember about him?
Speaker 2: He was a very good preacher.  He was very--we went to Florida Avenue Baptist Church [Washington, D.C.] every Sunday and he could really in the tradition of black ministers, he could get an amen.  I mean he really had the church feeling the spirit.  And that was my earliest recollection of religious things that the fact that people--I couldn't understand why people would fall out and do--that they would express themselves and so, it's embarrassing.  I said, you know, "Don't do that."  And, but as I got older and realized what that was and why and how it happened, it made more sense.  I mean and because it, because I then related it to other things in the community where people expressed themselves quite openly and quite verbally and quite visually, visibly (laughter).
Story_ID: 289647
Speaker 1: So on Sunday mornings how would the day unfold when you were--
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Sundays were, I have to--my memory when you asked that question it immediately came to my brother [Rudolph Taylor] and me.  Now I remember there are earlier things that I do remember but the first thing that comes to my mind when you asked that question is that we would get up and my mother [Antoinette Bacon Taylor] would make sure that we were properly dressed and had on whatever proper attire we should be wearing and the tie was tied and the shoes were shined and everything was the way it was supposed to be to go to church.  And then we would walk down to the church [Florida Avenue Baptist Church, Washington, D.C.], my brother and I.  And well actually we'd go to Sunday school and so about nine o'clock in the morning or whatever it was we'd be in Sunday school.  Then we'd come out of Sunday school and fool around and we'd--in the neighborhood of U Street there and get into whatever mischief we could and then go back when it was time to go to church.  And we would--my task was to keep my brother from doing all kinds of mischief, mischievous things.  He was younger than I and he could get way with a lot of things.  And he thought he could get away with everything.  So he would get us both into trouble all the time.  So we--anyway, we would go after--if I got him through that sacredly--safely, then I would go down to my [maternal] grandmother's [Mary E. Bacon] house, which was just a few blocks from the church, and we would, we'd get some food.  Not that we were hungry but she would feed us anyway and, and it was always good.  And then after we had some rolls or whatever it was she fixed, then we would go to my Aunt Alcindor's [ph.], which was two more blocks away and eat again.  And so by the time we got home, we didn't want any dinner and my mother was furious. She said--and every Sunday the same thing (laughter), that was our routine.
Story_ID: 289648
Speaker 1: Your father's father [William A. Taylor] was an educated man?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: He had gone to Shaw University [Raleigh, North Carolina] (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, right.
Speaker 1: And he graduated Shaw University.
Speaker 2: That's correct.
Speaker 1: And he was a principal.
Speaker 2: Yes, he was.
Speaker 1: And where was he a principal?  This was in, all in Virginia?
Speaker 2: All in--that was in North Carolina.
Speaker 1: North Carolina, okay.
Speaker 2: I'm not sure.  That part of it I don't remember as well as I should.  It's been a long time since I've really looked at it.  I--preparing for this I was trying, I was looking for many things that would jog my memory but I'm eighty-four years old so that's a long time ago (laughter).
Speaker 1: What do you remember about your grandfather and the way people looked up to him in the community?  What do you remember as his role being from your point of view as a kid within the community?
Speaker 2: My grandfather was unique.  He was very soft spoken and very rarely raised his voice in, you know when around us.  You know I mean many people when you have young kids who are as mischievous as his family, it's--the voices are raised quite a bit, you know.  But he rarely in my remember, my remembering of it, he rarely raised his voice.  He said, "Don't do that," and that was enough to, for you not to do that you know (laughter).  And so--but he spoke always, he had things, even as a kid I found interesting.  I don't know in hind, I can't recall any specific things but the less--the lessons were such that you, whatever he was preaching on it had relevance to what was going on, on U Street [Washington, D.C.] or somewhere in the community.  And he was very community minded and he really--I remember at one point when I was larger, I wanted to practice some jazz in the church [Florida Avenue Baptist Church, Washington, D.C.] and, which was right across the street from the Howard Theatre [Washington, D.C.].  And some of the sisters didn't like that, and I didn't do it very often.  But for some reason or other I just asked him if I could--it was closer or it had something.  And he said, "Okay."  And so when he was asked about it to, by some of the people he said, "Well, you know they're right here.  They're not in any mischief, you know.  I don't particularly care for the written, the music they're playing but that's all right.  I mean as long as they're out of mischief that's fine," (laughter).
Story_ID: 289649
Speaker 1: Did your grandparents talk about their lives growing up?  Like they, did they relate stories to you about their childhoods?
Speaker 2: My mother's [Antoinette Bacon Taylor] father did.
Speaker 1: What did he say?
Speaker 2: He was blind.  He lost his sight when--
Speaker 1: And what was his name again?
Speaker 2: Nathaniel [Bacon].
Speaker 1: Nathaniel.
Speaker 2: And he used to tell us, you know, he was a good storyteller.  He would tell us--he'd have all his grandchildren sitting around and he'd tell us all kinds of tales.  Must not have, I don't think they were true, but they sounded good.  And I don't remember anything, you know, at this stage.
Speaker 1: Any slavery tales (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Anything particular--I just remember that some of them, he would pick up on the fact that we liked Western movies and that we were always playing cowboys and Indians [Native Americans].  And we--and he had stories about what really happened in the West, and he used to say, well there was something else he used to tell us. I don't--he was--oh, he was saying that, how much fun it was to dance.  You know, he said, you know, "I used to dance with your grandmother [Mary E. Bacon] and so and so and so and so."  And he'd talked about--and that didn't make too much sense to me, 'cause I didn't dance with anybody (unclear) you know.  And so what's the big deal about dancing, you know (laughter).  But he was talking about the social context, you know at a party or a dance at a prescribed place where everybody did--was dressed very formally and looked good, and everybody bowed to one another and everything.  And he was very graphic of what the many things he talked about.
Story_ID: 289650
Speaker 1: So did your family ever, do you know of anyone ever tracing the ancestors, tracing your ancestors?  Like how far back do, can you remember?
Speaker 2: I have a cousin who is a writer and she's done some of that. She's (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What do you remember about what she's done?
Speaker 2: Well [HistoryMaker] Shirlee Haizlip is her name.  And--
Speaker 1: What's her name again?
Speaker 2: Shirlee Haizlip.
Speaker 1: Haizlip.  Do you know the last name how do you spell that?
Speaker 2: And she wrote a book ['The Sweeter the Juice: A Family Memoir in Black and White,' Shirlee Taylor Haizlip] about her part of the family when she was young.
Speaker 1: Can you spell her last name for me?
Speaker 2: H-A-Z-L-I-P [sic.].
Speaker 1: Okay, Haizlip.
Speaker 2: Now--
Speaker 1: And she's written about her--?
Speaker 2: Yeah, her you know she grew up in Connecticut and my--her father [Julian Taylor] was married twice.  And he moved that part--he was a minister.  And he moved--he got an opportunity to preach and became quite a well-known person in Connecticut in terms of what he did, in terms of his congregation, the things he did in politics and, you know, he was quite a figure.  And he was, he and my father [William Taylor, Sr.] as brothers will do, had many serious discussions on race and what should and could be done about their children and others and to--
Speaker 1: Oh you have to share some of those stories.  What can you remember (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well it--
Speaker 1: What was like a big debate for them?
Speaker 2: Well it--the kind of thing my father was, as the oldest, was always using that or, you know, "I'm the oldest and I know best."  And his brother, who's a minister, and just as articulate said, "No, you're not."  And they would really, they would get in, into discussions that really had to do with not only community things that they were concerned about but, you know, dad was, my dad was a frat man and he was--he said that some of the things that the fraternity was doing were things that he was secure with and his brother who's a--belonged to another fraternity said, "Well, yeah, well we're doing just as good things in our area.  But we're doing them differently," you know.
Story_ID: 290525
Speaker 1: You were about to give your father's [William Taylor, Sr.] and uncle's [Julian Taylor] fraternity affiliations.
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Oh, my dad was a Kappa [Kappa Alpha Psi Fraternity] and my uncle was an Alpha [Alpha Phi Alpha Fraternity].  And they, you know, both of those fraternities are very wonderful in terms of what they were doing at that time for, or trying to do, the kind of thing they brought to the communities that they served.  I'm very proud of the fact that many of the things that we did for people who we consider less fortunate than ourselves were done in that kind of southern experience--reference, you know.  And so you can say well, I know that together we can do some things as opposed to I'll run out here and try to batter the wall down by myself, you know.  And so they, though my father and uncle disagreed in some respects, on most of the things that they agreed on were that hey it's really worth the time and effort and all of the things you can do to make it happen when you educate your children, when you really do the kinds of things that we, meaning the two of them in different towns, do in our communities.  To really make Washington, D.C., for instance, what's going--gathering around Howard University [Washington, D.C.] being--having everything right in that small circle that was--had everything that we needed.  There was nothing that I had to go outside of this small part of the capital of the United States to get.  I mean I had a dentist, I had a doctor, I had--anything I needed was right there.  And these were excellent professionals who--
Speaker 1: And they were all black.
Speaker 2: And they were all black.
Story_ID: 290526
Speaker 1: And then when it came to the kind of spiritual things that my [paternal] grandfather [William A. Taylor] and my uncle [Julian Taylor] were giving, I could even see in my youth, you know, how that was working.  And I said, well, you know, not for me, but that's cool, you know (laughter).  And, and in many respects, it was for me.  And the--for instance, my uncle was a very good person to bring the family together and really make us cooperate with one another.  My father [William Taylor, Sr.] and I at one point had a very serious disagreement and I really just stopped speaking to him for a long time (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Can you tell me what it was?
Speaker 1: No.
Speaker 2: No, okay, all right.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) But it really, I thought it was, you know, I--he--I was disappointed.  He--my dad was someone I looked up to all my life.  I mean, I thought he was a great human being.  And on this particular occasion and on this--it just, you know, I didn't appreciate what he did, and how he did it and so forth.  And it really--we had gone through a lot of that before you know because when I was at Virginia State [College for Negroes; Virginia State University, Petersburg, Virginia], I changed my major from music, I mean from sociology to music and without telling him.  And so he was paying my way to school and had every reason to think that if I was going to do something like that, I should tell him before or ask him before I made that, and I didn't.  And so he said, "Well, you know, if you are bright enough and big enough to do this then you pay for your rest, the rest of school for the next two years."  And I was a junior and I footed my junior and senior year.  I played a lot of gigs with the local groups and paid my way to school.  I didn't know that my dad had told them, the people at Virginia State that, "If he falters at all, don't leave him, let him get out of school. Let me--I'll pay for it, but, you know, don't tell him" (laughter).
Story_ID: 290527
Speaker 1: What are your earliest memories of your life in North Carolina or South Carolina?
Speaker 2: North Carolina (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) North Carolina.
Speaker 2: Yeah, Greenville, North Carolina.  Yeah, a lot of people make the mistake--Greenville, South Carolina is a big town.  This is a tiny little tobacco town and the--East Carolina State [sic. East Carolina University, Greenville, North Carolina] is there now so it's bigger than it ever was (laughter).  But when I was born, it was just a tiny little--with lots of tobacco and all that sort of stuff.  It was a rural, a small place.  And I remember the corn being high as the top of that picture and I--it was--for a kid, it was lovely.  It was very nice.  I mean, I remember dirt roads and riding on the back of a wagon and, yeah, a lot of things that I didn't get when I went in--when I moved to Washington, D.C. I mean (laughter)--
Speaker 1: At what age did you move (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Which was the city (laughter).
Speaker 1: What age did you move to Washington?
Speaker 2: I was five years old.
Speaker 1: You're five, so you were still very young?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Well I had--my mother [Antoinette Bacon Taylor] had moved us to, both of us, my dad [William Taylor, Sr.], she talked him into, said, well, "Why don't you try to have a practice, your practice in a larger town, cause the school would will be better?  You got Shaw University there [Raleigh, North Carolina].  You got things there that you know and you know people there.  Let's you know, cause it will be better for our son."  And he tried that but she said, "No, it's still too far south," you know.  And so she talked him into coming back to Washington and so I entered kindergarten at, in the year--at age five.  I was, because I was really--I was big for my age but, you know, she told them I was six years old, so I got in (laughter).
Story_ID: 290528
Speaker 1: So do you remember, what do you remember about kindergarten?  What were some of your teachers' names?
Speaker 2: Actually in kindergarten, I don't remember any names.  I just remember there was a very pretty girl whose name I don't remember but I got my first crush on someone also in kindergarten because you know that's the first social kind of thing we're getting.  I said, yeah, I'm ready for that (laughter). So, but the--I just, you know, all I remember in early school was either in North Carolina or in Washington [D.C.] was that my mother [Antoinette Bacon Taylor] stayed on my case.  She was a teacher, and she just really made me, whatever I was supposed to do she made sure I did it and did it best, was, as well as I could.  And she was, she must have been a pretty good teacher (laughter).
Speaker 1: At what point in your life were you introduced to music and by whom?
Speaker 2: I was interested (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) How old were you?
Speaker 2: --to music before I could talk because I, I'm told this.  The--my dad [William Taylor, Sr.] sang, and he played the piano.  And everybody, we had rehearsals for my [paternal] grandfather's [William A. Taylor] choir at my house.  And so I heard a lot of music, and I was always trying to bang on the piano and trying to do other things.  And so finally my uncle sat and played something to quiet me down.  Well that was--my Uncle Bob [Robert Taylor]--and he--I thought that was, you know, I want to do that.  So now it took me several years to get to the point where I could, I kept saying, so finally when I was, oh, about six, seven years old, something like that, seven probably, they--my dad said, "Okay you've got enough.  You'll--we'll see if you can handle some piano lessons."
Story_ID: 290529
Speaker 1: And who was your piano teacher?
Speaker 2: My piano teacher was Elmira Street was her name.  And I was just a few--just a couple of weeks ago.  No, it's been longer than that--earlier this summer, I was driving through--on Florida Avenue [Washington, D.C.], and I don't have occasion to go in that direction very often.  And we went, but we did and I went right by the place where my music teacher used to live.  It's still there.  The house is still there (laughter).  So just tiny little house there.
Speaker 1: What do you remember about Ms. Street teaching you music?
Speaker 2: She was very good.  She was very patient and she taught me a lot of things.  I didn't realize at the time that she taught me how to read music and how to really play or have some discipline about playing.  But I wanted to abandon all that discipline and play some stuff that I was hearing on the radio and I was trying to do that instead of my lessons, and I must have been an awful student (laughter).
Story_ID: 290530
Speaker 1: Now at seven, when you were hearing stuff on the radio, were you able to identify who the musicians were?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: No, just (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, not yet. Not yet.
Speaker 1: --the sound of the music intrigued you?
Speaker 2: I mean, there were certain people that--whose names were, like Duke Ellington, someone like--you know I didn't know who Duke Ellington, what he looked like or anything but that was Duke Ellington or whatever it was, you know.  And then there would be other people.  The people that made the biggest impact on me at that time were people who were on the radio who might be just something I, you know, you turn it on and say, "Who is that?  Oh that's pretty," whatever it is you know.  And you heard all kinds of music, all, at all hours of the day time.  I mean it wasn't like now.  You heard classical music.  You heard music that really I couldn't under--I couldn't understand or identify, realizing it, because I didn't know that much about European classical music.  But it was, some of it was very nice, some of it was not interesting to me.  But all of it had the same quality of--for me, it was something new.  And so everything was coming at me, was coming you know I was saying, "What was that? I've never heard that," you know, whatever it was, you know (laughter).
Story_ID: 290531
Speaker 1: So where did you end up going to high school?
Speaker 2: Well in Washington, D.C., we had the elementary school and we had junior high (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What was the name of your elementary school?
Speaker 2: Lucretia B. Mott School [Lucretia Mott Elementary School, Washington, D.C.].  It was down, right down the street from Howard University [Washington, D.C.].  And so I was--at that time we were living around the corner from Howard University, and so I could walk like two blocks, and I'm in school.  And then we moved further away to the other side of Howard University. I mean, it wasn't that big a deal.  It was a different neighborhood.  But we moved up on Fairmont Street which was on the other side of Howard University and the, and then my brother [Rudolph Taylor] went to--I went to Shaw Junior High School [Shaw Middle School at Garnet-Patterson, Washington, D.C.].  He went to Garnet-Patterson [School; Shaw Middle School at Garnet-Patterson, Washington, D.C.] and--junior high because he was younger than I.  And I went to [Paul Laurence] Dunbar High School [Paul Laurence Dunbar Senior High School, Washington, D.C.].  And Dunbar High School was a unique place in the world at that time because I was taught by five teachers in, on the faculty who had doctorates.  And they had doctorates because they had earned them, and yet they could not teach at Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] or the kind of schools that my daughter [Kim Taylor-Thompson] is teaching in now or somebody else is.  You know, things have changed, you know, but they--in those days that wasn't possible.  So we got the benefits of a wonderful education by wonderfully qualified teachers who were so mad with the system because they couldn't get the kind of thing that they should get as teachers that they just laid it right on us and said, well, "You will learn and learn all of the stuff that I took so much to earn, you're going to learn it," whether they want you to or not.  And so they really, in English and foreign languages, all that stuff was, you know, just a part of what we learned.
Story_ID: 290532
Speaker 1: At [Paul Laurence] Dunbar High School [Paul Laurence Dunbar Senior High School, Washington, D.C.], who were some of your role models?
Speaker 2: Well (laughter), the only role model I remember now, I mean and believe me there are many others.  I'm ashamed of the fact that I don't have any better memory of people other than Mary Reese Europe who was the sister of James Reese Europe who was teaching at the school at that time, was one of our teachers, and Henry Grant.  And Henry Grant is--was the head, was one of the people who helped establish the Association of African American Teachers [sic. National Association of Negro Musicians (NANM)] back I guess in, around the first--after the First World War [World War I, WWI], you know. And he was a wonderful teacher. He was a great musician. He was the kind of person that Duke Ellington used as a reference. As a matter of fact in his, in Duke Ellington's autobiography, 'Music is My Mistress,' there's a full page of young Henry Grant, you know, very handsome man who was a great musician.  And he, one of the best teachers I ever had.
Story_ID: 290533
Speaker 1: So when you look back over your years at [Paul Laurence] Dunbar High School [Paul Laurence Dunbar Senior High School, Washington, D.C.], what sort of stands out for you?
Speaker 2: Well Dunbar was a place where I really began to realize that I wanted to play jazz and I wanted to--we had--I played in the orchestra and I played saxophone in the orc- very badly.  I fooled around with cello and a couple of other instruments and--but I was fortunate in that because of the nature of black schools in those days, we had in addition to the traditional--we had saxophone.  We had other instruments in the orchestra you know and, because they were available and people had them and it was all inclusive so you got to play what you could on that instrument.  One of the reasons I didn't play piano was because one of the great classical pianists and I'm embarrassed right now.  I'm trying desperately to remember his name.  I can see his face right in front of me.  But he was--we were in high school together.  He was about a year younger than I and this guy was playing [Sergei] Rachmaninoff.  He was playing all, I mean he was playing it.  He was beautiful, you know.  I said well (laughter)--.
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: --okay.  Let me try a little more Teddy Wilson and--but I really, I didn't chalk that up as a loss maybe because I always wanted to play both.  I always wanted to play jazz but I wanted to play with some of the things that I had begun to listen to and learn from Henry Grant.
Story_ID: 290534
Speaker 1: So when you look back over your elementary at Lucretia B. Mott [Lucretia Mott Elementary School, Washington, D.C.] and at [Paul Laurence] Dunbar [High School; Paul Laurence Dunbar Senior High School, Washington, D.C.], and just your early life in Washington, D.C., what are some of the sights or smells or sounds that remind you of your life in those days?
Speaker 2: Well, one of the things that I--I lived close to Howard University [Washington, D.C.] for much of my young life on one side or the other of the campus.  And so I was always, I was on the campus a lot and that's probably one of the reasons I never went to Howard because I had already been there already (laughter).  And, because it was an excellent school then and I learned so much just going to Howard.  My [paternal] grandfather [William A. Taylor], church [Florida Avenue Baptist Church, Washington, D.C.], they would have recitals and people would do classical music and so forth.  My uncle [Robert Taylor] would play classical organ, so forth.  And then I'd go to hear someone who was just as good as anybody I heard on the radio and here at Howard University.  And here's somebody playing [Frederic] Chopin.  Here's someone playing [Alexander] Scriabin and playing and say, "Wow, that's--" you know, "Wait a minute," you know.  And, you know, and I mean I'm really, I've got enough musical knowledge now to know what I'm listening to.  And there were not, there was not only the cultural exchange between the churches and the fact that we didn't have a proper concert hall in that, except for the school concerts.  And so many of the things that I heard were on what I know now was the, not the best piano to play [Sergei] Rachmaninoff on or to play [Claude] Debussy on and something like that.  But for me it sounded gorgeous.  I mean it sounded--I mean I had never heard anything like that, I heard on the radio.  And here's somebody that looks like me sitting there doing the same thing.  I said, "All right."  And the choirs were terrific.  Everything in the community upheld the fact that this was a forward looking community in Washington, D.C. in those days.  It was a kind of--you--I felt that, I was--there was nothing that was impossible, you know, that I could, you know, if I worked hard enough then things would come around to me, you know.  And I--they, the teachers made me believe that, feel that.  They said, "Yeah, sure you can do it.  Of course you can."  They're why there's Paul Robeson, why there's so and so.  And we had a lot of those people come to--I remember Dorothy Maynor coming to my school and singing in a glorious, at a height of her talent, you know, as an artist, as a concert artist, you know.  She, she's come in this glorious voice and she'd sing.  I'd say, "Wow."  I told her years later when she started her program here in New York [New York], I told her about that and she said, "Oh you were there?  You're too young for that" (laughter).  So, but she was, she and Marian Anderson and many other people who you didn't have to be smart or know anything to realize that this was an exceptional person and was as exceptional talent to hear someone, you know, doing what they were doing and realizing that this is world class.
Story_ID: 290535
Speaker 1: So when you were in [Washington] D.C., and either during elementary [Lucretia Mott Elementary School] or at [Paul Laurence] Dunbar [High School; Paul Laurence Dunbar Senior High School], did you have any part-time jobs?  Did you work at all? What did you do (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh yeah, I played with local kids' bands.  I mean I wasn't good enough to play in any of the professional bands or semi-professional bands.  But I played, I could play little gigs.  I could play parties and I could play--I, from about thirteen, I played in night clubs, I played in--
Speaker 1: What night clubs--
Speaker 2: Yeah, oh yeah.
Speaker 1: --did you play at thirteen?
Speaker 2: Well the very--it still exists on--it's one of the few places that still exists on U Street.  It, oh my, the--it's on U Street just off of, between 13th [Street] and 14th [Street] and the name will come back to me in a minute (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you have a [paternal] grandfather [William A. Taylor] who is a minister.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: A father [William Taylor, Sr.] who is a dentist.  How did you sneak out of the house to play clubs at thirteen?
Speaker 2: Well actually it wasn't the things that I really got to do.  My parents were not aware of the fact that I was playing at clubs per se.  I played dances.  You could play dances and these were social affairs.  And it was you know--so that was--so I, I'm you know, I'm sneaking out to play myself on you know cause things were very lax and nobody paid any attention to age.  If you could play, that was all right.  And I could play well enough to do some of the little jazz things that I was asked to do.
Story_ID: 290536
Speaker 1: So when you think of, when you look back on [Washington] D.C. and those days and you talked about being so close to Howard University [Washington, D.C.] and the access and how great the community was, what sort of resonates with you as to what you would take from that experience and use later in life?  What are some of the things you learned?
Speaker 2: One thing I had a--everybody around me was a professional or of professional quality.  There were many people who worked at the White House [Washington, D.C.].  Many people who did, which were things--
Speaker 1: Okay, before you go on, what did they do at the White House and give me a year?  And we're talking about African Americans?
Speaker 2: Yeah, oh sure.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Sure.  They worked at the White House.  The worked at, at the [U.S.] Bureau of Engraving [and Printing, Washington, D.C.].  They worked in all of these government jobs.  People worked on pretty substantial government jobs.  Everybody who lived in Washington worked for the government one way or the other you know.  And so many of the people that got a chance to do a lot of things got it based on the fact that they were capable of doing whatever the job called for, you know.  So it, sometimes that didn't, had nothing to do with the color or anything.  It just, here's somebody, "Yeah, you do that," you know, and they did it.  And so a lot of things happened along those lines simply because there was no one else to do whatever was necessary.  And--
Speaker 1: So you had the opportunity to be around a lot of professional people.
Speaker 2: Yeah, and who talked about the fact that they were working in a--mixed society when they were aware from their own community.  And they went into another group and they had access to go in there and do things that were not open to me right then, you know.
Story_ID: 290537
Speaker 1: So when you were looking at universities and you decided--how did you decide upon a major, or was it decided for you by your father [William Taylor, Sr.]?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Very easy.  I had been taken to Virginia State [College for Negroes; Virginia State University, Petersburg, Virginia] when my dad was--my dad liked to play tennis and in the summer he would take us down--there was a tennis court, a tennis tournament that happened at Virginia State.  So it was several times he took me down to--and I fell in love with it.  I said, "(Unclear) I want to go to Virginia State."  And so that was--he said, "Fine, okay."  I went there, okay.  And so he made sure everything was all right.
Speaker 1: So your father was an athlete himself, he played baseball earlier.
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, he was a very good one, yeah.
Speaker 1: Who did he play--
Speaker 2: Yeah he was a four letter man, you know, so he was very proud of--very disappointed because his son didn't do that.  I mean I--he had one son did it.  His youngest son [Rudolph Taylor] did but I didn't.
Speaker 1: So which baseball team did he play on?
Speaker 2: He, oh he didn't play--
Speaker 1: But he was on like, there was a baseball team for dentists or--?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: Black dentists or black doctors?
Speaker 2: Right.  Yeah, right.
Speaker 1: And there were enough in [Washington] D.C. at the time to form--
Speaker 2: A team.
Speaker 1: --a team and also a team that played in a league with whom else?  Who did they play against?
Speaker 2: I don't know.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But they had a uniform and they played games.
Speaker 1: So that's, yeah that's good research, something to look into like--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --because they're, obviously they play other black teams.
Speaker 2: Yes, that's correct.
Speaker 1: So there were other maybe the trucker's union or I mean the train, porter's union had a team or--
Speaker 2: It was a big deal.  Our--my grandfather's church [Florida Avenue Baptist Church, Washington, D.C.] was--the back door of his church, you walked out of the back door, you went into Griffith Stadium [Washington, D.C.].  So we had--and that was where the, this, the Washington Senators played and other teams.  It was the ballpark for everything.  As a matter of fact it was a community joke, it was the fact that you could go in there and get a hot dog and you could get--do a lot of things that you couldn't do outside of the stadium.  It--prejudice makes no sense at all.  I mean it really doesn't.
Speaker 1: So the stadium wasn't segregated?
Speaker 2: It was.
Speaker 1: It was.
Speaker 2: But not to the extent, I mean there--certain, I guess the way they did it was certain, they didn't sell certain tickets in certain places.  But all I remember is being anywhere in, at a game.  I mean I'm, I don't know--I don't see how that--didn't seem to be segregated to me (laughter).
Speaker 1: Yeah, people were all around (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, all, they were around.
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah okay.
Story_ID: 290538
Speaker 1: So when you're leaving Washington [D.C.] to go to Virginia State [College for Negroes; Virginia State University, Petersburg, Virginia]--
Speaker 2: Which was, Virginia was very, as a state, was very segregated.  I mean, they were really--now that campus was totally different.
Speaker 1: And give me a year and then let's talk about it.
Speaker 2: That was 1938.
Speaker 1: Nineteen thirty-eight [1938], you arrive in Virginia?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: At Virginia State.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: And that campus--?
Speaker 2: Yeah, and it was a beautiful campus.  It was you know--I really enjoyed my time there.
Speaker 1: You were telling me that Virginia was very segregated.
Speaker 2: It was and so wherever, any time I walked out of town if I wanted to go to the movies, the only way I--there's one movie that we could go to and we had to sit way up in the crow's nest and had special staircase you went to and you sit.  So I didn't go to the movies too much.  I mean I didn't, you know I didn't, that wasn't--we went to a lot of dances.  We went, we did a lot of other things that, because I don't know, I just felt demeaned by that.
Speaker 1: Of course.  So who were your, at that time who were you hanging out with (unclear)?
Speaker 2: Well I had--they were--I had a roommate who had been in high school [Paul Laurence Dunbar High School; Paul Laurence Dunbar Senior High School, Washington, D.C.] with me.  There were other people from New York, from other places, Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], other places and so--some of my frat brothers [Kappa Alpha Psi Fraternity] and so forth.  So there was a whole idea of coming together and doing specific things that would, that were of interest to all of us.  I mean we'd go to, we would leave Virginia State and go to Hampton [Institute; Hampton University, Hampton, Virginia] or we'd go to North Carolina, we--for a day game, and so, we'd go to all the places.  And we, because we had the--we got in--we couldn't stay in the hotels in many places, but that wasn't a problem because there was, there were people who would put us up, you know.  Say, "When are you coming in," or, "This is Mrs. So-and-So's son, so he's fine," you know.
Story_ID: 289665
Speaker 1: We were talking about segregation and Virginia State University [Virginia State College for Negroes; Virginia State University, Petersburg, Virginia].  But if you can just sort of--but before we go on, I'm just going to step back a moment and I asked you off-camera, we talked about, a lot about segregation.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And I was making the point, my--I thought my point would be that you can't hear music's color.  So I asked you, could you--did music have a color or could you hear color in music and you replied?
Speaker 2: In those days, yes, now because the way we--black people played was one way.  The way people who were not black played, in the same cultural context, was totally different.  And so they had to adjust to each other.
Speaker 1: And the example you gave is when you were thirteen.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, well I would go play for these dances and, you know, because they needed a piano player and so I, whatever they asked that was--I'm trying to do the best of my ability. And I noticed one thing on my own and that was that when we played something of rhythm, and really a rhythmic thing, kind of thing that makes people get, black people get up and dance and do what their special things in dancing were, that didn't mean anything to the group of white listeners. When we played melody, when we played a lovely melody, you know, something that's just gorgeous, the line going along, they were dancing, oh man they were all over the place.  So I said, well okay that, that's one of the differences that's obvious because if we don't play the melody this white audience is not going to like it, you know (laughter).
Story_ID: 289666
Speaker 1: One other story I want you to repeat is--which will lead us back to where we were is when you were studying [at Virginia State College for Negroes; Virginia State University, Petersburg, Virginia] you'd go and visit friends like Hampton [Institute; Hampton University, Hampton, Virginia], you'd leave campus and go visit people. But leaving, taking the train in [Washington] D.C., tell me about that experience, whether you were going north or south made a difference?
Speaker 2: The capital of the United States was the hub and to start there, if you were going south then you had to get on a segregated, in a segregated car.  It was usually in those days of coal burning trains, you're right--that comes back on you because you're in--that's the first car that's behind the engine.  And in many cases, you know, it was not the cleanest car to be in.  And, but that was the car that you as a black person would ride no matter where you went in the South.  And so, now, starting from the same point and going from Merrill [ph.] north, you didn't have that problem.  You got on the train and you sat wherever you wanted to sit like everybody else and we had, you know.  So it was very difficult for a young person to say well, you know, this is--you know, we kept trying to push the boundary you know.  And several of us got in some trouble you know trying to say, "Well, I don't want to sit up here."  And you know luckily karma has at that point prevailed, and we didn't get, and you know a head knocked in as we could have, you know, in those days. Because they thought nothing--physical violence was not a big deal in those days.  I mean you could get hurt really bad just for doing something very simple, you know, like saying something to, you know, a white guy that he didn't think was apropos.
Story_ID: 289667
Speaker 1: Which was quite different for you in lots of ways because you were playing at this time with white musicians?
Speaker 2: No, not in (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Or for white audiences?
Speaker 2: No, no we're playing for white audiences.  No I didn't play for--we--I could jam with white (laughter)--same time in the '30s [1930s].  I could jam with white musicians.  They would come in the black community and we could play, and we'd play together.  And it was, you know I was fifteen, you know fifteen, sixteen years old, something like that and it was fun, you know.  And these guys, these guys that came in town with Benny Goodman or came in town with somebody else that was well known you know, Charlie Barney--Barnet came, Charlie Barnet was the, one of the first white bands to come to the Howard Theatre [Washington, D.C.], in my memory, to come to a white theater--to the Howard Theatre and play with, he had Chubby Jackson and Oscar Pettiford playing with him, two wonderful bass players.  And he had both of them playing in the same--and that was a big deal for us I mean, cause two black--one black guy in an all-white band, you know (laughter).
Speaker 1: And then Oscar later played for you?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Right, played with you.
Speaker 2: Yeah with me, yeah.  Yeah he was, well he was a wonderful musician.
Story_ID: 289668
Speaker 1: So who else, I mean now that you've mentioned it, who were other bands that came through the Howard Theatre [Washington, D.C.] that you had the opportunity, I mean to see and made an impression on you, a big impression on you?
Speaker 2: One of the bands that made the really, a lasting impression on me was the band that Mary Lou Williams played in.  This was called Andy Kirk and the Ten Clouds or the Twelve Clouds of Joy [Andy Kirk and His Twelve Clouds of Joy], whatever it was.  And to go in--she was called The Lady Who Swings the Band.  And man, she did just that.  She was one of the swingingest piano players I ever heard in my life and I just love what she did.  And it was so effortless, I mean she just sat there and played and she was--I really--that was one of the reasons that all, many years later I decided, I--she didn't get enough credit.  And I started the Mary Lou Williams Women in Jazz Festival, because I mean as hard as she worked and as much as she gave to the music, I had to do something that paid tribute to her because she's, she was an unusual artist for any style of music, anything.  She was not only a great player, she was a great composer. She was at a time when women were not accepted as readily.  She broke all of that and she was the one that everybody wanted to play with, you know.  So--
Speaker 1: So you saw her what year, can you remember about what year you saw her?
Speaker 2: It had to be, this is before I went away to college [Virginia State College for Negroes; Virginia State University, Petersburg, Virginia] so it had to be '30 [1930], '36 [1936], about in 1936, yeah.
Story_ID: 289669
Speaker 1: What year did you graduate college [Virginia State College for Negroes; Virginia State University, Petersburg, Virginia]?
Speaker 2: Thirty-eight [1938].
Speaker 1: Nineteen thirty-eight [1938].  And in 1938, yeah, well, actually in 1936, before we get to '38 [1938], is when you decided to change majors.
Speaker 2: Oh no, no.  No, that was, I changed major in--I was in college, so that was '38 [1938].
Speaker 1: Okay, '38 [1938], okay.
Speaker 2: So it was '40 [1940], actually, when I did that.  So 1940, we're getting into the next decade.
Speaker 1: Okay, so when you just tell your father [William Taylor, Sr.] that, or when your father realizes that you changed your major to music, your uncle [Robert Taylor] must have been pleased because he introduced you to music (laughter).
Speaker 2: (Laughter) I'm not sure, but I hope so.  But, because you know he was kind of along with his father--with his brother on that. He thought I should really get an education before I started doing all--whatever else I wanted to do, you know.
Speaker 1: What did they want you to do?
Speaker 2: They didn't care.  They really didn't, they didn't say you ought to do, you ought to be a doctor or a dentist or anything like that.  But they wanted to--I was--they thought that--I should have had more sense than I did.  Said, now this kid was born when things were really rough in the [Great] Depression.  My dad actually said, he said, you know, one of the reasons--we had a discussion about being a musician.  And so, this is when he asked me not to select music as my major.  And you know, I said, "I'm going to school. I want to be a musician."  He said, "No, it's all right to be a musician, but you should study something and get a more rounded education," and so forth.  So, I said, well I'll study sociology, because it was something I was interested in.  And, but the whole idea of what really, you know, I felt I was losing time because I was, I wanted to do both.  So what I actually did was that I chose music as a major and I, everything that--I mean I chose sociology as a major but everything that I had as an elective was, had to do with music and so forth. I was in a band. I was in a marching band. I was in the jazz, it wasn't a jazz band in those days it was a dancing band. And I was playing from my first year I was playing with local bands because, though I wasn't good enough for Washington [D.C.], I was fine (laughter) for all these guys in college, you know. So I really learned how to play in a band at that particular time.
Story_ID: 289670
Speaker 1: So in 1940 when you graduate, or you made this big switch--
Speaker 2: By that time I was the leader of the band.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I mean I could, you know, I would, you know, do some things, the Virginia Statesmen were really in the state of reorganization, and so that was a little band that we had.  And so I was working with a lot of other groups in order to get good enough so that I could lead the band and I did my senior year.
Speaker 1: And what--did your father [William Taylor, Sr.] ever come to performances?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: No?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: So he totally stayed clear of the music?
Speaker 2: He did.
Speaker 1: What about your uncle [Robert Taylor] who taught you the ragtime (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, nobody--this was isolated.  I mean, I'm at Virginia State [College for Negroes; Virginia State University, Petersburg, Virginia]. I'm way down in the South, you know. And unless they come--unless it's something special that they, they had no reason to come down. And that was all right with me because that left me free to do a lot of things that--I played in a band, Benny Layton was his name. He had a local band [Benny Layton and the Rhythm Kings] and there was another band called [Roy] Johnson's Happy Pals and so I played with, these are local bands that I could play with.  And I mean I played--you could buy, the band leader could buy a score and, with all the parts written out, different parts for the instrument and it only cost a dollar. I mean, for one dollar you had Duke Ellington's 'Take the A Train' or (laughter), you know, whatever it was I mean, but for a buck, you know.  And it had the solos, you know (unclear) solos in there, you know, and so like that.  So that was great I mean because, you know, you could sound, get that sound in your little college band like they did then.  And they could do it now, but this is a hundred years later now, I mean (laughter).
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Story_ID: 289671
Speaker 1: Before you graduated college you, then you changed your major to music.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: What were you thinking you'd do to earn a living?
Speaker 2: I hadn't thought that far. I thought at the very least I could teach music. I mean so it was, that was not--I didn't see that as a problem. I figured that if push came to worse, I mean I could do, you know, I could become a musician. But when I graduated, I applied for a job in a music--you know, after you graduate from school there's some job openings or what. They offered less to me than I had made playing with the band. And so I said well that doesn't make too much sense, you know. I mean I'm not going to take a salary cut here. And so I didn't even consider that. But it gave me, it really made me realize that that wasn't the area of musicians, as a musician that I wanted to go into.
Speaker 1: Who were the other musicians you were hanging out with at the time right as you're about to graduate Virginia [State College for Negroes; Virginia State University, Petersburg, Virginia]?
Speaker 2: Well there were mostly people right in my--
Speaker 1: Locals?
Speaker 2: --the names wouldn't matter to--
Speaker 1: Okay.  Were there any people that later on became accomplished musicians like yourself?
Speaker 2: No one in that particular group.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Most of the musicians that were in college with me went on to do bigger and better things. They went, they became, one of them became--one of my saxophone players is a frat brother [Kappa Alpha Psi Fraternity] here in New York [New York]. He was a trombone player. We had--there was a bass player was a dentist. Yeah, I mean became a dentist.  Several other--I mean they all had nice careers, but no one chose music in that way.
Speaker 1: So when you--
Speaker 2: Even the guys that we thought were good at it.  They were better musicians in the band than I and, but they didn't choose to be musicians.
Story_ID: 289672
Speaker 1: When you graduate, you decided to move to New York [New York]?
Speaker 2: Yeah, well after a year then I--
Speaker 1: What did you do in between that year?
Speaker 2: I took a government job, just because I wanted to make some money and I wanted to--it was easy.  It was, the Second World War [World War II, WWII] was on and there were, and that was one of the reasons I wanted to go to New York because I wanted to go why all the piano players were out of town, you know (laughter).  And it worked out just like that.  And the--but I wanted to have some money so that I could go and not starve to death and you know go and have something to--I figured that it would take me maybe three or four, from what I had heard from other musicians, it would take me three or four months to kind of get myself together and have somebody willing to hire me, you know.  I thought you could get a few gigs or something but--
Speaker 1: But it didn't happen for you then?
Speaker 2: No it didn't.
Speaker 1: You arrived in, on a Friday in New York City?
Speaker 2: Arrived on a Friday and dropped my bags and went to the one place to jam which was Minton's Playhouse and this was a wonderful place in Harlem [New York, New York] where musicians I knew from all the, talking with all the musicians that I had befriended and I had met.  I had met a lot of musicians by that time who were professional musicians.  And I had actually while I was at, in, at Virginia State [College for Negroes; Virginia State University, Petersburg, Virginia], Count Basie did a one night, nighter in Petersburg, Virginia.  Now that is unbelievable when you consider the size of Petersburg.  You know, why would Count Basie play that little town, it was a little dance club. Anyway, he did.
Speaker 1: Why did he?
Speaker 2: The whole band--because he needed the money.  It was a part of a tour (laughter). I didn't know about how the tours were arranged in those days, you know.  What it, what that was, that was about--it was just far enough from Richmond [Virginia] for him to do another gig and get paid extra money to do that on his way to wherever else he was going, you know (laughter). And so that was a glorious experience for me because Jo Jones, Papa Jo Jones, fabulous, the great man that was his drummer for many years, for me, one of the best drummers in the world, he was in the band. And so the guys in my band went over, we all went over to try to say hello to the musicians during the intermission.  And so one of the guys in the band said, "You know the guy, leader of our band is a piano player.  You think you can give it a play?"  I said, "Man get out of here." You know, "Don't do that." (Laughter) So he said, so, and sure enough. But surprise, surprise, Jo said, "Who? He's a piano player?" Said, "Oh, yeah, let me see if I can do something." He asked Basie, he said, "Hey Basie, we got a piano player. Let him play one." And sure enough he let me--so I sat in with the Count Basie--you talking about glory, oh man that was--so I'm a big man on campus.  And that was, I didn't know what a godsend, that one act and, what my saxophone player did for me by asking him if I could sit in.
Story_ID: 289673
Speaker 1: Years later, when I came to New York [New York], two years later when I came to New York, Jo Jones remembered me.  He--I'm playing with--
Speaker 2: At Minton's [Playhouse, New York, New York].
Speaker 1: No, I'm playing--well I'm ahead of the game.  What happened is I had to get back to the story that I was telling before. I mix too many of them up (laughter).
Speaker 2: That's okay. I'm following you.
Speaker 1: Yeah? Okay. When I came in on Friday night I asked the--it was fashionable in those days for me to introduce myself as a new man in town.  Say, "Look, I'd like to sit in and this is a jam session so I, you know, I'd like to play."  Now this guy doesn't know what I can play or you know whether I'm just fooling around or whatever it is.  And so he, you know we got a--it's, this is Friday night so we got a lot of people.  He doesn't want to take a chance in case I can't play.  So there's a couple of other guys that's sitting around, so they got a chance to play before I did. They came in, the guy sat down and played, another guy came in and sat down and played.  So I then--toward the very end of the night I get to play.  And so by the--all night long it's been four or five guys on the band stand.  Now there are ten guys on the bandstand.  There are fifteen guys on the bandstand because these are all the guys that have gotten off from work and they all--the jam session is really on now, you know.  So one of the guys, I look up and this guy is an idol of mine. I mean this is a guy I've gotten--because here's a man whose records I have had, I used to buy--I wanted to play tenor saxophone and if I played--if I could play the saxophone well enough I wanted to play like Ben Webster, you know (laughter).  And so, and I had records and you know had studied his records.  I listened to them, I knew different things on it.  And so I decided, okay I'm really going to play for these guys.  I look up, here's Ben Webster coming in.  He's there and I can't, there's nothing for me to play.  There's so many guys on the band--bandstand that the solo never gets to me.  Maybe I get eight bars, nine bars, or introduction or something like that.  So anyway I'm playing and I'm doing the best I can under the circumstances.  At the end of the evening, toward the end of the evening Ben comes back, comes over and says, "What's your name?"  I told him.  And he said, "I hadn't seen you before around here."  I said, "No, I just got in town."  So he said, "What are you doing?"  So I said, "Well you know just, you know trying to look, play, you know," and so forth.  So he said, "Well, I liked what I heard you play."  He said, "I didn't hear very much because you didn't get too much chance to solo.  So why don't you come down to the Three Deuces [New York, New York] where I'm working."  I said, "Yeah I'll be there in the morning."  He says, "No, no, not tomorrow night, on Sunday night."  And so he said, "Sunday's quieter, and I can get a chance to listen to see how you sound. You sound all right, I'll get, I'll see what--you know, we'll talk."  And so I said, "Yeah okay."
Story_ID: 289674
Speaker 1: Saturday took forever to get over (laughter), but finally it's time to go down and I go to the Three Deuces [New York, New York].  I don't even have a clue as to where the Three Deuces are.  All I knew it was on 52nd Street, and I didn't know where 52nd Street was (laughter).  But I found it.  Anyway, the first club that I came into when I got off the subway was the Three Deuce.  I look up and says, oh man, this is it.  Now I didn't notice whose name was on there.  I, you know I, I'm--I kept saying well, you know, how could I not notice whose name is that, you know?  And--but I'm so excited, oh Three Deuces, right.  Let me go find where Ben Webster is.  So I go in, I sit in, I get the job, and so forth. The--now I'm introduced to the, to--no, I got ahead of myself. The--I'm going up to sit in and--cause this is the second set. This is not--he told me not--don't come in the first set, come in the second set.  So the second set when I go in, there's people sitting down and I'm on my way to the piano to sit in.  And a lady grabs me by the arm and says, "Billy [HistoryMaker Billy Taylor], when you come in town?" And it's a--one of--she is--this woman who called me, who caught my attention, was a good friend of Art Tatum and was, it was Tatum she was sitting with. And I don't hear that. All, and I'm--I don't know him.  "How are you doing?" She said, "What are you doing in town?"  I said, "I'm going to audition for this job." And so she's, "Oh good luck." So I go up and I sit and I try to do everything that I could, everything I knew in twenty seconds.  And then when I got to the piano, one of those double take things where I had gone up--she had, before I went to the set she said, "I want you to meet a friend of mine.  It's Art Tatum."  I said, "Yeah, right."  And so I go and I sit down, and I start to play.  And I said, no, no, no (laughter). It couldn't be. So I went on and played and sure enough when I got off, it was Art Tatum, man.  And I said I'm really glad I didn't realize it (laughter). But he was one of the best mentors I ever had.  I mean he was gentle and really--
Speaker 2: So did you meet him that night?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: She--and that night he took you under his wing?
Speaker 1: Oh no, no, no.
Speaker 2: No? Okay.
Speaker 1: He--I met him and, but I got the gig that night.  So that I'm playing opposite, he's the headliner at the--so I'm--Ben Webster opens for him.  So I'm playing with Ben Webster so every night I got to sit and hear Art Tatum, so that was wonderful (laughter).
Story_ID: 289675
Speaker 1: And how did your relationship develop with Art [Tatum]? When did you become (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well because I had made him aware of the fact that I had all these records of his that I had listened to very carefully and tried to learn as much as I could from him.  And at, and one of the things that I learned very young was that I wanted to ask more questions, as many questions as I could, and to learn as much about a musician's life and all of the things that they knew from the musicians themselves.  Because I knew from my own reading there was a lot of stuff that wasn't true even that I could recognize that.  Say, well that doesn't make sense.  And then I'd ask somebody, said, "No that's not true."  Say okay.  And so by the time I got to 52nd Street [New York, New York], I was, I mean I must, I really--a classic pest.  I mean, I really just wanted to know everything I could learn from these guys and Tatum was wonderful and many of the other musicians were, you know they--Jo Jones met me that first week that I was there.  And he came in to see Sid Catlett who was out, the drummer who was playing with Ben [Webster] at that time.  And so Sid introduced me then.  And so he said, "Oh, I remember you," and you know because when I met him--I said, "yeah I met you down in Virginia."  He said, "Oh that's where I know you from."  He said, "I never forget a face."  So I said, "Yeah okay."  So he--so I said, "Well would you let me go along with you? I'd like to meet some of the guys around the corner."  I knew he was going around the corner to the White Rose Bar [New York, New York].  And so--
Speaker 1: What was the White Rose Bar?
Speaker 2: That was just a bar where musicians in between sets they hung out.  And so I go in and he said--I was introduced to many people.  Said, "Could you introduce me to Coleman Hawkins?"  He said, "Sure."  So Coleman Hawkins was standing at the bar.  He said, "Hawk, here a young friend of mine just out of college kid, just got a job with Ben.  You're going to like him."  And said, "Check him out."  So he said, "This is [HistoryMaker] Billy Taylor, he can't drink."  All in the same--I don't know why he said that you know because I'm a frat man [Kappa Alpha Psi Fraternity].  I can drink.  I'm cool, you know, in the bar, you know, everything.  So, but he said I can't drink.  So, okay, so I didn't drink.  So he--Joe had ordered a Coke [Coca-Cola] for me and--because he said, "I'll have whatever he's drinking, double," or something, "and he'll have a Coke."  And so I'm standing there and we're--musicians are talking and so forth.  So that round goes by and said, "Oh, could I buy you a drink?"  Said, "No, I'll buy you one."  So I said, "Okay."  And so Hawk turns to the bar and says, "I'll have a double and he'll have a Coke." And so I mean and so from that point all the guys that Jo introduced me to, that was the introduction I got. So you know, they said, "He doesn't drink," you know.  And I said, "Yeah, I did a little bit," you know. But that was his way of really trying to--whiskey was the narcotic of the day of that particular time, and he was trying to keep me from doing that.
Speaker 1: Because he felt if you did that you'd move further (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, yeah, yeah, right.
Speaker 1: Okay, that was the start of--
Speaker 2: And it worked.
Speaker 1: And that was in what year?
Speaker 2: Nineteen forty-three [1943], '44 [1944], '44 [1944].
Story_ID: 289676
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) When Dizzy Gillespie first came to 52nd Street [New York, New York], would that--
Speaker 1: That was the year.
Speaker 2: That was the year?
Speaker 1: That was exactly when it--yeah, I was playing with Ben Webster then.
Speaker 2: And then so tell me that story.  How did that happen because he came in (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Well I was working with Ben across the street.  I had met Dizzy when he was with, in Washington [D.C.] when he was with Earl Hines band.  And so I went over and made my, you know I'm, now I'm one of the boys.  I'm already on 52nd Street, you know so--
Speaker 2: Right, but how long had you been on 52nd Street before you met--
Speaker 1: A few weeks.
Speaker 2: A few weeks, but you still, okay you're one of the (unclear)--
Speaker 1: And so, but Dizzy came in and it was a great thing to try to do something with him.  He had no piano player.  Bud Powell was supposed to be his piano player and he didn't, for whatever reason he wasn't there.  So he had no piano player.  He had Oscar Pettiford, Max Roach and what's his name, Max Roach, Oscar, Dizzy, that's all--and, oh saxophone player Don Byas, yeah.
Story_ID: 289677
Speaker 1: We'll just go back to the Dizzy [Gillespie] story.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: But the story you were telling was about your father [William Taylor, Sr.] and your--I had asked you off-camera if your father, if you sang, because you have a great voice.  And you (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Thank you.
Speaker 1: --said you didn't sing (unclear) your father.
Speaker 2: No, I don't sing because I actually have a record where--it was one period in my life when I wanted to sound like Nat [King] Cole, and I wanted to have a trio like that [King Cole Trio].  I thought he was just wonderful.  And so I sang along those lines.  I had a quartet and it was patterned after what Nat Cole did.  Didn't sound like Nat, but it was, you know, that was what I had in mind.  But I really didn't--piano playing took so much time from what I wanted to do.  I was very interested in the touch, in the way the instrument sounded.  I wanted to play ballads.  I wanted to--that, what I was saying about white people dancing to the melody, well one of the things I loved is melody and one of the things that I do is to try to play melodies that are singable, whether they have words or not, you know.  And so maybe the melodies that I create for myself should have words, but they don't, because I just never bothered to put words to it.  But I thought of it as something that should be sung.
Story_ID: 289678
Speaker 1: Just going back to where we left off with Dizzy [Gillespie], and take--you having the opportunity to play.  So that night he was missing a piano player?
Speaker 2: When Dizzy Gillespie opened at the Onyx Club [New York, New York] at this time he just didn't have a piano player.  So there was--he had hoped to have Bud Powell who was supposed--he was billed as the person who would be there.  He, for whatever reason he couldn't make it and didn't make it.  And so as soon as we found that there was no, the piano seat was vacant, somebody--everybody jumped, I jumped up there, other guys jumped up there and said, "Hey let me"--because we all wanted to learn how to play bebop.  And bebop was the new music, and we wanted to see what, you know, what are these guys doing?  Dizzy Gillespie was a wonderful teacher.  I mean he would reach over me like this and say, "Billy [HistoryMaker Billy Taylor], it go"--and he'd play what the chords were and so forth.  And I mean he was not only a good teacher, but he taught by example.  I mean he could not only play all those things but he could show you why he was doing it and how he did this thing.  And it was just a great opportunity, one that I really cherish.  Because two, it did two things for me: it showed me what a great teacher Dizzy was and what he was like as a person.  I mean, because, you know, many of the older guys and he was just a couple of years older than I.  But many of the guys would take that and say, "Well man, you know, let me--where's Bud?  Find somebody.  Find somebody," you know.  And he would just take the time and say, "No, no, this is what we need," you know.  And that went on from that time 'til he died I mean we always had a great relationship.  I mean I would, I remember being, coming to a club over by Columbia University [New York, New York], and I went in just to see Dizzy.  And so I--the place was jammed I mean you know because he didn't play uptown very much and here he was right on campus.  And so I went in to say, "Hey," you know, "how's it going?"  He said, "Come on, come on, come on."  Said, "What do you mean come on?"  He said, "Come on up here."  So I went up front and I said, "There's no seat up here."  He said, "Yes there is.  Piano," (laughter) so I sat in for him, with him for the rest of the night.  So on a couple of occasions he had many years later that happened where I got to sit in because he didn't have a piano player.
Story_ID: 289679
Speaker 1: So who are some of the, I mean at that point that becomes a turning point for your career.  Other people--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --start to--and who are the other, I mean, after you play with him [Dizzy Gillespie], other people hear about you.  The word spreads around New York [New York] that you're a great--
Speaker 2: Well once you work on 52nd Street that, in those days the door was opened.  And so you, I got a chance to work with Slam Stewart.  I got a chance to work with [Benny] Golson (unclear) (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What was it like working with Slam?
Speaker 2: It was wonderful playing with Slam because there I was replacing Erroll Garner, who was a good friend of mine.  And I knew some of Erroll's tunes and things like that and so that was the easy gig, you know.  And Slam was just a very entertaining guy, you know, so if you worked with him I mean you're going to be playing different places.  We played the RKO-Boston [Boston, Massachusetts], we played the Howard Theatre [Washington, D.C.].  We played a lot of--you know many of the things that I did in theater in those days were with him.
Speaker 1: How was it going back to the Howard Theatre being, now being a musician versus a kid in the seat?
Speaker 2: It was great.  It was really wonderful.  I had been in, I had been back a couple of times with Eddie South.  I played clubs with--the [Club] Bengasi [Washington, D.C.] with him and I played--Stuff Smith, I played on the, at, on 52nd Street.  At another later date I played with Stuff and that--I had met Stuff when I was with Eddie South. And I knew the friendly rivalry that they had and it was fun. You know different as night and day. Eddie was smooth and just a perfect musician in terms of the kinds of things he did.  And Stuff was the kind of ball--I'll blow you out of the place, you know, kind of a person. And he was just a shouting, happy, exciting musician.
Speaker 1: When did you work with Roy Eldridge?
Speaker 2: That was around the time when I--
Speaker 1: Same time?
Speaker 2: --was playing on 52nd Street and I played--this was after I had played with Ben [Webster], and Ben went on to do something else.  And I, the guy who was the, who owned the club and he was, you know, now calling me to fill it with other players.  And so that was nice.  I enjoyed that.  Roy Eldridge--
Speaker 1: Cause that's steady work, yeah.
Speaker 2: Roy Eldridge was just such a remarkable musician.  I mean to play with him at that time--
Speaker 1: What did you learn from him?
Speaker 2: Stamina.  I mean I, this guy, little guy, man he's got more, had more power than almost anybody I ever heard and just so effortless.  I mean it's just you know, he's full of music and it's just coming, all coming out, you know.
Story_ID: 289680
Speaker 1: Now was the jazz world at this time segregated?  Like, did you have like Benny Goodman and all the white guys on one side and--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: No. You guys played together?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Yeah, we--the business aspects of the music were segregated.
Speaker 1: And by that you mean what?
Speaker 2: Black music made, black musicians made considerably less salaries than white musicians for a variety of reasons.  The union didn't insist on us being paid--for jazz musicians period--being paid much more than whatever the going rate would be.  And so they, the club owners kind of made up their own scale.  You know, said, "Well okay this guy is worth so and so, and he's worth so and so."  You know, I mean, that's, you know it's, that was the way it was.  And many of the guys, the older guys could get around it, and made it possible for us who were younger to ask for more money and--
Speaker 1: Who do you consider the older guys?  Who was it that was--
Speaker 2: People like Jo Jones, people like Sid Catlett, people like Wilbur de Paris, musicians who had had more experience in big bands and who had enough experience to say, well, "I have to be paid X amount of dollars," you know, Sid Catlett people, you know. And they, you know it--in today's world it's not the kind of money that people would call money.  But in those days it was a big difference from what other band musicians were making.
Story_ID: 289681
Speaker 1: So you came, when you came into music, or when you came into jazz, big band was the form of jazz that was the most popular?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: That (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) But it was on the way out.
Speaker 1: And what was replacing it?
Speaker 2: Small combos for a variety of reasons.  The dance halls were going out.  This was unfortunate because that was prior to the Second World War [World War II, WWII], dance halls were big source of money making for big bands for the hall, people that owned the halls and everything.  And it was a source of jobs straight across the country.  I mean, you could go literally from New York [New York] straight across the country playing one-nighters or enough to support yourself to go from place to place, you know.  And in a very short time after the Second World War, that wasn't possible.
Speaker 1: But you also had an opportunity to, after the Second World War, to be a part of the first African American band to go to Europe to play for the soldiers.
Speaker 2: That was really a unique thing. It was--one of the people that I met when I first came to New York was a guy named Timme Rosencrantz. And Timme Rosencrantz was a Danish baron, and he was the black sheep of the family. And they said, "Get out.  Not only get out of town, get out of the country and stay in some other country. Don't stay"--you know. And he was, he had enough money to support himself. And he was a writer, he--Timme, I don't know who gets the credit, but Timmy was really a person who discovered Erroll Garner. I mean because Erroll Garner was working on--we were good friends. We were working on--I met him when he was working down I think, I can't remember the club now but a club on 52nd Street and I was just taken by the impish way the guy handled the piano and he was such a nice human being.  And we'd hang out together.  We would laugh and play all kinds of stuff.  And I asked him one time I said, "How is it--you play by ear?  I mean, you know, most people who play by ear can only play in one or two keys.  You're playing all the keys?  I said how do you do that?"  He said, "I was curious.  I wanted to know what's going on," (laughter).  And so he literally could play in any key and he said, "They're all the same." I said, "Oh no they're not," you know (laughter).  And he said, but he said they were all the same to him because he felt, he could just sit there and he'd play these things that were just instant compositions.  I mean you--this is the one thing about Erroll that has somehow gotten lost in the things that he did as an accompanist--he was one of the most influential musicians on 52nd Street when he was there.  And he influenced a lot of other people and so forth.  But critics seem to get angry if you make money and you do something. And he made a lot of money and he did because it was very popular. What he did was just--it reached out and touched people. And he was very much in the tradition of the old big bangs and as a matter of fact his style was taken from those old big bands. He heard in his left hand he heard the guitarists such as Freddie Green with bass, plum, plum, plum, plum, like that.  He did that with his left hand and he did all of these other things with his right hand that were like the whole big band playing something, you know.  And so, to me, he was not only a unique voice in the music itself, but he added something that wasn't there and hasn't been there since.
Story_ID: 289682
Speaker 1: Then the music changed.  It became, it sort of moved away from big band and it became bebop.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: What's the difference?
Speaker 2: What happened was that musicians came back from the War [World War II, WWII] and they found a totally different set, the big bands were no longer--what do you do?  Where do you go?  Where can you play, you know (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Right, because you said the dance halls were done.
Speaker 2: Well they were being phased out.
Speaker 1: They were going--being phased out.
Speaker 2: They were being phased out, yeah.
Speaker 1: So if that, if the dance halls are being phased out, did that phase the music out also?
Speaker 2: In many cases, yeah.
Speaker 1: So the music had--in many cases, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah in many cases.  But in those days in New York [New York] or in Chicago [Illinois] or in Philly [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] and on the West Coast and different places, there were always specific places that hired jazz musicians and--
Speaker 1: The small combo you mean?
Speaker 2: Yeah, depending, small being whatever you want it to be (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Six to eight people, right.
Speaker 2: It could be six to eight people or it might be as many as ten or twelve, you know.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And especially in the older forms, like in a Dixieland band or in a New Orleans [Louisiana]-type band, they might have ten guys up there, you know, playing.  And so some of that was picked up by some of the R&B bands, and so, in those days the lines that were drawn were not as careful.  You know, you could play with an R&B, you could play--it was all the same thing.  I mean it was--jazz musicians were playing--many of the jazz musicians came out of the big bands, you know.  And so, this was a small combo from Duke Ellington, or a small combo from Chick Webb or somebody like that, you know.
Story_ID: 289683
Speaker 1: Chick Webb, that reminds me, I'm from Mississippi.  He was, you know, in the South.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Chick Webb was big.
Speaker 2: He was one of the greatest jazz musicians ever.  And he's gotten lost in the way we keep records.  We don't celebrate the people who are, who give us in many cases the best gifts.
Speaker 1: What was his gift (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Chick Webb was a musician who always, as a band leader, had the best musicians he could afford, the best arrangers he could have to play.  He was at the Savoy [Ballroom, New York, New York] because they blew everybody else out of--they just played better than everybody that came in.  And so they blew other guys out.  He discovered Ella Fitzgerald.  He put her, made her the singer in the band and the band took a certain kind of shape with her and him playing the trumpet-playing the drums and people playing the trumpets like Dizzy [Gillespie] and other players who played, worked with Teddy Hill and some of those other kinds of bands.  And so, the kind of music that was being played was what I call pre-bop. And this was something that was not yet bebop.  What happened when bebop came in, Dizzy Gillespie and Charlie Parker and a few others had this great idea up in Minton's [Playhouse, New York, New York] that one of the things that we could do is to extend the harmony, make the harmony a little more complicated, you know.  Make the rhythms a little more complicated but--keep swinging, but be adding some other elements to swinging.
Speaker 1: Improvised elements or--?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, yeah, sure.  What happened, what Max [Roach] and other guys were doing, they were what was called in those days, dropping note bombs.  The guy would play something, you hear a bass drum, boom, boom.  And just, it was like an explosion, you know.  And other things that they did really took the music from one place to another. So it was no longer dance music. It was music to be listened to. The phrases were longer. They were more--you had to listen. You had to pay attention to understand what was going on, and people did.  And so it really gave a possibility of music growing to the level on which it is today.  I mean, all of the basic elements that were laid by those people like Thelonious Monk, Dizzy Gillespie, Kenny Clarke, musicians who came out of the big band, Jo Jones, all of those guys did certain things that made it possible for other things to happen.
Story_ID: 289684
Speaker 1: In what year was it that you played with Billie Holiday?
Speaker 2: That was when I first (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) It was called 'Holiday Blues' [sic. 'Holiday on Broadway'], or what was the title of the show (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, that was when I was with Slam Stewart.
Speaker 1: Okay, what year was that?
Speaker 2: That was about, it must have been about '44 [1944], '45 [1945].
Speaker 1: What was that experience like?
Speaker 2: Oh, it was wonderful.  I mean I, she--I had met Billie on 52nd Street [New York, New York] and played with her on several occasions and, you know, subbing for someone else.  And here, we played--this was when I was playing with Slam and we had played, we had done the RKO-Boston [Boston, Massachusetts], we had done several places in Philly [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] and several other places.  I don't remember where we played.  But the whole idea was that we were playing a lot of places, one of which was Baltimore [Maryland].  And we played the Royal Theatre in Baltimore and doubled from the--which we, when we got through with that we went over to a night club and played for Billie Holiday.  And that was a sad occasion for me because I didn't realize how much she had been abused in terms of people taking advantage of her.  Baltimore was her home, was the kind of place where it should have been packed.  It should have been like it was on 52nd Street when she was there.  But by that time she was such an addict that she really had no--and it wasn't a very pleasant side--sight for people to come to see.  And it was unfortunate because she was singing okay.  I mean, you know, all of the things that were a part of her misery, or whatever, were a part of her artistry, you know.  And so she gave a lot to whoever was there to listen, but it was very sad.
Story_ID: 289685
Speaker 1: When did you record your first record?  Was that with--
Speaker 2: No, the first record I did (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Was it with Slam Stewart?
Speaker 2: --it wasn't released on that--pardon?
Speaker 1: Was that with Slam Stewart on that trio?
Speaker 2: No.  No, the first one was with my own trio [Billy Taylor Trio].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And it was--actually, no, no.  I must, I think--the first one was with my own trio and that was with, around the time I was working with Ben Webster.  One of the reasons I made the record at that time was because he was just--the guy that had the record company was just going through 52nd Street [New York, New York] and getting the guys that were playing.  He got Erroll Garner, he got a lot of other guys that had played.  And my unfortunate experience was that when he got to me he had already heard Erroll Garner.  So I'm playing what I tried to play and the first thing he said after the first record was done, said, "Can't you play a little more like Erroll Garner?"  I said, "No man, I'm trying to"--(laughter).  Herman Lubinsky was his name.
Speaker 1: What was the name of his record label?
Speaker 2: Savoy Records [New York, New York].
Speaker 1: Savoy Records.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So he went through and recorded all of you guys at that time?
Speaker 2: Yeah, a lot of folks, yeah.  I made other records for him too later, but the--there was a guy named Teddy Reig who was one of his artist--repertory people, and he liked what I did.  He heard me on the street and he used me on several things.  As a matter of fact, Teddy Reig was the reason for one of my first hits, something that I wrote for--when I was at Birdland [New York, New York] and that's many years later, it was called Cu-Blu. And it was a combination of, what we call cubop and bebop.
Story_ID: 289686
Speaker 1: When did the Cuban influence, Afro-Cuban influence, seep into your work?  Where did it come from?
Speaker 2: That was in the mid-'40s [1940s] before I went to Europe.  And let me see, that was--I played, I had already played with, I did a show, which was called the 'Seven Lively Arts,' and it was on Broadway, it was Cozy Cole's group.  And it was a wonderful opportunity for me--first Broadway, time I was on stage, I had played prior to that for, in the pit for an all-black program. It's funny those things run together.  It wasn't that long between--
Speaker 1: Oh the stuff happened (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) some of those were happening you know.  And--
Speaker 1: Was Tony Brown--
Speaker 2: Oh no that was much later.
Speaker 1: Much later, okay.
Speaker 2: No, this was still in the '40s [1940s].
Speaker 1: Oh, okay.
Speaker 2: So this was--and Mary Lou Williams was in that show.  It was a show that was--and it had, oh my goodness what is her name?  Ethel Waters.  Ethel Waters was a headliner, and she was trying to beat Bill "Bojangles" Robinson to Broadway with a show that he had and that she had.  So he--she was trying to get hers on Broadway first.  It was a very nice show and it had a lot of wonderful people in it.  I was in the pit but it was a great experience.  But this other experience which was later, much later, I was on stage--
Speaker 1: What was the name of the show much later?
Speaker 2: That was--
Speaker 1: The Seven--
Speaker 2: The 'Seven Lively Arts.'
Speaker 1: 'Seven Lively Arts.'
Speaker 2: And that was a show created by Billy Rose and it was, it had, what do you call it--the ballet part of it.  Benny Goodman was the original group that--we replaced the Benny Goodman Sextet in the show and it was a quintet that Cozy took in.
Speaker 1: I think it was [HistoryMaker] Katherine Dunham.
Speaker 2: So out of that, that was how I got to work with Cozy.  Through Cozy I got to work with Machito and so it all, that all tied in like that.
Story_ID: 289687
Speaker 1: And then that's where all the Afro--the Cuban influences came from (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes. Yeah, Machito was the greatest at that time.  That was in the '40s [1940s].  This was the--Mario Bauza was the musician who had, who single handedly took all of the things, the big band stuff that Chick Webb--he had worked with Chick Webb and Cab Calloway so he knew what those big bands should sound like.  He played, he was a wonderful musician.  He played trumpet and saxophone.  When he was conducting, when he was leading Machito's band, and we were playing shows in the Latin jazz club, if the, when we played the show, if the saxophone part was hard, he played it, and he lead the saxophone player.  If the trumpet part was hard, he played that and lead--I mean he was a remarkable musician.  When I first worked with him, they had just lost, their piano player had just been drafted and so they said, "You got to," you know they called me.  I was playing intermissions with Cozy Cole's partner and so I--we were just a regular jazz group.  But that was really the first group I ever recorded with.  And, you know, with major, other players and so forth.  So, but that experience led directly into the Cuban thing, and that made an impact on me that I still have.  I mean it's an important part of the way I play music, and what I do with melodies and rhythms.
Story_ID: 289688
Speaker 1: So at that time you had already, I mean once the--you had already recorded albums?  You had already recorded a few albums (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah. Right, yeah.
Speaker 1: And you'd done so with the Billy Taylor Trio was the name of--
Speaker 2: That's much later.
Speaker 1: Oh, that's much later?  Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, oh yeah.  I didn't, I couldn't support a trio until after I came out of Birdland [New York, New York].  That was the beginning of my--
Speaker 1: When did you get to Birdland?
Speaker 2: Nineteen forty--wait a minute, '49 [1949] I think it was, yeah, '49 [1949] to '51 [1951], yeah.
Speaker 1: And then Charlie Parker, all those guys were at Birdland when you were there?
Speaker 2: Well, no.  I opened at Birdland playing for Charlie Parker.  I mean, I got a call one day.  I was home practicing.  I got a call from his piano player [Al Haig] and he said, "Bird [Charlie Parker] is opening at Birdland tonight.  Can you cover for me?"  He was a good friend.  I mean I had known him and I had seen him around with Bird.  And so, but I was about the fourth guy that he had called that day.  You know, everybody else was out or something, you know.  And so, and luckily I was in, and he called me.  And he had decided that he was going to leave Bird.  That he was not going to play with Bird at that time.  And so I got the gig and I got to play with him and that was the beginning of my two-year stint as house pianist in Birdland.
Story_ID: 289689
Speaker 1: By the time I got to Birdland [New York, New York], I had already written my first book on bebop ['Billy Taylor's Basic Bebop Instruction for Piano,' Billy Taylor], so--1948 when I was working in Harlem [New York, New York].  A guy named--excuse me--a guy named Charlie Hansen [Charles Hansen] came up and said, you know, "We'd like to get you to write, you know, you--I've seen some of the things you've written for magazines and stuff like that.  I would really like for you to write something very concise and very readable on bebop," so I did.  So I wrote about four or five books.  The first one was on bebop, one was on Dixieland, another one was on ragtime and another one was on Latin jazz.  And so these were all about less than thirty-two pages and in each one I said, "Here's what the style is. Here are some of the things that people use when they're playing that stuff--style and some of the devices, and here are some examples." And it was a wonderful--I didn't think of the format, he thought of the format, but I had to make it happen and it worked. And some of the--I still use a lot of those things in my teaching now because it, it's concise enough that someone could say, oh that's what bebop is. Oh that's what ragtime is, you know, and it kind of cuts through everything else.
Story_ID: 289690
Speaker 1: So can you give me just a quick, for each of those, bebop is, ragtime is, sort of--
Speaker 2: Yeah. Well, bebop was the--well let's start with the earliest style.  In the earlier styles what you got is a combination of taking the blues and taking elements that are rhythmically, harmonically and melodically put in a certain context so that you--it's like dance music and so froth.  And you get that in the early ragtime, and some of the other kinds of jazz of that period.  In the Latin, I had to talk about the clave and the fact that you hear (clapping), and when you hear that, that's the key to many of the rhythms that they say.  So people think that's just something that goes on in the background but that's really what everybody's point of reference is.  And it took me, when I learned, when I first got to play with Machito, it was just so wonderful to have someone explain this to me.  So he said, "You've got to know what the clave is, and you got to know," you know.  So, and he'd turn, sometimes it's backwards (clapping) instead of (clapping), you know.  And so I mean it's little things like that, that are really the key to the fact that this is music that's coming from a different source and has a different intent.  And so, by the time I got to bebop, Dizzy Gillespie was really very much, he was the great, the godfather of cubop, and a lot of those things like that because he brought together all of the Latin things with the harmonic and melodic things that comes from the big band and from the kind of searching that Thelonious Monk and other people who were part of the group that in the early '40s [1940s] that were trying to say, well, let's move the music forward this way, harmonically, melodically and rhythmically.
Story_ID: 289691
Speaker 1: So what were the highlights covering your two-year span at Birdland [New York, New York]?  You were an in-house musician?
Speaker 2: I got to play for--play with everybody.  I mean I played with almost every musician who was on the scene in those (unclear). I altered--one of the most exciting evenings for me was the opening, Duke Ellington's opening at Birdland, first time he had played the club.  And I, my job as house pianist was to--and the band comes on and plays--and then when the band stops playing, then I play at intermission.  Now Duke Ellington is such a wonderful showman that he would not allow the fact that I was going to play solo piano to be a dead issue.  And so I mean he was just, he just thought that way.  So the house, we, I played, the band played, and it really, I mean, it was just stupendous. I mean you know the house was yelling, people were screaming, standing ovation, it was, everything.  So noise, I mean they, there was so much noise that Duke stood at the mic and said, "Louis Nelson loves you madly and Cootie Williams loves you madly"--he'd call everybody's name in the band and as he's saying it the whole sound of the room which is--it's echoing the sound of Louis Nelson's drums.  I mean he just knocked everybody off the seat.  And they, what they are doing now is common.  He said, "And so and so loves you madly," and ran on down.  And finally when the room is quiet he says, you know, "Ladies and gentlemen, I have a young fellow from my home town, and his name is [HistoryMaker] Billy Taylor, and I want to listen to him a little bit, and I want you to listen to him."  And so (laughter), you know, and, I mean, you know, "Everybody could quiet down and listen."  And I sat down and played my little piano solo.  And I, you know I, I've never forgotten that.  I mean it was the, that was so, it was such a stroke of genius to know what to do in something like that. He didn't want any dull, anything--you know, it would have been fine if he had left it where it was. Everybody said, oh man it wasn't you, it wasn't, you know all of that. He didn't want that. He said, you know, "It was cool," no, next thing (laughter). He was wonderful.
Story_ID: 289692
Speaker 1: After that two-year experience [at Birdland, New York, New York] you have enough clout to put your own trio [Billy Taylor Trio] together.  Or you start to (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) But during that period I played with everyone.  See, I was in the--part of my job was to play with the quote all-star group, so I played with everybody, James J. Johnson [J.J. Johnson], with Kai Winding, you name, the Stan Kenton (unclear) different guys, you know, Lee Conitz and so all different guys, you know.  Played with Miles [Davis], played--you know all of these in that period of my experience, I literally played with just about everybody who was on the jazz scene in those days.  And so, I can honestly say I know what it is to play for so and so and so and so and so, because I did.  I played for all the singers for Dinah [Washington] and for Ella [Fitzgerald], you name them, I played for them you know, Sarah [Vaughan], you know.  So it was just like going to school.  I mean I, you know I learned so much in that period that I just felt capable of saying, well okay, I got it (laughter).  I'm ready.  I mean, all those other years were preparation.  This is what it did.
Speaker 1: So what was the word back home now that you were doing so well?
Speaker 2: Well, hey, by the time I got to Birdland I was, you know, we were on the air six or seven nights a week.  I mean, Symphony Sid had a regular broadcast from twelve o'clock midnight until six o'clock in the morning.  And so we were on--I was on with the all-stars and whoever almost every other night and something like that.  So you know, and that and playing at the later, at other clubs where we also had, like the Hickory House [New York, New York and places like that, where we also had radio broadcasts.  It's just wonderful to--
Story_ID: 289693
Speaker 1: Now when you start to record your own music is that when you started to compose as well?
Speaker 2: I, no I was composing when I was in college [Virginia State College for Negroes; Virginia State University, Petersburg, Virginia] and so I actually was doing things in college that--I hope I can find a record of it cause I had a group, which was called, well it was six voices and it was two girl--four girls and two guys.  And the guys played--we had a lot of things that we did.  It sounded like The Pied Pipers or any of those groups that used to sing with the big bands in those days.
Speaker 1: So you were, I mean I'm (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So I was composing.
Speaker 1: You were composing.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And you also, I mean I may be jumping a big jump in time but you composed a piece that you were commissioned to do for [Reverend Dr.] Martin Luther King [Jr.]?
Speaker 2: Yeah, that's a long time.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Before that I had, I played at the 'Seven Lively Arts.'  The conductor [Maurice Abravanel] of the Broadway show, the 'Seven Lively Arts' was, became the composer--the conductor of the symphony orchestra [Utah Symphony] and, many years later.  And we were on the Council for the Arts [National Council on the Arts], NEA [National Endowment for the Arts], and so he had never heard me play.  He heard me play at a party that Nancy Hanks, where we had the meeting.  She said, "Billy [HistoryMaker Billy Taylor]," and we had been at everybody's throats and we had been arguing with each other. "Play something to tone everybody down for me over there." So I said, "Okay," so I went over and sat and played piano.  And so, oh my goodness I'm blanking out on his name.  But he had never heard me play.  And so he said, you know, "That was really lovely," when I finished.  He said, "I would like for you to write something like that for my band. Could you do that?"  I said, "Oh sure," you know. So not the faintest idea of what I'm getting into. So then I figured it's a party, you know, it's a nice thing to say you know.  And the conductor of the Utah Symphony, I'm sure, I know that's the last I'll hear of that you know.  So two or three days later I get a call from Salt Lake City [Utah] and sure enough he says, "I'm serious.  I'd really like for you to do something."  So I record, I wrote a song.  It's called 'Suite for Jazz Piano and Orchestra.'  And we premiered it in the Mormon Tabernacle [Salt Lake Tabernacle] and I play (unclear).  My son came out.  He was living in California then, came out and babysat me.  It's one of the few times that I've been so--I don't get nervous when I play because I usually know what I'm going to do.  So I don't have--I had the worst case of stage fright I ever had in my life.  I mean and so Duane [Taylor] just walked me through and said, "Yeah dad, I mean come on, you got that."  So he walked me through and so it was, that was turnabout (laughter).
Story_ID: 289694
Speaker 1: You recorded over how many records?
Speaker 2: It's hard to say now because many of them are on CD.  And so some of them (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Well, CDs, yeah.
Speaker 2: So, you know, it's--I would say, I'm trying to give a--in, just looking at the CDs, maybe, things that are out on CD, maybe twenty-five, thirty, something like that.
Speaker 1: At what point did you start to do other stuff with your music outside of just recording it for people to listen to?  I mean, and to arrange and compose for symphonies?  When did you start to teach, and when did you move into television and work with David Frost?
Speaker 2: I moved into teaching right straight from when I was writing those instruction books.
Speaker 1: So that was way back (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Because--so that was way back, yeah.
Speaker 1: You had been doing it all?
Speaker 2: I've been doing that for a long time.
Speaker 1: So you were doing it all at the same time?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I taught right through that Birdland [New York, New York] period and other periods.
Speaker 1: So by day you'd go teach?
Speaker 2: No, I wasn't teaching in the school.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I was teaching in private, either private--
Speaker 1: Private, I mean, but by day you'd teach people, too?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Oh yeah, right absolutely.
Speaker 1: And at night you'd go to Birdland?
Speaker 2: Yeah, and then I would do, and I would also study because I wanted to, I was taking, studying composition.  I was doing some things. I wanted to write longer works and do things, which were comparable to some of the things I had been listening to, and I wanted to know how to do that.  I was very fortunate in being able to do a lot of radio shows in those days.  And so my television, I did in 1958, I did the first television show that had to do with the--it ['The Subject is Jazz'] was twelve, thirteen weeks.  And it took jazz, it did the same thing that was done recently, in a much longer period, on--by just taking all of the styles of jazz and taking them from earliest jazz right up to what we now think of as I guess about the '70s [1970s], '60s [1960s] or '70s [1970s], something like that.
Story_ID: 289695
Speaker 1: What point did you start with David Frost?
Speaker 2: David Frost came out of my radio and television work.
Speaker 1: But you were the first African American to lead an orchestra on TV, too?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Yeah, okay.
Speaker 2: Yes I was.  And I was the first one who had a daily show.  I don't think I was the first one, but I think I'm the first one who, I was on a daily (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Appearing daily.
Speaker 2: It ['The David Frost Show'] was a daily show and it was coast to coast.  I mean, you know, it was all over the world.  And it was a wonderful opportunity to me because I was the bandleader.  I had a small band and we got to play a lot.  And everyday--David was always late so we--I got to play a short concert before every show, you know. So I had a very tight band and it was one that I was very proud of. We took it on, put it on the Newport Jazz Festival and wiped out two other bands because we just had the tightest band and good musicians. And these were guys who could play everything because they had had all kinds of experience on radio and television and Broadway and everything, and so they brought a lot to the table, you know. David gave me an opportunity. He started every show, he said, "Ladies and gentlemen, we're going to do so and so and so and so.  Today, glad to have you with us," and of forth. Okay, "Billy [HistoryMaker Billy Taylor]" was my cue. And, so, but every--as long as he was on the air, that was the way he started the show.
Speaker 1: And how long were you with him?
Speaker 2: Three years.
Speaker 1: Three years.
Speaker 2: And he was a wonderful guy to work with.  I mean I've never worked for anyone that worked, for a long period like that where not one thing that we did, cannot find fault with.  I mean the guy was just a prince and really it was so special I mean because he made, he really--when he hired me he said, "Could you make up a band?"  He said, "If I hired you, what kind of band would you put together?"  So I said, "Well it would be a jazz band, but it would be able to play anything you want."  So he said, "Could it play country western?"  I said, "Yeah."  We play--he said, "How about classical?"  I said, "Yep."  He said, "What"--and so everything he said I said, "We can do that," and we did over the three years.  And so I was--he gave me an opportunity to do all those things, man.  He was, it was really nice for me to be playing on the show and have, you know, a famous concert artist come over and say, "That was very nice, young man."  I said, "Really," (laughter).
Story_ID: 289696
Speaker 1: Now did you win your Emmy [Award] working with David Frost on TV?
Speaker 2: No. We won Emmys there, but that was for the show ['The David Frost Show'] itself, it was not for me, and it wasn't for the music per se.  No, the Emmy was for when I got on (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) CBS?
Speaker 2: It was the first thing that I did, one of the first things I did, first year on the show ['CBS Sunday Morning'], when I did a piece on [HistoryMaker] Quincy Jones and, which was wonderful. It was one of the best programs, one of the best pieces I ever did on television, and I'm delighted that that's the one I won, program on Quincy. Quincy was so special, and to point the finger at a guy at that point in his career, this is before many of the things that had happened now when he's a super-super star, but he was a superstar to me then.  But he was just--I had recorded with him, and we're good friends, and I just--he was someone that I admired so greatly, I guess it came off on the tape, you know what I mean.  Because just--we spent about three days together hanging out, getting the tape together, it was fun.
Speaker 1: So you started to also produce music, sort of short segment documentaries for TV?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Yeah, I had, I did something ['Jazz Counterpoint'] for Bravo when they first were doing the kind of thing they're doing now.  And I did a whole series of things where I talked about jazz and I did things like that.  And I'm trying to find a way of putting that out again because it--so far as I know, no one's but The Kennedy Center [The John F. Kennedy Center for the Performing Arts, Washington, D.C.] has been able to use some of those things.
Speaker 1: So you won an Emmy for the Quincy Jones piece?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Did that in--what, do you know exactly what year that was?
Speaker 2: I don't know if it's on there.
Speaker 1: Okay, we'll look.
Speaker 2: I can't remember the year.
Speaker 1: Did that inspire you to do more TV or to--what came after that (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well by this time I had been doing a lot of television, and it really seemed to me, just to be--I really wanted to do more.
Story_ID: 289697
Speaker 1: The '[CBS] Sunday Morning' show was perfect for what I wanted to do (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And tell me how you got 'Sunday Morning,' 'CBS Sunday Morning'?
Speaker 1: They did a piece, the man who does the show now, Charles--
Speaker 2: Osgood?
Speaker 1: --Osgood did--interviewed me for 'Sunday Morning' and another young man who was a producer, who had organized all of this, really set it all up and made it possible for me to get the kind of exposure that made them want to hire me. So I'm really, I'm (unclear)--a lot of things like that in the--
Speaker 2: What did you do for them, 'CBS Sunday Morning'?
Speaker 1: Well, basically, what I did for them was to give music, I did exactly what Charles Kuralt wanted me to do.  He had me and he had Eugenia Zukerman and I--what he had in mind was to add two people who, both of whom were musicians who could talk in the first person about what it was to make this kind of music--classical music on one hand and jazz on the other.  And it was very well balanced and we played off one another in terms of what we put, had put on the air and so forth and it worked like a charm.
Story_ID: 289698
Speaker 1: In the '90s [1990s] you started to tour again.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: You did the dueling pianos with your good friend Ramsey [HistoryMaker Ramsey Lewis].
Speaker 2: Ramsey, sure (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Ramsey. And where, how was that?
Speaker 2: Oh, it was fun.  Ramsey had called me one time, he was doing his radio show ['The Ramsey Lewis Morning Show'].  Ramsey has over the years, has, you know, I'm older than he is and he always said, "Yeah that's the guy I want to be like when I grow up." Well, he's more than that now (laughter), and he's--the thing that he's doing now is presenting the NEA Masters of Jazz [Awards] and, you know, which is the kind of thing that I was leading up to when I had him as my guest on the show ['CBS Sunday Morning'].  And so, one thing I enjoyed so much was that the three years we played together because everybody came, expected to hear Ramsey play one of his hits or something and, you know, and that wasn't what we was about.  We sat and we played other things and it showed dimension of Ramsey that I think not enough people were aware of. And I'm delighted that out of that, I mean he's got the kind of career that he has, which is all encompassing instead of just being, saying well here's a guy who had some hits and here's another hit and so forth because that's one side of what he did, but you know not--it's only a small part of the man, you know.
Story_ID: 289699
Speaker 1: We didn't talk about the NEA award [National Endowment for the Arts Jazz Masters Awards], but I want you to, this is a good time for you to tell me that you--I know that you were a recipient of that award?
Speaker 2: Well one of the things that the NEA [National Endowment for the Arts] has done over the years was to choose many people who have been unqualified in terms of the kind of contributions they've given to jazz.  So it's a wide roster of people and, I mean, it's amazing.  I mean everybody from Cecil Taylor to me, you know and everybody in between is there, you know.  And it's really, it says more, I think, about who jazz people are than most of the things you read or hear about.  They're--these people were chosen, I was one of them, which we were all chosen because a group of our peers looked at something was going on at that particular point in time and said, "All the people that are around that are available to us this year, these are some people we think are worthy of your continued support," you know.  And so far I was one of the people who chaired after I got mine, I chaired the committee for several years and I was very proud of the fact that we were able to get in people that perhaps wouldn't have been thought of at that time in that way, you know.  So, and I think that's the way the other people feel now, you know, when they look at it and say, "Well, okay this is now and these are the people that we are, we're considering and this is how we're doing it," you know.
Speaker 1: So in 2005, you received a Grammy Award?
Speaker 2: That was particularly, I was very, particularly excited about because it was for what I've already done and for, it was the fact that enough people who were my peers looked at that and said, well, you know, this guy has done enough in terms of his contribution to the music, what he's done as a teacher, what he's done as a player, what he's done in all the areas that he's worked in. And so, you know, we'll give him this year, we'll salute him. And so, I'm very grateful for that.
Story_ID: 289700
Speaker 1: Which of those areas are you most pleased with your contributions? As a teacher, as a composer, as a player?
Speaker 2: It depends on what I'm doing, because I really, I feel there are many people who are better known and whose work is much better known in its entirety other than I, and yet, I'm very pleased with the kind of support that I get both from my peers and from other people for my compositions and for the kinds of things that I've tried to do as a musician.  I mean I'm always--one of the things that, really, I feel very grateful about is that some of the young people that I've taught and that I've worked with are really reflecting some of the things that I think they learned from me.  And that's--
Speaker 1: Who are some of the students?
Speaker 2: Well, the best known one is Eldar [Djangirov] from the, he's from Russia, and I did a piece on him when he was twelve years old. And he is, he's eighteen now, he's going to college, and he is perhaps the best young pianist out there right now.  He came from Russia and he's been focused on what he does.  He's very sincere.  I really love what he does simply because he puts his heart into it.  He really, he has not been corrupted by a lot of the things that happen to many of the young people.  His parents [Tanya Djangirov and Emil Djangirov] have been wonderful in kind of helping him guide himself through the maze of stuff that you have to go through in order to get noticed and be the popular field--figure that he has become.  I used him two consecutive years at The Kennedy Center [The John F. Kennedy Center for the Performing Arts, Washington, D.C.] as the anchor of two groups that I put together for--that year for young people.  And to see him as, really he had been working with solo, with trios and solos and so forth and to see him come together with young musicians his age and give that much, put that much into the music simply because he, that's the way he feels about music, that was very heartening.  I mean I really feel very delighted that someone, that I had something to do with.  And I'm not taking any credit for his instruction or anything like that, but where I had a hand in it was that I--he listened. We've talked a lot over the years. We, I've tried to explain to him why I thought so highly of him, you know. And not enough people do this for young people in the way that I think it should be done.
Speaker 1: How should it be done?
Speaker 2: He's the kind of person--I don't need to tell him how good he plays. He knows how good he plays. I'm trying to say, these are some of the things that you need to think about when you're creating what you're creating now. You're going off in your own direction. I have nothing to do with your direction and like that. I applaud it, but you are looking to where you have to go and you're doing it very well, and he is.
Story_ID: 290539
Speaker 1: You've been all over the world.
Speaker 2: Well one of the advantages of traveling all over the world is that you see yourself through other people's eyes, and vice versa.  You get to know things about people and understand and to appreciate what's at home and to understand that the things that African Americans have done by giving the world jazz, we have done something that speaks to the idea and the ideal of freedom the way no other world of music in the world does.  Nowhere--when you go to Russia, when you go to Israel, when you go to places that, like where they're fighting now, whether you talk about Turkey or you, any of the places like that, they don't speak the language, but they are aware of why we can say what we say, do what we do, of the kind of freedom that I as an African American have to say and do the kinds of things that I do. That's a lesson that's, we don't teach very well from the school--this country, but it's something that is very, it's not lost in Africa, in South America, in Australia and other places like that where people don't have the kind of freedom that we have to do many of the things we do. And who say, I admire that and I want to act with that in mind. And that's a very important thing to realize that some people who don't even know me or don't care about me or anything like that have been influenced by those--that aspect of what I do.
Story_ID: 290540
Speaker 1: What would you like for your legacy to be in reference to your life and jazz music? To--
Speaker 2: I would like very much to have people realize that there is a certain freedom that comes from expression, expressing one's self. I wrote a song called 'I Wish I Knew How It Would Feel to Be Free.' And that says just about, well very succinctly, just about everything I'm trying to say in these few words. I wish I knew how it would feel to be free, because that's where you can--how you can do and why you can do all of the things that are possible for you to do. And that varies with every individual, and it really is something that has been, I've been very happy to say to many people when I was fortunate enough to perform for [Reverend] Dr. Martin Luther King [Jr.], many of the things that he stood for were things that I tried to say in my music and in my teaching and all the things that I do. He was one of the most articulate human beings I've ever met. I mean he said things that really touched me. I remember one time I was musical director for Jackie Robinson up at his house for a series of things that we did there. We were raising money for the March on Washington and other things like that, and Dr. King was a guest in Jackie Robinson's house. And so, many people were there just to see Jackie Robinson, I mean he's the star and a wonderful human being. And so, we're in the house and we're talking. I'm trying to get everybody back to the place down the hill where we were supposed to put on, introduce him and allow him to say what he has to say to address this audience. While we're there waiting, a young man, one of the kids of someone who was there said to Dr. King, "How do you feel when someone who's my age let's you know without flinching that Malcolm X is his hero?" So Dr. King said, "Well, you know you have a right to choose your own heroes, but whoever is your hero, you should be so proud of that, that you shouldn't have to ask that question because it's a matter of pride for you to say then this is my"--so I wrote a song called 'It's a Matter of Pride' (laughter) coming from that. The--I was asked--another thing that he said on that same afternoon, one of Jackie Robinson's and Rachel's [Rachel Robinson] neighbors said to him, you know, "I really support you because I give money to your cause and I want you to know I'm behind you.  I think you're marvelous," and so forth.  And she said, "I wish I could do much more to help you do what you--I think what you're doing is so important.  I wish I could do more."  And he said, "Well I'm sure you're doing--if you're right here or wherever you are, you know you can do whatever you think is the proper thing in this, because if you really are concerned, you can show it." So that's another idea that I based on, two songs on. So to me, one is inspired by people like that, and I write music like that. I write other things, which are wordless, you know, but they say the same kind of thing, and I hope the music brings the message across the same way.
Story_ID: 290541
Speaker 1: What are your hopes for the African American community?
Speaker 2: My hope is that we will realize that we have to take charge of our young people and that we have to--I was so fortunate in having a Jo Jones or to having an Art Tatum and having a Duke Ellington. I mean, these are people who didn't--that they're way above and beyond being stars and idols and all.  These are people who did something for me personally and bam! Like--and, you know, I really, I can't give enough in their name to say thank you to them. So I would like to see everyone who has had that kind of experience give back the way those people who I admire gave back to me.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA INTERRUPTION)
Speaker 2: One of the things that really I think about a lot is the impact of the media on our children. And I'm very--having spent so much time in media, I know power. And we as a group, those African American groups that I belong to and others like me belong to, we're not doing enough. We're not making enough--we're not doing what you're doing to the extent that we can do it, you know. We need all the help we can get to say that it's not about profanity, it's not about downplaying other people or putting women down or doing all the derogatory things that many of our young people are decided are hip to do because it's a waste of time and for the people doing it, the people that are trying to make money doing it. One of the things, when we can be proud of the kinds of things that young, our young people are and there are many things to be proud of in music and all of the arts and all of the things we do, we need to, those of us who are older, need to isolate those things and make sure that our own community knows what this is and that we are using the fraternities and the sororities and we're doing--and the organizations that we have to do the things that we say they stand for. Our churches have done a magnificent job of many things, but they can't do the whole work. And we need to do it in business. We need to do it in music. We need to do it every way they, we possibly can do it and we need to do it with same kind of flair and fun and the kinds of things that makes our comedians funny, our musicians play the kind of things we want to hear, our actors come on with the kinds of things that we expect from them and our writers. Put down in writing the same kind of thing that the slave narratives put down and make that available so that we all get to realize what it is, work with what it is. And I think that many of us are trying to do it, but not enough of us are organized in all the areas that we touch.
Story_ID: 290542
Speaker 1: Do you see a lot of young, talented black musicians in your arena? I mean, as equal to, or maybe not as talented, but at least as inspired as the eighteen-year-old Russian kid [Eldar Djangirov] doing--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: You do. We do, okay, okay, okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And, you know, we've got a lot of them, and that's one of the things that I think we are not getting those people into the arena fast enough. There are not a young--in athletics we are. In some fields we are. In many unrelated fields we're getting, but in the areas that are visible to me in writing, I'd like to see more writers really write from the black point of view. I mean so they can say something and I say, "Oh yeah that's," you know, "I concur with that." The--or I don't have to. I mean it could be something I don't--it could be something that I should have thought about, you know, and the, because there's so much there. We have so many young people who have so much to say that we're not giving them an opportunity to do it.  I'm trying to provide an opportunity at The Kennedy Center [The John F. Kennedy Center for the Performing Arts, Washington, D.C.] and Wynton [Marsalis] is trying to do something at Lincoln Center [for the Performing Arts, New York, New York]. We're both handicapped by the fact that the feeder system is not working. We're not getting enough people coming to me and to Wynton and to other people so that I can say, well, "Here is another Eldar, here's another," some, whatever, you know, because we're both locked into the place. This is competitive now. I mean, I'm not going to give a kid just because he's black a chance to do something just because he's black, you know.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: He's got to be better than the other guys just like I was and other people. But, you know, you really got to measure up or the standards are lowered too much, yeah.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: And the thing is that it--many people are doing this, many.  I'm probably preaching to the choir here, but there are many people in the International Association of Jazz Education [International Association for Jazz Education], I mean, there are so many people there that are doing such a wonderful job in terms of making people understand that this is black music and that there are many things that we invite other people to join us with.
Story_ID: 290543
Speaker 1: We talk a lot about what the problems are, like in the black community. Can you, like some of the organizations you've mentioned like the Alphas [Alpha Phi Alpha Fraternity], the Kappas [Kappa Alpha Psi Fraternity], AKAs [Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority]. Are there specific things that you think we can do to make things better? I mean--
Speaker 2: Sure.
Speaker 1: Just list some of those things for me?
Speaker 2: Well basically I'm a statistic in my own field, jazz.  We have created something which is unique to the world. We are allowing it to become the property of someone else. Most of the people who are now teaching jazz, who are writing about jazz, who are doing things, are not black. And so, what they're teaching is certainly good and certainly accurate, in many cases, but it's not from the perspective that I was taught by Art Tatum and by Count Basie and by (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What's different about it?
Speaker 2: Because the soul is not there.  The kind of soul that I'm talking about is not--it was in the work of all the artists that taught and played. And I don't hear that in many black people now who have been classically trained, who have been pushed into another area simply because they can do it and saying you should do this as opposed to, "We've already done this," you know, this other kind of stuff.  But you don't throw it out, throw it away because you've already done it.  We've got a list of--there was something called 'The Real Book' that was put together by some students at, in Berklee [College of Music, Boston, Massachusetts]. And it was put together because those of us who were teachers were not teaching young people what the repertoire was that we were playing. And so my, so the kids put it together, and there were a lot of mistakes and so forth.  Now it's been done so, redone to such an extent that it's an encyclopedia of what's going on in jazz, and very good.
Story_ID: 290544
Speaker 1: The whole idea of having things that we can point to so that we can say that--I look at the, some of the fraternities right here in New York [New York], a sorority, AKAs [Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority] used to present something every year, several artists, you know. It's a drop in the bucket, but they did it every year and it, I know that it made a difference in the community. And that's what the--it's not how well you do it so much as when you do something, and you focus it to the best effect to get the best effect that you can given the audience and all the things that you're working with. And only those of us in the community know how to best do that. And so that's why I put the weight right on the community, that's where we got to go. The Jazzmobile [Inc.], which I created some years ago, was designed for that very purpose, to bring--in the '60s [1960s] when I started doing this, it was too expensive to go to jazz clubs for most African Americans. It's even more expensive now.  What I would like to see is to--more things that are within the pocketbooks. We're doing some of these at Jazzmobile at one of the local bars here in--as a matter of fact in two of the local bars right here in New York. Same thing is being done on the South Side of Chicago [Illinois], and other places. So there are people in isolated pockets who are doing these and we have to--in order to get our story told so that we approve of it, those of us who are living it, it's got to be a community kind of thing. We have to come together as a community.
Story_ID: 290545
Speaker 1: What do you think about the story ['Jazz'] Ken Burns told?
Speaker 2: It's sadly lacking in many things that--
Speaker 1: What is it lacking in?
Speaker 2: Well, it does not tell--I--he's a very precise and a very honest guy who does what he believes.
Speaker 1: From the heart, yeah. Of course, we agree (simultaneous)
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And I believe he did that very well. But you're telling a story of black people. You're telling a story of what, who we are and what we're about. I don't see enough of that in what he wrote. And I don't see--there are so many things that are left out because they don't fit into the jazz came up the rhythm--river idea or--what needs to be, we need to talk about the specific of, a time specific thing. Because jazz doesn't--I play things that I have been playing since the beginning of my learning how to play jazz. There are other things that I have discarded.  But I haven't discarded many of the things that are a part of the growing legacy of jazz are still intact.  They come, they change as time goes on and that wasn't reflected in Ken Burns' work. And I--this could have been done. It could have done.  We--if you go back and look at what we did on that series, the subject is jazz, you'll see how we did that. That's not to say that's the only way to do it, but that was one way to do it and I think it could have--
Speaker 1: It's definitely a black perspective?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And this was not done by all blacks.  I mean we had a white conductor, I mean a white--we had a mixed band and we had, you know this was done by people who were involved in the creativity of the music that, as, from our (unclear).  So it had nothing to do with black and white in that respect, but it did have something to do with black and white in the prospect of--this is a music was which created because of the need for something like this to be in our society.
Story_ID: 290546
Speaker 1: Why did you agree to be a part of this project [The HistoryMakers], the oral history project?  Why did you agree to be a HistoryMaker?
Speaker 2: Because I think what you're doing is something that needs to be done and I think, I'm delighted the fact that you chose to do it. It's something that we need more of. We need--the better we can produce, the better we can state the things that we believe to be the truth, the more they will be lasting, as far as history is concerned.
Speaker 1: What have you not been able to say, for whatever reason, to a wide audience?  Let's say, and I'm speaking like in the media that you've not been able to say because it perhaps may be too black for a mixed audience that you can perhaps share now with a primarily black audience that will be beneficial? Is there anything?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah there are many things. There are many people who are excellent writers, who are excellent musicians, who are trained in the music and in writing and in all areas I was talking about, our looking for their image in the music. And their image may be there, but I don't want it to be presented so that it changes the image of the people who created it. I don't want to lose a Roy Eldridge. I don't want to lose a Dizzy Gillespie. I don't want to lose an Art Tatum, because there's someone who plays something differently. I mean, I don't think it's necessary to lose Art Tatum because Bill Evans was an excellent pianist. He was a brilliant pianist, you know, and beautiful. And, you know, but that was one side of what he learned from Miles Davis and from other people and from George, oh my, a wonderful composer/arranger, George Russell. And so there are--I'm not looking to cancel somebody else to say that you didn't do it right or you didn't, you know. I wouldn't say that to Ken Burns or anybody else. I mean he has a right to do what he saw. And so--but what I'm looking for, for me, is to have the story told so that my children will understand why they came, why I do it, how I do it and why it's so important to me.
Story_ID: 290547
Speaker 1: Well on that note we'll end. Is there any lasting thought, one jewel, one saying that perhaps something that will reach a kid who will see this and inspire him in his own music?
Speaker 2: There's one anecdote I'd like to tell about Art Tatum.  Art Tatum, we were in California and a guy sat down and he wanted--he said, "Mr. Tatum, I've listened to your records for years, and I want you to know how much I admire you and I've learned to play this thing that you recorded, and I would like to play it for you just to show you what I, you know how I do it." And so he sat down and he started playing this very difficult thing that Tatum had recorded back in those days. And technical and you know and everything. So I'm looking at Art, I'm saying, "Wow, this guy transcribed all this. I mean he heard all this because it wasn't written by anybody. He heard all of this and can play it." And Art was kind of ho-hum, he was, "Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah." So I said, "Well, you know, that's hard, you know." He said, "Yeah, you know, he knows what I do. But he doesn't know why I do it."
