Story_ID: 13897
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe.  I'm the Interviewer.  Our videographer is Paul Bieschke.  And I'd like you to please state your name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: Jackie Taylor.  J-A-C-K-I-E, T-A-Y-L-O-R.
Speaker 1: All right, could you give us today's date?
Speaker 2: Today's date is May 28th, 2002.
Speaker 1: And could you give us the address of this--,
Speaker 2: We're at the HistoryMakers, 1900 S. Michigan--
Speaker 1: In Chicago.
Speaker 2: In Chicago, Illinois, yes.
Speaker 1: All right, okay, what's your date of birth again?
Speaker 2: August 10, 1951.
Speaker 1: And your occupation?
Speaker 2: Producer, Actress, Director, Writer.
Story_ID: 13898
Speaker 1: So what's your favorite food?
Speaker 2: My favorite food?
Speaker 1: Yeah, you--that one has (laughs) my favorite food.  My favorite food is spinach salad.
Speaker 2: Okay, what's your favorite time of year?
Speaker 1: Winter.
Speaker 2: Okay, what's your favorite color?
Speaker 1: Red.
Speaker 2: Do you have a favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 1: Las Vegas [Nevada].
Speaker 2: Okay, do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 1: A favorite phrase, "Smile and be happy."
Story_ID: 13899
Speaker 1: Can you, please, state your parents' names and spell them for me?
Speaker 2: Okay, my father's name was Gus L. Taylor, G-U-S, Lewis, L-E-W-I-S, Taylor, T-A-Y-L-O-R.  My mother's name Lucille [Ward] Taylor, L-U-C-I-L-L-E, T-A-Y-L-O-R.
Speaker 1: Okay, and can you give us the names of your siblings and--the names of your siblings and the first born (unclear)?
Speaker 2: Okay, well, my oldest sister is Gussie [Augusta Taylor Ross], and then there was Anna.  Then there was, then there is Sonny--Gus L. [Lewis] Taylor, Jr.  Then there was George Taylor and then there was, then there is Harriet Taylor Day.  And then my youngest brother's name was [Joseph] Joe Taylor.
Speaker 1: Okay, and where do you fit in (unclear) (simultaneously)?
Speaker 2: I'm next to Joe.  I'm the youngest girl.  Joe was the youngest boy.  So I'm number six, I think--five or six.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, you were born--What's the date of your birth?
Speaker 2: August 10th, 1951.
Speaker 1: Okay, and you were born here in Chicago [Illinois]?
Speaker 2: In Chicago.
Story_ID: 13900
Speaker 1: Can you tell us something about the background of your father [Gus Lewis Taylor, Sr.], you know, where was he born, and if you know anything about his ancestry or where the family originated, you know, to share that?
Speaker 2: Well, I don't know very much about my father's ancestors.  I do know that my father was born in Cleveland, Ohio.  I do know that he was raised by his grandmother.  He was a mixed blood.  He didn't know--his, his mother gave him to his grandmother.  And his grandmother died when he was thirteen.  And he was on his own.  He didn't have any other family.  So he migrated--he was a pianist and a singer.  And he--that's how he made his living when he first started as an entertainer.  And he came to Chicago [Illinois] to try and make a living in entertainment.
Speaker 1: Can you give us the name of his grandmother?  I mean of your grandmother, his grandmother?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: You don't know.
Speaker 2: I really don't know.
Speaker 1: So he, do you know what year he came to Chicago?
Speaker 2: No, he was about thirteen.  And my dad was born in 19--let me see, 1901 or something like that.  Let me see, my mother [Lucille Ward Taylor] was born in 1918.  My dad was born in 1908.  So 1922, somewhere around there, he came to Chicago.
Speaker 1: Okay, well, what kind of person was he?  Do you have any memories of him, any stories?
Speaker 2: Well, by the time I came along my father was about forty-six or forty-seven years old.  He had stopped performing.  He did play the piano for us at home, but he was a postal worker.  He was the kind of man that worked all his life.  He, he and my mother were together and not together, you know, sometimes he was with us.  And sometimes he wasn't.  And he was a very loving man, a very dedicated man.  The most that I remember about him was that he always had a job, no matter what.  He always had a job.
Speaker 1: Do you have any interesting stories about him?
Speaker 2: Well, my dad was an alcoholic.  And all of my stories a--in remembering him, the funny times were always when he (laughs) had had too many.  But there was one incident in grade school, I think it was, where I was doing some kind of play.  And my dad came to see me.  And he got up and played the piano.  And that gave me a, quite a feeling that I never had before to, to have him play and sing for these people.  And that was a wonderful feeling.  He would have never did it, but he was a little tipsy so, he was able to get up and do it.
Speaker 1: That's interesting.  But do you think that your own affinity for the theater was somehow, you know, inspired by that, or do you think that is just something, you know, like a bonus (unclear)?
Speaker 2: I, I don't know.  I, I've always been involved in the theater as a, as a very young child, I, I used to think in terms of characters in plays.  I didn't know that that's what it was, but that's certainly what was going on in my mind.  My parents were very worried about me because I would spend my time in the closet, on the floor.  And from, I guess if you were listening from the outside, you would hear this little girl talking to all these people and making all these (laughs) scenes in my head.  But for me, I was, I was creating and I was performing and I was making up stories.  So the theater has always been a part of my life, just naturally.
Story_ID: 13901
Speaker 1: Let me ask you about your mother [Lucille Ward Taylor] too.  Can you, do you know much about her background or where she came from, she was born in Chicago [Illinois], right?
Speaker 2: Well, I know my mom was born in Chicago.  Her mother's name was Estelle Ward.  And Pa, my grandfather's name was Richard Ward.  And they also were born in Chicago.  That was something that they were quite proud of, that they were born in Chicago.  That much, I, I know about my grandparents.
Speaker 1: So you don't know where they came from before they came to Chicago?
Speaker 2: No, no I don't.  I'm sure my sisters [Augusta Taylor Ross, Anna Taylor and Harriet Taylor Day] would know a lot better than I do.  I do know that they were mixed with Cherokee indian.  But that's really what I know, yeah.
Speaker 1: Were people in those days prouder to have been born in Chicago than to have been born some place else?
Speaker 2: I, you know what, I, I can't answer that because all I know is specifically speaking, my mother was very proud of the fact that her parents were born in Chicago.  Now, why or why not, I haven't the slightest idea.  I never went into it with her.  I wasn't close to my parents.  I wasn't close to my--I was closer to my father [Gus Lewis Taylor, Sr.], but he was, he was in and out.  So I, I never saw my father a lot and I certainly didn't grow up with my father.  But I wasn't close to my mother at all.  So conversations about my heritage and, "Where did--where were you born?" and  "What about your parents?" and the passed-down stories, they just didn't get to me because I didn't sit and talk with my mother like that.  The most, the most my mother and I talked would be a good fifteen minutes and it wouldn't, it would just be, "How you doing?"  "I'm fine.  How are you?" (laughs)  And that would be it.
Speaker 1: Well, what was your mother like when she--?
Speaker 2: I think my mother was a very, very highly intelligent, frustrated African American woman.  I think that she had a lot of goals and a lot of ambitions, but because of the time that she was born and being a very dark woman, she suffered quite a bit in terms of society and what she could and couldn't do and places she could go and could not go.  And racism affected her quite a bit to the point where--she always wanted to be a nurse.  And finally when she was, oh, I think like fifty-nine or sixty [years old], she was able to get her degree and be a nurse for a little while.  She, she died in--when she was about sixty-five.  But she, she--what I remember most about my mother was that she would write a lot.  There were stacks and stacks and stacks of papers.  And she would write.  And I, I know that's where I got my writing from because I would be there, and I would just watch her.  So I would do the same thing, and I would start writing.  And, and she would write anybody and everybody.  She wrote the President.  My brother, my brother was in Germany, and they had him in jail.  And my mother--there were no limits, you know, to my mother in terms of who she would talk to or anything, no limits.  And she would get on the phone, and she would try to get--I mean she literally, you know, tried to get the President of the United States to help my brother get out of jail.  She, of course, he did get out.  And she was able to get help, but her goal was to first just go to the President and say, "Now, my son is in jail.  Get him out, and he's in Germany."
Speaker 1: So she was a determined--
Speaker 2: She was a very determined woman.  I, I do understand that she herself was a singer when she was very young.  I don't know very much about that.  By the time that I, that, that I remembered my mother and I was born, she had had six children already.  She was a housewife.  She--the goals and ambitions that she wanted, they, they didn't happen.  She--that, that color thing that, that blacks have and especially at that time, the lighter you are or the darker you are, you know, she, she had suffered quite a bit from that from her family.  So she--my mother was not a happy woman.  She was a very, very unhappy woman.  And by the time I came along, her unhappiness was at a, a very--it, it was quite a bit.
Story_ID: 13902
Speaker 1: Was there anybody else in the household when you grew up?
Speaker 2: Sure, I grew up with--well, my sister was, was grown, my oldest sister [Augusta Taylor Ross] whose fourteen years older than me.  So I grew up with her.  I grew up with my brothers, my oldest brothers and then, of the families, my sister--my mother's sister was very close to my mother.  So we all lived close by so there was always, you know, other relatives around that could counteract negativity in the household and that sort of thing.
Speaker 1: Are any of the other relatives of particular significance to you as you were growing up?  Did they play a role?
Speaker 2: Well, my Aunt Harriet [Ward] who was, who was my mother's sister and was very close to my mother.  See, my mother was the outcast of her family.  But my Aunt Harriet didn't believe in that.  And she stuck with my mother.  And she helped my mother.  My mother was sickly.  She had a bad heart.  And she would help her to, to--whenever she went into the hospital, we went to my Aunt Harriet.  And my Aunt Harriet never made us feel like we didn't belong or that we were a bother like some of my other relatives did.  She just, you know, said, "Move over, you sleep in that bed, and you sleep over there," (laughs) and you know, that was it.  "Set another plate at the table."  And she was always there.  She, she showed us unconditional love.  And she would try to explain sometimes why it was difficult for my mother to show us love or to, or to be affectionate or, and when we thought that she hated us.  You know, she would explain, "Well, no, it's not that.  She's just had a hard life or whatever."  But I think my Aunt Harriet had a great deal of influence on me.
Story_ID: 13903
Speaker 1: Can you talk about where you grew up and talk about some of the sights and sounds and smells of your childhood?
Speaker 2: Well, first, I grew up on the West Side [of Chicago, Illinois].  And what I remember about growing up on the West Side is the grass and the flowers and, and the houses.  And there was a club.  And I mean, you know, I grew up on the West Side at 2414 West Maypole.  And there was a club that all the little kids and, I mean we couldn't have been anymore than 3, 2, 3, 4, 5 at the most, but we were in a club.  And I just remember going every Saturday and, and having them sit down and talk to us about God, and, you know--.
Speaker 1: Was it a church club?
Speaker 2: Well, I don't know what kind of club it was, except that it was for the kids in the neighborhood.  And we would go every Saturday.  And we would talk about God and, they would ask us questions about what we ate?  And were we being taken care of?  It was, I remember that the, I thought that environment was very nourishing.  I, I enjoyed being around all the other children.  And it felt like there were so many other adults that weren't related to us, but just were adults and who were taking care of us.  And it felt like a, a tribe, you know.  As I got older, that's what I got related it to, growing up in a tribe, tribal atmosphere.  And that was very, that was, that was nice.  We moved from there, and moved into the projects.  And what I remember about the projects is that it was so different.  There, all of a sudden there wasn't an apartment, it wasn't a house.  There was, there were big buildings.  And then there were nine families on every floor.  And what I remember most was there was a lot of, lot of kids.  And the first thing that struck me about the projects was everybody was so angry.  The kids were--it was hard to go outside because you--it wasn't as, there was no tribe.  Everybody was--the kids would fight.  That's, that was your initiation.  And when we first moved there, my little brother [Joseph Taylor] and I, we didn't, we didn't know what to do in terms of fighting.  We had not come from that background.
Speaker 1: I just want to backtrack a second now.  What project was it and how did you all feel about the move?  Did you think it was like a move up or a move down at the time?
Speaker 2: Well, it was Cabrini [Green public housing project].  And we didn't feel any way.  We were too young to feel anything.
Story_ID: 13904
Speaker 1: I mean the projects have been considered like an upgrade and some people have considered it a downgrade.  I don't know.
Speaker 2: Well, I know my mother [Lucille Ward Taylor] was excited about getting in there.  I remember that.  She was excited about being, you know, having the apartment.  And, but we, you know, once we got there [to Cabrini Green public housing project], what my mother would always say to us was, "You are not project people.  You're not--the kind of attitudes that I hear."  I know that she was very disappointed.  I do know that because we weren't expecting the violence.  We weren't expecting the anger.  And we weren't, we were expecting something different.  And once we got into the environment, she just always reminded us to not bring the kind of attitudes that were on the outside, inside the house.  And her favorite phrase was, "You are not a project person.  And don't bring that kind of attitude into my house."
Speaker 1: So by that time, the projects had some kind of stigma, cause I know at a certain in Chicago [Illinois], they didn't.
Speaker 2: Well, right, when they first built them, they were wonderful.  You know, they, they had, they were a dream building, where people were going to use them to transition from one level to another level.  Well, they didn't end up like that.  They, they weren't transitioning.  They were staying there and staying--with, with so many people on top of one another of the same economic level, where by the time we moved in, the projects had not been that old, but they were old enough where hopelessness was setting in, anger was setting in, violence was setting in.  And, I remember me and my brother [Joseph Taylor], when we went outside the first time, some kids chased us off the playground, up, upstairs.  And my mother locked us out and said, "Deal with it cause this is where you gonna live. (laughs)  So if you gonna--think you're gonna run up in this house and hide in here, you're wrong."  And we had to fight.  And we did.  And that kind of--my brother and I--my brother was an entertainer.  And I was an entertainer.  So we, we kind of used that.  My brother was a natural comedian.  So he would just act totally crazy.  And I would act totally crazy with them.  So the kids would laugh and we kind of were able, once we had those initial beatings, we were kind of able to make our way that way.
Speaker 1: So you kind of used your wits and talents--.
Speaker 2: Well, you know, it was very smart of my mother to lock the door.  I'm sure it was very difficult for her to do it.  But that's where we had to live.  And I'm sure she would have preferred to, you know, open the door and protect us.  But we had to learn how to protect ourselves.  And her locking the door made us do just that.  So, yeah, we used--you tend to use whatever you have at your disposal.  And we, we had our, our entertaining.  We were just natural entertainers.  That's what my brother and I would do.  We would--that's how we played.  We would pretend we were cowboys, and we would go into the town and save all the town's people.  And then they would ask us to perform for them.  And, of course, we did.  You know, and this was all in our minds, but that's what we did.  So, yeah, I would have little shows where I would invite the kids from the second floor and the third floor and pop some popcorn and charge them a nickel, and we would perform.  But that, that was my first, you know, trying to make some money. (laughter)  And, and we did, you know, popcorn was a nickel.  You can buy a whole big, ole bag, and you pop it and you get, and--I mean, you know, we made profit.
Speaker 1: I think I just got this.  You said, your mother locked the door.  She was locking you all out of the house?
Speaker 2: That's right.  She locked us out.
Speaker 1: I don't know I didn't get that when you first said it.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: I was thinking past it or something.  So what do you think her philosophy was on that, to toughen you all up?  Well, right.  This is where we had to live.  She wasn't gonna let us run away from it.  You're gonna have to face it and deal with it.  And that was very smart because that's exactly what we had to do--we had to deal with it, and at a very young age.  We weren't--six and seven, I think.  So we dealt with it.  And we fought.  And we--it was about fourteen kids.  But we, you know, once you, you whipped one or two, that was it, you know.  And after that, we had less problems.
Story_ID: 13905
Speaker 1: So where did you go to school?
Speaker 2: I went to St. Joseph's grade school [St. Joseph School, Chicago, Illinois], and I went St. Michael's High School [St. Michael Central High School, Chicago, Illinois].  I went to Loyola University [Chicago, Illinois].  I went to Catholic schools all my life.  That, that also set us apart.  Everybody in the building was in Byrd School [Richard E. Byrd Community Academy, Chicago, Illinois] or Cooley [High School, Chicago, Illinois], you know.  Nobody went to St. Joseph's.  That was crazy.  And--
Speaker 1: How were you able to maintain--I mean go to St. Joseph's?  I know there's a tuition involved.
Speaker 2: I don't--you know, my mother [Lucille Ward Taylor], my mother never let money get in her way.  She never--she used to always tell us, "We're not poor.  Don't, don't--we, we don't enough to eat, but we're not poor.  We just don't have enough money."  And she never let it get in her way.  She was very initiative in terms of, you know, "You go to [apartment] 207 and borrow some flour and go to 203, get a couple of eggs--go to 202, get some baking powder.  I'll make us some cookies.  And that's what we'll have for dinner."  I mean, you know, (laughs) we're seven and eight getting on the bus going out to my sister's [Augusta Taylor Ross] house to pick up a chicken, you know, and bringing that back home.  And she always--whatever--I had a piano.  My brother had drum sets.  I had a guitar.  You know, whatever--my mother, when, when she paid bills, you know, she'd pay $2.00 on this, $2.00 on that, $2.00 on that, $2.00 on that.  And then the rest of it, we would live.  You know, and her thing was, "You know, we're gonna enjoy life.  Just because we don't have a lot of money doesn't mean we can't enjoy life."  And that's what we did, you know.  And that's where I learned how to look at money, you know, not as something that can stop, but there are ways that you can get whatever it is that you need.  And you have to find it.  You know, we would do things like collect pop bottles and, and, you know, you can two cents off of a pop bottle.  You can get a nickel.  You know, you can get a quarter off the real big ones.  And we would go to the junkyard and collect pop bottles and come back and have enough money, and put all the money together and we could have a pretty nice dinner, you know.  And, she just, she always--we never were ashamed, you know, not, not of not having any money.  That was just the way life was, but we didn't have to feel bad because we didn't have any money.
Speaker 1: Now, where was St. Joseph's and could you tell us a little about the school?
Speaker 2: St. Joseph's was at 1065 North Orleans [Street].  It was right through the, right--it was right through the lot.  There was Seward Park which is still there, had a big field, and you'd just go straight through the field, but you had to get past Byrd School.  And that was the problem because that's, that's how we started going to school at different times because if you went to school at the same time that the kids did in public school, you had to go right by the school.  And there was always fights because the kids would, you know, they would fight you because you went to a Catholic school, cause nobody else in the building went to Catholic school.
Speaker 1: You had the uniform and everything?
Speaker 2: Right, right.  So they knew where you were going.  And so we had--they started school earlier for us and let us out earlier so that we could get home before the public school was out.  But most of the kids who came to St. Joseph's lived across the tracks, east of us.  There were very few children who went to St. Joseph's that lived west of St. Joseph's, which was the projects at the time.  It was a good mix though.  It was a mix.
Speaker 1: Okay, so what kind of a student were you in school?
Speaker 2: I was a very angry student.  I was angry.  I was a very bad student.  My mother was very angry, and when children are not--when they don't feel loved, they tend to act out.  And they tend to try to get the attention some other way.  And I did not feel loved from my mother.  My brother did because he was a boy.  And my mother had this weird boy-girl thing, where girls were less and boys were more.  And so I was very angry.  So, in my younger years, from first through fifth grade, they used to seat us in Catholic school at that time, according to the smartest, to the least smartest.  And I was always in the last, they called it the 'dummy seat', the kids did, you know.  "You in the dummy seat," because that meant all--you were the lowest grade in the whole class.  Of course, they don't do those kind of things anymore.
Story_ID: 13906
Speaker 1: Okay, this is (unclear) Chuck Smith that's taking over the interviewing portion.
Speaker 2: Ah, Jackie, you were telling us about your experiences at, at St. Joseph's [School, Chicago, Illinois].  And they had put you in the--,
Speaker 1: (Laughs)
Speaker 2: --in the back of the place.  Was it back row?
Speaker 1: In the 'dummy seat', yes, but, of course, the teachers didn't call it that, but that's what the kids called it.  Yes, because I was not--I was just a very angry child.  And I was not working in school at all.  And it wasn't that I didn't, that I couldn't.  I most certainly could, but I was angry and I was looking for some kind of attention.  And no matter, even though it was negative attention, it was still attention.  It wasn't until the fifth grade when--actually, it wasn't in school.  It was Seward Park.  I had joined--some kid and I were throwing bricks at the windows in Seward Park.  And I couldn't run fast enough.  And the drama instructor, John Houston, he caught me.  And he said, "You know, you can go to jail for this because you're destroying public property."  He said, "I'm gonna give you a choice, you either come up and be part of the drama class at Seward Park or I'm gonna turn you in and you're going to jail."  So I said, "I'll be part of the drama class." (laughs)
Speaker 2: And how close was Seward Park?
Speaker 1: It was right, it was just a few feet away from 1160.  That's where I grew up, 1160 N. Sedgwick.  So it was right on the end, I mean, and it wasn't even a block away from the, from my house.  And it was he who, John Houston, who, who didn't know me from Adam, except could tell very readily that I was a very angry child, but very talented cause I could, those scripts, I could read them and I could remember them.  And I, I was a natural performer.  And he was the one that said, "You know, no matter what, no matter what, you have to love yourself."  And he said, "If you don't love yourself, how are you gonna expect anybody else to love you?"  And that really stuck in my mind.  I kept trying to figure that out, you know.  I gotta love myself.  And then I had a teacher, Sister Celestine, who took me, who said--at the same time that I had Mr. Houston, that same year, she, she told me, she said, "You know, you have a lot of energy and a lot of talent.  And I'm gonna put you in the gym.  And I, I want you to make a theater."  And she said, "I'll give you all the kids that you, that you need and I want you to put on, put on a play.  And as long as you do your work and make positive choices, you can, you can stay all year in that, in that, in the gym," which was--which had a little stage.  That was the best thing that could have ever happened to me.  After that, they cut, they had cut out that, you know, the smartest to the--but after that, I was the smartest kid in class.  I, I changed.  I started loving myself.  I started not believing those negative things that my mother [Lucille Ward Taylor] had told me.  I started really loving myself and believing in myself and wanting what was best for me.  And as soon as I did that, that changed my whole life.
Story_ID: 13907
Speaker 1: How did Sister Celestine--did she see you working with Mr. Houston, or?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously)--I was in her class [at St. Joseph School, Chicago, Illinois], no.
Speaker 1: There was no connection between the Seward Park to the--.
Speaker 2: No, there was no connection, no.  I was just in her classroom.
Speaker 1: And what kind of things were you doing that started this (unclear)--.
Speaker 2: Well, I always wanted the attention.  So I would disrupt and I would make up funny stories and I would say funny things out loud.  And where the other teachers saw it as a problem, she saw it as creativity.  And she took it and channeled it.  She didn't, it wasn't--I wasn't bad to her.  And she told me that, she said, "You're not bad."  She said, "I know everyone has told you that you're bad.  You're not bad.  She said, you have a lot of energy.  And you're very, very creative.  And you're very talented.  And I want you to stop thinking of yourself as bad.  That's, that's wrong.  You're not bad.  I'm gonna put you in this room, and I--you, you're gonna create.  And we're gonna use that energy.  And you you're gonna use that talent, but you've got to get your grades.  You've got to study.  You've got to work."  She said, you--because I was a very good reader, and I, I knew math.  She said, "You know this stuff, and you haven't even been paying attention, and you know how to do it.  How do you know how to do it?"  And she, she made me realize, I'm smart.  I'm, I, I got to be smart.  She said, "Look, look, look at, look, I can put this paper in front of you.  And your first four years, you didn't do anything.  How do you know how to do those things?  You weren't listening.  You didn't do it in first grade, second grade, third--you didn't do it.  You can do it now."  And she--I, I said, "Yeah.  She's right.  I'm smart.  And I'm gonna be something.  I'm not gonna just not be anything."  And that was the beginning that really changed me.  It was two teachers that just--from two strangers out of the blue that recognized how to really look at a person and see beyond the, the surface.  And that's what changed me.
Speaker 1: Do you remember any of the activities that you put together at the school?
Speaker 2: Sure.  I remember them all.
Speaker 1: Tell us about them.
Speaker 2: Well, my first play was a play that I rewrote based on Scrooge.  And I, I can't--I think I called it the 'Scrooge was a Colored Person' or something crazy, but it was an all-black Scrooge.  And I rewrote the whole script, and I played the, the, one of the parts, the Ghost of Christmas Past or something.  And I put in all up-to-date music at that time, which was, you know, (laughs) the early '60s [1960s], so, 'Twist and Shout' was in it and all kind of stuff.  And I directed the kids on stage.  And they loved it.  We, and we did it for the school.  And then after that, they, they let me do--they called it, they made up something called 'Spirit Days'.  And they said that, "You're gonna direct the Spirit Days.  You're gonna put a show on every Spirit Day."  So once a month, I got to write and direct a show.  And I would just--whatever they told me, you know, they wanted it to be, well, this, "We want you to talk about fighting in school."  And I would make up a scene and a play about fighting or make up the music and use music, put records in it and that sort of thing.  And I also wrote a script called 'The Swinging Wizard of Oz' before, you know, the, 'The Wiz', where Toto, you know, he would talk.  He was a rapper.  I, I--it wasn't, it's rap now, but then Toto was a rapper.  And Toto would, he would rap about Dorothy and how they got to the, to that land of Oz.  And he talked.  It was the funniest little script (laughs).  I still have that script.  But those were, those were some of the things that I, I first started, first did.  Yeah.
Story_ID: 13908
Speaker 1: And after St. Joseph's [School, Chicago, Illinois], you went where?
Speaker 2: I went to St. Michael's [St. Michael Central High School, Chicago, Illinois].  And I had help at St. Joseph's because my teachers wanted to make sure that I would still get the nourishment that I needed.  And so they found a school for me that had Theater and had Spirit Days and had opportunities for me.  And Sister Celestine took me to many schools, and when we found St. Michael's, she said, "This is it.  This is the one."
Speaker 1: And where is it located?
Speaker 2: It was located on Hudson, 1648 North Hudson [Avenue].  It's no longer there now.  But it was an all-girl's school, and it was very theatrical.
Speaker 1: Did you have far to travel?
Speaker 2: No, no, maybe about six or seven blocks.
Story_ID: 13909
Speaker 1: ...About how you felt unloved because of some of the things of an adversarial nature that you had with your mother [Lucille Ward Taylor].
Speaker 2: Well, my relationship with my mother was not a good one.  My mother was very angry, very negative, and she would say things to me, things like, "You'll never be anybody," or "You're ugly," or "I don't like you," or (laughs) things that just, you just do not say to a child.  Of course, as I became an adult, my relationship changed.  I let go of the anger when I was about twenty-two and realized it wasn't doing me any good at all, and why carry it?  That was the past.  So we, we did come to terms when I was an adult, but, (pauses) yeah.
Speaker 1: So in high school, I mean at St. Michael's [St. Michael Central High School, Chicago, Illinois], tell us a little bit about your high school experience.
Speaker 2: Well, my high school experience was absolutely wonderful.  I mean I was everything you could be in high school, cheerleader, academically, on the Honor Society, President of the class.  I performed every year.  I did the class--they, they always did an annual play, and I got to star in the annual play.  And I had a very nurturing environment of the children, the, the teenagers, which was all of mixed breed, but we were all very close.  And it was a very positive environment.  And it was the time of Black Power, where James Brown was singing, 'I'm Black and I'm Proud'.  And it was something how in, in this school, with, not only did we embrace each other as blacks and as young blacks in the, in the struggle, but then all the other minorities like the Japanese kids and the Puerto Rican kids and Mexican kids all of a sudden, (laughs) they were part of the movement too.  So it was--that was a very--I learned a, I learned, I learned some very hard lessons in high school.  I learned how to--my head had gotten very big, and I was expecting to be captain of the cheerleaders.  And what stopped me from being captain of the cheerleaders was my head was just too big.  I was too full of myself, but I learned that, and, and that was what I wanted to be more than anything.  But I--because of my personality that I was displaying at the time, I wasn't able to be captain of the cheerleaders.  But that taught me a big lesson, and it stayed with me the rest of my life about humility and understanding that your gifts are, are just that, gifts to be used to benefit people, but not to be used in such a way where you get to the point where you think that you're above and beyond anybody cause you're not.  So the, high school was a very--taught me those lessons.  So that I was able to carry those lessons with me the rest of my life.
Speaker 1: What about the theater activities?  Was there--there was a regular program after school that you were involved with.
Speaker 2: Well, they had Drama Club.  They had Spirit Days where--which was a carryover from my grade school, where I got to write the Spirit Days.  I got to perform.  They had drives where you--chocolate drives and whatever it was that they were selling at the time.  And I got to write the shows to, to motivate the students to want to sell, you know.  And so, and then I wrote all the cheers, choreographed all the cheers.  So it, it was a very, very nourishing atmosphere.
Speaker 1: So that your creativity was being used to its fullest?
Speaker 2: All to its fullest.  And, and my teachers were so creative themselves.  They were, they were very young, and they were--they were very new in the, in teaching.  So the kind of things--I loved to go, I loved, I couldn't wait to go to school every day because there was a story that I wrote or there was an experiment that I had to present, or I was going to pretend that I was somebody different that day for this class so that the teacher could demonstrate.  It, it was a small environment.  It was a nourishing environment and it was very creative, very creative.  So high school, I got to--every day was just, it was a joy.
Speaker 1: Can you name any of the teachers at high school (unclear)--?
Speaker 2: Wow, Sister Simone, Sister Celestine was at--that was a different Sister Celestine.  She was my Spanish teacher.  Sister Adelaide was my freshman teacher.  She was someone that I'll never forget.  Sister Mary--Sister Mary Bennett was the Principal.  Gosh, that's about it.  That's all I can remember.
Story_ID: 13910
Speaker 1: Now, how did you go about the selection of a college?  Did you know while you were in high school [at St. Michael Central High School, Chicago, Illinois] (unclear)--?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) I, I wanted to go to a theater.  I wanted to go to a school that, that theater was a strong asset.  And Loyola [University, Chicago, Illinois] in 1970, l969, Dennis Zacek was the professor.  He headed the Theater Department over there.  And it was hot.  You know, that's where you went.  So I, I went to Loyola because they, their theater department was wonderful.
Speaker 1: Tell us about some of the experiences in college.
Speaker 2: Well, I lived in the theater.  That's--I don't even remember much about anything, any of the other classes, except that I mean I had to take them.  And I got them out the way quickly in my freshman year.  So my sophomore, junior and senior year, I, I lived down in that theater.  And that's where I was.  Dennis ran it like it was a professional, on-the-street, in Chicago [Illinois] place.  He didn't run like it was an academic university.  You, you had to, you had to audition.  And you didn't make at, you didn't make it because you weren't in a show that year.  You could go through your whole four years and not be in a show.
Speaker 1: Tell us who Dennis (unclear) is--
Speaker 2: Dennis Zacek is the founding, one of the founding members of Victory Gardens Theater.  He was the Executive Director of Victory Gardens Theater.  Victory Gardens is one of the oldest theater companies in Chicago.  I think they're about thirty years old now.  And at that time, he was the Head of the Theater Department at Loyola.  So every year, I performed.  Every year I, I took all, all the classes that you had to take, set design, lighting design, costume design as well as all the theater classes.  And then I, I'm also an educator so I took a lot of education courses cause I love teaching.  But--and then in my senior year, I was, I was cast in a professional touring company, Free Street Theater.  And I told Dennis that I might--my last year, May, I wouldn't be able to be in class because that's when Free Street started.  And then you worked from 10:00 [A.M.] until 5:00 [P.M.] every day in Free Street Theater, Monday through Friday.  And Dennis told me, "You know, this is what you went to school for, and I'm not gonna penalize you as long as you get all your work in for that last month, you'll graduate.  Just mail me the stuff."  And that's what I did.  I mailed him my stuff, and I was able to graduate on time and go right out of school into a professional career.
Story_ID: 13911
Speaker 1: Tell us about Free Street [Theater].  What was Free Street?
Speaker 2: Well, Free Street is still in existence today.  It was one of the first companies that was mixed.  They were going on the road, and they were a traveling troupe that would go into neighborhoods [in Chicago, Illinois] and perform on the street and go into neighborhoods that people just didn't go into, like we performed in Cabrini [Green public housing project] (laughs), and we performed in Robert Taylor Homes [public housing project].  And then we would travel outside of the country--I mean outside of the city, not the country, and perform in neighborhoods that had never seen a black person.  It was my--I was with Free Street for two years.  At that time, Patrick Henry was the founder and the director and a humanitarian, who just believed that theater could heal the world, and took us into all these places.  So it was quite a fabulous experience.
Speaker 1: Can you name some of the, some of your colleagues at Free Street?
Speaker 2: Noreen, Noreen Winningham was, was with us in Free Street.  Steven, I can't remember Steven's last name now, but he was a--gosh, that's funny.  That's twenty-three years ago, no, I mean it's much longer than that about--'73 [1973], oh, my goodness, that's almost thirty years ago.  But Noreen I remember because we, we stayed friends past that.  But the other kids, un-un.
Speaker 1: What I, I remember Free Street being one of the first organizations where you got your Union card, and you could be with--you actually got your [Actors'] Equity [Association] card and joined the union.  It was a union thing.
Speaker 2: The Goodman is where I first got my first union card. I don't--Free Street, I don't remember, but I do know that I went from Free Street and start, and went into--Patrick put me in 'To be Young, Gifted and Black' [by Lorraine Hansberry], and that's where I got my union card.
Speaker 1: Which was a big thing in those days?
Speaker 2: Well, it was 1974, at the Goodman Theatre, it was quite something.
Speaker 1: Tell us about that, so from Free Street, then the Goodman, was the transfer--
Speaker 2: Yes, that's right.
Speaker 1: --the next thing.
Speaker 2: I went from Free Street Theater.  I performed with them for two years all over the country.  I had a baby.  I performed up until two weeks before I had the baby.  And Patrick finally said, "Jackie, go home and have the baby. (laughs)  It's time now, you know."  So I did.  I went home and had the baby.
Story_ID: 13912
Speaker 1: When did you meet [Jackie Taylor's daughter] Tyne's [Wright's] dad?
Speaker 2: I met Phil [Wright] in high school.  I was a senior in high and I--
Speaker 1: At St. Michael's [St. Michael Central High School, Chicago, Illinois]?
Speaker 2: St. Michael's and he was on the beach.  And it was a bunch girls and a bunch of guys, and we just started talking and, you know, we were young and that's--he was tall and good looking.  And that was good enough for me at the time. (laughs)  Yeah, so after Free Street [Theater], I went right into Goodman Theatre.
Speaker 1: So, how, I mean did that, you know, motherhood and theater, what did that--was there a little bump in the road there or was it (unclear)--?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Well, my first transition was when I got married, cause I got married when I was--I had just finished my sophomore year.  I was going into my junior year in college [at Loyola University, Chicago, Illinois].  And I remember Dennis [Zacek] saying, "Why, why are you getting married?"  And I said, "I don't know.  It's just something to do."  And that's really what it was, just something to do.  I didn't give it any big thought.  I went--we had went and took our blood tests, and then we got up three days later, put on our blue jeans, and I called my best friend.  She was my witness, and we went down and got married.  So that was the first transition.
Speaker 1: And how did that affect your, you know, your--?
Speaker 2: No, it didn't affect my career.  It--I, it could have if I had allowed it to.  But I was not the kind of woman that was going to allow for anyone to tell me what to do.  That I--that's, I wasn't going to do that, I was going to live my life, not the life that someone thought I should have.  And now, as my ex-husband's wife at that time, yeah, he thought that I should, you know, act a certain way and do certain things.  But I didn't care that he thought that.  That was his personal opinion, and it didn't have anything to do with me.  So it caused, you know, some battles, but I wasn't going to not live my life.  So I was still able to do what I wanted to do.  So I was still able to perform and to do the things that I needed to do.  Even when my daughter [Tyne Wright] came along, motherhood--my daughter was six weeks old when I made 'Cooley High' [motion picture, 1975].  And I always had surrogate family around me, my nieces and nephews who I had raised at this point were in college, young adults.  And so I had them to come in and stay with me while I made the film and watch my daughter who was six weeks old.  Now, I had, I had my nephew make a list of everything she did from the moment she woke up, what she ate, what, what the diaper contained, everything.  So (laughs) it was a little stressful for him, but I, I never stopped because I had learned long ago, you, you don't, you don't have to stop.  You can continue.  Nothing has to get into your way.  You just move over the hurdles or jump over them or how, whatever you're gonna do.  But I was able to continue.
Story_ID: 13913
Speaker 1: Now, so you went from Free Street [Theater] to the Goodman [Theatre] --,
Speaker 2: Um-hmm.
Speaker 1: --and what was that experience like, doing ['To Be] Young Gifted and Black' on the Goodman stage?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, everybody was talking about how wonderful it was that Goodman was presenting a mixed company.  At that time, I didn't know that the only production that the Goodman had, had did before was where Cookie, Calestine Boatwright (ph.) had, she played a maid in something.  And that was supposedly at that time a breakthrough for the theater.  And now here, I think it was maybe five or six years after that, where they were presenting 'To Be Young Gifted and Black'.  So at the time I just kind of took it for granted, but it was a historical production in that it was a mixed group, blacks and whites on stage together in 1974, and it was something that hadn't been done.  So it was a job, and I was doing my job.  I was glad that, to be part of the experience, but I really just kind of took it for granted.
Speaker 1: What was the next big thing that happened and after the Goodman, what (unclear) (simultaneously)--
Speaker 2: Then, I went on into Victory Gardens [Theater].  And Victory Gardens was, you know, they were way ahead of the Goodman in terms of producing black theater because they were producing all-black plays.  And I performed from 1974 all the way up until 1980 almost every year with Victory Gardens in a production.  They would do, at that time, they, you know, people were talking about producing black theater, but they had been doing it.  And it was just a natural part of what they did.  So I did Victory Gardens for many years.
Story_ID: 13914
Speaker 1: Tell us about 'Cooley High' [motion picture] and what--how did that fit in (unclear)?
Speaker 2: Well, 'Cooley High', I made 'Cooley High' in '74 [1974--sic, 1975].  And 'Cooley High' was one of the first major movies that was made here in Chicago [Illinois].  And it was, right, and today it's a cult movie.  I, I would have never known, having made it then, that, you know, twenty-eight, twenty-nine years later, 'Cooley High' is still very popular.  And people love that movie.  Schultz, Michael Schultz was the director of it and I think his ideas were quite new for the time.  And the story was a story Eric Monte wrote about growing up in Cabrini [Green public housing project].  And as an actress, I just felt, here was the perfect role for me.  I had grown up in Cabrini, and I, I knew the experience.  And here was a movie that was going to be shooting.  So I told my agent, and she told me I was too old, that they were seeing high schoolers.  So I found out who the, who the--I can't think of the, the term, but the casting director [Lauren Jones] was at that time, on the film.  And I just pretended that I was somebody else and told them that I had this fabulous actress that I would like for them to see.  And they put me, put down my name and said, "Okay, here's her time."  And then I called my agent back and told her, "Okay, I have a time."  This is my time cause you had to have an agent to go.  And I went down.  And I, you know, put my little bangs in my head and looked the, looked the age I was supposed to look and went down and got the role.
Speaker 1: Who was in that movie?
Speaker 2: Glynn Turman was the star.  Lawrence Hilton Jacobs was my boyfriend.  He played 'Cochise'.  Those are the two that, because those are the two guys that I worked with the whole time, that I really remember.
Speaker 1: That was a good experience for you?
Speaker 2: That was a fabulous experience.  It--Glynn Turman was a fabulous person and is a fabulous person.  And he was so giving and loving and nourishing and it was my first film.  So I was little, you know, afraid.  And Glen assured me, you know, it was absolutely nothing to be afraid of.  "You're a wonderful actress, just do your thing."  And that was enough, you know, to just calm me down.  After that, the producers were really impressed with what I did in the film.  So I did get a lot of different offers from that.  The problem was I didn't like the parts.  They were very degrading for me as a person, as a black person and as a woman.  I, I played one film where I was a prostitute.  And I realized then when I did the role that if it's not gonna say anything, I can't do it.  And I don't want to do it.  So I had some difficulty in being able to work on a continual basis.  If I had accepted the roles that they gave me, I wouldn't of had a problem.  But because I wasn't just gonna do anything, I started garnering a name of being difficult.
Story_ID: 13915
Speaker 1: The Black Ensemble Company, if I remember correctly, wasn't it once the Chicago Black Ensemble?
Speaker 2: It still is, Chicago Black Ensemble Theater.
Speaker 1: Okay, that is the official name.
Speaker 2: Um-hmm, um-hmm.
Speaker 1: So we're talking about the same thing.  So tell us about starting the company and why you did it?
Speaker 2: Well, I had, I had traveled, had done a couple of things in Hollywood [Los Angeles, California].  And what I noticed about the industry was that, number one, we as black folks, we didn't have much control.  Number two, the images that were being portrayed at the time, not only were they degrading, but they were a lie.  So I decided that, first of all, as an actress, I didn't want to perpetuate these images.  And I couldn't perpetuate the images.  I kept thinking about my daughter [Tyne Wright] seeing a film that I made, you know, and it's fourteen years later, and having to hang her head in shame at her mother, you know, or me teaching my students non-violence, and then they see me in a film where I'm shooting a gun or something.  I just didn't want to do those kind of roles.  What I decided was that instead--I had to do more than just talk about it.  I had to do more than, than just say, "No, I'm not gonna do that role because," I wanted to be a contributor.  I wanted to be a catalyst for change.  I couldn't do it in film because the door was just too thick and too closed.  I mean there was, at that time, there was absolutely no women at all and blacks were, I mean, almost non-existent.  But in the theater, I felt I could make a difference.  And what I wanted to do was to create a company that would perpetuate the positive images of African Americans, that would tell the history of who we were, would tell it honestly and would enlighten and educate in terms of how much we have given to society.  And I decided I would call it the Black Ensemble because New York had the Negro Ensemble, and I was in the age of black.  So I said, "Well, we'll call it the Chicago Black Ensemble Theater."  And I went to a bank to get a loan.  I had some money from my films.  And I had, I needed a little bit more to really get the company off the ground.  So I went to a bank and I filled out the papers, and the banker asked me what did I want the loan for.  And I told him, "A theater."  And he said, "Absolutely not."  And he closed the books.  "We don't loan money for that."  So I went to the bank across the street.  And he said, "Well, what do you want the money for?  I said, I want to buy furniture for my house."  And he said, "Sure." (laughs)  And I got the money together, and my first theater was on Wells Street, 1429 N. Wells [Chicago, Illinois].  And I rented that theater.  And that was the beginning.
Story_ID: 13916
Speaker 1: Do I remember correctly a Club Misty?
Speaker 2: Club Misty was where I first produced 'The Other Cinderella' on a professional level.  That was before I could find a theater, and they gave me--well, they rented me that space.  But that, you're right, Club Misty was the very first theater space that I had.  And we made that into a theater, right, wow, good memory, Chuck [Smith].
Speaker 1: Tell us about your experience on Wells [Street, Chicago, Illinois], the theater on Wells--was it a theater?
Speaker 2: It was a theater.  It was a theater.  It was, it didn't have a name.  It was a 150-seat theater.  I was there two years.  It was a struggle because we were just starting out, but we had had controversy.  We had had, I was going to produce 'The Other Cinderella', and this guy came to me with a play called, 'Cinderella Brown', and asked me if I would consider, instead of producing my 'Cinderella', to--that he would hire me and my company and pay my rent for five months if I would produce and direct 'Cinderella Brown'.  And, of course, I said, "Sure, why not?"  You know, this was a way for me to get the company off the ground and get my rent paid and get my actors paid.  So, "Yes."  We went into rehearsal.  We had a backer's audition where he raised a lot of money.  And then after the backer's audition, he told me he was gonna take it out to Summit, Illinois and would I please come with him.  And I said, "No, please.  I would not.  The reason that I did do your play was so that you could pay the rent and my company.  And if you're going to use my theater, I'm not doing it."  At the time, my actors went with him.  They said, "Well, you know, we have to go where the money is.  You know, you have to understand that."  And they went to Summit, Illinois.  In the meantime, I used his date that he said he was gonna open 'Cinderella Brown'.  I used his flyers.  I just changed the name on all those 10,000 flyers.  I used his mailing list that he had left at my theater.  And I called Irv Kupcinet and said, "Irv, I've got a problem, can you help me?"  And he publicized that I was going to be opening 'The Other Cinderella' and that the guy--I won't say his name, had went to the Summit Theater, but the audience could still see 'Cinderella' at the Black Ensemble Theater.  And that is how, that, that's what made us work cause that--the play was an instant--it had all that publicity around it.  And it was an instant success.  So we ran it for two years.  And then I got tired of playing 'Cinderella'. (laughs)  At the time, I didn't think about a understudy.  I just thought about, "Okay, what's the next play?"
Story_ID: 13917
Speaker 1: Now, just to backtrack just a little bit because you mentioned some of your other films.  I want to make sure we get those in here, some of the other Hollywood [Los Angeles, California] experiences, 'To Sir With Love'--.
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) The, the early ones were, I played--the only one in those early years, the only one that is mentionable and I don't even know the name of it.  It was one of, it was a black exploitation movie, one of those real quick, real cheap films.  And I played a prostitute.  And I was in a lot of trouble, and I got beaten around a lot.  But the name of it, I couldn't begin to tell you.  I don't know.  I and maybe my memory has tried to erase it, (laughs) you know.  I was so ashamed of it, you know, when I--
Speaker 1: But it was, they paid you well enough that (unclear) you at least had a little something to start off--
Speaker 2: Right, right, exactly.  Both, both movies paid enough for me to start the Black Ensemble Theater.
Speaker 1: And while we're on your film career, some of the movies you were in 'To Sir With Love'--,
Speaker 2: 'To Sir With Love, Part II' [television movie, 1996], 'Hoodlum' [motion picture, 1997], 'The Father Clements Story' [television movie, 1987], those are the ones--,
Speaker 1: Most of those were shot here in Chicago [Illinois].
Speaker 2: Um-hmm.
Story_ID: 13918
Speaker 1: Black Ensemble [Theater], after two years on Wells Street [in Chicago, Illinois], what happens next?
Speaker 2: Wow, after two years on Wells Street, I, and  I closed 'The Other Cinderella' and I realized I really had a company because all of a sudden I, it--I was faced with, "How do I continue?  I don't have money coming in every week."  I started writing grants, learning how to write grants.  I started looking for space.  I started learning how to actually develop and run an organization.  Before it was fun.  I was having fun.  I was performing.  I was on stage.  My company was, you know, we could pay the bills.  But I didn't think of it as work.  But once I closed that hit show, and was faced with paying the rent, paying the bills, I realized this is a job.  And I'm, and I had people who were depending on me for paychecks.  So I had to quickly learn what in the world it was that I was doing and make it work.
Speaker 1: So, where, when did you move over to the Beacon Street [Chicago, Illinois] space?
Speaker 2: 1984.  1984.  Before that I was at--I was housed in different places.  After Wells Street, I was housed at the old Organic Theater with Stuart Gordon because I was--I did a lot of the Organic shows.  So Stuart said, "Well look, I have that little theater back there.  To make it easy on you, why don't you just put the Black Ensemble back there, and that way, you can just come out of there and go, you know, right into the stage here."  And that just worked beautifully.  That was great.  Also, I housed it at Victory Gardens Theater.  They, they, they put me up for a little while.  And then my next space was the Jane Addams Center.  I was there in '82 [1982] on Belmont [Street].  And I, I produced 'Muddy Waters (The Hoochie Coochie Man)' there.  It was a big hit for us there.  And then I got a call from the Center--Uptown [Jane Addams] Hull House, because of our outreach programming that we were doing, that they would be interested in talking with me about coming over there and renting that space.  And now we're in 2002 and I've been there ever since.
Story_ID: 13919
Speaker 1: Tell us about the outreach programming [at Black Ensemble Theater], and, you know, did this float in directly from you, as an educator?
Speaker 2: Well, as, you know, I've always been in education because I've, I'm a natural teacher.  That's just what I do.  And I've always worked with problem children because I was a problem.  And I was always able to relate to the students who were supposedly behavioral problems or discipline problems or slow learners or whatever kind of stigma you want to attach to a child that's not performing at their capacity.  So I started working in different schools, through different programs, Illinois Arts Council, Urban Gateways, several different programs that were working in the schools.  And I, I garnered a very strong reputation because the program, my program that I developed was to help children who were not learning, to develop skills that would enable them to learn through theater.  So my program was raising reading and math scores, without me saying that's what I was doing.  I was basically coming in to work with the students to help them when they had been given up.  One of my first classes was a second grade class that were all failures.  And I was brought into the school and asked to work with these second graders to get them to pass because they weren't performing.  Well, first of all, they were angry.  They were all in the same grade again and all with the same problems.  So I built a theater program that taught self motivation, that increased their self esteem, that increased their respect for themselves, that, that tore down all the laws of, I can't, I don't know how.  And, and through that program, by six months into the year, they had surpassed all the other second graders.  And so it was through that program that, you know, word just spreads.  And people, you know, schools want you if you're able to do that.  Then I started teaching teachers.  I, I taught teachers for the [Chicago, Illinois] Board of Education, teaching them how to teach the curriculum through theater because they're already actors any way, being up in that classroom is a performance every day.  And if you know what skills to manipulate, you can manipulate classroom management, and you can teach in a way that the children are going to be entertained.  And they're going to entertain you.  So the outreach program started getting bigger and bigger because the problems in our schools are huge.  We started being in demand in more schools.  We started being in demand in schools that nobody would want to come into.  So it blossomed into me actually teaching a group of actors what it was that I did so that they could go into the school and do the same thing.  And, but we work with all kinds of students.  We worked with children who are labeled as mentally challenged, physically disabled.  We worked with women who are, who have a history of abuse, mental disability.  Now, we work with all kinds of groups--,
Speaker 1: So it's still, it's on-going.  It's still going on?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, it's, it's--.
Speaker 1: It covers all grades.
Speaker 2: All grades.  Grade school, high school, teachers.  It covers--I have nine teachers now.  You know, I, I think I've taught maybe about seventy artists and I have nine who I continually use because the program is so popular.
Story_ID: 13920
Speaker 1: Over at Beacon, Beacon Street?  Now, what was that like?  That's a pretty historic place, you know, Stuart Gordon was (unclear)--.
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Yeah, Stuart Gordon was there.  So it was, it was kind of weird because I had went to 'Huckleberry Finn', I saw there.  You know, I had been there.  So it was kind of weird to go into the place.  But the people who, the executive director of [Jane Addams] Hull House had seen some Black Ensemble [Theater] shows, had experienced some of our educational outreach program, had been involved in the school that I was involved in and knew the success of the programs.  So they were very supportive.  They were very supportive.  And I went in there, I was in partnership with Zebra Crossing Theatre.  We were both in there at the time.  And then Zebra Crossing moved and then Black Ensemble took over the space totally.  Now, we're at the point where we've been there for seventeen years.  We've been very, very, very successful.  And we've outgrown it.  We've outgrown it.  We're bursting at the seams.  And we're in the midst of designing a new Black Ensemble Theater.  We've identified a space in Cabrini [Green public housing project], where I grew up, where they have revamped the total neighborhood.  And it's across the street from where I used to live.  The project isn't there anymore.  And we're looking at making that, we're designing a three-story building now.  And we probably will announce at the beginning of 2004 our capital campaign, and we anticipate 2005 we'll be in our new space.
Speaker 1: That's great.  Tell us about, a little bit about your experience overall in black theater and, you know, what different personalities in the Chicago [Illinois] black theater community, being on the West Side, you know, or being on the North Side and most of the theaters were on the South Side back in those days.
Speaker 2: (Laughs) Well, of course, and when we started because all of the theaters were on the South Side, we, we had a little hassle, you know, we had a little hassle.  It was, like people saying, "Why are you on the North Side?  Black people don't go to the North Side."  "Well, I lived on the North side.  I grew up on the North side, and I'm a black people.  So I don't know what you're talking about and everybody that I know is on the North Side.  So I'm starting a theater in the community that I know."  And I knew the North Side.  So that's where I was most comfortable.  Yeah, it was, it, it was different.  It was new.  So, of course, you're going to be hassled.  But the Chicago, the community in Chicago, the black community in Chicago is very unique and much different than any other community any where else that I've experienced, in that, you can have your differences.  You can have your different philosophies.  But you still have our support.  We're still brothers and sisters.  We could still argue.  We could still disagree, but at the same time, what do you need?  I don't like that show, but, hey, what it is--what is it that you need?  And I had very strong support from Val Gray Ward of the Kuumba Theater, from Abena Joan Brown from ETA, from Paimun Rahmee (ph.) who was at the LaMont Zeno [Theatre] at the time.  I had very strong support, even though they told me I was crazy, and that wasn't no black people gonna come over there, they still supported what I did.  And that was very important.
Story_ID: 13921
Speaker 1: And you served as President of the old Black Theater Alliance board for a couple of years?
Speaker 2: Yeah, for about three or four years, right.
Speaker 1: And currently, you're President of the new, sort of revamped Black Theater Alliance, the African American Arts Alliance--
Speaker 2: African American Arts Alliance of Chicago [Illinois].
Speaker 1: Tell us about that.
Speaker 2: Yes, that's--you know, we, we--the black, the old Black Theater Alliance kind of just evaporated after a while.  And, as artists, we were talking amongst ourselves, saying, "We need that entity.  We, we need something that's going to bring us together so that we can share resources and network and communicate in an organized fashion."  And actually Joan Gray and I, Joan Gray of Muntu Dance Theatre, we sat down and talked about it, and then you, Chuck Smith and we started talking about black theater, how we could have a national black theater festival in the city.  And it all kind of came together.  We decided, okay, the way to do that, the organization to do that is through the African American Arts Alliance.  And I think it was four of us that day who met--,
Speaker 1: Ronald J.--,
Speaker 2: Ronald J. Parsons [sic, Ronald O. J. Parson], you, me and Terry Cullers or--
Speaker 1: Terry or Joan or, yeah, but that was the--.
Speaker 2: Yeah, that was the initial group.  And we elected officers at that time, and that's how we started.  And now, it's five years later.
Speaker 1: Tell us about some of the activities of that group?
Speaker 2: We've produced five Black Arts Weeks.  We've, have about 7,000 people who have participated in our activities on some level.  We have 126 members.  And we're growing by leaps and bounds every day.
Speaker 1: Juneteenth, the (unclear)--.
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Juneteenth is the film festival that we, we've produced Juneteenths, exposed different up and coming, young film artists.  The thing of it, the good thing about the Alliance is that it's not only theater.  It's film, it's dance, it's music, it's literature, it's visual arts, it's performing arts.  It, it encompasses the African American Art forms in general, as many as we can possibly think of and, and there'll possibly be more in the future.  But it, it's a difficult task in that it is so many different art forms, but it's a job that has to be done.
Story_ID: 13922
Speaker 1: There's another breakthrough thing that you're involved with right now, which is touring your show, 'The Jackie Wilson Story'.
Speaker 2: Well, you know, actually, Chuck [Smith], the, the idea of touring, you and I have talked about off and on for--,
Speaker 1: (Unclear)
Speaker 2: Oh, okay, all right.  The, the tour is--we see all these productions coming into the city, all these black touring productions.  And those plays, they have their place.  They've done something for the communities in that they have ignited some fire into the general masses into coming to theater.  But there are so much more stronger representation of black theater around the country than what we see come through.  And I felt that the productions of the Black Ensemble [Theater] were a strong representation and needed to be part of that touring mass because there has to be a responsibility for the masses to understand that there is, there are other types of works that are out there on another kind of level that deserved their attention too.  And that's why I started touring because I wanted to get the message of positivity, uplifting, professionalism, out to the masses in another type of way.  And so I took advantage of the role that has been traveled now by the other touring companies.
Speaker 1: Now, you were at the National Black Theater Festival in [Winston-Salem] North Carolina, the last festival a couple of years ago.  Tell us about that experience.
Speaker 2: Well, we were the first Chicago [Illinois] company to open the National Black Theater Festival.  And we set a record.  We were also the first company to, not only open the festival, but play every night and to sell out in this 1,200-seat theater every night.  We set all kind of attendance records.  Our tickets were being scalped for $200 a piece.  And, of course, they have asked us to come back.  So we put Chicago on the map in that sense.  We wanted them to understand that--first of all, Chicago was not represented before.  And we wanted them to understand that Chicago is the home of some dynamite, dynamite theater.  I would venture to say that we were, we're number one when it comes theater in our community.  And I, I just felt that the world needed to understand that.  They needed to know that.  If they're gonna have a National Black Theater Festival, then they gonna have to represent.  And there's no place like Chicago.
Story_ID: 13923
Speaker 1: For a while, you were with the New Regal [Theatre].
Speaker 2: I was the Executive Director.  Then I was the Artistic Director.  And then I left.
Speaker 1: And that's located where, the New Regal?
Speaker 2: 1645 East 79th Street [Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 1: And tell us about the environment, the--it primarily is what kind of theater?
Speaker 2: Well, now, it's a booking house.  But it was the dream of Mr. [Edward] Gardner for it to be a theater and for it to have a season.  And that's why I was brought in.  I was brought in to produce a season at the theater and to help raise money for the theater.  Of course, we produced, we produced a season.  We produced 'A Streetcar Named Desire' and we produced 'The Other Cinderella'.  We, we produced a full season at the Regal.  But at that time, the cost of the season and the budget that the Regal had just was not enough to, to ensure that the season can't--could continue.  And the theater wasn't old enough to garner enough foundation and grant support.
Speaker 1: Your [Black Theater Ensemble] plays all, you know, the ones that currently produce mostly, you know, of historical black figures, Muddy Waters, Jackie Wilson, Moms Mabley, Nat King Cole, currently, Ethel Waters, what's, I mean, who's, do you have any idea about other figures that you might start, zero in on?
Speaker 2: Well, for next season we're, we think we're going to try to do Etta James.  We're going to explore what ever happened to the girl groups, like the Shirelles and the, you know, those.  What ever happened to those groups?  We don't hear--we hear about the guys, but we don't hear about what happened to those ladies.  And we're gonna know what happened.  So we're gonna explore all the black, girl groups, those early young ladies to, to, and find out what happened, and bring back their music because they were quite something to break through at that time.  We're, we're thinking about the Jamaican, the Jamaican singer--help me here.
Speaker 1: Bob Marley.
Speaker 2: Yes, Bob Marley.  We're doing some research now to see if that's a possibility.  We're gonna bring back the WVON [Chicago-based radio station] story because next year is their 25th Anniversary.  So they've asked us to, to bring back the WVON story which we're going to do.  And then there's--I've been trying to get the rights to Sidney Poitier's life because I would like to tell his story, even though it's not music, I think his is a story that would just be so beneficial for us to, to learn from and very educational, very historical.  So there are some that we're working on.  But, you know, there's such a vast amount.  I also want to do Howlin' Wolf, the blues singer.  There's such a vast amount of, of material.  We could go on forever and ever.
Speaker 1: What about talent in Chicago?
Speaker 2: The, the talent pool is deep and wide.  It's a lot of fishes in the talent pool.  It's enough--I don't care who you want to do, there's always somebody who is there that can do that person.  So there's, there's no limit when it comes to the talent in Chicago.
Story_ID: 13924
Speaker 1: You write all these pieces.  And there's, you know, you get so much information from your productions [at the Black Ensemble Theater].  Well, now, how do you put--who does the research?  Do you have a team or is it mostly you?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, sometimes when I'm co-writing, like I co, co-wrote 'Muddy Waters [The Hoochie Coochie Man]' with Jimmy Tillman and I co-wrote 'Doo Wop Shoo Bop', we'll do research together.  But when I'm writing myself, I do the research.  I read everything I can get my hands on.  I go, the Internet now is wonderful cause you can get so much information.  But I pick up a lot of magazine articles, go to a library.  It's, it's--in doing these plays, what I found is that in Europe, in England and France and Germany, there are better historical records on African Americans than we have here.  They just, they, there was--in Europe, there was so much information on Jackie Wilson.  I mean just a phenomenal (with emphasis) amount of information, whereas here, you know, there's one or two books.  But there, they--when it comes to black culture, American culture of entertain, entertainers, they just, they, they, they eat and sleep it, and, and there's just so much information.  So I do a lot of overseas.  I send away, you know, I have a lot of overseas contacts.  And I sent away for different material and they send me different things back.  But I read, I just read everything.
Speaker 1: You mentioned Jimmy Tillman.  When did Jimmy Tillman become a part of the Black Ensemble [Theater]?
Speaker 2: 1984.
Speaker 1: And tell us about Jimmy Tillman.
Speaker 2: Jimmy Tillman is the Black Ensemble Theater's Musical Director.  And he came to me with an idea of a play that he had written for his high schoolers at that time, called 'The Life of Muddy Waters'.  And he had heard that I produce musicals.  And he thought that that would make a good musical.  And I read the script.  And I said, well, you know, this script needs a lot of work, but I kind of like the idea.  And we started working together.  And we've been working together ever since.  He has co-written several productions with the Black Ensemble Theater.  And he's a genius at taking music and making it work underneath the, the script.  He can, he can hear and know exactly what music to put there, how long it should be there, when it should come out.  He's just a genius at that.  He's just so, so creative in that way.  And he's a good writer.
Speaker 1: And it's, it's really, it seems to work really nice for the Black Ensemble--,
Speaker 2: Oh, yes.
Speaker 1: --to have their own music component, you know.
Speaker 2: It, it, it was a blessing because he brought in all the best musicians.  He brought in a wonderful team of people, of arrangers and, and song writers, and it's just been a marvelous match.  It's been a match made in Heaven.
Story_ID: 13925
Speaker 1: What do you want the world to think of you say 100 years from now when they talk about Jackie Taylor?  What do you want, what do you want them to say?
Speaker 2: Well, I want them to say that she made a difference, that she made change happen in the world.  That she was an educator, that when people came to see her theater or one of her productions [at the Black Ensemble Theater], they left knowing a whole lot more than they knew before they got in.  I want them to say that she helped to put a dent in racism and ignorance in the world through her productions.  That she was able to bring people together of all races and all kinds so that they could understand each other and learn about each other and accept each other as human beings.  I want them to say that she crossed the cultural barriers, that she crossed colors and was able to make change happen.
Speaker 1: And that's probably, that sort of fits into maybe why you've done some of these classical works like 'A Streetcar Named Desire', and 'Medea', 'The Glass Menagerie', 'Julius Caesar'--,
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --that sort of fits into that.
Speaker 2: Well, you know, I started the company also to supply jobs, to make a change in the way that we were being perceived as African Americans and to help eradicate racism because Chicago [Illinois], for me growing up, was a very racist and segregated city.  And racism, as far as I'm concerned, is based off of ignorance and not knowing and not understanding.  So I wanted the theater to be a theater that brought people of all colors into the environment so that we could learn about one another.  So that's why I produced classical pieces, trying to find what was going to attract people of different races, people of different cultures.  So I started producing a black 'Streetcar Named Desire' because I felt Tennessee Williams is a great writer.  He has a strong following.  I'm sure a lot of people will want to see, "Well, what are they gonna do with that?"  That's why we produced the black 'Medea', a black 'Julius Caesar' and it worked.  It brought people into the theater of many colors and, and hues to see what was going on.  And it made change.  It made a difference.  So, yeah, that's why we did it.
Story_ID: 13926
Speaker 1: Jackie, is there anything else you'd like to, you know, share with us or is there anything that we haven't covered that you might like to talk about, anything? Ah,what do you think of this oral history project?
Speaker 2: I think it's one of the most important aspects that can possibly be done in our society.  If you don't understand your history and where you're from, then, as the old saying goes, you're destined to repeat all of the mistakes all over again.  And if we're going to understand our culture, our heritage, not only as African Americans, but as human beings, the more we know about each other, the better.  And it's no way to do it than to record it and save it for generations after generations to learn from because that's--when, when you look at things today that are from a different era, there's so much that you understand, just watching an old movie, so much that you learn.  Oh, I didn't know that that came from that.  And we don't know what this is going to teach, but it's definitely going to be a vital instrument for teaching and learning.
Speaker 1: How do you think your parents, if they were around, how do you think they'd feel about you?
Speaker 2: Wow, (laughs) ha, ha, I think they both would be very, very proud.  I know my father [Gus Lewis Taylor, Sr.] would be very proud, but he always saw, saw the best.  He always knew that, that I was going to achieve something.  And my mother [Lucille Ward Taylor], when she was older, just a couple of months before she was gonna pass away, she let me know that she was proud of me and that she admired what I did, and that she didn't really mean any of that stuff that, that she had put me through.  So I know now, that seeing what I've accomplished since they've passed--and my mother passed in 1980, my dad in 1974, and seeing what has happened thus far, they would be very, very proud.
Story_ID: 13927
Speaker 1: Okay, that's me, Jackie Taylor, when I was a teacher at [Henry H.] Nash [Elementary] School [Chicago, Illinois], and that had to be around 1980.  So that was my 30, 28, 29, 30 somewhere in there.
Speaker 2: [Jackie Taylor's portrait from her teaching assignment at Henry H. Nash Elementary School, Chicago, Illinois, ca. 1980.  From the collection of Jackie Taylor.]
Story_ID: 13928
Speaker 1: That is a picture of me in the Bahamas.  That was about 1987.  And I was just on vacation.
Speaker 2: [Jackie Taylor on vacation in the Bahamas, ca. 1987.  From the collection of Jackie Taylor.]
Story_ID: 13929
Speaker 1: On the right [sic, left] side of the screen is my sister, Harriett.  She is the--she's seven years older than me.  And she's the fourth sibling in the family.
Speaker 2: Is she married?  What her married name?
Speaker 1: She's--her name is Harriett Day.
Speaker 2: [Jackie Taylor's sister, Harriet Taylor Day (standing), and an unidentified woman, Chicago, Illinois, not dated, from the collection of Jackie Taylor.]
Story_ID: 13930
Speaker 1: Wow, that's a very young picture of my sister, [Augusta Taylor Ross] Gussie, my oldest sister.  And it had to be around 1977, 1978, somewhere in there.
Speaker 2: In Chicago?
Speaker 1: In Chicago.
Speaker 2: [Jackie Taylor's sister, Augusta 'Gussie' Taylor Ross, Chicago, Illinois, ca. 1977-1978.  From the collection of Jackie Taylor.]
Story_ID: 13931
Speaker 1: Okay, this is my little girl, Tania Wright.  This is here when she was about eight or nine years old.  She's twenty-eight now.  So that picture is about twenty, twenty-one years old.
Speaker 2: [Jackie Taylor's daughter, Tyne Wright, Chicago, Illinois, ca. 1982.  From the collection of Jackie Taylor.]
Story_ID: 13932
Speaker 1: Okay, that's another picture of me as a teacher.  You know how you had to take those pictures at school, so that was another one of my 'Ms. Taylor' pictures.  I can tell cause I have no make-up on.  And that had to be about 1985.
Speaker 2: And what's the school?
Speaker 1: I can't remember what school that was, maybe Lewis.
Speaker 2: Elementary or high?
Speaker 1: [Leslie] Lewis Elementary School [Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 2: [Jackie Taylor's portrait from her teaching assignment at Leslie Lewis Elementary School, Chicago, Illinois, ca. 1985.  From the collection of Jackie Taylor.]
Story_ID: 13933
Speaker 1: That is my ex-husband and myself.  He was nineteen at the time, and I was seventeen at the time.  And we were walking down the street, downtown [Chicago, Illinois], going to dinner.  And they snapped our picture, and we ordered the picture, and this is that picture.
Speaker 2: His name?
Speaker 1: This is Phil, his name is Phil Wright.
Speaker 2: W-R-I-G-H-T?
Speaker 1: Um-hum, W-R-I-G-H-T.
Speaker 2: [Jackie Taylor with her ex-husband, Phil Wright, Chicago, Illinois, ca. 1968.  From the collection of Jackie Taylor.]
Story_ID: 13934
Speaker 1: Okay, that's me on the left with the circle around.  That's our--that was after the Prom.  That was the prom, the picnic after the Prom, the next day.
Speaker 2: What year?
Speaker 1: 1969.
Speaker 2: And the other two people, do you know?
Speaker 1: Valerie and Cynthia, those were my two best friends in high school.
Speaker 2: [Jackie Taylor (left) with her high school friends, Chicago, Illinois, 1969.  From the collection of Jackie Taylor.]
Story_ID: 13935
Speaker 1: That's my little brother, Joe, Joe Taylor.  That's him performing.  He's doing his famous Elvis Presley impersonation.  And that's at a Christmas party, and the year was 1977.
Speaker 2: [Jackie Taylor's brother, Joseph Taylor, performing at a family Christmas party, Chicago, Illinois, ca. 1977.  From the collection of Jackie Taylor.]
Story_ID: 13936
Speaker 1: That's my Mom [Lucille Ward Taylor] and my brother, Sonny [Gus Lewis Taylor, Jr.].  My Mom, my brother was getting married there.  And my Mom is at the wedding.
Speaker 2: What year was this?
Speaker 1: That was 1975.
Speaker 2: [Jackie Taylor's mother, Lucille Ward Taylor and her brother, Gus Lewis Taylor, Jr., at his wedding, Chicago, Illinois, ca. 1975.  From the collection of Jackie Taylor.]
Story_ID: 13937
Speaker 1: And that was the [Chicago, Illinois] 'Sun-Times' [newspaper].  That was around 1974.
Speaker 2: The 'Sun-Times' publicity?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Was it for a show?
Speaker 1: It was, they were talking about 'Cooley High' [motion picture, 1975].
Speaker 2: [Jackie Taylor in a newspaper clipping from the 'Chicago Sun-Times', Chicago, Illinois, 1974.  Copyright, the 'Chicago Sun-Times'.  From the collection of Jackie Taylor.]
Story_ID: 13938
Speaker 1: That's Sasha Dalton, Jimmy Spinx is behind me, an actor, and Oscar Brown, Jr. is the other person.
Speaker 2: Jimmy Spinx, S-P-I-N-X?
Speaker 1: Uh-huh, S-P-I-N-X.  And they had come to my school.  I had a talent show with all of my 300 students.  And they were the judges.  And that was that day.  That was 1980.
Speaker 2: At which school?
Speaker 1: Nash.
Speaker 2: Elementary or high school?
Speaker 1: [Henry H.] Nash Elementary School [Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 2: [Local actors visiting Jackie Taylor at Henry H. Nash Elementary School, Chicago, Illinois, ca. 1980; (L. to R.): Sasha Dalton, Jimmy Spinx, Jackie Taylor and Oscar Brown, Jr.  From the collection of Jackie Taylor.]
Story_ID: 13939
Speaker 1: That's a photo shot of 'ER', which was a play that I was one of the original writers on, that was produced by Stuart Gordon.  And I played Nurse Julie.  And this is the photo shot of that, and that was 19--man, it had to be 1983--
Speaker 2: Organic.
Speaker 1: Organic Theater [Company, Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 2: [Jackie Taylor (standing, left) and other actors in Organic Theater Company's production of 'ER', Chicago, Illinois, 1983.  From the collection of Jackie Taylor.]
Story_ID: 13940
Speaker 1: That is a play by Wole Soyinka.  It's called 'Death and the King's Horseman..  It was at the Goodman Theatre [Chicago, Illinois], and I think this play was produced around 1981, 1979, '80 [1980], '81 [1981], somewhere in there, in that season.  And I'm right behind the man, on the other side.  There I am.
Speaker 2: Can you remember who the leads were?
Speaker 1: Oh, I don't remember it at all (laughs).  But Bonnie DeShong was in it, Masequa Myers was in it, Ernest Perry [Jr.], but I don't remember what his name was.
Speaker 2: [Jackie Taylor (back row, second from right) and other actors in the Goodman Theatre's production of 'Death and the King's Horseman', Chicago, Illinois, ca. 1979-1981.  From the collection of Jackie Taylor.]
Story_ID: 13941
Speaker 1: Okay, that's a character that I played.  So that's not me at all.  That's Adele [Louise Parker].  That's Adele from the play, 'Ceremonies in Dark Old Men', and that year is 1978.  That was Victory Gardens Theater [Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 2: Tell me a little bit about the character.
Speaker 1: Well, Adele was the daughter of, in this family, and the father--,
Speaker 2: She was the only one who had a job.
Speaker 1: Right, she was, she was the only one who worked in the family.  Everybody else was living off of her.
Speaker 2: [Jackie Taylor as Adele in Victory Gardens Theater's production of 'Ceremonies in Dark Old Men', Chicago, Illinois, 1978.  From the collection of Jackie Taylor.]
Story_ID: 13942
Speaker 1: That's me in grade school.  I think that is the second grade so I am all of seven years old right there.
Speaker 2: And the name of the school?
Speaker 1: That's at St. Joseph's [St. Joseph School] grade school in Chicago, Illinois.
Speaker 2: Did you like going to Catholic school?
Speaker 1: I loved it, I loved it.
Speaker 2: [Jackie Taylor with her second grade class at St. Joseph Catholic School, Chicago, Illinois, ca. 1958.  From the collection of Jackie Taylor.]
Story_ID: 13943
Speaker 1: Okay, that's a picture of me.  I was in college [at Loyola University, Chicago, Illinois].  So it had to be around '71 or '72.  And I was playing my guitar in front of my--actually, that's in my living room.
Speaker 2: In college, you lived in a house?
Speaker 1: Yeah, I was living in an apartment.
Speaker 2: [Jackie Taylor playing a guitar in her living room, Chicago, Illinois, ca. 1971-1972.  From the collection of Jackie Taylor.]
Story_ID: 13944
Speaker 1: Okay, that's a picture of me in 1980, '81.  And that's just a photo, just a head shot that I used to use many, many years ago.
Speaker 2: [Head shot of Jackie Taylor, ca. 1980-1981.  From the collection of Jackie Taylor.]
Story_ID: 13945
Speaker 1: Oh, that's from 'Eden', and I can't remember what year we did that.
Speaker 2: '78 [1978].
Speaker 1: '78, 1978, at Victory Gardens Theater [Chicago, Illinois].  And I played somebody's auntie or something.  I can't even remember that play.  But I sure look crazy in that picture.
Speaker 2: Are they struggling to get something away from you?
Speaker 1: Yeah, that's--they're struggling to get the knife away from me.
Speaker 2: [Jackie Taylor (center) and other actors in Victory Gardens Theater's production of 'Eden', Chicago, Illinois, 1978.  From the collection of Jackie Taylor.]
Story_ID: 13946
Speaker 1: That's from 'Eden', and as you see, she's older than I was.  And I was a, had to--the director wanted me to smoke. (laughs)
Speaker 2: What year again was this picture?
Speaker 1: 1978, '79 [1979], somewhere in there.
Speaker 2: [Jackie Taylor in a publicity photo for Victory Gardens Theater's production of 'Eden', Chicago, Illinois, 1978.  From the collection of Jackie Taylor.]
Story_ID: 13947
Speaker 1: Okay, that's a brochure from Victory Gardens Theater of their theater season, 1974-75 [sic, 1979-1980].  And these are different photos of the plays that they had at that time, and what the critics said about them and so forth and so on.
Speaker 2: (Unclear) it has to be later because 'Eden' is up there, so that was probably '79 [1979], '79 [1979], '80 [1980].
Speaker 1: Okay, '79 [1979].
Speaker 2: Yeah, cause there you are in '80 [1980].
Speaker 1: Yeah, right, so that's that same picture.  And I had did two shows and '[This is My] Play Song', which was my original show, I did with them.  So 'Play Song' became the center of the, of the brochure.
Speaker 2: [Jackie Taylor in a brochure highlighting Victory Garden Theater's past productions, Chicago, Illinois, 1979-1980.  From the collection of Jackie Taylor.]
Story_ID: 13948
Speaker 1: Okay, that's a picture from 1990, and it's a photo, publicity shot.  It was shot by Jennifer Gerard.  And that's basically it.  I used it for a lot of things.  It appeared in the press quite a bit.
Speaker 2: (Unclear) 'Sweet Mama Stringbean [The Ethel Waters Story]'?
Speaker 1: Uh-unh.  It was a little before the original 'Sweet Mama'.
Speaker 2: [Publicity shot of Jackie Taylor by Jennifer Gerard, 1990.  From the collection of Jackie Taylor.]
Story_ID: 13949
Speaker 1: Okay, well, that photograph was taken in the '70s [1970s].  That much I remember.  And it, it--somebody was fooling around and--.
Speaker 2: [Candid photo of Jackie Taylor, ca. 1970s.  From the collection of Jackie Taylor.]
Story_ID: 13950
Speaker 1: That is my high school graduation picture, 1969, eighteen years old.
Speaker 2: Which high school again?
Speaker 1: St. Michael's Central High School [Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 2: [Jackie Taylor's graduation portrait from St. Michael School, Chicago, Illinois, 1969.  From the collection of Jackie Taylor.]
Story_ID: 13951
Speaker 1: from a play called 'Dame Lorraine'.  That was 1982 at Victory Gardens Theater.  The, the top person is Esther Rolle, famous great actress.  And that's my character down there.  I don't remember her name, but Esther Rolle was my mother.
Speaker 2: I think your mother-in-law cause she had the son, and you were married to one of the sons.
Speaker 1: My mother-in-law, okay.
Speaker 2: [Jackie Taylor (bottom) with Esther Rolle in a scene from Victory Gardens Theater's production of 'Dame Lorraine', Chicago, Illinois, 1982.  From the collection of Jackie Taylor.]
Story_ID: 13952
Speaker 1: Okay, that's from the movie 'Cooley High' (1975).  That's my character that I played, Johnny Mae.  And the guy was Cochise, he was played by the actor, Lawrence Hilton-Jacobs.  And that's one of the photo shoots from the movie itself.  And I was twenty-three [years old] when I made that movie.
Speaker 2: [Jackie Taylor (left) and Lawrence Hilton-Jacobs in a movie still from 'Cooley High', Chicago, Illinois, 1975.  From the collection of Jackie Taylor.]
