Story_ID: 36636
Speaker 1: Good afternoon.
Speaker 2: Good afternoon.
Speaker 1: Nice to meet you, Mr. Tzomes--Pete, if I can say that.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: We're going to get started by what's called slating.  First of all, just introductions a little bit.  My name is Anthony Pool.  I'm the interviewer for today.  And Scott Stearns is the videographer.  He's behind me.  And somewhere in this interview, Larry Crowe is another interviewer, he'll be coming in to observe.  So, in order to get us started further, can you state your complete name and spell it?
Speaker 2: My name is Chancellor.  As a matter of fact, I'll tell you like my mother taught me when I was four years old.  She would literally, when I was four [years old], somebody would say, "What's your name, young man?"  And I would say, "My name is Chancellor Alfonso Tzomes.  I'm named after my daddy and my uncle Alfonso.  My nicknames are Pete, Peter, and Peter Pan."  (laughter).  But you spell the name T-Z-O-M-E-S.  If you want to do any research on my family background, you'll find that the name, my family's name, is T-O-M-E-S, okay.  And I don't know the details, but I do know that my mother officially got the name changed from T-O-M-E-S to T-Z-O-M-E-S, and that was even before I was born.  And I guess my father let her do it.  But I know my father's sisters were very upset, because his driver's license used to always say--his driver's license until he died, said T-O-M-E-S.
Speaker 1: So, Chancellor Alfonso--
Speaker 2: T-Z-O-M-E-S.
Speaker 1: Tzomes.  And Alfonso--could you spell that?
Speaker 2: A-L-F-O-N-S-O.
Speaker 1: Okay, thank you.  And your date of birth, and where were you born?
Speaker 2: December 30, 1944 in Williamsport, Pennsylvania.
Speaker 1: And what's today's date?
Speaker 2: Today's date is August 21, 2013.
Speaker 1: And the location of today's interview is where?
Speaker 2: I'm at Ihe HistoryMakers' facilities on South Michigan Avenue in Chicago [Illinois].
Speaker 1: Thank you.
Story_ID: 36637
Speaker 1: I'm going to ask you a few questions, just sort of get you comfortable.  We call them People Magazine type questions.  The first one is what's your favorite color?
Speaker 2: (laughter).  I don't have one (laughter).  I really don't.  I mean, there are some colors that I don't like, you know, like violet.  Bright purples I don't like.  But I think most colors I can accept.  If you go by my wardrobe, most of my clothes have black in them, but I don't think black is my favorite color.
Speaker 1: Okay, that's fine, that's fine.  And your favorite food?
Speaker 2: My favorite food.  Depends on which stage of my life.  When I was growing up it was hoagies and submarine sandwiches.  Now, it's steak.
Speaker 1: Okay, thank you.  And your favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Depends on where I'm living.  In the, where I'm living now in the Midwest, it's the spring, summer, because I like to come to Chicago [Illinois] in the spring and summer. It's a fantastic city, other than in the wintertime.
Speaker 1: And your favorite vacation location, if you have one?
Speaker 2: I don't really have one.  Matter of fact, I don't take enough vacations.  When I was in the [U.S.] Navy, we used to accumulate what's called leave, or vacation days, and we typically earned thirty a year.  And then you could go to sixty.  And then after sixty, you would have to give your days back if you didn't take them.  And I, most of my Navy career I probably took a vacation twice in twenty-six years.
Speaker 1: Thank you.  And your--if you have one, a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: I have two.  One is professionally at work that's in the Navy.  And when I left the Navy, I went to work for Exelon Corporation.  And that's, "Expect what you inspect."  And I picked that up from Admiral Rickover, who's the father of the nuclear Navy.  And that was one of his favorite sayings, and it's something I latched on to.  And it's proved true throughout my entire adult professional life.  Then I have a home one, because my wife gets a kick out of it all the time, because it's a thing between her and myself.  It's "What's your Plan B?"  And she goes through--and a lot of other people--and I say, plan things.  I don't care whether it's events--.  You mentioned vacation--whether it's vacation, whether it's something personal, whether you're behind on your bill payments or whatever--you develop a plan, and you say this is what I'm going to do.  But you don't anticipate something going wrong, or to take your plan off-course.  And I always say, "What's your Plan B?"  Because when you develop a Plan A, you've got to have a Plan B.
Speaker 1: Okay, very good, thank you.
Story_ID: 36638
Speaker 1: Next, we're going to talk about your family background.  Not your nuclear family now, but going back to mom and dad.
Speaker 2: Ahhhh--
Speaker 1: Well, let me just--.  My question is--first tell me about your mother, where she was born and--
Speaker 2: So, this is interesting.  (laughter).  As far as my family, I was adopted.  And I always loved my parents, especially my mother, because it took a special kind of love to adopt somebody and raise them like your own.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So, I grew up--so, I was born in 1944.  And I buried my father in 1998.  So, however many years that is.  That's fifty--
Speaker 1: Fifty--
Speaker 2: Fifty-four years, okay.  And I did not know he was my real father until we were driving to the cemetery to bury him.
Speaker 1: That's very interesting.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  And I've been living with that, because as I was growing up, my father--my mother had the most influence in my life because I was there.  My father was working.  But my mother had the most influence on my life, and--
Speaker 1: Well, can you do this?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: I know you're getting ready to tell an excellent story.  But I want to know--and we're going to get to your father in a minute.  But I want to know just more about her.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Her growing up.  What was--?
Speaker 2: She--
Speaker 1: Was she from--
Speaker 2: She's from Virginia, a place called Gordonsville.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And she had two sisters and a brother, if I'm not mistaken.
Speaker 1: What was your mother's name?
Speaker 2: Hill.  Charlotte Eudora Hill.
Speaker 1: Thank you.
Speaker 2: And she was a schoolteacher, and gave up school teaching when she married my dad.  Actually, when she re-located to Pennsylvania and met my dad and they married, she gave up being a schoolteacher, and was a home--not a homebody--but stayed at home most of the time until there were some financial issues, and she went and got a job probably for about ten years as a nurse's aide.  The other thing she did is-Williamsport [Pennsylvabia]--I have a saying from when I grew up.  It's not just my saying, it's with people who grew up in those days, that "The North conceals what the South reveals," when it came to segregation.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And we had issues where I grew up.  We even had a street, now formerly named--. You don't want me to go there yet.
Speaker 1: Not yet.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: I want to know all about Williamsport--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --and the North versus South.  But your mom--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --and then we'll get to your dad a little bit.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Your mom grows up in Gordonsville?
Speaker 2: Virginia.
Speaker 1: Virginia.  Did she ever talk about growing up in Gordonsville?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: No.
Speaker 2: Now, what we did do, was when I was growing up, her sister lived in Gordonsville at the home they grew up in, in fact, okay.  And up until I was probably nine years old, maybe ten, we used to get on a train and go spend the summers in Gordonsville, okay.  And my father would go with us.  But my father grew up in another town in Louisa County, Pendleton, Virginia.  And (laughter) when we would go there for the summer, my father would go to where he grew up, and I would go where my mom stayed with her sister, because she had indoor toilet, indoor plumbing.  Where my father stayed, they didn't.  They had outdoor facilities.  And what happened, on one of my summers before my mother's sister got indoor plumbing, one of my cousins got stung by a bee on his behind sitting on one of these outdoor toilets.  So, I used to always go stay with my mother and her sister.  And my dad would come over and visit about once a week. (laughter)  And then he would drive us over to spend a day with his family.
Speaker 1: So, your mom didn't talk very much about Gordonsville.  But did she talk about--did you, well, did you know your grandparents on that side?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And remember, I was adopted.  So--
Speaker 1: Right.  That's right, that's right, that's right.
Speaker 2: And at the time, like I just told you the story about me going to Virginia and staying with my mom's sister--if I had known that that was my real grandmother where my dad went, you know, I obviously would have spent more time over there.  But as far as I was concerned there was no family attraction in either case, because I was adopted.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: So, there's things like that that I've re-lived ever since I buried my dad, had I had it to do all over again.
Story_ID: 36639
Speaker 1: What was your mom [Charlotte Eudora Hill] like?
Speaker 2: She was a--
Speaker 1: She was a very loving person, you say?
Speaker 2: She was loving, and a disciplinarian.  Because of her education background, she always drove it into my head that I should always get good grades, and studying came first.  And she used to, especially in my early years, used to go over all my homework with me.  And you'll get a kick out of this, maybe.  But even in, up through high school, okay, she wouldn't let me leave the house until my homework was done, okay--would not let me leave the house until my home was done.
Speaker 1: So you couldn't go--
Speaker 2: Even through high school.
Speaker 1: You couldn't go out and play first and come home and study?  It was--
Speaker 2: No.  And I couldn't go on a date.  I couldn't make a date until the homework was done.  And one of the things--well, I guess you don't want me to go there.  I'll wait until later.
Speaker 1: Yeah, we'll get to that.  And so, a loving person--. She really was very, a disciplinarian.
Speaker 2: Correct.  Made me eat. In other words, my wife's grandson just spent the summer with us.  And we plan our meals around him, okay, as recently as last week.  And I used to get upset.  Like, I made some chicken vegetable soup.  "I don't like soup."  So my wife said, "You're going to eat it anyway."  So, he takes two bites and says, "I don't want it."  So then he gets what he wants.  When I was growing up I had to sit at the table, ate whatever she put in front of me, and if there was anything left over, I sat there, even if it was an hour, until it was all gone.  My mother and father used to both tell me stories about starving kids in China--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --who wished they could have my scraps.  So, I was going to sit there and eat my food.
Speaker 1: And your mom made sure you got your homework done and completed.  Did she sit down with you and work with you on your homework?  Did she do any of that?
Speaker 2: Very early, you know, like in elementary school.  I think, you know, once I got into junior high school and high school--
Speaker 1: Do you know how far she [Tzomes' mother, Charlotte Eudora Hill] went, in terms of her education?
Speaker 2: Yeah, she had a college degree.
Speaker 1: Excellent.  Do you know which college she went to?
Speaker 2: I've forgotten.
Speaker 1: Okay.  If it happens to come back then, just tell me a little bit later.
Speaker 2: It was an historically black college.  I just can't remember which one.
Speaker 1: Do you know maybe what state?  It was maybe Virginia or South Carolina?
Speaker 2: It would probably be Virginia or one of the Carolinas, but I don't remember.
Speaker 1: Okay, thank you.
Story_ID: 36640
Speaker 1: Let's get over to your father, your father's side.  So, what was your father's name?
Speaker 2: His name was James Chancellor [Tomes].  So, my first name was his middle name.
Speaker 1: And where was he born?
Speaker 2: He was born in Pendleton, Virginia.
Speaker 1: Okay, you said Pendleton.
Speaker 2: And he had five sisters, I think it was, I believe.  I need to get this right.  Aunt Mildred, Aunt Mary--
Speaker 1: Well, you say it, you can say it for the mike.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Aunt Mary, Aunt Mildred, Aunt Sarah--three sisters, I guess, three sisters.
Speaker 1: Who was the oldest?
Speaker 2: The oldest is still living.  She's ninety-three [years old].  Her name is Mildred, she lives in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania].
Speaker 1: And where was he, in the birth order of things?
Speaker 2: He was next to, let me see.  We need to figure this out, okay.  He died in 1998.  He was ninety-one.  And this is 2013, and Aunt Mildred's ninety-three.  So, he was probably the second, because I think Aunt Mary, one of his sisters, was older than him.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, he was born and raised in Pendleton?  Is that--?
Speaker 2: Yes, in Virginia.
Speaker 1: In Virginia.
Story_ID: 36641
Speaker 1: So, what was he [Tzomes' father, James Chancellor Tomes] like?  What was he like as a person?
Speaker 2: Ahhh--
Speaker 1: What was his nature?
Speaker 2: He worked.  He was, oh, what's the right word?  He wasn't a modern, he wasn't a traditional parent.  My mother [Charlotte Eudora Hill], I would say, did most of the parenting.  I'm trying to be polite here.
Speaker 1: Well, you can describe it.  You don't have to put it in a few words.  But in terms of--she was a disciplinarian, she helped you with your homework--
Speaker 2: He was the provider.
Speaker 1: He was the provider.
Speaker 2: Okay, and he focused on providing.
Speaker 1: And what did he do?  What was his profession?
Speaker 2: He--
Speaker 1: --or career?
Speaker 2: Well, he worked at a steel plant in my hometown.  And I don't know the details, okay.  But before I was born--no, I guess maybe while I was growing up, he lost his job.  I never did know the details.  Then he went to work as a bartender at a segregated country club in Williamsport [Pennsylvania].  And he worked there for many years.  But my dad also had a drinking problem.  And he ended up getting released from there for (laughter) drinking up the booze, and not paying for it, okay.  And then he got a job as a laborer in a local store in Williamsport, and then he retired from that.
Speaker 1: So, you know, he was basically a laborer in some ways, and does, you know, a number of different things--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And later on when he gets to Williamsport--.  So, that's fine.  But growing up in--did he ever share stories about where, when he grew up?
Speaker 2: Not really.
Speaker 1: Not really.  Did he, how far along did he go in terms of his education?
Speaker 2: Fifth grade.
Speaker 1: And siblings?  Did he have--oh, that's right.  You talked about that.  So, you talked about his siblings already.
Story_ID: 36642
Speaker 1: Did he [Tzomes' father, James Chancellor Tomes] talk about his, well, did he talk about his aunts, his sisters--
Speaker 2: No, but they did--we used to go to Philadelphia [Pennsylvania].  They lived in Philadelphia, which is about 180 miles from Williamsport [Pennsylvania].  And we used to go there frequently, okay.  And they used to talk a lot.  And I got to know them quite well.  And they--well, what is interesting, I talked to you about not knowing he was my father [James Chancellor Tomes].  They all knew who I really was, okay.  And when, at his funeral that I refer to, they, two of his sisters--one of his sisters was there, as well as my cousins.  And you know, we went in the family limo, and we're talking about things.  And they thought I knew all along.  But I never did.
Speaker 1: Alright.  Let's pursue that a little bit.  So, it was--as you said, it wasn't until the day he died that you found out that was your real dad.  So, all these years you were told you were adopted?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And you're saying, "Well, that happens."  Was that--how did that feel, you know?
Speaker 2: It felt like, it felt terrible.  Because I had intentionally not opened myself up to either one of the families.  I considered myself being respectful, okay, but never developing the love that most families do.  You develop a love for your cousins, you develop a love for your uncles, you develop a love for your grandparents.  I did not really develop that, except for now with the aunt that's still living.  And then I have three primary cousins that I've since, you know, changed my feeling about, as far as just having more warmth and love for them.
Speaker 1: So, growing up, you've been told--.  By the way, when were you first told that you were adopted?
Speaker 2: Probably junior high school.
Speaker 1: And how did you find--
Speaker 2: Maybe before that.
Speaker 1: About that time.  So, you know, you're about maybe ten, about eleven or twelve [years old]?
Speaker 2: Even before then.
Speaker 1: Before then, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: But how were you told?  How did you--
Speaker 2: I don't remember, okay.  I do remember finding my original birth certificate.  And my original birth certificate, my name was Nelson Edward Martin.  I don't know if that's when I confronted my parents, or if I knew even when I found the birth certificate.  I really don't remember.
Speaker 1: But just sort of, it was almost like one of those moments in life you look back at now and--
Speaker 2: It may have been somebody made an off the wall comment, okay.  You know, like in Williamsport [Pennsylvania]--maybe a neighbor, or maybe I heard something.  You know, like I was in one room and my mother [Charlotte Eudora Hill] may have been in a room with someone else, and something came up and it caused me to challenge and ask, you know, why did they say that.  I just really don't remember.
Speaker 1: Did that--how did that, if it did, how did that change your relationship with your mom and dad, going forward?  Is it something you ever--?
Speaker 2: It made me--like I said earlier, it made me appreciate them more.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And did they ever sit down and just talk to you a little bit?  You appreciated them more, but was there a point and time of--?
Speaker 2: Not really.  Because I became part of the family, and they both loved me as if I were their own, even though (laughter) it turned out I was my dad's.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: And then they later adopted another person.  I think was about six years old, and they adopted another person.  Because the way my aunt tells the story is that--.  Well, the way I got to be where I am, is my mother had, my mother and father got in a disagreement.  He left the house and had a fling with a woman he met at a bar.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Okay.  So, that's how I came about.  My mother and--.  Now this is--I'm getting this from my aunt.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: After my dad's buried--the funeral--.  So, I'm getting this--the whole thing comes out after 1998, from my aunt that's still alive.
Speaker 1: Which aunt?  Aunt--
Speaker 2: Her name is Aunt Mildred.
Speaker 1: Mildred, okay.
Speaker 2: And so, apparently he had a fling.  I came along.  But my mother--I don't know if it was her religious belief or upbringing, or what have you.  For whatever the reason, she says, "I'm not leaving you.  I'm, we'll adopt him."
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So, adopting was her idea--me.
Speaker 1: Right, right.
Speaker 2: Okay, apparently.
Story_ID: 36643
Speaker 1: Let's back up a bit.  So, how long had they [Tzomes' parents, James Chancellor Tomes and Charlotte Eudora Hill] been married?  Or, you know, at what point and time did they get married?
Speaker 2: Ahhhhh--
Speaker 1: If you can--
Speaker 2: Okay.  When she [Tzomes' mother, Charlotte Eudora Hill] died in 1980--we have to figure this out mathematically.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: She died in 1980.  And when she died, they were married fifty-two or [fifty] three years.
Speaker 1: So, that's 1928?
Speaker 2: So--
Speaker 1: Yeah, my--I used to be outstanding with math. 1928.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I was a math major, and I can't figure it out.  (laughter).
Speaker 1: But I guess what I'm going with is, you know, had they been married for a little while when--?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah, okay.  So they were married, he has this fling?
Speaker 2: Uh huh.
Speaker 1: And so, this other woman says, you know, I'm not going to take care of this child, and--
Speaker 2: I don't know the details.
Speaker 1: Right, you don't know.
Speaker 2: But the facts that I know that I got from my aunt, is that it was my mother's idea to adopt me, okay.  And so, complicating the situation is my mother, the person he had the fling with, was white.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And that further complicated things.
Speaker 1: Right.  But this is all unbeknownst to you.
Speaker 2: Unbeknownst to me.
Speaker 1: Until your father dies in nineteen ninety--
Speaker 2: Eight [1998].
Speaker 1: We'll make a little note to go back around 1998 and come back to that.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: We will definitely come back.  Thank you.
Story_ID: 36644
Speaker 1: So, let's, let's kind of go back to your experience growing up.  What's your earliest childhood memory?  What can you go back to in terms of what you--?
Speaker 2: That's a good question.  I guess getting a crush on my neighbor that I developed a crush on, I guess started when I was five or six years old.
Speaker 1: And what was that, what was her name?
Speaker 2: Her name was Lucille.  There's a story behind that, too.
Speaker 1: Well, tell me that story.
Speaker 2: Okay.  So, I had a tendency--I think you asked me about food.  I told you I liked hoagies when I was growing up?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Well, eating so many hoagies, I also had a weight problem.  I've had a weight problem almost all my life, okay.  And when we get to talking about me in the academy a little later, which I think we'll probably do--
Speaker 1: Yes, we will.
Speaker 2: Okay.  I had to lose seventy pounds to pass the physical to apply, okay.  Lucille, when we were in junior high school and high school, used to always tell me, "Peter, if you lose some weight, maybe I'll pay attention to you."  (laughter).  So, my junior year in high school, I lost seventy-four pounds, okay.  Then I approached her, and she wouldn't have anything to do with me.  (laughter).  So--
Speaker 1: And--
Speaker 2: But we're good friends.
Speaker 1: And how old were you, to have that crush on Lucille?
Speaker 2: I think from about the time we were five years old, all the way through high school.  We used to play together and you know, like I said, we were neighbors, lived a half a block away from each other.
Story_ID: 36645
Speaker 1: Any other memories from around that time when you were that young [in Williamsport, Pennsylvania]?
Speaker 2: Yeah, playing in the coal field.  Where I grew up there was a coal field that had the old fashioned, you know, locomotives, the coal burning locomotives.  They had these houses where it was like a, sort of like a carousel, where the engines would go in for maintenance and things like that.  Well, that had coal dust all over it.  And that was about two or three blocks from my house, and we used to go play football in the coal dust.  We'd come back, and my mother was not very happy.  Because I, especially being light-complected, you know (laughter), all the black coal dust showed up on me worse than sometimes some of the other folks.  But--
Speaker 1: Now, you had I think one sibling growing up?
Speaker 2: A brother.
Speaker 1: Brother.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: What was his name?
Speaker 2: His name was Pierre.
Speaker 1: Pierre.  Is he still alive?
Speaker 2: No, he died in 2001.  He also had a weight problem, and that did it to him.
Speaker 1: And you grew up in Williamsport [Pennsylvania]?
Speaker 2: Correct.
Speaker 1: Williamsport, Pennsylvania.
Speaker 2: Correct.  Home of Little League Baseball.
Speaker 1: Thank you.  That's absolutely correct.
Speaker 2: As a matter of fact, the Little League World Series is this weekend.
Speaker 1: That's right, that's right.
Speaker 2: Well, it's going on now, but the championship game is this weekend.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  Well, we'll talk about that.  We'll talk about baseball.
Story_ID: 36646
Speaker 1: Tell us about Williamsport [Pennsylvania] a little bit.  So, geographically where it is in Pennsylvania--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And then we'll get kind of, we'll trim down geographically to your neighborhood.  So--
Speaker 2: Well, Williamsport was, is right in the center--.  If you can picture Pennsylvania, and you put your finger in the middle of the state with your eyes closed, you should hit Williamsport.  It's on the west branch of the Susquehanna River, okay.  And growing up was unique.  I guess I can lead in now about the North reveals what the--the South reveals what the North conceals.
Speaker 1: Well, hold that thought.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: We're going to get you there.
Speaker 2: Because that has a lot to do with how I frame my attitudes about a lot of things, both growing up and then after I grew up.
Speaker 1: Absolutely.  We're going to get that in just a few minutes.
Speaker 2: So, it's in the center of the state.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Okay.  It's a small town.  Back when I was growing up, it had about forty-thousand people, forty, fifty thousand people.  There was no close large city.  Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] is 180 miles southeast of Williamsport.  Penn State College [State College, Pennsylvania]--because of Penn State and all the notoriety here this past year with the coaches--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --and Joe Paterno [former football coach].  Penn State is thirty-two miles from Williamsport, about thirty-two, right.
Speaker 1: And I think Harrisburg [Pennsylvania] is--
Speaker 2: Harrisburg is eighty-nine miles south.  That's funny-when we were there--.  I just got to tell you a quick story about Harrisburg [Pennsylvania].
Speaker 1: Fine.
Speaker 2: So, I'm stationed in Hawaii.  And we're going to get around to me being nuclear trained and all that stuff.  So, I'm stationed in Hawaii.  And when Three Mile Island had its accident in 1979--remember that?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: So, my mother [Charlotte Eudora Hill] is panicking in Williamsport [Pennsylvania], eighty-nine miles away.  And so she calls me, panicked, okay.  Because it's all over the news.  And so, she says she's got to get out of town right away.  And I say this because you mentioned Harrisburg.  And I said, "Why?"  And she says, "Well, Miss Hilda--"  When I was growing up, we always called people by Miss or Mister, and then their name, okay.  "Miss Hilda is leaving right now, and she's going to be with her son up in upstate New York, okay.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: And Miss Hilda lived about a block away, okay.  So I said, "Mom," I said, "I'm in the nuclear business."  I said, "Are you going to believe Miss Hilda or are you going to believe me when I tell you it's safe to stay there?"  (laughter).  So, she listened and she stayed.  She didn't try to leave.  But--
Speaker 1: Thank you.  I was just trying to, you know, from a reference standpoint, get to--get to where we are--.  Eventually, you can talk to me about your (unclear), the experience.
Story_ID: 36647
Speaker 1: But, just maybe you--I know it's a little difficult to talk about.  But how did your mom--your mother [Charlotte Eudora Hill] and your father [James Chancellor Tomes], end up in Williamsport, Pennsylvania if, you know, he's from Virginia, and--
Speaker 2: They met in, and I don't know the details.
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: They met in Phoenixville, Pennsylvania.
Speaker 1: Which is?
Speaker 2: Close to Philadelphia [Pennsylvania].
Speaker 1: Thank you.
Speaker 2: Okay.  That's where they met and married, and re-located to Williamsport.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I don't know the details as to when or why.  I'm assuming it had to do with the job.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That's what I'm assuming, but I don't know.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: There was no other--unless my uncle--.  The reason I say that, my mother had a brother that lived in Williamsport.  But I don't know if he preceded her there or if she preceded him there.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 36268
Speaker 1: I guess I should have mentioned earlier that the black population of Williamsport [Pennsylvania]--.  So, when I first was born--this is 1944 thereabouts--in the upper '40s [1940s], lower '50s [1950s], the population was about eight--seven or eight hundred blacks, okay.  But then we had--I'm not going to use the term explosion, but Williamsport, as I said, is in the center of the state.  And a lot of Pennsylvania--like, I believe the state motto back in those days, and may still be, is that "Pennsylvania has everything."  Point being, it has a little bit of everything as far as the land, hills, mountains, waters, what have you, including farming.  As a matter of fact, I used to work summers detasseling corn, picking strawberries, picking blueberries, picking tomatoes, okay.  And so, there were a lot of migrant workers coming through from the south, seasonal workers.  And over the period probably starting in the early '50s [1950s], until I even went away for college, it would not be abnormal for migrant workers to come up and stay after the farming season, find a job, and make Williamsport their home.  So, by the time I graduated from high school, I'd say the black population was somewhere around fifteen hundred to two thousand, thereabouts.
Speaker 2: Thank you for explaining that.  Because one thing I was looking for was the migration of black folks up to the north from the south, and that's very enlightening.
Speaker 1: Jobs weren't very good, but they came.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Story_ID: 36269
Speaker 1: So, you're in Williamsport [Pennsylvania] with your mom [Charlotte Eudora Hill] and dad [James Chancellor Tomes], and Pierre [Tzomes' brother] is younger?
Speaker 2: Uh huh.
Speaker 1: A couple of years younger.  What was your neighborhood like where you grew up?
Speaker 2: We had two neighborhoods.  Actually, we had, I'm going to put it this way.  We had two black neighborhoods, and then we had the rest of the town, alright.  And my neighborhood was all black.  Actually, it was (laughter)--Williamsport had its borders, okay.  And if you were black, you stayed in those borders.  And in fact, where I lived, two blocks away was the beginning of a white neighborhood.  And we had, this was in the 1950s, late '50s [1950s], we had a social worker who was the executive director of the community center, tried to move two blocks from where I lived, okay, actually bought a house.  And they--he had threats, death threats.  And they threw rocks in his house two or three times, broke windows out of his house, because they didn't want a black person living there.  That's just two blocks from where I lived, okay.  You, the schools were integrated, obviously, but that didn't mean much.  But the, so all your friends were black.  Most folks didn't socialize with whites until they probably got to junior high school or high school.  And even then, who you socialized with, it was a function of the parent of the white person.  You know, I don't want my kids playing with any black kids.  And in those days, obviously we were Negroes.  So, you sort of grew up with your own and socialized, went to church with your own, except the--.  Now, sports--okay, like basketball, baseball, all the traditional sports, we tried out for and were accepted on the various sports teams, okay.  However, you still went your own way after the game.
Speaker 1: Now, you described two black neighborhoods.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Was one blue collar and the other one--
Speaker 2: No, no, no, no, no.
Speaker 1: They were just--
Speaker 2: No.  They were just physically separated by probably about a mile, okay.
Speaker 1: And I think you had been--
Speaker 2: And the one portion of the neighborhood had the projects, the housing projects was the center of it.  So, one of the housing projects in Williamsport was, you know, primarily for blacks.  Now, I'm sure it's integrated.  Back in those days, you didn't have any whites living in the black projects.
Story_ID: 36270
Speaker 1: And on your immediate street--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Can you describe your house and your neighborhood and your friends that you kind of grew up with?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  My house is kind of interesting, specifically, my house and the house across the street.  Their name was Mallicks [ph.] and their daughter Sonya and I grew up together.  We played together the whole time we were growing up, living right across the street.  She was in my house half the time, and I was at her house half the time.  The, what I'm leading up to is part of the experience of living in Williamsport [Pennsylvania] in those days, is there were no hotels where blacks could go stay.  And we had two things that attract black people that needed temporary lodging.  One was a technical school, a technical trade school, called Williamsport Technical Institute.  And the other was entertainers like, did you ever hear of The Ink Spots?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Well, when The Ink Spots came to Williamsport to play, they had no place to stay.  So, my mother [Charlotte Eudora Hill] and Mrs. Mallicks created tourist homes.  Our tourist home was Tzomes Tourist Home and the Mallicks' was Mallicks Tourist Home.  And the word informally got out via--for lack of a better term, the black underground--that when you come to Williamsport, this is where you need to go stay because you can't stay at a hotel, okay.  So, then I had the Elks IBPOE, Elks Lodge, was next to my house.
Speaker 1: IBPOE?
Speaker 2: IBPOE, Improved Benevolent Protective Order of Elks.  I'm sorry, you're black.  I thought you knew what IBPOE was. (laughter).
Speaker 1: Well, I really, I need edification for everyone else.
Speaker 2: Well, the difference--you know, you've got BPOE, Benevolent Protective Order of Elks.  When we, when they set up a black Elks organization--my father [James Chancellor Tomes] was an Elk, okay--they put in 'I', for 'Improved' because we'll accept everybody.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Whereas the BPOE would not accept blacks, okay.  The, we had a dentist lived across the street, the only black--the only black medical person in town was a dentist.  His name was Dunston.  My church was two blocks down the street.  I grew up in a Baptist church.  The Dunstons had a bunch of boys.  We played together.  So myself, the Dunstons, Sonya, and then Lucille, the girl I had the crush on from age five...  So, we were all sort of the clique that played together all the time.  Then my godmother lived--we lived on a corner, two streets.  Our address was on a street named Park Avenue, and the side street on the other side of the house was Walnut Street.  And down Walnut Street my godmother lived, the only black barber in town lived.  But his barbershop was somewhere else.  And then another girl that I grew up from school with was two doors down.  So it was, we were all just together, and we grew up and socialized together, and that's what we did.
Speaker 1: So, in terms of sort of square miles or square yards, it sounds like you had a few blocks--you went in one direction and a few blocks another.  And you didn't go beyond a certain area, as you described, but how--
Speaker 2: Until we got to school, because we walked to school.
Speaker 1: And--
Speaker 2: And everybody looked out for each other.  You know, I'm sure you've seen this.  You've probably interviewed a lot of people like this too.  But, you know, the business about it takes a village to raise a child, and all that kind of stuff.  Well, that's the way life was.  I mean, you did not act up when you were away from home, because one of my mother's friends or father's friends, are going to see me, and they're going to tell, or they're going to escort me back home.
Speaker 1: So, you're one of those stories about if Miss so-and-so down the street saw you do something, they're going to yank you and take you home and then tell your mom.
Speaker 2: Correct.
Speaker 1: Speaking of which, your mom was a disciplinarian.  So, was that in terms of, I'll use the term corporal punishment.  Was that in your home?  Did--
Speaker 2: Oh, I got punished.  I got switched.  She had her favorite--we had bushes in the front.  And she used to cut the, you know, two or three branches off the bush.  And that's why I got, I got whipped quite a bit.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 36271
Speaker 1: So would you, when you were young, would you describe yourself as--.  How would you describe yourself as a young person back in, you know, elementary school?
Speaker 2: Probably a rabble rouser, probably.
Speaker 1: Can you tell me a little--.  Back to your home--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: In the neighborhood could you describe some sights, sounds and smells growing up in that part of the world?
Speaker 2: Sounds--we had the public bus stop right in front of our house.  Across the street on one side we had a gas station.  I'll never forget.  That was, other than--.  No, that was my first job, even before I spent the summers picking stuff, pumping gas at a gas station when gas was twenty-nine cents a gallon.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So, and so I used to pump gas, clean windshields.  So, there's a gas station across--the smell of the gas station, being close to the gas station with the oil and stuff.  It's right across the street.  This town was clean.  It used to be the lumber capitol of the country until they cut down all the trees, like in the early 1900s.  So, I don't recall anything unusual about smells, other than things were pretty much clean except for the coal field, which you could smell when you got within a half a block of the engine house that I was trying to describe.  You could smell the coal.  And then the coal got in your skin.  And if you didn't take a bath frequently--and we didn't--then after awhile you could smell coal, we could smell coal on each other, okay.  And that stuff really penetrated the skin.  Because I remember when I was growing up, you know, Saturday nights before church was when we took a bath.  We didn't take a bath except for once a week on Saturday nights.  So, most of us that lived in that area probably smelled like coal most of the time.
Speaker 1: And sights, and sounds of trains, and other such things.
Speaker 2: The train that you mentioned--you could hear the train when it came by.  Because the train station, line of sight--that the train station, the passenger train that I told you we used to take to go to Virginia, line of sight, that train station was probably a mile away.  I'm not driving through those streets, but line of sight is probably about a mile away.  So yeah, you heard the trains all the time, both freight trains and passenger trains.
Story_ID: 36272
Speaker 1: Now, in your home itself, anything that you remember in particular around the traditions--Christmas, the holidays?
Speaker 2: Christmas, sort of a tradition, okay.  Because we always got our Christmas tree Christmas Eve.  And what happened, my dad [James Chancellor Tomes] got paid--or now that I'm grown up, it's not really--it was his paycheck, it was his Christmas bonus.  My dad would get his Christmas bonus, which was a few dollars, okay, and come and give, I'm assuming most of the money to my mother [Charlotte Eudora Hill].  And then that's when we would go and get a Christmas tree.  So we set up Christmas tree on Christmas Eve.  Unbeknownst to me until I found out there was no Santa Claus, okay, that's also when my mother would go and get the toys for me, and then after my brother [Pierre Tzomes] came along, for the two of us.  In my particular case, that's all the money she had for Christmas, was that that my dad gave her.  So, that's for the tree and presents, okay, playing Santa Claus.  Well, my birthday's December 30th.  So, I always used to tell people, and I still do, that I got robbed out of Christmas when I was growing up.  Because my mother, with that Christmas bonus money, would always buy gifts and put one aside because my birthday's five days after Christmas.  So, I'd always have a birthday present.  So, if I had been born in January, February or March, I would have gotten all my Christmas presents, plus would have got my birthday present then too.  But that's not the way it worked out.
Speaker 1: I understand.
Speaker 2: So that was, that was kind of the tradition.  But tradition isn't really the right word.  It was a ritual.
Story_ID: 36273
Speaker 1: What about, you mentioned church.  You went to a Baptist church.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Did your family go regularly?
Speaker 2: My mother [Charlotte Eudora Hill] and I, not my dad [James Chancellor Tomes].  And so, I sort of grew up in the church.  As a matter of fact, when it came time for me to go to the [U.S.] Naval Academy--and we'll probably talk about that later.  But my mother--there's a certain minimum amount of money that you have to pay to go to a service academy, okay.  In those days, I think it was three hundred and fifty dollars.  And my mother came up a hundred dollars short.  And the church, that church, because of my involvement with the church, gave me a hundred dollars to go off to the academy.  And another story about the church--because in my current church in Illinois, I was telling the pastor--because they want me to get involved with something in the church in Illinois, but I can't sing.  But growing up, I used to sing in the youth choir.  And when I was about thirteen [years old]--and my godmother, the lady I told you who lived across the street, my godmother was the choir director.  So, I sang so badly that one time they got fed up with practice.  And they said, they said, "Miss Lizzie, you've got to rid of Peter.  He's messing us up."  So, she kicked me out the choir, my godmother.  And then they made me a doorman.  We didn't have ushers.  This church was a small church.  So, then they made me the doorman for the church so I could do something.
Speaker 1: What was the name of the church?
Speaker 2: Ebenezer Baptist Church [Williamsport, Pennsylvania].
Speaker 1: And it was 100 percent black?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.
Speaker 1: Do you remember the pastor?
Speaker 2: Yeah, Woody.
Speaker 1: Pastor Woody.
Story_ID: 36274
Speaker 1: Let's talk a bit about going to school.  What elementary school, or primary school, did you attend [in Williamsport, Pennsylvania]?
Speaker 2: I went to two.  I went to a place called Transeau--
Speaker 1: Could you spell that for us?
Speaker 2: T-R-A-N-S-E-A-U.  And then I went to, that was to the fifth grade, and they closed the school.  Then I went to sixth grade in a place called Cochran.  And it's got a name, but I just can't remember the full name.  And then that was the sixth grade.  Then I went to Stevens Junior High School for grade seven through nine, and then Williamsport High School for high school.
Speaker 1: So, in elementary school, do you remember any of your teachers?
Speaker 2: Ah, (laughter), funny you should ask.  I forget her name, but she was the sweetest lady in second grade.  She even made it a point at Christmastime to visit all the kids at Christmastime.  But I can't remember her name.  My favorite teacher growing up, was in junior high school.  Her name was Miss McGraw.
Speaker 1: But in elementary school, you said she visited all the--
Speaker 2: My second grade teacher--and I can't remember her name, visited the homes of all her kids.
Speaker 1: How many students in the class?
Speaker 2: Probably about 20, 25.  She was a sweet lady.
Speaker 1: And what classes or what subjects do you remember the most when you were in elementary school, if there are any?
Speaker 2: I was always bad in art.  I got Ds and Fs [grades] in art all the way through school.  I cannot draw.  I can't draw a straight line with a ruler.
Speaker 1: So, you have Miss Lizzie kicking you out for singing [Church choir; Ebenezer Baptist Church, Williamsport]--
Speaker 2: (laughter).
Speaker 1: And school art--.  But what, was there a subject that you felt you were really good.
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, I was good.  I've always been good at math.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Even though I demonstrated it poorly early.  (laughter).  But math--I kind of took a liking to geography and history growing up, and science.  But art and music, I couldn't do.
Speaker 1: Since you later on went into the Nuclear Power Program, where science was something you were good at--.  But did you really enjoy any particular part, parts of science, or just--?
Speaker 2: No, just math.
Speaker 1: Just math.
Story_ID: 36275
Speaker 1: In elementary school [in Williamsport, Pennsylvania], did you have a lot of friends that--I think you talked about some of them before.
Speaker 2: But did you play sports?
Speaker 1: Yeah, I played Little League baseball.  And as a matter of fact, I thought I was pretty good.  They featured me--I don't know if you remember Roy Campanella, 1954 [Brooklyn] Dodgers.
Speaker 2: I do.  But some other folks might not, but we can talk about him.
Speaker 1: Yeah, Jackie Robinson was the first black in baseball, okay.  And then Roy Campanella was up there close, okay.  So, there were very few blacks, okay.  And I was a catcher.  And so, my coach used to call me Little Campy.  And they ran a story about me in the hometown newspaper.  That swelled my head.  That's what led me--and I'm sure we're going to talk later about how I got to the Academy.  But one of the things I wanted to do when I was growing up was become a professional baseball player.  And that's how that got started, with them calling me Little Campy, from I think I was about ten years old, nine or ten years old.
Speaker 2: And any other sports that you played?
Speaker 1: Now, I played intramural basketball, like with a church league, but I wasn't very good.  And, but baseball was my sport.
Speaker 2: And--
Speaker 1: And football, I thought I was too small, and I was afraid of getting hurt.  And plus, I had the weight problem, too.  (laughter).  I told you about it.
Speaker 2: Right.  Was there, at that point and time in your life, were you inspired by any teachers or anybody in the community when you were young, ten, eleven [years old] or so?
Speaker 1: Miss McGraw in junior high school.  And that was eighth grade.
Speaker 2: That's eighth grade?
Speaker 1: Yeah.  As a matter of fact, when I went away to college and used to go home, I always made it a point to go visit her, because I attribute my--for lack of a better term--my academic discipline to my mother [Charlotte Eudora Hill] and her.
Speaker 2: So, you were a good, sounds like a good student getting--except for art, getting--
Speaker 1: As and Bs.
Speaker 2: As and Bs.  And everything was good.
Story_ID: 36276
Speaker 1: But you just at that point and time may not have had anything, any aspiration to--except for professional baseball.
Speaker 2: Well, I wanted to do three things when I grew up.  And I developed this probably in high--well, I know when I did.  It was in junior high school, okay.  I wanted to be a professional baseball player, number one; or a garbage man, or a pimp.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: The reason for the garbage man is the guy used to come to our house every Friday to collect for the garbage.  And in those days I didn't recognize it, but my mother [Charlotte Eudora Hill] was paying fifty cents a week to take away the garbage.  But the guy used to always pull out a big wad of money, literally, about that thick, to give my mother change.  So I said, oh, garbage men make a lot of money, okay.  And then I got influenced by television and a few other people about the pimp thing.
Speaker 1: Did anyone in your family--did you communicate any of those possible professions to anybody in your family at that point?
Speaker 2: Ah, no.
Speaker 1: Just something you kept to yourself?
Speaker 2: That's correct.
Story_ID: 36277
Speaker 1: Now, your brother, Pierre [Tzomes].  How, what's his--how many--eight years apart?
Speaker 2: Ah six, six or seven [years].
Speaker 1: So did you, growing up with Pierre, did you guys hang out together?
Speaker 2: No, completely different.  He had a learning, he had a--I don't want to say learning disability, but he flunked the first and second grade.  And I've never seen anybody flunk both first and second grade my entire life, okay.  He ended up getting a trade.  There's this place that I told you about, the Williamsport Technical Institute.
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: He ended up going there in his adult life.  And he picked up a trade as operating a, like a print press, or something like that.  And he developed some serious medical problems, and also the weight issue.  And he died early.  He was like in his late thirties, early forties, when he died.
Speaker 1: Okay. Thank you.
Story_ID: 36278
Speaker 1: So, you end up going to junior high school.  What was the name of the junior high school, again?
Speaker 2: Stevens.
Speaker 1: Stevens.  And--
Speaker 2: Thaddeus Stevens.  I forgot who it's named after, but--
Speaker 1: So, you're at Thaddeus Stevens Junior High School [Williamsport, Pennsylvania].  And how was that?  How was that experience overall?
Speaker 2: It was okay.  It was okay.
Speaker 1: Did you have a--you still had your friends and still playing baseball?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  That's interesting, because I told you there's two--actually I misled you.  I told you there was two primarily black neighborhoods.  There were three, now that I'm thinking about it.  And the reason I just now thought about it was because when it came time to go to junior high school we were at--there's three junior high schools in town, and there were blacks in all three.
Speaker 1: And so, they all came together?
Speaker 2: We, well, Williamsport High School, that's when we all ended up at the same school together.
Speaker 1: So, how many high schools were there?
Speaker 2: Three.
Speaker 1: Thank you.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: So, when you're in junior high school, I read somewhere that was a point and time in your life where maybe a career started coming.
Speaker 2: Well, that was the, that was the [U.S. Naval] Academy experience.  But you have to put things in perspective about growing up in Williamsport racially.  And I alluded earlier about the South revealing what the North concealed. Because living in the North, okay, you were expected to remain in your place.  That meant education; that meant work; that meant socializing with whites--what have you.  Like, we even had a street in Williamsport, its formal name was Nigger Hollow.  That was the name of the street.  The way it got the name, it was part of the Underground Railroad, from slavery days.  But that's, even though it was part of the Underground Railroad, they named it Nigger Hollow.  And it wasn't until maybe the late '60s [1960s], early '70s [1970s], that the name got changed to Freedom Road, with some backing by the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People].  That's how the name got changed, and its current name is Freedom Road.  I used to always get very upset.  As I alluded to earlier, we always spoke to adults by calling them by Mr. and Mrs., okay.  But anybody would call anybody black by their first name.  So here's my dad [James Chancellor Tomes], you know, forty-something years old, and I'm thirteen years old.  And I have to call the white guy's father Mr. Johnson, but this same thirteen year old calls my dad Chauncey.  He doesn't call him Mr. Tzomes.  Mister or Misses wasn't in anybody white person's vocabulary for addressing you.  The, we had an issue where some minor, professional--a minor league baseball team in Williamsport, okay--.  So, I want you to look at my hair, okay.  There's nothing unique about my hair, right?  So, the owner of the team, his brother had a barbershop.  So he used to give free haircuts to anybody that hit a homerun from the pro baseball team, okay.  So, the black players on the team--there's typically one or two, okay--would not use them.  So one year, one of them gave me his free haircut certificate.  So, I go in the barbershop.  And as soon as I go in there, he says, "We don't cut your kind of hair in here," okay.  This is my town, okay.  The country club that my dad worked at, I could not go in the front door.  Blacks weren't allowed, it was a white only country club.  And my dad had to put up with people--.  You know, because he was there, he had to put up people talking.  And occasionally racial things came up, okay.  But I called myself getting back at the country club.  My dad, because he was a bartender, when I came home from college one summer he got me a job there waiting tables, okay.  So, I'll never forget.  Top shelf scotch was ninety-five cents a drink, and bottom shelf scotch was eighty-five cents a drink.  I developed this knack of determining who'd be a good tipper.  This is a segregated country club now, okay.  And so, let's do scotch.  So, they would order top shelf scotch at ninety-five cents a drink.  So, I always gave them top shelf scotch their first round.  Because the way the bar worked is I would pay the bartender, okay, unlike the way they do it nowadays.  And then every round after that, I would charge them for top shelf scotch but give them bottom shelf scotch, and pocket the money.  That was my way of getting at someone.
Story_ID: 36279
Speaker 1: So, Mr. Tzomes--well, can I call you Pete?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Thanks, Pete.
Speaker 2: Please do.
Speaker 1: Okay, thank you.  So, you were talking about your experience at the country club.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: What was the name of the country club?
Speaker 2: Williamsport Country Club.
Speaker 1: And your dad [James Chancellor Tomes] was a bartender.
Speaker 2: Bartender, yes.
Speaker 1: By the way, did it ever get integrated?  Has it ever?
Speaker 2: Apparently it is now.  The reason I say that is our--let's see, what class reunion did I just miss?  '62 [1962] to '12 [2012], what's that?  Sixtieth?  Yeah.  The Sixtieth Class Reunion, I didn't go to.  And I was going to go, because I was going to make it a point to give a speech about how in high school I couldn't go in the front door, and here I am sitting here partying, and I couldn't belong.  But I didn't make the Sixtieth Reunion.  But, so, I'm assuming it's integrated, since they had the Sixtieth High School Reunion there.  I can't tell you when it got integrated.
Speaker 1: Sure.
Speaker 2: It was just, just kind of interesting.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now--and you were talking about Williamsport, and really, I think some of the racism--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --in that part of Pennsylvania.  And--
Speaker 2: Well, when you say racism, it's--you were kept in your place.  You knew where you couldn't go.  And I used to ask my mother [Charlotte Eudora Hill] and father--you know why, you know, why is this?  Why can't I do this?  Why do they call you by your first name?  And they sort of told me, you know, that's part of being black growing up in America--except you know, in those days it was colored, you know.  It was part of being colored and growing up in America, and you just had to deal with it.  And I did not notice--even though we went to Virginia--.  Like I told you, we went to Virginia on the trains.  But I was young, and I don't remember the white and colored bathrooms at the train station, I really don't.  But my mother always made it a point to shelter me from that kind of stuff when we went to Virginia.  But in the whole time I'd spend my summers in Virginia, it was out in the country and, you know, all black, so.  But it's just part of being colored.  This is the way you're treated.  This is what you're expected to do.  This is where you can go.  This is where you can't go.  These neighborhoods, you can't go in.  If you do, you might get beat up, or what have you.
Speaker 1: So, did you sense at the time there were a lot of unspoken rules?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.
Speaker 1: Just, just--
Speaker 2: That's why the saying, "The North conceals what the South reveals."  I mean after I grew up, for example, I didn't know my first southern experience until I was refused service at a Tastee Cream [ph.] in, where was I?  I think I was in Louisiana, okay, after I was an adult.  So, that's my first experience of not getting served anywhere.  Because in Williamsport, yeah, we didn't have segregated lunch counters.  Down south, they did.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But not in Williamsport.
Speaker 1: Now, that first experience when you went down south, about how old were you then?
Speaker 2: I was in the [U.S.] Naval Academy.  I was about nineteen, twenty years old.
Story_ID: 36280
Speaker 1: I want to go maybe to a touchy subject.  But I just want to get your impressions.  You're fair complected.
Speaker 2: Correct.
Speaker 1: And you talk about, you know, being black.  Did you ever feel that you were different because you're--
Speaker 2: I got mistaken--
Speaker 1: This is growing up.
Speaker 2: Growing up?  I'd gotten mistaken for not being black, even after I was an adult, okay.  That's happened, you know, a few times.  The (laughter)--I had a friend--.  At first, you couldn't interracially date when I was growing up, okay.  So, I don't know, I can't remember if I was a sophomore or a junior in high school.  But anyway, a white girl had gotten attracted to a friend of mine, and they wanted to go on a date.  And they both asked me if I would go pick her up from her parents and tell her parents I was Italian.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And we did.  I went--she was a cute girl.  And I went and got the girl, and they ended up in the back seat of my car.  I dropped them off to wherever they wanted to go, and then I went on about my business.  But, you're right.  People--I've been mistaken growing up a few times in my younger days when I was an adult, especially after I got in the [U.S.] Navy.
Speaker 1: Well, I can say that a bit.  My father was fair complected, almost the same complexion.  And he never talked about it growing up in North Carolina.  So, but I know those experiences are different if not difficult, too.  So, I'm just--
Speaker 2: And then also growing up--and I'm, I mean I'm sure you're aware of it--especially in those days--your skin color was a big deal.  Some people socialized by their skin color, you know.  Lights socialized with whites, darker people socialized with darker people.  And I was experienced to that, too, because everybody on my father's [James Chancellor Tomes] side of the family is very, very light complected.  And my adopted mother's family, the one in Virginia, you know, they were dark complected.  But you'd always hear it in adult conversations.  I mean, the skin tone would come up.  And I got exposed to that, too, listening around my family and the way people would talk about each other.  And it's unfortunate, but those conversations did exist, and sometimes that influenced who you socialized with.
Story_ID: 36281
Speaker 1: So, going back to Williamsport [Pennsylvania], were there any other experiences that had an impact on you about the African American community and prejudice, racism--.  And I'm sure there's a number.  But anything else in particular?
Speaker 2: Other than just the normal stuff--you can't go here and you can't do this.  We did not have the openly segregated--.  Well, let me put it this way.  We did have a segregated country club.  I'm willing to bet we had segregated restaurants.  I was just never exposed to any of them, okay.  I'm--there had to be.  If the country club is segregated, there had to be some upscale restaurants that were segregated.  But the public stuff was never an issue.  Riding in a bus was never an issue.  No matter where you rode on the bus--at least from my recollection.  I started riding the bus with my mother [Charlotte Eudora Hill] when I was about five years old.  And she used to take the bus to go downtown shopping, okay.  And that was never an issue.  I don't know if taxicabs were an issue because we weren't, we didn't have enough money where we'd ride around in a taxicab.  But I'm sure there may have been some issues there.
Speaker 1: So as a young person, there were certain ground rules that you didn't--it wasn't as blatant as say being in Alabama or Mississippi--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: --with the signs and all that stuff.
Speaker 2: No signs, right.
Story_ID: 36282
Speaker 1: So, let's go to Thaddeus Stevens Junior High School [Williamsport, Pennsylvania].
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And I think off-camera--in my notes there were some experiences that, positive experiences, that you had that may have impacted you, looking forward to your future career.  Would you--
Speaker 2: That was, I was in the eighth grade.  And I think what you're referring to is I was in the eighth grade.  And the [U.S.] Naval Academy midshipmen can get extra, we call it leave in the military, but vacation days if they volunteer to go give presentations to help recruiting for the Academy in their hometowns.  And that's primarily before a holiday, like a Thanksgiving or a Christmas holiday.  And we had a midshipman come on one of those trips to my junior high school.  I was in the eighth grade, and they gave a presentation along with a movie called 'Ring of Valor'.  'Ring of Valor' still exists.  It's about the Naval Academy ring and what's behind it.  And I was impressed.  And after the presentation, about a day or so later I went to our--we had a junior high school all-purpose counselor.  He was the assistant principal, but he was also the official counselor.  And I went to him and I told him that I thought I wanted to go the Naval Academy, that I was impressed by the presentation.  And I'll never forget, you know, I'll never ever forget.  He looked at me and says, "Pete, don't you know that Negroes cannot go to the Naval Academy, you're not allowed?"  And I made the point of saying, "The midshipman didn't say, they didn't say anything about it in the movie, and I want to learn about the Naval Academy."  And he told me, he says, "Well, you're not going to go there.  You need to set your goals on being something reasonable.  You still want to try to go to college, but you need to set your goals on doing something reasonable, because you're not going to go to the Naval Academy."
Speaker 1: And how did you react to that?
Speaker 2: I was upset.  And I still said, you know, it didn't say that.  And I finally, when I got on to high school--well, actually I got--what's the right word?  There was a TV movie, a show, came on--a half hour show every year around that time called 'Men of Annapolis'.  And I used to watch that religiously.  If we'd had DVRs in those days I would have been recording every episode.  And so, that sucked me in, in saying that's where I want to go.
Speaker 1: So, you're in eighth grade.  That's nineteen fifty--
Speaker 2: Seven [1957].
Speaker 1: 1957, or so.  Do you remember the name of the midshipman that--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: No, okay.  And the counselor that--?
Speaker 2: (laughter).  I know I said I probably ought to reveal those names.  But I've gone all these years not embarrassing him, so I'll continue not to mention his name.
Speaker 1: That's fine.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: But that--so it got you upset that he said that to you.  But sounds like--did it get you motivated in a different way?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: How so?
Speaker 2: So, you know, somebody's not going to tell me I can't go there when I don't see the--when I'm looking at the TV show all the time, okay.  And then it wasn't until later, until probably my junior year in high school when I was really getting serious in applying for the Academy, that I recognized that there were a few blacks there, okay.  And then Wesley Brown, who's the very first black Naval Academy graduate--he graduated in 1947, and there's a book about him.  I didn't know about him until after I'd gotten into the Academy.  But if you look at the high school counselor's reference point, the very first black graduated in 1947, okay.  So, here you got my counselor in 1958, okay, whose exposure is not recognizing that maybe one or two blacks have gone into the Naval Academy.  I'm not defending him, okay.  Because being--with everything else the way it was in Williamsport, including the schools and the counseling and stuff you got in the school, his job was to counsel me to find out what I needed to do, if that's what I wanted to do for a dream.  And at that point it was a dream.
Story_ID: 36283
Speaker 1: So, in high school [Williamsport High School, Williamsport, Pennsylvania]--just to jump from junior high school to high school--what was the demographics there?  You know, minorities--black students versus white students.
Speaker 2: Well, my class, my graduating class, we had about--oh, I want to say about eight, nine hundred thereabouts.  And there were I believe--one, two, three, four, five--five or six of us in my graduating class.
Speaker 1: Out of nine hundred or so students?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Remember, I told you the black population was still relatively small.  That's not the total population of the school.  That was my class.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: So, I would say the other classes at the time I was in high school probably had about the same, the same type distribution.
Speaker 1: And students going to just college, what was that like?
Speaker 2: Not very many.
Speaker 1: Did you know of anybody going off to, say--
Speaker 2: Yeah.  The dentist across the street--in fact, all his sons turned out to be doctors or dentists, all of them.  He had five sons (laughter).  And we had a social worker.  We didn't have many role models when I was growing up.  And the two most educated people--actually, there were three.  There was a female teacher who was up in years, and she had been teaching at our elementary school.  She was well respected.  There was the dentist, and then we had a social worker, okay.  We had a community center, the Bethune Douglas Community Center.  And his name was P.D. Mitchell.  And he was always pushing for people to go to college.  So, most folks that went to college did so because they set their goals to do that.  And they got some financial aid--myself included--when I went to school in New York, okay.  Or, their parents pushed them in that direction, like the dentist and Mr. Mitchell.  Mr. Mitchell's sons and daughters all went to college.  Athletes--like when I was growing up we had a guy get a full ride for Purdue [University] for playing football.  And then he went there and messed up socially.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But in my period of growing up, there was only one that got a full scholarship for a football team, one black out of Williamsport.  There's been several since.  But back when I was growing up in junior high school and high school--I can't give you a percentage.  I can just tell you that most folks went on to work or went into the service, okay.  And then the next pocket were folks that pursued an education, and most that did had to get some assistance.
Speaker 1: So--
Speaker 2: And there was a state teacher's college not too far away that attracted several.  Because they were close enough to home where it wouldn't be as expensive to go somewhere else--it wasn't expensive to go there, compared to somewhere else.  And then we had a few people going to historically black colleges.
Speaker 1: Thank you.
Story_ID: 36284
Speaker 1: So, let me make sure I got it.  Was it junior year the counselor--
Speaker 2: Junior high school [Stevens Junior High School, Williamsport, Pennsylvania], eighth grade.
Speaker 1: Junior high school, the counselor said to you in high school--
Speaker 2: Said Negroes can't go to the [U.S.] Naval Academy.
Speaker 1: Right.  So, you--sounds like you were still a good student, getting As and Bs most likely.
Speaker 2: Yeah, thanks to my mom [Charlotte Eudora Hill].
Speaker 1: Yeah, your mom's a disciplinarian.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Made sure you did your homework before you go out and do anything.
Speaker 2: That's correct.  I give--I don't do it as much anymore, just occasionally.  And I used to talk to students, especially high school and college kids, about the importance of good grades and the avenues that it opens up for you.  And probably we should be able to get around to that during this interview because--but that's one of my big pitches, that good grades opens up all doors.  If you don't get grades, there are going to be doors quickly closed.  And I used to talk about my mom.  And then I always, I've raised it when I was in the [U.S.] Navy and used to give this pitch.  I used to tell them that my mom told me, especially when I was in high school--and she wouldn't let me go out until checking my homework--that I should not be thinking about sex, because sex didn't get to be good until you were in your thirties.  And then when I'd go out speaking, okay, I would speak and I'd hold up a ten dollar bill.  And I'd say, "So, when I'm done here, I want you to go home tonight and tell your parents what I said.  And if they say that I'm lying, come back to me and I'll give you this ten dollars tomorrow."  Okay.  And now I've raised that to twenty dollars because (laughter)--.  But when I was in the Navy I used to tell that.  And believe me, I would give--I think I've given, I've given thirty or forty of those presentations.  I've given one to high school students, okay, and nobody ever came to me, okay.  Then in my church, about eight or nine years ago, I got the pastor's permission to show the movie about me and then give this presentation about good grades.  And I got his pre-permission to talk about the sex, okay.  But we limited it to the kids.  The only kids that could come were, I think, twelve years old and older.  So, we put a restriction on the kids that could come during my presentation.  And the whole time, my adult life, this one little smart girl came up to me the next day saying that her mother said I was a liar.  And that was in the church.
Speaker 1: That was an excellent story.  You had great wisdom--
Speaker 2: (laughter).
Speaker 1: --to do that.
Speaker 2: She came wanting her ten dollars.
Speaker 1: Right, right.
Speaker 2: I didn't give it to her.  (laughter).
Story_ID: 36285
Speaker 1: So, you're in high school.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: What was the name of the high school?
Speaker 2: Williamsport High School [Williamsport, Pennsylvania].
Speaker 1: Williamsport High School.  Did you feel all of a sudden now, because you're motivated because of negative comments from a counselor that you're going to go to the U.S. Naval Academy?  Or, what was going on in high school?
Speaker 2: Well, during high school, I told you I have a family saying of a Plan B.
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: You know, what's your Plan B?  Okay, so in high school my Plan A was to pursue the Naval Academy.  My Plan B was to go to a state teacher's college, okay.  So, my mother [Charlotte Eudora Hill]--you know there was never any doubt I was going to try to go to college, primarily driven by mom.  So--.  Yeah, my dad [James Chancellor Tomes], too.  I don't want to play down my dad.  My dad was the provider.  You asked about his education.  He had a fifth grade education, okay.  But you know, he was behind everything behind me as far as going off to school.  And then you should have seen him beam with pride when I graduated.  And in fact, I've never forget.  I alluded earlier that my dad had a drinking problem.  Well, he had quit drinking.  He used to tell people, "I drank enough to sink a battleship."  That's what he used to tell people.  And he had stopped drinking for five years, maybe four.  And at my college graduation a prominent person in Annapolis threw a reception for me.  And my dad drank at that reception, and then turned back to an alcoholic for another four years.
Speaker 1: Thank you for that part of your life.
Speaker 2: So but then he, he then quit again.  And then like for about his last fifteen years that he was living, he didn't drink.  He'd stopped drinking.
Story_ID: 36286
Speaker 1: Let me back up a bit.  I wanted to ask you this question.  You saw this movie, 'Ring of Valor'?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: What was it about the [U.S.] Naval Academy that excited you?
Speaker 2: Ah, all the scenes about the midshipmen, the uniforms and possibility of a Naval career.  Because like I told you, you know, most folks when they grew up and left Williamsport [Pennsylvania], most black kids, you know, they went into the service.  A lot went into the service or they got jobs--service job, or college for a few.
Speaker 1: So, you're getting towards your senior year in high school, and you're thinking Plan A, U.S. Naval Academy; Plan B, teacher's school.  How were you preparing to apply to the United States Naval Academy?
Speaker 2: Well, I'd--different counselors in high school, (laughter) plus the head guy--I was sort of, oh what's the right word?  His name was Warnick.  He was a retired [U.S.] Army colonel, and I was like his assistant.  I forgot the title, okay.  And so, he sort of helped me do the research.  And the way we did it--the way you get appointments to the service academies is congressional. They're legislative appointments unless you have a parent that died on active duty, or something like that, okay.  And each legislator at the time--and I'm assuming it's the same today--could have five people in the service academy at one any given time.  So, each legislator has five appointments.  The way my legislator did it, was he gave a competitive written exam.  And I took the exam in my, I had to take it in my junior year.  And that's also when I lost the weight, because part of the whole process was to take the physical, okay.  So, I had to take the physical my junior year and--no, junior going into senior year--excuse me, that summer.  I took the exam in the fall of my senior year, okay.  So, that would have been 1961.  And I, I scored to get--the way our congressman did it, he--there was a principal appointee and four alternates.  And the reason for that system is if something happens--let's say the principal fails his physical exam.  He changes his mind, especially if he's an athlete.  And I say he, because we didn't have women in those days at service academies.  He's an athlete and gets a scholarship to Penn State [University], and decides I want to go play football at Penn State and not go to the Naval Academy, what have you.  You have the alternate system.  So I was the second alternate, which means I got, out of the five of us, I got the third highest score, okay.  And so, I did not get the appointment.
Story_ID: 36287
Speaker 1: So, I went and I found this school.  It's called Oneonta State College.  It's part of the State University in New York system.  And through small scholarships and through some other things, I was able to go to school there.  And while I was there, I applied again--same process.  And the process is the written exam.  I got a second alternate appointment again (laughter), okay.  However, about a month later, I got a letter from the [U.S.] Naval Academy.  I was on the dean's list.  So, I had--I was carrying--when I took that exam, I was carrying four As and one B, five courses--four As and one B.  And I got a letter from the Naval Academy that said, "If you maintain your grades where they are, we will give you what's called a qualified alternate appointment."  What that means is I've already proven myself academically as far as the Naval Academy admissions process is.  I haven't proved myself as a leader or any leadership potential that they can see on an application, except for extracurricular activities.  So, I'll never forget.  Because I got to be successful in the Navy because of the things that people did for me.  And I'm leading up to something here, okay.  So, first semester I got four As and a B, okay.  The, when I got the letter, it was about halfway through the second semester, and I'd pledged a fraternity, okay.  So, that was a distraction.  So, the grades started to go a little bit.  So at the time I got the letter, I had I think two As, a B, a C and a D, okay, because I started messing around.  And the course I had a D on was quantitative analysis.  The way you get your grades, it's a chemistry course.  And the way you get your grades is what you get on the lab experiments.  So, if your lab experiment comes out, and you get whatever you're supposed to get--the right color when you put two liquids together, what have you--that's how you get your grades, okay.  So, I went around to each of my teachers.  And it turned out that in the course that I needed a C on, if I perfected the final, he'd give me an A.  And I already had a couple of As.  So, on my quantitative analysis, I'll never forget.  It was Dr. Donahue.  And he had just accepted a position at the end of that school year to go to Purdue [University], okay.  And I'll never forget, because I was worried.  I took my final, went and saw Dr. Donahue the next day.  And he says, "Pete, I'm not going to tell you what you got."  And he says, "What I will tell you, don't disappoint me at the Naval Academy, alright."  So, I had a close call.  But I got in on that appointment.
Speaker 2: And the timeframes around this--
Speaker 1: That would have been '63 [1963].
Speaker 2: So, you graduated from high school in--
Speaker 1: '62, [1962].
Speaker 2: '62 [1962].  You go through the competitive process with your State--U.S. Congressman.
Speaker 1: Uh huh.
Speaker 2: Second alternate--State University--and 1963--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Is that when you got your appointment?
Speaker 1: At the same, both.
Speaker 2: Both.
Speaker 1: And entered in June of '63 [1963].
Story_ID: 36288
Speaker 1: There's a lot going on in the United States around that time [1963].
Speaker 2: Yeah.  And you saw, you saw the article that the [U.S.] Navy ran on me in Black History Month this past year, okay.  And the petty officer that put that article together did an excellent job about describing what was going on racially in 1963.  And then he painted this picture about--"And then Tzomes enters the [U.S.] Naval Academy."  Well, there were two in my class.  The second guy's name was Calvin Huey.  And we talk about it this day.  All the racial stuff going on--the March on Washington; the "I Have a Dream" speech, okay; [President John F.] Kennedy assassinated--.  We're in the Academy.  We're busy.  We don't even have the privilege of watching television because you're--.  That summer--if you, you know, if you are--.  You're barely getting six hours sleep a day, and you're busy all day, and you're not allowed to watch television.  So, you're not reading the paper, you're not watching television.  This stuff goes completely past me and Calvin, okay.
Speaker 1: You're--
Speaker 2: That year.  Because you're a plebe--. Well, first is the summer--
Speaker 1: Summer.
Speaker 2: --and then you're a plebe.  A plebe is what you refer, what a way a freshman is referred to at the service, at the Naval Academy.
Speaker 1: So, during the summertime what are you doing as a, before you're a plebe?
Speaker 2: You're going through this rigorous indoctrination that's primarily military driven.  And its purpose is to weed you out and break you down.  And if you break down, you get dismissed.  So, you think of it as a, as a sophisticated boot camp.  I think if I use the term boot camp, you can relate to boot camp.  Well, it's a boot camp type environment with people yelling and screaming at you all the time, because the purpose is to convert you into being a follower, and not an independent thinker.  And the job of the staff is to quickly determine does this person have the military potential to make it through the Academy?  And if that determination is made during that summer that you don't, you get kicked out.
Story_ID: 36289
Speaker 1: So, summer of 1963, you are in sort of a summer boot camp.
Speaker 2: Correct.
Speaker 1: And you've already alluded to the fact that there was a lot going on that summer of August, 1963.  Dr. [martin Luther] King makes his "I Have a Dream" speech.
Speaker 2: Which I missed.
Speaker 1: Which you missed.  Two hundred and fifty thousand people march on [Washington] D.C. [District of Columbia].  Later that year, President [John F.] Kennedy was assassinated, too.  But even before that, I think there are some things you were going to say you wished you had at least known about.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  We had the killings after the bombing at the Baptist church down south [Birmingham, Alabama].  We had the one university integrated with two kids.  With Alabama, right, George Wallace--.  There's one positive Alabama thing that I always like to talk about--as recently as about a month ago, okay--and that's Bear Bryant [University of Alabama football coach], okay.  With all these schools--like Ohio State [University] whipping up on Alabama, Bear Bryant took on George Wallace and said, "I'm getting my share of Negroes.  I don't care what you say."
Speaker 1: And when did he say that?
Speaker 2: Oh, that was in the, I think that was, I think that was in the '60s [1960s].  I can't remember, okay.  But you know, I just all of a sudden developed quite a bit of respect for Bear Bryant, with all the racial stuff going on those days--and he stood up to Governor Wallace.  That's exactly what he said. "I don't care what you say, I'm getting my fair share of Negroes for my football team."  "Negroes"--that was the term, you know, back then.  So--
Speaker 1: Thank you.  Thank you for adding that.
Story_ID: 36290
Speaker 1: So, we have summer of 1963.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: There's Pete Tzomes and Calvin Huey [at the U.S. Naval Academy].
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: You're the only two at the time.  And that--
Speaker 2: The only two in my class.
Speaker 1: In the class, African American students at the Naval Academy.  You're not quite a plebe.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And you're going through some hell, in boot camp.  Can you tell us more about that.
Speaker 2: It's just physically challenging--a lot of marching, a lot of running, a lot of exercising, a lot of memorizing of things that they expect you to regurgitate.  And the staff were primarily upper class midshipmen.  But the staff that runs that program are primarily juniors.  And they volunteer to do that for the summer.  Most of them are folks who--at that time, most of the people who did it were people who planned on going into the [U.S.] Marine Corps, okay.  So, they got a kick out of doing that, okay.  And yeah, I can't tell you what the percent attrition is as a result of Plebe Summer, but a significant number of people do get weeded out.
Speaker 1: And sounds like an equal opportunity hell period.
Speaker 2: Well, yes and no, okay.  And I'll tell anybody that in those days--and it was even true when Wesley Brown was there, okay.  When Wesley Brown was there, nobody roomed with him.  He, the people refused to room with him.  He had no roommates, okay.  He had--he just caught hell from the upperclassmen, okay.  There was one white, that Wesley Brown will tell you if he was alive today, who sort of treated him halfway decently, okay.  That one person is ex-president, Jimmy Carter, okay.  And so, what I'm saying is people take their racial baggage with them to the Academy.  There's nothing in the rules that bias against, in those days, blacks.  And today it's bias against women.  I'm sure you've seen all this recent stuff about female issues in the services, okay, even service academies.  So, it's people.  So, when you say equal opportunity Plebe Summer, it's equal opportunity plus racial epithets by those who have that sort of baggage in their upbringing--both the people who were doing the drilling as well as your now new classmates, okay.  And so, yeah, I got called "nigger" quite a bit during that summer.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I guess I was getting to the point that almost like drill sergeants in boot camp, they tend to treat everybody the same.  But, I'm glad you added the point there is certainly other treatment by those upperclassmen and fellow students, I'm sure.
Speaker 2: That's correct.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Story_ID: 36291
Speaker 1: So, let's jump to--so, both you and--
Speaker 2: Calvin [Huey; the only other African American in Tzomes class in the U.S. Naval Academy]?
Speaker 1: Calvin, made it through the summer.
Speaker 2: Yeah, Calvin--and this is another piece of trivia for you, okay.  Calvin is the first black to play varsity football for [U.S.] Navy, okay.  Now, other people will tell you that's not true--it's a gent named Darryl Hill who turned out to be a superstar at the University of Maryland.  What is true, is Darryl Hill was the first black recruited to play Navy football.  Darryl Hill, his plebe year, he played freshman football and then intentionally left the Academy.  He went over the hill, or AWOL [absent without official leave], and never came back.  So, Calvin is the first to play varsity football for Navy.  But a lot of people who do research about blacks at the Academy know about Darryl Hill, and they'll try to tell you that Darryl was the first person to play football for Navy, and a that's not true.  Because when you think Navy, you think varsity, and that's Calvin.  He was a, he was an end.  Great hands, great hands.
Speaker 1: Thank you for clarifying that.  I appreciate it from a historical standpoint.
Story_ID: 36292
Speaker 1: So, Plebe Year [U.S. Naval Academy] is another form of hell.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Can you tell us--
Speaker 2: I'll tell you a couple stories about Plebe Year.  One of them's funny.  So, there were eleven blacks at the Academy at that time, eleven or twelve, including two, three, four seniors, okay.  They were called "Firsties," okay.  Coincidentally, oh, but in those days--it's not true now.  They stopped this with the graduating class of '60 [1960], maybe in my class, or '68 [1968].  It may have been my class.  No, yeah--my class was the last class.  Each midshipman is assigned a Firstie as a, the term is Firstie.  So, each Plebe gets a Firstie, okay.  And the Firstie's job is to--like I told you about the summer--to break you and then get you thrown out before you start your academic year.  The Firstie's job is to determine, primarily during the first semester, whether you have what it takes to be a Naval officer or a potential Naval officer or a [U.S.] Marine Corps officer.  And if you don't, it's that Firstie's responsibility to ensure you get enough demerits that you're thrown out of the Naval Academy on excessive demerits, okay.  So, it's that Firstie's job, okay.  Coincidentally, okay--and it's unusual, with only eleven blacks in the Naval Academy and twenty-six company--oh, by the way, there's eleven blacks and there's twenty-six companies at the Naval Academy in those days.  I don't know if it's still the same now.  Or, was it twenty-four?   Maybe twenty-four.  The point being, eleven blacks, twenty-four companies.  And my company that I was assigned to--we had a black Firstie, a black 2nd Class, and me, which to this day none of us can explain how that happened.  So, the black Firstie got assigned to be my Firstie.  So, here you got this guy with Tzomes--.  I'm leading up to my complexion again, because you talked earlier about my complexion, okay.  So, what happens is whenever you're a plebe and you're around the upperclassmen, you have to do what's called "brace up."  It means you stand at rigid attention with your chin into your neck and you have to look straight ahead, and it's "Yes sir", "No sir," and just--that's the way it is.  It's called bracing up.  So, the very first meeting we, the plebes, get invited around to their Firstie's room for an introduction and sort of, you know, "I'm your Firstie, this is what I'm going to do," and so forth and so on.  So, my Firstie's name is Pat Prout, okay.  He had me braced up, and he says, "Tzomes, what do you think about having a--"  I can't remember what he said.  I think he said Negro.  He said, "Well, what do you think about having a Negro as your Firstie?"  And I started breaking out laughing, okay.  And you can't do that when you're braced up, right?  Those are the rules.  And he says, "What are you laughing and smirking at, boy?  Get down, give me--" I think fifteen push-ups or something.  Anyway, that was standard punishment, get down and do push-ups.  I got back up, and I continued smirking.  He says, "Wipe that smirk off your face.  Why are you smirking?  I'm serious.  What do you think about me, having a Negro as your Firstie?  And I broke out laughing.  And I said, "I'm black, too, Sir."  (laughter).
Speaker 1: So, here you have, is it 1st Midshipman, or--
Speaker 2: He's a first, he's referred to as a 1st--he's a senior--
Speaker 1: Senior, thank you.
Speaker 2: And he's personally assigned to me, to make sure that I have what it takes to succeed, or run me out of the Academy.  That's his job.
Story_ID: 36293
Speaker 1: Well, it's basically just break you down as much as possible and try to make your life difficult.
Speaker 2: Well, no, he's not--there's a lot of other people trying to break you down.  That's a special relationship, that Firstie-Plebe, especially when he makes the determination, okay, that you should be able to succeed.  And that's, like I said, primarily during the first semester.  Because what happens is you, they have this tradition called spooning, okay.  And what that means is when you are spooned by an upperclassman, you have permission to call that upperclassman by his first name, okay.  And typically, your Firstie is the first one to spoon you.  Like, I went my entire senior year, I mean plebe year, without calling a lot of upperclassmen by their first names--yes sir and no sir.  But when you're spooned by an upperclassman--a sophomore, a junior, or a senior, you can call that, you're entitled to call that person by their first name.  So typically, that's why this relationship is so special.  Once he's made that determination, he becomes your mentor, once you've been spooned, okay.  And so, there's an interesting story about--and it's unusual for seniors, or Firsties--seniors or first class midshipmen to make every Plebe call him Sir the entire Plebe year.  So, that's unusual.  So where I lived, around from us, I had two roommates.  And we had three people in what's called the Brigade Staff.  And this had nothing to do with race, okay.  But they took me and my two roommates and made us their personal slaves.  And this lasted all the through until a week before their graduation.  And they used to come in and wake us up in the middle of the night, make us go clean their room, and all sorts of things.  And my Firstie couldn't intervene, because they're also 1st classmen.  And they had that privilege.  They had the privilege of making us their slaves, and my Firstie couldn't do anything about it.  So, but I'll never forget.  The guy's name was Curtis.  And this was the week before graduation.  They came off liberty drunk.  Because the school, the week before graduation for seniors, there's no more school.  It's all partying and getting ready to graduate.  And they came in drunk.  And it was about four o'clock in the morning.  They got me and my roommates up, had us braced up in their room.  And I'll never forget, Curtis says, "Tzomes, I think you wish I was dead, don't you?"  And I said, "Yes, sir," okay.  The guy committed suicide.  They found him dead three or four hours later that morning.  And the, what had happened, he was, he was in this upper social class where he grew up.  And he and this socialite from the hometown were supposed to get married.  And the day before, she terminated the marriage.  They were going to have this big elaborate marriage.  And he couldn't take it.  I felt kind of bad for a couple weeks, obviously, especially when they told me they found him dead.  And I got the reputation of causing his death.
Speaker 1: As a personal slave, what were the limits on that?
Speaker 2: None.  I would--we'd shine their shoes, we'd clean their room.  We did any menial task that they assigned us to do.  I mean, they can't hit us, okay.  But any menial task that would be considered--I use the term slave, because that's exactly the way they treated us.  But that wasn't a racial thing.  My two roommates were white, so--
Story_ID: 36294
Speaker 1: So, you're, you know at the [U.S. Naval] Academy from 1963.  You graduate in 1967.
Speaker 2: '67 [1967].
Speaker 1: 1967.  Thank you.  And what, what type of classes do you have?  Everyone, I'm sure the first year, is taking basically the same classes.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: But later on, what were you focused on?
Speaker 2: It's different now.  Just like a regular college, you declare your major in what you want your degree in when you first get there.  That's the way it is now.  Then, we all got a general bachelor of science degree, okay.  And then when I got--it was our junior year--my special emphasis was math.  So, my junior and senior years were heavy in math and science.
Speaker 1: Now, there's another side to Annapolis [Maryland], and that's the community.
Speaker 2: Oh, yes.
Speaker 1: When, at what point and time do you actually get to go off campus?
Speaker 2: Well, let's, let's talk racial stuff in Annapolis.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Because this is unique, and this is--this is really my first exposure to the signs, and the things that we talked about, that I wasn't exposed to in Williamsport [Pennsylvania].  So, right off, Annapolis is segregated.  The schools are segregated, okay.  Right off, part of the Naval Academy indoctrination for midshipmen is to teach you how to dance. And so Plebe Year, every Sunday we had what they're called tea fights.  And they used to invite women from all the area schools, some of the prestigious schools, okay.  And the women volunteered to come because they'd have an opportunity to meet midshipmen, and maybe end up marrying one of us, you know.  So, the way it works is you line up in the gymnasium.  The men come from one side, the women come from the other.  And then whoever you pair up with, that's your partner for the tea dance, okay.  Well, they weren't going to let blacks do that, not at all, okay.  So, Calvin [Huey; the only other African American in Tzomes' class at the Naval Academy] and I--and this was true for the other blacks that were there too when they went through their plebe years. They'd go out in the community.  They have a social director at the Academy who was a female.  I forget her name.  She had contacts in the local Annapolis community for whenever she needed a partner for a black midshipman.  So, Calvin and I had partners, okay.  Both attractive ladies, which got some of the white midshipmen extremely upset.  Because every tea fight--every Sunday, Calvin and I had the same girl, and they were both good-looking.  Whereas, the others--like I said, you walk in, and you can imagine what some of the combinations probably turned out.  So, that was one thing where race worked in my favor, and not just then.  Even shortly after I got out of Academy--I'll never forget.  As a matter of fact, it was Calvin and I.  We were at our summer training our junior year, okay.  Excuse me, going into our sophomore year.  After Plebe Year, we're in Norfolk, Virginia.  And they have a tea dance for the midshipmen, okay.  So, once again--but this time, it was an active duty Navy commander, came up to me and Calvin.  I'll never forget this.  He said, "Midshipman Tzomes," he had a southern drawl.  He said, "Midshipman Tzomes, Midshipman Huey.  I hope y'all understand.  The Navy's integrated, but the young women in Norfolk aren't."  Okay, just like that.  So, he arranged for two dates.  Calvin's date was Howard's [University] homecoming queen for that year.  So, she was pretty nice, okay.  And I had a doctor's daughter who turned out to be pretty nice.  And we both ended up dating them the rest of the time we were there, after that dance.  But the Navy continued--.  I mean, that's the way the Navy was back then in those days, okay.
Story_ID: 36295
Speaker 1: And in the community [Annapolis, Maryland; 1960s] itself, movie theaters were segregated.  Black midshipmen could not go to the movie theater in Annapolis.  There was a black movie theater, but it was kind of rough.  And we were, we were sort of encouraged by the local blacks not to go, especially in uniform.  And that's because of certain people in the Annapolis community with a stigma about black midshipmen, okay.  And you know, the young boys.  So, we didn't.  And then my junior--my sophomore year, we had a superintendent--or maybe it was the end of my Plebe Year, who got fed up, went to the chamber of commerce and said--.  Because remember, the Naval Academy's got about, at any given time, between four and five thousand midshipmen, okay.  That's a lot of business for that movie theater, because there's only one movie theater.  So, he went to the Chamber of Commerce and sort of insisted that they open up the movie theater to black midshipman, or he was going to make the movie theater off-limits for all midshipmen.  So, that negotiation went on for several months.  And they finally ended up in a compromise where black midshipmen could go if they were in uniform, but they couldn't take a date.  So, even the upperclassmen still did not go, even though they had the privilege, because they didn't take a date.  So, but it was still a racial accomplishment at the same time.  But the local high school was segregated, okay.  He got the movie to open up.  And this was in other areas of the country.  And I even experienced this, like I told you, when I was in the south in Virginia, in the summers, where the blacks watched movies and the whites were downstairs.  I did get to experience that, okay.  But with that being the typical experience down south, he was successful in at least getting black midshipmen welcome if you wore your uniform.  But none of us did it.
Story_ID: 36296
Speaker 1: So, here you are--
Speaker 2: But that's the town [Annapolis, Maryland].  I still got more to talk about the town.  So, the black community--remember, Annapolis is the south--racially segregated, signs and everything, okay.  So, the local community embraced the black midshipmen, totally embraced us.  We had one woman while I was there, and we ended up having other women.  Her name was Lillie Mae Chase.  They now have a street named after her in Annapolis.  And she was our mother away from home, okay.  We were having times, hard times, racially.  Now Plebe Year, I didn't get, I could not go out.  I could not go out in the streets until starting my sophomore year, okay, except for special occasions, okay.  And so, Lillie Mae adopted us.  And about the time there was about--well, the whole time I was there, she probably adopted about twelve or thirteen of us.  And we cried on her shoulders--anything--any problems we were having, any issues.  And she did so much for helping us get through, especially when things were racially trying in Annapolis at the [U.S. Naval] Academy.  And the rest of the older black community was sort of like her.  So, they had the area, like I told you--not my freshman year, but like I told you about Annapolis and the black theater--I used to refer to it as the black belt, okay.  That's, you know, no whites are going to go in the black belt.  It's an area where, it's where a large black community exists, including a social club.  And I used to, I used to go to this social club.  I would take my uniform, and I would change clothes in the bathroom at the social club.  And then I would go hang out there on weekends whenever I was allowed to go out in town.  And then they would look out for me.  For example, if they saw a police or something coming down the street they'd tell me, and I would go hide in the bathroom until the police would come in and go out, say.  And then I joined a black church.  We had what's called church parties.  You could worship at the Academy, or you could go on church parties.  The churches were the Baptist church, because I told you I grew up in a Baptist church--was a Southern Baptist.  And Southern Baptists had racial issues with them.  So, I went to the Academy and I said, "I am not a Southern Baptist.  I'm a Baptist.  I want to worship where I belong for my religion."  And they let me, there was a senior at the time who was going to a Baptist church out in town.  So, I went to his church.  It was called--I can't remember the name of the church.  I want to say Second Baptist, but I can't remember.  So, we used to walk--on Sundays we had a two-person church party.  Then I, for two years, it was me by myself.  And then I'll never forget.  My senior year, there was a plebe that I sort of introduced to the church.  And we all have--each company has a company officer who was responsible for everything dealing with the companies--typically, a Navy lieutenant or a Marine Corps captain.  And so, myself and Tucker were going to church one Sunday.  And on Monday my company officer called me in the office and said he got a phone call from one of his contemporaries who said he saw me and Tucker straggling in the streets of Annapolis, and what were we doing, doing that?  And he told me, he says, "But I stuck up for you.  I told them that was you marching Midshipman Tucker to church."  (laughter).  So, when you talk about the racial issues, okay--although they had--the Academy--and I told you earlier about the rules at the Academy.  So, all I had to do was go and say, "I'm not a Southern Baptist.  I want to go to my church."  And they said okay.
Story_ID: 36297
Speaker 1: I happened to know before about Lillie Mae Clark, so--
Speaker 2: Chase.
Speaker 1: I'm sorry, Chase.
Speaker 2: That's okay.
Speaker 1: Chase, right.  Chase, thank you.  Miss Chase.  So, did she, she sounds like a real nurturing person.
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.
Speaker 1: So, if something happened, did you get a chance to go on the weekends or--
Speaker 2: Yeah, we went to her house.
Speaker 1: Just went to her house.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: You just--
Speaker 2: And hung out.
Speaker 1: Just hung out.
Speaker 2: And then, oh, yeah, I'm glad you mentioned that.  They had, remember it's segregated Annapolis.  Well, they had what's called drag houses, okay.  In those days, the slang for your date is a drag, okay.  That wasn't meant to be, what's the right word?
Speaker 1: Derogatory?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  It's not meant to be derogatory.  That's just part of the lingo, okay.  So, a lot of the homes in Annapolis developed formal drag houses, where young women could come and pay a nominal fee and stay there while they were dating midshipmen on weekends.  No black drag houses.  So, Lillie Mae would open up her house for our dates to come meet us at her place.  And then over the years, there's a few that she let stay there.  But there wasn't a formal drag house.  But since we couldn't go meet at another place, that's where our dates would come.  People that we would date from out of town, like maybe at another college or something, would come into town for the weekend to be with us, to be with their significant other or what have you.
Speaker 1: So, that's--your first year as a plebe, you can't leave?
Speaker 2: Cannot--you can now.  But you cannot date, you cannot leave.  No dating.  You could go out in town, okay.  And I forget how many weekends it was allowed, or how many--.  Maybe it was just a Saturday only.  But you could not date.  And then that's when I would go over to Lillie Mae's house and pretty much just watch TV and hang out, because I wasn't going to the movie or anything.  But it did, it did turn out that thanks to Lillie Mae, the young lady that used to come to the tea dances, she ended up coming to meet me at Lillie Mae's house.  (laughter).  Her name was Angela, Angela Bryant.  I'll never forget.  That was my first, my first serious experience with a female.  Because of these issues with my mother, I mean, I did not get intimate or serious about any women essentially in Williamsport [Pennsylvania] because--.  Oh, I'd go to parties, but never--I never developed a serious relationship with anybody, especially after Lucille [Tzomes' neighbor and childhood crush] shot me down when I lost the weight.  So--
Speaker 1: Did you keep in touch with Lillie Mae?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.  She came to visit me when I was stationed in Connecticut.  She came up to visit me.  Whenever I was in the [Washington] D.C. [District of Columbia] area, I was always--always at her house, always.
Story_ID: 36298
Speaker 1: So, in 1967, you graduate from Annapolis [U.S. Naval Academy, Annapolis, Maryland]?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: That's the year.  And if I--what were you planning on doing upon graduation?  What was your plan?
Speaker 2: My plan was to be a [U.S.] Marine.  I wanted to be a Marine pilot.  And the way the Academy worked, and it still is--.  Once you determine you're going to be a Marine, you're expected to study and act like a Marine, through graduation.  So I, this all started halfway through my Plebe Year, where I wanted to be a Marine pilot.  So, I started--whenever they played the Marine Corps hymn, I would stand at attention, because that's expected.  And I would read books about the Marines.  My Firstie, Pat Prout, ended up going in the [U.S.] Marine Corps.  He got commissioned as Second Lieutenant.  So he influenced me too, as far as the Firstie-Plebe relationship, especially after I got as far as the Marine Corps, and getting gung ho about being a Marine, because he was doing that.  And so, I went to take my flight physical my senior year.  And they told me I was too short to fly.  And then I applied for the Nuclear Power Program.  This is part of the spiel that I give young people all the time about good grades--leave all avenues open.  I did not need As and Bs.  I could have had all Ds to become a Marine.  Not that Marines are stupid.  My point is there's no academic screening criteria for academic performance to be a Marine.  There is for the [U.S.] Navy's Nuclear Power Program, okay.  And since I kept all the technical subjects, okay, and then I got--when I got told I couldn't be a Marine pilot, I changed my mind about being a Marine, and I applied for the Nuclear Power Program.  So, I ended up--.   There's a retired admiral, the Navy's only four-star black admiral, Paul Reason.  I'm surprised if you all haven't interviewed him.  He was the first black admitted into the Nuclear Power Program.  And he went Surface Navy.  And I was the first black admitted into the Submarine Nuclear Power Program, and it was kind of interesting.  I don't know if you've ever heard of Admiral [Hyman G.] Rickover?
Speaker 1: I have, but we'll let you talk about that in just a moment.  We're going to take a pause.
Speaker 2: Okay, alright.
Speaker 1: Thank you.
Story_ID: 36299
Speaker 1: Yeah.  He helped turn the [U.S.] Navy around racially.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: He started.
Speaker 2: Okay, we're back.  So, we were getting ready to talk about Admiral--
Speaker 1: Admiral [Hyman G.] Rickover?
Speaker 2: But before we get to that, it's 1967 and you're graduating from Annapolis [U.S. Naval Academy, Annapolis, Maryland].
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: You want to be a [U.S.] Marine pilot.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: But--I'll put--two different things going on.  One is this thing called the Vietnam War.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: And the other one was racial tensions were taking place in major ways across the country.
Speaker 1: Well--
Speaker 2: So--
Speaker 1: Let me talk about--
Speaker 2: (simultaneous) Well, let's talk.
Speaker 1: Let's say well, (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (simultaneous)
Speaker 1: Well, first Vietnam.   My Firstie [Pat Pruit] went into the [U.S.] Marine Corps.  He immediately went to Vietnam after he completed his basic training in Quantico [Virginia].   So, we were corresponding.  So, when we had my issue with the flight physical, you know, I was also biased by my Firstie--not, he wasn't saying anything negative, but he wasn't having a good time in Vietnam, alright.  And so, that's, that also contributed to me saying, well let me try nuclear power first, okay.  When you talk about the racial issues, something that I have not mentioned except for the issue with the tea fight and the Howard [University] homecoming queen at Norfolk [Virginia]--.  So, every summer, if I got down south, there were issues.  That's when I first saw the different restrooms.  That's where I got, I got refused service at a Tastee Freeze.  And one reason I got refused service with my light complexion, is I was with Calvin [Huey; the only other African American in Tzomes' class at the U.S. Naval Academy], okay.  And Calvin and I went to get served.  I went to Calvin's home town in Pascagoula, Mississippi for Christmas.  His mother invited me, and I spent Christmas 1962--'61 [1961] or '62 [1962].  I want to say it was Christmas sixty--maybe it was '61' [1961], in Pascagoula with Calvin.  And that was really, you know, going out there everyday seeing the signs--.  Calvin and I went to a restaurant where we thought we could get served, like about two o'clock in the morning, an all-night restaurant.  No way.  They kicked--we were sitting around a bar, and we got kicked out.  So, that's, that experience and the experiences in Norfolk in the summers of--I said '62 [1962]--wrong.  Summer--I graduated--Summer of sixty--Christmas of '65 [1965], I spent with Calvin, okay.  And I told you about the experience in Little Rock [Arkansas].  So, it's my summer when I got to exposed to some of the racial issues, including, you know, things on television.  And then also, especially when I was in Norfolk, socializing with college kids primarily from historically black colleges, they were sharing stories with me.  And that's when I first sort of got enlightened to a lot of things that were going on, because of being so sheltered at the Academy.  Because you really didn't get TV privileges at the Academy until your senior year.  So, I'm not allowed--I can watch TV on weekends while I'm out in town, like at Lillie Mae's [Chase] house and so forth.  And then plus, Lillie Mae used to share stories with us about Annapolis.
Story_ID: 36300
Speaker 1: But the funny little story about the racial issues--in the summer of 1964, I got apprehended for inciting a race riot in Norfolk [Virginia]--me, okay.  So, the way that happened was the girl that I met at the tea fight, she went to college--I forget--down south somewhere.  And she had a little social network.  And they welcomed me into their social network.  And the fellows had a place--they were from pretty much upscale black families.  So, they had a place that they rented in the summers, where they would go hang out and drink and invite girls and so forth, okay.  And so, we were at this place.  It had a name.  I can't remember the name that they called it.  But it was just a slang reference to their place.  But the reason that's important, because when they would mention that name to certain women in the Norfolk area--about I want to take you to--let's just say the Pad.  I can't remember what they called it.  If a woman knew what the Pad was, because they'd heard about these guys in their networking, they knew what they would be getting themselves into, okay.  So, but there were no women there that night, we were just drinking.  So, we decided we were going to go get something to eat.  And we went to a supermarket, I can't remember what it was.  But it had a 24-hour counter.  And we all went in, and it was about five--four or five of us.  And we sat around the counter.  And one of us sat next to a white guy, an older white guy.  And he says, "Nigger, get out of here."  That's how it all started.  And one thing led to another, and I am not exaggerating.  From the first time that that guy said, "Nigger get out of here"--I'm not exaggerating.  I'm going to tell you there were five cop cars in the parking lot in two or three minutes--five cop cars, okay.  They walked in, the white people pointed at us.  We all got handcuffed for inciting a race riot, okay.  The guy that got vocal got arrested.  So, I said apprehended, okay.  He got arrested.  When they found out I was a midshipman, because I had my midshipman ID card, you know, the cop says, "You go to Annapolis [U.S. Naval Academy, Annapolis, Maryland].  You ought to be ashamed of yourself."  And I said, "What do you mean?  I just want to get something to eat."  So, they let the rest of us go.  They arrested him.  And then we went to the Pad, I can't remember the name.  And we all pooled our money together and we were able to scrounge up enough money to go bail him out the next morning.  But that was Norfolk, and that was the summer of '64 [1964].  And then I had another experience my senior year.  We have, this was in Key West, Florida.  We have a, there's a submarine squadron there.  And your senior year, you go on what's called first class cruises.  So every midshipman has to go on a cruise on a ship your first class year, and I was able to go on a submarine at Key West.  So, there were several of us.  And at the end of the year, at the end of the cruise experience, like in about mid-August, the Chamber of Commerce threw a party for all the midshipmen there from their cruises as sort of a going away.  They invited girls, similar to the tea fights in Annapolis, from local colleges.  I was specifically uninvited--uninvited.  My executive officer, I'll never forget.  And I forget the guy's name, too.  But the executive officer of the submarine I was on felt so strongly, he went to the commanding officer and said, "Pete has worked just as hard as these other midshipmen.  He deserves to go to the party," okay.  And the commanding officer told him it's none of his business, to stay out of it.  The executive officer felt so strongly about it, he went to the squadron commander.  He went above the commanding officer's head, over his head.  So, the squadron commander--pleading the case why I should go to the party.  You know, he put his career on the line, doing that, that guy.  And I didn't get--I was like I said, uninvited, and didn't get to go.  And that was Key West, Florida.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I was just wondering.  Like I said, 1967, there were a lot of things going on across the country.  Detroit [Michigan] in particular had these race riots, and a lot of other places.  Did you, by that time you at least had access to TV.  Did you get a sense of all of that?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: All that turmoil?
Speaker 1: And plus I met people in various places.  Then I eventually got to be stationed when I was going through my nuclear training.
Story_ID: 36301
Speaker 1: So, unfortunately you can't be a [U.S.] Marine pilot.  And then you decide, you thought about the Nuclear Power Program.  And I think one thing you said when we were talking about it briefly, was good grades can help you...
Speaker 2: Good grades keeps all doors open.  That's my message to kids whenever I get a chance.
Speaker 1: So, you knew you had good grades.  And you said...  Well, why the Nuclear Power Program?  Why?
Speaker 2: Submarines.
Speaker 1: Submarines, that's what it was about.
Speaker 2: That's what drove me.  I said forget being a [U.S.] Marine, I want to go drive submarines.  And I also had a couple of company officers--. See, what happened, I told you there's a company officer for each of the companies.  Well, they come from the various warfare specialties--Surface, Aviation, Marines.  And so, you know, typically if you have a company officer who's from Submarines, okay, he's going to talk more about submarines.  And my first company officer was a guy named Joe Steckler.  And he was a submariner.  And even though I wanted to be Marine while he was my company officer, I paid attention to all the good stories he had about submarines.
Speaker 1: And how long is that program?  There's advanced training--
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.  There's, I can't tell you today.  I'm sure it's very similar.  But you go through six months of nuclear power training, which is post-graduate, essentially post-graduate level math and physics and nuclear physics, okay--courses, in six months.  If you pass, you go to what's called prototype, where those are actual reactors.  They don't go to sea, but they're mimics of surface and submarine reactors, actually operating reactors.  And you have a qualification program that you pursue, both academic study and then hands-on, at the prototype.  And that's six months worth of training.  And then once you finish that--in the case of submarines, the case of surface Navy--you're ready to go to your first ship.  In the case of submarines, then you got to go to submarine school, which was another six months.  So, I didn't get on my first submarine until over a year and a half after I graduated.
Speaker 1: So, when you're training at the Academy, you've been on surface vessels.
Speaker 2: I was on surface vessels for two--for one cruise.  You have two cruises.  One, you're a freshman going into your sophomore year, commonly referred to as your Youngster Cruise.  And then you have first class cruise.  So, my Youngster Cruise is an aircraft carrier which, once again, biased me to submarines because our bird (unclear) wing was in the very forward part of the ship.  And on heavy seas, the carrier would go like that, and I would get sick, and had upset stomachs frequently at night.
Speaker 1: So, all that rolling where you could see the front--
Speaker 2: I couldn't see it, I was asleep.  I'm below the flight deck, in the very front of the deck, in the very front of the ship, going like that.
Speaker 1: But when did you first get on the sub?
Speaker 2: I first got on a sub was my midshipman cruise in Key West [Florida] when I was first was physically on a submarine.
Speaker 1: And so, is part of the nuclear power program--you've got to know a lot about science, physics, obviously math.  How was that?  Was it, how did you handle that?
Speaker 2: It was hard.  We had, we had some guys in my class who had taken some of the courses already while they were at the Academy, as electives.  Since I was not planning on nuclear power at the time when I chose my courses, I didn't.  I had one course that was extremely rough.  And similar to Dr. Donahue at [State University of New York] Oneonta, there was one instructor who really helped me get through one difficult course.  And he went above and beyond and I got through that course, and I made it through nuclear power school.  With the exception of that course, I didn't have any issues at nuclear power school except you couldn't take your books home, so you had to study in the building.  And so, typically, 12, 13, 14 hour days for me, whereas I had classmates that were out of there in six or seven hours after formal courses.
Speaker 1: How many students in your class?
Speaker 2: In nuclear power school?  About twenty-five or thirty, thereabouts.
Speaker 1: Any African Americans?
Speaker 2: Yeah, Calvin [Huey], in fact.  And Calvin, Calvin failed though, nuclear power school.
Story_ID: 36302
Speaker 1: Oh, that reminds me, Admiral [Hyman G.] Rickover is the father of the nuclear Navy.  So, Calvin [Huey] and I obviously had to go to him for interviews.  But fortunately, like I told you, Admiral [Paul] Reason had been selected before us.  He was two years ahead of us.  So, Admiral Rickover had his experience with his first black kid in the nuclear power program, okay.  But Admiral Rickover is the father of the nuclear Navy.  In other words, when we had the experiment for the atomic bomb the [U.S.] Navy sent Admiral Rickover as a, some type of military representative.  He visioned nuclear driven ships.  And he took that vision and created it into the program that we have today.  And as part of the obligation of [U.S.] Congress--the head of it is called the Division of Naval Reactors--that individual has to personally interview all applicants for the Academy, I mean for nuclear power.  And part of the process is three interviews by his staff.  And then the Admiral, and it's still true today, gives the final interview.  Now I know what I know today, okay--.  The Admiral knows whether you're going to be selected or not before you walk in there--unless two people say you ought to be accepted and one says no, or two say you should not be accepted and one says yes.  Then, the Admiral's interview means something.  Other than that, he's just keeping his commitment to Congress that he personally interviews and screens all applicants for Navy nuclear power, all officer applicants.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: So, there's all kinds of Rickover stories, from people back from my vintage and earlier.  But in my case, in my Rickover interview, he says, "Tzomes, your grades have been going down every year.  Why is that?"  And I said, "Well, Admiral, as you well know, being an Academy graduate yourself, each year you get additional privileges."  Remember I already alluded to the fact that I couldn't date Plebe Year, and so forth.  And also, you get more privileges and allowed weekends away from campus as you go further up.  And I said, "As I was getting more privileges, I was spending more time socializing, and my grades went down as a result."  And he said, "Get out."  And I got put in a closet, literally a closet.  And this was not abnormal treatment.  This was, everybody has Rickover stories similar to this.  And what happens--in my case, I was in this closet for three hours.  And I got interrupted about three times with what I now know what the person is.  But back then, I was intimidated because the person was telling me, wanted me to sign an obligation to give up all my privileges at the Academy in order to get into nuclear power.  And I refused to do that.  And we ended up negotiating where I gave up my, all my off-campus weekends my second semester, and I promised that I would stay and study at least half day on Saturdays.  That was my written commitment.  And the Admiral was known that when you made these commitments, his staff would call and check on you to see if you were actually doing them.  So, we all got bussed over for these interviews, and we all got bussed back.  So on the ride back we're all telling these Rickover stories about what happened to us.  So, Calvin gave up all benefits, including his Christmas vacation.  So, senior year Christmas, Calvin had to stay at the Academy.  And another guy, I'll never forget.  He was an Italian guy named Frank Verisona from New Jersey.  And if you can picture a New Jersey accent--.  So, Frank's telling his story.  And Frank's, you're not allowed to marry while you're at the academy.  If they find out you're married, you get expelled.  So, there were people who were secretly married.  Frank wasn't one of them, but his fiancee relocated to Annapolis [Maryland] his senior year to be with him.  So, Frank's telling the story in his New Jersey accent, where he tells this staff member--he says the staff member wanted him to give up all weekends as well as his off-campus privileges, for being out of the area.  And I can't imitate Frank, but you got to picture the New Jersey accent.  He says, "My fiancee moved here just to be near by me.  And if you think I'm giving up my weekends to stay on campus and not be with her, you're crazy."  Okay, in the New Jersey accent, okay.  So, what the person told Frank was, "Why don't you just tell the Admiral that you promised to study faithfully all weekends, and you take your books out to your fiancee's place?"  And that's what Frank did.  So, here's poor Calvin, gave up his Christmas; I gave up all my second semester off campus-out of area visits, okay.  And Calvin gave up his Christmas plus his out of area visits.
Speaker 2: So you're giving up these--
Speaker 1: For the same thing.  See, we could have all been like Frank, okay.
Speaker 2: But if I understand it correctly, you're giving up privileges because there's a decision made that you're--I'll use the word--you're deficient in some--
Speaker 1: Admiral Rickover wants you to, wants you to make some personal sacrifice, because this program means so much to you and you want it that badly.
Speaker 2: But did that apply to everybody?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Yes.  As I said, on the bus ride back, we were all swapping stories.
Story_ID: 36303
Speaker 1: A couple of things:  In--so when do you actually graduate from the Nuclear Power Program?  After six months, is that it?
Speaker 2: Six months, that's training for the prototype.  If you want to use the term graduate, it's after a year, after twelve months.
Speaker 1: So, '68 [1968], '69 [1969] or so?
Speaker 2: Sixty--Spring--summer of '68 [1968].
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now in 1969, let's see.  Going outside of the [U.S.] Navy now, I believe you have a son that's born, Chancellor Alfonso.
Speaker 2: My son, he was born in 1970.
Speaker 1: Thank you.  And when did you first get married?
Speaker 2: I first got married in 1968.
Speaker 1: And your wife's name was Mar--
Speaker 2: Martu (ph).
Speaker 1: Right.  And that was your former wife, I think?
Speaker 2: Yes, I divorced her and I remarried to my current lovely wife whose name is Carolyn [Eason], in July, 2007.
Speaker 1: Thank you.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Just, you know, a little note.  And 1969, let's see.  I believe, is that where you get your first submarine?
Speaker 2: Submarine, yep, the USS Will Rogers.  Now, let's talk about race about the Will Rogers.
Speaker 1: Oh.
Speaker 2: I've had racial issues on essentially my first three submarines.  Because I was the first, like I said, I was the first black admitted to the Submarine Nuclear Power Program.  So, I'm the first.  So, people are ready for this guy, Tzomes.  And that has good annotations and it has bad annotations, okay.  So, my first commanding, I had two commanding officers on the Will Rogers.  And my first commanding officer was, he was a carryover from diesel boats.  What happened, when they first started the nuclear power program, you have to use diesel submariners initially until you start building up your training base for people.  So, you got homegrown nukes, and then you got ex-diesel skippers when I came in.  So, my first CO [commanding officer] was an ex-diesel skipper.  And he came from that tradition of-- even though he hadn't been around black officers--but he'd been around black enlisted, okay.  And the camaraderie on the diesel boat isn't as formal as it is on the nuclear submarine, okay.  But part of that is driven by everything centered around safely operating the reactor.  So, you know, you don't play games.  You don't, everything is serious business.  So, my second commanding officer was what we call a home grown nuke, okay--trained from the beginning through the Navy's nuclear power program and no previous experience on commanding a diesel submarine.  That guy--remember how you used to have to take a written exam to vote in the south?  Now, you don't remember--
Speaker 1: I--
Speaker 2: --but you've heard about it.
Speaker 1: I even know about it, yes.
Speaker 2: Okay.  So, he made me take a written exam for a job.  I've had two experiences that when I was in the [U.S.] Navy, of special treatment because I was black.  That was the first, as far as a senior officer not trusting my ability to do a job, okay.  And I had to take a written examination.  I'll never forget.  I was in the engineering department.  And I got so mad when he told me that I had to take a written exam, I went to my boss who was the engineering officer, and I cussed him out.  And then something happened.  We exchanged words.  He got up in my face, I was in his face.  I ended up slamming the door in his face, and I almost caught his finger in the door jam, I was so mad.  Because I was accusing him of not defending me, because I'd already worked for him in a different job.  It was a new job assignment.  It was time for, it was time for--for lack of a better term--job assignment rotations, within the ward room, okay.  And the new commanding officer wanted me to take this written exam for this job assignment.  I ended up taking it.  I was mad, and ended up with the job assignment, but I was upset, okay, extremely upset.
Story_ID: 36304
Speaker 1: The other time was, I was a lieutenant commander.  And I was assigned to the Nuclear Propulsion Examining Board, where we were responsible for doing nuclear inspections on all nuclear ships.  You have an organization like that in the Atlantic theatre, and another one in the Pacific.  I was in the Pacific theater, out of Pearl Harbor, Hawaii.  And we had a senior member, who I was his first exposure to blacks.  And that was true my whole time in submarines.  I could be the first black person that half the crew would ever have any close experiences with.  You know, including standing next to--you know, like I've had people tell me, "I'm not going to take any orders from a nigger, a nigger officer."  That happened on my first couple submarines.  It happened to blacks in the surface Navy very frequently.  And in fact, in some of the larger home ports like San Diego [California] and Norfolk [Virginia], whites did one of two things:  They refused to salute a black officer, or they crossed the street to avoid coming close to a black officer.  I mean that's when I got commissioned in '67 [1967].  That's the way it was in the late '60s [1960s].  That's the way it obviously was before I got commissioned.  Okay, so on my Nuclear Propulsion Examining Board, I had the reputation, I went from an engineer officer assignment to this inspector job.  And I had the reputation by the admiral over our squadron that I was the very best engineer officer, you know, on any submarine in the Pacific at the time.  That was my reputation.  That's how I got this job, okay.  I went there and my first week, everything I did got scrutinized.  And I had to have another officer double check everything that I did, okay.  So, I'm there, and I'm saying okay.  However, the next four guys that came to that same job, did not get that treatment, not one of them.  And one of them was stupid.  And I literally mean that, because he embarrassed us when we went out on examinations, okay.  And, but I was the only one where I got special treatment, where all my work had to be double checked before it could be released.  And those are the two most overt treatments by senior officers to me on my days at Submarine.  After that and at other times, I did not have issues like that with my commanding officer.
Story_ID: 36305
Speaker 1: I had one commanding officer who tried to protect me.  And I need to lead to a certain story about--.  Because what got me on this, you were talking about my first wife.  So, this is my--the submarine that I was assigned to be the engineer to--there's a separate qualification to get your engineer's certification, and then the assignment is nuclear.  Not every nuclear trained officer is allowed to be an engineer.  And there's another academic thing you got to go through.  So, I'm on my, my submarine is the [USS] Pintado that I'm on.  And I get certified to be an engineer.  So I'm getting transferred to the Drum, to be the engineer officer on the Drum, the USS Drum.  And my commanding officer calls the detailer.  The detailer is the person in Washington [District of Columbia] that determines where you go and when.  They're called detailers.  And he says, "I think we're setting Tzomes up to fail."  And that's because he was very familiar with the commanding officer of the Drum, who came from a very segregated, racist, deep rooted southern background, both him and his wife, okay.  And he says, "With Tzomes being the first, you do not want to send him there under that guy."  The detailer didn't listen to my captain.  He says, "Does Tzomes qualify for the job?"  "Yes."  "Do you recommend him for the job?"  "Yes."  "He's going to the Drum."  Okay.  So, I get to the Drum, and there's a story here.  Because I told you that frequently on the submarine I was the first exposure to a lot of people, as far as being next to a black person, okay.  So, I'm coming here with his bias towards blacks, and I'm going to be his engineer, which is a very important job.  We leave port, I report to the ship overseas.  We immediately go in what's referred to as a Spec Op.  That's secret missions that we did in the Cold War that you can't talk about.  And you don't communicate, you're not allowed to communicate, okay, at all unless there's a disaster and you have an accident, okay.  Then you have to abort your mission.  So, we're underway, and the person I relieved did a terrible job, and they failed an inspection.  So, the captain's got this stigma over him.  And this black guy now is supposed to be able to clean it up.  Yeah, yeah, yeah.  So, he has daily meetings with me.  By the way this captain, besides the racist thing, he was so impersonal that the officers avoided him.  In a wardroom, one of your favorite times of the day is to eat the meal together and socialize.  In that wardroom, the captain and the oncoming, two oncoming watch officers, ate dinner together.  No other officers ate dinner with them in the wardroom.  So, besides this racial baggage, he's got other issues.  So, he has me go to his state room every night, and we have about three hour meetings.  And he gives me this list of things to do--typically thirty, forty, fifty things to do, okay.  He would get up the next morning and summon me.  And I'd get out of the state room about maybe ten o'clock.  And then whoever worked for me that was on watch at the time, or who was going to come on watch at midnight--I would parcel out some of these things, okay.  And, but I wouldn't give all the assignments out.  So, he would summon me every morning about nine o'clock--eight or nine o'clock.  We'd go over this list, and then he'd tear into me when I would not be able to tell him that half the list had been accomplished, okay.  It went like that for two weeks.  It went like that for two weeks and he told me, he says, "Engineer, I cannot deal with you."  He says, "If I had the power, I would surface this submarine and take you back to port and fire you."  Okay.
Speaker 2: This is your commanding--
Speaker 1: This is my commanding officer, okay.  So, there's more to this.
Story_ID: 36306
Speaker 1: Okay, I was talking about my commanding officer [on USS Drum] who, if he had the power with the Surface, he would have dropped me off, because he couldn't work with me.  So, the third day, we're underway on this Spec Op.  And we're scheduled to be underway about sixty-something days, submerged.  So, my wife [Martu Tzomes] goes to a social with the wife--it's typical throughout the [U.S.] Navy--the officer's group is called, referred to as the wardroom.  It's typical, especially when ships are deployed--and aviators have the same thing.  It's all called a wardroom.  And the spouses get together and do things, okay.  So, there was a function the third day after I got underway.  The reason that's important is there's no way my wife could communicate with me.  So, we talked about the commanding officer from the southern racial bias background, that my commanding officer on the [USS] Pintado said, "You should not send Tzomes to this guy."  So, Tzomes's wife goes to this function, okay.  The first meeting with the commanding officer's wife is--and I'm paraphrasing--my ex-wife.  She says, "My, you're sure pretty for a Negro.  I haven't had any experience with Negroes since my mammy when I was growing up."  This is 1960--no, 1970--.
Speaker 2: '70 [1970] or so?
Speaker 1: Yeah, when did I get--?  I was on the Drum from--.  You got it there--'76 [1976] to '79 [1979] [1973 to 1976]?  Does that sound right?  Anyway, this is in the mid-seventies.  And this is this woman going to my ex-wife, telling her she hasn't had experience with Negroes since her mammy when she was growing up, okay.  So, my wife's going through that, and I'm going through my thing.  Now, the Drum story ends up a good story, in that I got advice from one of the officers in the wardroom that I didn't take.  Every officer in that wardroom--I already told you about not watching movies.  Well, it turns out everybody lied to the captain, starting with the executive officer.  Everybody told the captain what he wanted to hear.  I'm thinking, although no bell went off, I'm thinking that he started to see the light towards the end of that patrol, because he started treating me a little differently.  By that, I mean favorably, positively.  And we had an inspection as soon as we got into port, coming off that patrol, that we passed with flying colors.  The captain still couldn't bring himself around to really talking to me the way he talked to the white officers.  But he did take me to the Officer's Club.  And his way of congratulating me on saving his butt on this inspection was to buy me a drink at the Officer's Club, okay.  So, we get back to our home port, San Diego [California], alright.  So, the relationship--especially after passing this--actually this inspection--.  Remember I said I was at the Nuclear Propulsion Examining Board?  That's what this inspection was on the Drum.  And what happens, if you fail this nuclear inspection, you automatically get your keys taken away for operating the reactor.  So, it's an important inspection, okay.  And so, we passed that with flying colors.  We come back to San Diego.  He's got a little more confidence in me, okay.  We get a new executive officer, and the performance cycle--the formal performance cycle--about a year after we get back to San Diego, okay, he ranked me as top officer in the wardroom.  That is unheard of.  Nobody in the [U.S.] Navy wardroom gets ranked above the executive officer.  I did.  So, we got this--the good point of this story--as was typical with my relations with other first time exposures to whites to black--was here's a guy from a racially biased background as demonstrated by his treatment to me; is known by my commanding officer on the Drum; and is demonstrated by the treatment of his wife to my then wife, okay--completely comes around and makes me his top officer, okay.  That's the ending story of that experience.
Story_ID: 36307
Speaker 1: So, there's the commanding officer who's usually a captain?
Speaker 2: He was a commander.
Speaker 1: Commander.
Speaker 2: Most submarine commanding officers are commanders.  That's the equivalent of a lieutenant colonel, if you're familiar with the [U.S.] Air Force climate.
Speaker 1: I'm somewhat familiar, but our audience may not be.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: That's part of clarifying it.  The executive officer, what is the role of an executive officer?
Speaker 2: The executive officer is the number two in command.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Okay?  He's the (laughter).  I can only talk in military terms.  He's the number two in command.  If the captain dies, the executive officer takes over, okay.  If the captain becomes incapacited, the executive officer takes over.  The executive officer is responsible for all the routine functions of the ship, any ship, or any aviation squadron.  He's responsible for all the routine functions of the squadron and the training of the officers.
Speaker 1: They call them XOs?
Speaker 2: XOs.
Speaker 1: So, Pete, the executive officer normally is what rank?
Speaker 2: Lieutenant commander.
Speaker 1: Lieutenant commander.
Speaker 2: And I was a Lieutenant commander.
Speaker 1: And that's what I was going to ask you next.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Lieutenant commander, okay.  And you're getting to talk about it, yeah, I think--
Speaker 2: Yeah, my first submarine...
Speaker 1: First submarine--
Speaker 2: It was kind of interesting.  We had two blacks, a steward.  A steward is, I don't know if you're familiar with that.  Back in the early days, the [U.S.] Navy, if you were black, you could only be a steward.  Stewards are essentially the, they're the food handlers and attendants for the officers, okay.  They were called stewards.  That's not the case anymore.  And it wasn't the case several years before I went into submarines.  Blacks enlisted could more than just stewards.  But in the very beginning, that's all they could do.  And we had a torpedoman.  And the steward, I'll never forget.  His name was Willie Wells, okay.  Because, with me being the first, okay--and what happens, and you can probably appreciate--.  I haven't seen the movie, 'The Butler' yet, okay.  But typically, when you have blacks in a servant function around certain white folks, they will say what they want to say, as if you're not even there, okay.  Right?  I think you've experienced that.
Speaker 1: I've seen that, yes.
Speaker 2: So, here I got my steward, Willie Wells.  So, he's black.  And apparently there are people talking about me while I'm not around.  And what Willie did for me on that very first patrol was he would say, "Mr. Tzomes, look out for that one."  "Mr. Tzomes, you can trust that one."  "Mr. Tzomes, avoid this one, okay."  You know, because he wanted me to--he and that first class torpedoman wanted me to succeed just as much as I wanted to succeed.  Because you know, they're calling all these white folks "Sir."  They won't call a black officer "Sir."  "And see that black officer--"   And we developed a lifelong relationship after that, to this day, okay, because he really did look out for me.  And that was important, because on your first submarine you have to complete what's called submarine qualifications.  So, you're doing a lot of studying, you're doing a lot of qualifying, and there's quite a bit of pressure on you.  And to know, to have some insight on who's talking behind your back, was good insight.
Speaker 1: And that was on the USS--
Speaker 2: That was on the Will Rogers.
Speaker 1: Will Rogers.
Speaker 2: Yep.
Speaker 1: Thank you.
Story_ID: 36308
Speaker 1: Now, you were involved with the, on the Nuclear Propulsion Board?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Is that the, a fleet, or is that a specific ship?
Speaker 2: It's all nuclear ships in the Atlantic arena and the Pacific arena.  So, it's surface ships and submarines.  So, its aircraft carriers, cruisers and submarines that are nuclear powered.
Speaker 1: And what year were you on that board?
Speaker 2: 1979 to '82 [1982], I think.
Speaker 1: So, it's a little bit later.
Speaker 2: That's after my engineer tour.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So it was--
Speaker 2: That's the tour where the captain had somebody triple check, double check all my work.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: And didn't make anybody do it.
Speaker 1: Now, somewhere in here--and I just want to make sure we got some of the dates down.  '69 [1969] was USS Will Rogers.  Let's see, somewhere I got the dates when you mentioned you became a member of the U.S. Naval Institute, or was that?
Speaker 2: No, that's afterwards.  That's after I retired.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That's a professional--well, actually I joined the Naval Institute while I was on actual duty.  But that's--
Speaker 1: That's right here.
Speaker 2: --a Naval professional organization.
Speaker 1: Okay, thank you.  I thought that was a little out of sequence.  So, what's your, what's some of--you're next assigned to?  And are you moving up the ranks--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --in your mind?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  So, then I became the executive officer.  When I left the Nuclear Propulsion Examining Board, I went to the USS Cavalla.  And I know I haven't made the distinction.  But the [USS] Will Rogers is a ballistic missile submarine.  That was, back in those days we had the nuclear triad, as far as the three areas of which the United States can launch missiles.  And the ballistic submarine was part of the triad.  To this date, the ballistic missile submarine is still--if you ask me, I will tell you it's the most important piece of nuclear deterrents because you know where the nuclear sites are if you're the enemy.  Well, I don't care where you are, Russia, today, England, anybody.  They know where our nuclear sites are in the United States.  So, they can send an aircraft over here or a missile themselves, and wipe them out.  You don't know where the submarine is.  So that's why I say it's the most important piece of nuclear deterrent, because you have our nuclear weapons at sea submerged, and can't be detected.
Speaker 1: So that triad is sea, land, and--
Speaker 2: Air.
Speaker 1: Air.  Thank you.  So, the Cavalla was a--
Speaker 2: It was fast attack.
Speaker 1: Fast attack.  And you were the executive officer?
Speaker 2: Yep.
Speaker 1: And a ballistic missile sub--. I mean for other folks who don't know the nomenclature--ballistic missile, you're talking about what type of missiles?
Speaker 2: You're talking about long-range missiles that can carry nuclear warheads.
Speaker 1: Alright.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Now, I'm glad you brought that up, because on my command tour, we could shoot Tomahawk missiles.  And most fast attack submarines now can shoot Tomahawk cruise missiles.  And you launch cruise missiles against surface ships, and you launch them against close end targets on land.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Whereas a ballistic missile submarine--the ballistic missile can go, you know, a thousand miles, maybe even more in the air.
Speaker 1: And when was the assignment for the USS Cavalla?
Speaker 2: The Cavalla was '79 [1979], '82 [1982].  Does that sound right?
Speaker 1: Sounds about right.
Speaker 2: I didn't, I don't have it memorized, but thereabouts.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 36309
Speaker 1: So, as executive officer--oh, I want to get your thoughts on this.  Earlier in your career, you run into sailors--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: White sailors who would walk by you, or say I'm not going to salute.
Speaker 2: "I'm not going to take orders from a nigger officer."
Speaker 1: Right.  What could you do, or what could you say to them?
Speaker 2: Well, let's--typically what I said was, "Don't look at me, look at my collar devices."  And then also typically, I could go to the chief petty officer who'd be in charge of them and remind them that who's in charge, who's really in charge, and who gives the orders, okay.  Typically, that took care of it.  I did have an issue on the [USS] Pintado, which was my second submarine, where my second day I was walking through the cruise mess area.  That's the primary dining facility for enlisted.  It's referred to as the cruise mess.  And I walk through there, and then somebody said something about Rastas.  And I left and came back, I think about five seconds or so later and I--because I'm brand new, okay.  So, they already know--regardless of my complexion, they all know Tzomes is this first black nuke [nuclear power program] in the submarine force, okay.  So, I walk back in, and I made a comment about overhearing the term and not knowing who said it or what group of them said it.  But if I ever hear it repeated, I guarantee that I would find out who said it.  And I would have been sure that I would be in the submarine longer than them.  And they, I really didn't have anymore issues after that.  That was my second day as far as--with the enlisted being overt, okay.  I do have a friend who came after me, okay.  So, the second commanding officer of the submarine, when he was an engineer, they wrote racial slurs on the lagging on piping in the engineering spaces on the submarine.  But I am not aware--because he could see that, because it was on the piping.  I'm not aware of anybody on my submarine racially writing things where it was visible to everyone.  I'm not aware of it.  Or if it happened, somebody cleaned it up before I got to see it.
Speaker 1: But as an officer, you could charge a sailor with insubordination if--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: If it was blatant enough.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: But you never did that?
Speaker 2: No.  It's better, it's probably better not to do that when it's racially driven, okay.  Like I said, my philosophy was to--because I already knew I was their first exposure, especially to an officer, okay--that my job was to educate them that I'm, I'm just as competent if not more competent than my white counterparts, and I deserve the same degree of respect.
Story_ID: 36310
Speaker 1: And for some of the black sailors that happened to have a commanding, or an executive officer--just a black officer on a submarine, what was it like for them?
Speaker 2: You had two groups, okay.  You had--and the reason that's a significant comment, I told you about Willie Wells.
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Well, in my second and third submarines, I developed relationships with certain enlisted in the crew.  Because, I'll tell you what drives that.  Because I even got asked a couple of times on why I don't socialize with the white officers when we're overseas, okay.  Overseas was segregated.  The United States was segregated with the--.  What the people did in the [U.S.] Navy--.  This is not the, this is not a Navy structure.  This is the people, the sailors, the officers.  Overseas, they were segregated.  There were certain places overseas where black sailors were not allowed to go to, okay, not allowed to go to.  And if you went, you got beat up or you got killed, okay.  And then there were black places.  So, when I was overseas going on liberty, I would go with the black members of the crew.  So, since I'm the only black officer--and then the other officers used to say, you know, "Why don't you ever go socialize with us at the bars and so forth?"  And I would explain to them.  Then I got to the point where I would go with the white officers.  We would find a place where I could go, and I would go with the white officers, typically the first night on liberty.  And then that would be the only night I would socialize with white officers because they would, they really challenged me.  You know, why--we socialize on the boat, why can't we socialize--?  And like in the Philippines, the place was called the Jungle, where blacks could go.  And then I had a double whammy.  Although I'm in civilian clothes when I'm on liberty--in that you don't want to go around a lot of black sailors who may have had some bad experiences with certain officers when they find out you're an officer, out in the jungle, okay.  And so, these black enlisted on the Pintado and on the [USS] Will Rogers, would look out for me on liberty, okay.  However, there were some sailors who couldn't take it, because on ship it's "yes sir", and "no sir", "Ay, ay, sir," when Tzomes talks to you, okay.  And there were some younger folks who couldn't deal with that.  So, I typically--like Willie Wells, like, he was older.  He'd probably been in the Navy about eighteen years when I met him on the Will Rogers, a first class torpedoman.  On the Pintado, we had a chief radioman who was like that.  He could take it.  But we had a couple of younger folks on the Pintado that couldn't take it.  By that, I mean they would see me like on the Pintado with the chief out in the jungle having drinks, socializing.  No "yes sirs" exchanged.  But once we got on that ship, it was "yes sir," "Ay, ay sir", the junior guy would want to talk about what we just did in the jungle the night before.  You can't do that.  So, that's why I said there were two types back in those days.  And then I just was very disappointed in the whole issue overseas in segregated ports.  And that's nothing the country did.  That's something the U.S. sailors did.  I mean back from, probably from before World War II, would be my guess.  And even then it would be worse, because only blacks could be stewards then.  So, there's probably fewer.
Speaker 1: Well, thanks for that explanation.  I was wondering what, you know, like I said, what it was like for the blacks.  That's very helpful.
Story_ID: 36311
Speaker 1: Let me go back, if I have the chronology correct.  In 1970, Admiral [Elmo] Zumwalt--
Speaker 2: Oh, Zumwalt.
Speaker 1: Zumwalt, yes, his Z-Grams.
Speaker 2: Yeah, okay, this, oh, this is interesting.  I'm the only black, right, submarines.  So, Admiral Zumwalt, we had this issue, this was in 1969 or '70 [1970].  We had race riots on, I think three or four aircraft carriers.  So, we had serious racial tensions in the [U.S.] Navy, more overt than I experienced on my submarine. Because one thing, quickly, about submarines--when going back to black sailors, okay.  We had a guy from my home town.  His name was B.O. Anderson.  And he was very proud of me when I went into submarines.  He was in submarines in World War II, and then he converted from steward to be a radioman when things opened up after World War II, okay.  Bruce would tell me these stories.  Like, we have a thing that's called a stores loading party.  That's where on a submarine, everybody except the officers has to participate in bringing new supplies, especially food, on the submarine. It's called a stores loading party.  So, Bruce was telling me a story from World War II where they were in Norfolk [Virginia].  And they took a break to go get some water.  And all the whites went to the "white" drinking fountain, and Bruce went to the "colored" drinking fountain.  And the whites physically took Bruce, and they said, "We're one ship, we're one crew, we're together at sea, we're going to be together at port.  You're drinking out of this fountain."  And Bruce took a drink out of the white fountain, and they started a fight on the pier in Norfolk, because the white sailors on other ships saw Bruce drinking out of that fountain.  And then that crew, they literally had a fight.  They had to bring the military police to break it up, okay.  And that's typical, once you get to know each other and understand each other when you're submerged.  Because a mistake by one person could cause the submarine to sink forever.  You can't get tied up in any racial biases, you know, among the crew.
Speaker 1: So, Admiral Zumwalt--
Speaker 2: So, Admiral Zumwalt, okay--
Speaker 1: He was the commanding--
Speaker 2: He was the Chief of Naval Operations, okay.  So, like I said, in submarines, we did not have the degree, the overt riots.  You might have a race riot on the submarine.  You might have some of these petty issues about not taking orders from a Negro officer, but you really had true racial tensions on surface ships and other places in the Navy.  And Admiral Zumwalt decided he was going to have an enlisted study group and an officer study group to study the situation and make recommendations to him for improving the racial situation in the Navy.  Since I was the only black in submarines, by definition, I became the submarine representative on that group.  I was a lieutenant.  And your wives went.  So, my wife [Martu Tzomes] at the time went, too.  And they had separate meetings for wives to discuss wife issues, and they had separate meeting for the husbands.  And then we were given a week to come up with a list of recommendations and to brief Admiral Zumwalt on our recommendations.  So, some of things our group took on was housing.  Like, we'll go back to my complexion again.  In Groton, Connecticut--you said you grew up in Connecticut?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: So, Groton, Connecticut, okay.  I'm leaving, it's my first submarine, it's the [USS] Wills Rogers.  So, I'm leaving the submarine--no, I'm leaving nuclear power school.  Excuse me, it was the submarine training.  No, I'm sorry, it was my first submarine.  Because in submarine training, I was by myself.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I go look at an apartment in, oh, Norwich, I can't remember.  And I sign the papers.  I've, we've looked at it.  And I can't remember why, but my wife did not go with me into the rental office, okay.  So, we got everything ready to sign.  I signed, and I said "Let me go get my wife."  As soon as my wife walked in, they said, "Oh, we made a mistake.  This unit is taken."  (laughter).  Groton, Connecticut.  So, anyway--
Speaker 1: But--
Speaker 2: They had segregated areas in Groton, in Connecticut, around Groton, too.
Story_ID: 36312
Speaker 1: Admiral [Elmo] Zumwalt--
Speaker 2: So, Admiral Zumwalt got us together, and our group talked about carrying Afrocentric projects in Navy exchanges; training white barbers to do hair.  Because if you were black and you had the, you know, short hair, the white barbers wouldn't cut your hair.  So, you had to go out in town.  You can appreciate a military base, because things are by definition cheaper, because it's part of the bennies [benefits?] for serving your country is to get some things cheaper.  So black, most black men had to go off base and pay the off base prices for haircuts.  So, we forced the Navy to train white barbers to cut black hair; forced the Navy to hire black barbers; forced the Navy to carry Afro products in the Navy exchanges.  We developed, and this--depending on who you talk to, some people may tell you that this backfired in a lot of places.  But every command was required to establish a minority advisor.  So, if you had an officer, that person became your advisor.  If you didn't have any officers, it became a senior enlisted.  And that was supposed to be the go-to person for the commanding officer to get, for lack of a better term, sensitivity exposure in dealing with black people, okay.  I'm not sure--maybe on aircraft carriers, especially since it was on the tail end of race riots, that it may have done some good.  I do know that a lot of admirals in the Navy did not like what Admiral Zumwalt did.  For example, I'll never forget when we--.  Each of us had an area, and we gave a presentation.  And Henry Nixon was the guy who gave the presentation about barbers and haircuts.  And in those days, Admiral Zumwalt, the Chief of Naval Operations, was in his uniform, but a lot of senior officers at the Pentagon went in civilian clothes.  So, we had all these people in civilian clothes.  I mean, we knew they were admirals.  And Henry gave his presentation about haircuts.  And when he sat back down, another person started presenting.  And this admiral muttered under his breath that--to Henry, saying, "Young man, you're making a mountain out of a molehill."  And Henry got up.  He says, "Admiral, excuse me Sir, but this gentleman--"  We knew he was an admiral in civilian clothes.  "--this gentleman sitting next to me thinks I'm making a mountain out of a molehill.  Let me elaborate."  And Henry went on to speak about five more minutes.  And then the admiral said something that essentially put this guy in his place, for saying something to Henry.  So, Admiral Zumwalt was very receptive to everything that both the officer group did-- the wives, and the enlisted group.  And then Z-66.  Now, Admiral Zumwalt's management style was the Chief of Naval Operations would release special communications on certain issues setting policy, coming from him, okay.  And they were called Z-Grams, short for Zumwalt.  And Z-66 is the infamous--it was a very lengthy message, outlining the racial changes to immediately occur in the Navy.
Story_ID: 36313
Speaker 1: Not to go too far with that--issuing a directive or command from the Chief of Naval Operations [Admiral Elmo Zumwalt's policy changes] is one thing.  But did you see changes take place after that?
Speaker 2: Well, the only things that were pertinent to me was, you know, the visible stuff like in the [U.S.] Navy exchanges.  Some things with housing--there was a way and a provision, although down south it didn't do much good, where a local commander could exercise certain things with assignments to officers and housing for areas that were known to have segregated housing.  Now, a few years after the Z-66, they did do some things in Meridian, Mississippi where they got together with the local communicators, local communities--and essentially saying that after a certain time, all officers coming to Meridian are going to be told don't go to this neighborhood for housing.  And if they do go, and you sell them a house, we're going to take away their housing, because you get a housing allowance.  We're going to take away their housing allowance.  That did eventually happen in Meridian, Mississippi, which was one of the, one of the stalwarts of holding out with segregated neighborhoods.
Story_ID: 36314
Speaker 1: So, let's fast forward.  Because I think you've gone through a couple of these things--the Nuclear Propulsion Examining Board, you're an executive officer on the USS--
Speaker 2: Cavalla.
Speaker 1: Cavalla.  And let's see, 1983--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: You become the first African American to command a--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: U.S. submarine.
Speaker 2: Right, first in the [U.S.] Navy to do.
Speaker 1: Very good.
Speaker 2: I always make it the point that I didn't stay in the Navy to become the first black commanding officer.  I knew that if I went through and did my job, and completed all my qualifications and certs [certifications], I would eventually be assigned as a commanding officer.  But my driver was to be a commanding officer, especially in the fast attack submarine.  Because we did a lot of, a lot of fun, dangerous stuff.  And I used to be very vocal, because this was back in the Cold War--that if we ever had to go to war against the Russians, the submarine force is the only portion of the military currently prepared to do what we need to do to take out the Russians.  So, other than that, I won't tell you much more, okay.  So, that stuff was fun, and only fast attacks could do it.  And so, that was my driver.  My driver was I want to be a commanding officer.  I want to take one of these things and be responsible for monitoring the bad guys on the Spec Op, and I like this.  And if I succeed, I will end up being the first black commanding officer.  So, that's the driver.  The driver was me liking Spec Ops.  The driver wasn't me wanting to be the first.
Speaker 1: In order to get to be the commander of a vessel, surface or submarine, there was probably a tough selection process.
Speaker 2: Yes, there's a screening.
Speaker 1: What is the--
Speaker 2: It's called command screening.
Speaker 1: So, what--put aside the fact that you're African American.  What's the process--
Speaker 2: The process is a board.  And the board meets in Washington [District of Columbia].  And your entire record is portrayed on a screen.  We have in the, in the Navy they're called fitness reports.  The civilian terminology would be called performance appraisals.  So, all your performance appraisals, any of your declarations, any of your awards, anything about you, good or bad, that's in your official record gets projected on a screen in this big meeting room in Washington, actually at the Pentagon.  No, not at the Pentagon.  Then it was at the Navy Annex.  I don't know where the Navy Annex is nowadays.  But anyway, back in those days.  And that's a formal screening process.  And so typically, back in those days about 90 percent of the officers were successfully screened for submarine command.  It's not a given, okay.  But they do--and now it's even worse.  It's extremely hard to screen for command nowadays.  For example--are we going to get around to talking about the Centennial 7?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Okay.  So, when we talk about the Centennial 7, I need to, to give you an appreciation for how long it's been since we got a black in command.  And part of that is driven by the, now it's a more rigorous screening process, because there's fewer submarines.
Story_ID: 36315
Speaker 1: You're the commanding officer of, what's the vessel?
Speaker 2: The [USS] Houston.
Speaker 1: The Houston.
Speaker 2: It was the fast--there's two Houstons.  There's the Sam Houston and there's the Houston that's the fast attack submarine.  I was commander of the fast attack Houston SSN-713.
Speaker 1: And taking on the role of the commanding officer of USS submarine, what, how did that feel to you?  I mean here you are achieving something, besides being African American, just in, you know--
Speaker 2: It felt great.  I mean, that's the only way I can explain it.  But there's, I mean, there's bad that comes with the good.  But as far as being the commanding officer, it felt great.  As a matter of fact, the 'Ebony Magazine' wanted to do a feature on me when I went to, when I went to the Houston.  I took command in May of 1983.  Ebony wanted to a feature in the summer of 1983.  The hierarchy in the [U.S.] Navy said, "We don't want to do this.  We need to make sure he's going to succeed.  We do not need to make a lot of hoopla about the first, then if he fails we're embarrassed."  So, I think that was a good decision.  So, there was nothing public, super public, about me being the first for the first couple of years that I was in command at the, essentially, at the insistence of the hierarchy of the Navy submarine force.
Speaker 1: Were there other African American officers who, that you were friends with or familiar with, also moving up either as submarine commanders or on surface ships?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Who else was--
Speaker 2: Well, we had, the immediate ones behind me were Tony Watson, who retired as a Rear Admiral; Mel Williams who retired as a Vice Admiral.  Tony Watson, I told you Tony Watson; and Bruce Grooms who's currently a Vice Admiral.  They're the ones that I was most familiar with, and for lack of a better term, mentored and shared stories and experiences with.  And Admiral Williams--we had this group, and I know we're going to talk about the Centennial Seven [African-American officers to command submarines in the 20th Century], but we'd periodically get together and we'd talk about our pasts.  And we'd sit down in succession, with me being first at one end of the table, and number seven being at the other end of the table, when all seven of us are together.  All seven of us have only been together about four times, okay.  And Admiral Williams tells the story about me in Groton, Connecticut.  I was on the [USS] Will Rogers, and he was apparently walking down the street on the base.  And I said--he mimics me as giving some sign of hissing sign.  And then I beckoned him, and we come over and I introduce me.  Well, I know.  It was there when I was there for, going for my XO [executive officer].  Anyway, he tells the story about me beckoning him over, sharing my name and experience, giving him my number, and telling him to make sure if anything goes wrong or there's any problems, to make sure he calls me.  So, we, that group of us have built quite a bond.
Story_ID: 36316
Speaker 1: I was--I belong to an active duty.  I belong to an organization called the National Naval Officers Association which is, its primary purpose is to provide mentoring and counseling and advice for primarily blacks, although it says minorities.  And so, we attract primarily blacks and Hispanics, mostly blacks, for people in the [U.S.] Navy, Marine Corps, and Coast Guard.  I was the president of two chapters, and I was the regional vice president for two years.  And because of my, for lack of a better--from stature in the submarine force, I was able to have a lot of influence as far as mentoring and helping other junior officers.  And I think you already saw the one film clip where they had me in Hawaii conducting a meeting.  And you could tell from those people's faces that there was, it's a very worthwhile organization.
Story_ID: 36317
Speaker 1: Well, I did see one other clip of, I forget which magazine, but it shows you with all these white officers around you.
Speaker 2: That was probably 'Ebony Magazine', yeah.
Speaker 1: I think so.  So, you're now in the 1980s--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And the (unclear) '60s [1960s] and '70s [1970s]--. How's the climate, at least on your submarine, in terms of respect for you as an African American [commanding] officer?
Speaker 2: I had an issue in the beginning.  And to this day, I don't know if I handled it right.  But I had a, an overt chief petty officer who just did not want me there.  And I went to the squadron commander and explained the situation.  I said, I said, "I got two choices.  We can give this guy the opportunity to leave, because he doesn't want to be there, or we can keep him there and I guarantee you he's not going to succeed over me.  And I will ruin his career."  And the squadron commander chose to give him the choice of leaving, and it didn't take him two seconds to say he wanted to leave.  So, we sort of screened him out.  And then as things progressed, I got, I will tell you that I got the full confidence of the crew.  To this day, I get people searching through Google and Facebook, where people reach out to me, reminding me about me and what it was like with me in command.  I was telling the story about influences that you have on people when you don't know you're influencing folks.  So, I was a cigar smoker.  I had special cigars made from Florida, that got shipped to me.  So, when I first got there, I can tell you, I was the only cigar smoker.  So, I got a crew of about 130 folks on the [USS] Houston.  After a year, when the crew saw that I had what it--that I could lead them properly, for lack of a better term--.  I'm not exaggerating, half to three-quarters of the crew smoked cigars.  I'm not exaggerating.  And that was sort of a compliment to me, okay.  And the, just that little simple action.  And then I remember just speaking about the communications (laughter).  I had one fire patrol technician.  He reached out to me a little over a year ago.  And he reminded me of this one Spec Op we were on, and things were kind of tense.  And he was one of the key players, as far as what we were doing.  And he was reminding me of how I would massage his back while he was doing what he was doing, and stuff cigars in his mouth.  (laughter).  It kind of, it brought back memories.  But, you know, you really don't know how you impress people until later on in life when they reach out and tell you what you did for them.  And I talked about Bruce Grooms.  He--and you should have seen the clip that the [U.S.] Navy ran during Black History Month in 2013.  Bruce said some things about me that I never knew, as far as the way he felt about me.  And then after he shot that clip and I saw it, I got in touch with him.  And he says, "I'm a Vice Admiral because of you."  And just some of the things that he said in that clip--.  And this is recent, it's just been since March, he told me that.
Speaker 1: You inspired him, but apparently you're not on the same vessels, though.
Speaker 2: No.  It's just the ability to know that he could contact me and ask for advice.  And in the video clip he talks about the first encounter was when he was stationed as a junior officer with the Naval Academy.  And he, the way he phrases it in the video clip is the fact that I, in no uncertain terms, sent a signal that he needed to stop being a crybaby and toughen up.
Speaker 1: Thank you for that, those insights.
Story_ID: 36318
Speaker 1: I'm going to switch gears a little bit.  We talked a little bit about your first wife [Martu Tzomes]--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And your son Chancellor, Alfonso--
Speaker 2: Tzomes, II.
Speaker 1: The second, thank you.  What's going on with that side of your life?  You've got a family.  Obviously, they keep--
Speaker 2: Yeah--
Speaker 1: --going overseas with you.
Speaker 2: The--
Speaker 1: This is in the '80s [1980s].
Speaker 2: Yeah.  In general, the military deployments put a strain on marriages, okay.  And I've always had a saying, and this is also true with my first marriage, okay.  I've always had a saying in advising young sailors and officers about getting married, okay: That you can't use what's happening to you as an excuse for the reason you're getting out of the [U.S.] Navy, okay.  Because if you're meant to be with each other--.  And the other advice I give people is to date through at least one deployment before getting married, because you cannot talk about what it's like being separated, okay.  It puts a strain on you, and when you're in a submarine you can't--.  Now today with emails and things like that--and I haven't kept up with it.  But there's ways that families can communicate more readily with their sailors, at least get an email to them.  The sailor, because of transmission requirements, because of your mission, may not be able to send something to you.  But back in those days, we had what was called family grams.  And you could get five family grams per patrol.  And your family grams got screened by somebody on the staff ashore.   And this used to be a favorite complaint by my wife, because you could not say anything negative in the family gram.  If you said something negative in the family gram, the Navy wouldn't let you send it, okay.  And that used to drive her batty.  And then the strain in raising your kid--and in my particular case, it just plain didn't work out.  But also in my particular case, I had the opportunity to wait until my first submarine and deployment to get married.  I did not do that.  That's one of the drivers why, that's the advice I always gave people after I got married:  Do not get married until your potential spouse experiences at least one deployment, because it puts a strain that cannot be described.  You have to experience it yourself.  And we, I paid the price, paid the price professionally and paid the price with respect of raising the family.  If I had it to do all over again, I would have made a lot different decisions.
Speaker 1: Thank you for that.
Speaker 2: Now, the one--not so much funny story, but talking about being incommunicado.  So, we were in Holy Lochs, Scotland, alright.  And this was when I was on the Will Rogers because we operated out of Rota, Spain in Holy Lochs, Scotland.  And remember the show, 'Hair'?  It was an all nude show.  It was more popular overseas before it came to the United States.
Speaker 1: It was on Broadway?
Speaker 2: It was on Broadway for awhile.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: But it started out in Scotland, okay.  And it was in Glasgow.  And a group of us wanted to go see it.  So, four of us went to see it.  We got two hotel rooms.  We had to take a train from where we were to Glasgow.  And in order to get back to the submarine, we had to check out of the hotel like at five o'clock, four or five o'clock in the morning.  So, one room was in my name with two of us.  And another one was in the name of another guy, one of the other officers, okay.  So, we get checked out.  It wasn't, it was not a good experience, because the clerk didn't know what he was doing.  So, I go to sea, alright.  The third day I'm at sea, there's a letter, official letter, with this hotel from Glasgow, Scotland on the return address.  So, my wife opens it.  It is a bill for a room for two, Glasgow, Scotland.  And she can't call me.  So, 57, 58 days later, when I'm back in port--we came back to port at Holy Lock--she called me as soon as she could, and just chewed me up--left side, right side, any way I could get chewed out.  She was not listening that I was not in Glasgow with a woman, okay.  So, I get back to the States a couple of weeks later, and I see the bill.  And the equivalent of the bill that was due was the U.S. equivalent of about seventy five cents.  That did not do--and then the first wardroom function after we got back, you know, the other guys went to my wife and said, "You know, this is really what happened.  We went to see 'Hair'."  She says, I'm not believing you guys.  You guys all stick together.  You're lying for him, you're going to keep lying for him.  So, I never got over that.
Speaker 1: Now this is your--
Speaker 2: First wife, yeah.
Speaker 1: By the way, when did you get married later on?
Speaker 2: July, 2007.
Speaker 1: Thank you.
Speaker 2: I took my time.  I dated this lady [Carolyn Eason] for fifteen years.  (laughter).
Story_ID: 36319
Speaker 1: So, in 1986 you are promoted to captain?  Or that's according to at least our--
Speaker 2: That sounds about right.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Are you still with the USS Houston?
Speaker 2: No, I was at Pearl Harbor [Hawaii].
Speaker 1: Pearl Harbor.  So, you're reporting to Pearl Harbor.  In what capacity, now?
Speaker 2: I was the Force Operations Officer for the staff of submarine forces, U.S. Pacific.
Speaker 1: And what, what exactly were your responsibilities?
Speaker 2: I was responsible for all of the at sea operations in the submarine force.  One of my first--and I'm thinking, this guy, what's his name?  The guy that went to Russia, the young guy right now, with all the secrets?
Speaker 1: [Edward] Snowden.
Speaker 2: Snowden?
Speaker 1: Snowden.
Speaker 2: Okay.  I'm thinking about him recently, because my first job, my first job when I went as the force operations officer, we had a, it was called the Walker's spy ring.  I don't know if you remember back in those days.  But Walker and his brother sold all kinds of top secret documents and information to the Russians about what we did in Spec Ops, and the whole nature of our communications set-up in submarines.  And when the Walkers went to their court martial, he was an officer, the judge said, "Okay, there is no punishment adequate enough to make up for the damage that you've done to the security of our nation."  These thoughts have recently been going through my head about Snowden.  Because my first job when I went to Pearl Harbor was to evaluate the damage that the Walker spy ring had done to our operations, and to make recommendations for changes to our operations because of the information the Walkers divulged.  Now, we did not know everything the Walkers divulged.  We only know what they were talking about in court, okay.  But it was pretty significant.  And if Snowden has done anything close to what Walker did back there, John Q. Public really doesn't understand what's gong on about treating him as a whistle blower instead of what he really did.
Speaker 1: So, your job, looking at--
Speaker 2: But that was my first assignment as a force operations officer, was to evaluate the damage and make recommendations for changes in the way we operated.
Speaker 1: Now, are there other parts of Naval operations, obviously, besides secret material that you were responsible for?
Speaker 2: Well, just the overall scheduling and operations, exercises.  I was responsible for emergency response.  We had a command center, for example.  If there was any disasters, both to the ships or submarines, or to the reactors, I was responsible for setting up all the exercises that the submarines participated in.  And their, and tracking them.  We had a big command center with a special 24-hour watch officer, the 24-hour watch officer.   The watch position worked for me and reported to me and reported to me when things happened at sea, either good or bad, that I needed to know about.
Speaker 1: Now, this is still during the Cold War?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Because we kind of forget that that was going on.
Speaker 2: That's correct.
Speaker 1: So, even though Vietnam was over, someone had to keep, protect our country.
Speaker 2: That's correct.
Speaker 1: And for--so that's, I guess that's a great responsibility, you know, as being part of the military. Because I think some folks might have the impression it was peace time and you were in Pearl Harbor, which was a beautiful place.  And the submarine was all just kind of leisurely--
Speaker 2: No way.
Speaker 1: This is serious business.
Speaker 2: Correct.  Oh yeah, I was also responsible for the tenders, submarine tenders, because of maintenance periods, and scheduling submarines for the maintenance periods.
Story_ID: 36320
Speaker 1: In 1987, Anthony Watson becomes the second African American to command a submarine.
Speaker 2: Correct.
Speaker 1: So, things were opening up for a few African Americans, at least in the sub [submarine] site.  On surface, how were things advancing?
Speaker 2: Well, surface was ahead of submarines.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: We had black commanding officers on surface ships long before me.  We also had Vice Admiral [Samuel] Gravely.  He was the first black admiral, okay.  So, like he had a command tour.  His command tour was a surface ship, and it was, I can't even remember when it was, okay.  But no, he--now, black Cos [commanding officers] on surface ships had the same similar experience as I had, but since they were before, there were a lot more things that they had to deal with.  Like, I have a friend named George Gaines who they gave him every surprise inspection in the book, okay.  He would--he would come in the port, and on two hours notice, get told you're having this special inspection, okay, because they tried to find a way to fire him.  And the system never got to him, he was that good.
Speaker 1: You know, you've given surely insights about quite a bit of prejudice and racism in the [U.S.] Navy.  But overall, up to that point and time, you're still satisfied.  I'm not sure the word is in love with the Navy, but it's still that passion there?
Speaker 2: That's correct.
Speaker 1: So, there was the good side and the bad side.
Speaker 2: The good side and the bad side.  The only bad thing I hated was leaving the submarine command.  But you can't stay there forever.
Speaker 1: Right.
Story_ID: 36321
Speaker 1: So, you end up in Pearl Harbor [Hawaii].  And what's your next assignment after Pearl?
Speaker 2: I became the director of--the official term was Director of Navy Equal Opportunity and Personal Advisor to the Chief of Naval Personnel in equal opportunity issues.
Speaker 1: And when was that?
Speaker 2: That would have been '88 [1988] to '90 [1990].  And there's a unique story there, okay.  I've told you about a couple of people that have supported me.  In the affirmative action business, that was a tour, that I did some unique things and almost got fired out of the submarine force.  Few people know about the threat that I'll talk about, now that I'm out of the [U.S.] Navy, okay.  I had a chief--well, first I had a Chief of Naval Operations, Admiral Trost.  Remember when I told you that I got the reputation of being the best in the west engineer officer?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Admiral Trost was the admiral that put that label on me.  He later went to be Chief of Naval Operations.  So, he knew me, alright.  We had a Chief of Naval Personnel, called Mike Borda who was a, I don't know the right way to--in one or two words, to describe him.  But he was not your typical flight officer, okay.  He was--for example, as an admiral when we would go places and you would have to get off of the pier to travel on a small boat to get to a ship, he would drive the boat himself.  He would go take over the controls of the boat, okay.  He was a very active kind of guy.  And I tell people, or used to tell people when I was on that job, if you didn't know what Admiral Borda looked like, you would swear he's black.  Him and Admiral Trost together let me do all kinds of things, as far as creating upward mobility for black sailors and officers.  I remember I went out on a briefing.  I went to all the major ports to give briefings about the Navy's new affirmative action program that I developed, okay.  And I'll never forget this one admiral.  We did some unique things.  I don't know if I'm allowed to talk about them or not.  But we did some new things.  Well, yeah, I can talk about one, okay.  We did some unique things.  For example, remember I told on the commanding officer's screening board, how they put things on the screen?  Well, for promotion boards, they did the same thing.  They put your entire record up on a screen.  You could tell--you could put a black lieutenant's record next to a white lieutenant's record--and without knowing anything else, you could tell which one was the black lieutenant.  That's what we called racial bias in performance appraisals, or we called them fitness reports, okay.  And the racial bias is exactly that.  Specifically, if one commanding officer who--we're not going to say the guy was racially prejudiced, but we will say the guy treated that black officer differently than the white officers in the way he wrote about him.  Like, there were certain code words, okay, that you would see in a black officer's fitness report.  Like, he is dedicated.  Whereas in the white officer, he would use a stronger word, okay.  The grading pattern--a black officer, let's take me.  I could go to [USS] Will Rogers and have all my grades on this side of the sheet, and then go to the [USS] Pintado and then all my grades on that side of the sheet. It's impossible for my performance to change like that in a one year period.  The difference has been two commanding officers on two different ships.  And that's called racial bias.  So, we were allowed, I was allowed to teach how to identify racial bias in fitness reports to the senior member of all Navy promotion boards for two years, okay.  Admiral Borda allowed me to do that.  When I went out on my little demonstration of the new Navy's affirmative action program, I had an admiral say, "Pete, that doesn't sound like equal opportunity to me.  That sounds like special opportunity."  I said, "You're damn right, Admiral, it's long overdue."  And Admiral Borda backed me up.  Because that officer, that admiral, you know, called Admiral Borda and said, "This is what your guy Tzomes is out here talking about."
Story_ID: 36322
Speaker 1: The--I created, and unfortunately, the equivalent--. I told you about Admiral [Hyman G.] Rickover, right?  Admiral Rickover subsequently left that job.  But his, the person that replaced him in the Division Naval Reactors, I made it part of the Navy affirmative action program.  Because what we found, we found that technical majors from most historically black colleges did not get the same degree of the math and science courses that you got at Penn State [University], and that you got in other places where we had NROTC [U.S. Naval Reserve officers' Training Corps] units, the [U.S.] Naval Academy.  So I created, and I sold it to Admiral Borda and Admiral Trost--to create a special one-year program for certainly screened potential officers for nuclear power to be able to go get this training to bring them up to speed on the same courses that they were teaching at the Naval Academy and at Penn State and some of the other prestigious technical schools, okay.  Got that in the plan, got it approved.  The equivalent of Admiral Rickover complained, and I got a call from the head admiral on the submarine forces, his personal aide.  And says, "Pete, Admiral Rickover--"  This is the new one--  "He doesn't like what you did.  And we need to remind you that when you leave that job, you're supposed to come back to the submarine force, but we just may not take you back." Okay--and I end up having to take that out.  But all the other special things that I put in, including dual screenings for people applying to NROTC scholarships--because we had the same issue with people screening blacks for NROTC scholarships, okay.  And by that time, most of the selection board screening boards were all white officers, okay.  So, we set up a process where to help eliminate potential racial bias, where if you were black, two officers had to screen your application to prevent the first--.  If you, if you were turned down, another equivalent officer from another university had to screen your application.  And then if the second screener thought the person was, could qualify for a NROTC scholarship, then they got referred to Washington for us to decide.  That was new.  So, special opportunity?  Yes, but long overdue.
Speaker 2: So, from Admiral [Elmo] Zumwalt to Z-66 to--
Speaker 1: To Admiral Borda--
Speaker 2: To Admiral Borda.  Things, there was some--sounds like there was some improvement, and you were placed in an opportunity to help make some positive things--
Speaker 1: Yeah, Admiral Borda--I mean, I just, I can't say enough about the way--like I said, just this--there were things in meetings that I was afraid to say, that he would say, and not hide any language or anything.  He'd just tell it like it is.  And I would be afraid to say the similar thing in the meeting.  That's why I said if you didn't know he was, you would think he was black.  And sometimes I was embarrassed where I should have been saying things, but he was saying them.
Story_ID: 36323
Speaker 1: So, in 1990, you become the commanding officer of Great Lakes Naval Base.
Speaker 2: Recruit training commanding officer.
Speaker 1: Recruit training.
Speaker 2: Which is the [U.S.] Navy's boot camp.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And that's actually just north of Chicago [Illinois].
Speaker 2: Correct.
Speaker 1: So, what was your, what were you doing, what were your responsibilities there?
Speaker 2: I was sort of like the superintendent of a large school.  For example, we had a staff of, about five hundred staffs.  And we had during the peak training season, as many as 14,000 recruits.  I was, as the commanding officer, I was responsible for all the operations at the boot camp, and the physical--and the facilities at the boot camp.  And also, we had apprentice training.  There are some folks who don't get specialized training when they leave boot camp.  They go off to apprentice training for several months, before they then go to the fleet.  So, the apprentice training was also at recruit training command.  The only thing I ever, the thing I always worried about was killing somebody at boot camp.  Because there's a lot of horror stories, especially at Marine Corps boot camps, of people committing suicide.  And I had two close calls in command.  I had one individual who had his belt, and he hung himself from a toilet stool in his barracks.  And he got caught by--we have roving security people in the buildings.  He got caught by one of the roving security people who was able to take him down before anything serious happened.  And I had another case where, I had one guy--and I can't describe a drill hall to you.  But let's say it's about--it's a large, very large building--probably two football fields long, maybe three, and a couple hundred feet high.  We had a recruit one Sunday get on top of a roof and threaten to jump off a roof.  And he got talked down by his company commander.  That's the thing that always worried me, because boot camp is pretty rigorous.  And there are folks, I mean, we had attrition.  And the attrition was typically nine to ten percent, okay.  So, people that just can't make the grade.  And then with society the way that it was in the nineties, it's not like people are in real good physical condition when they come.  We had a fat squad, obviously.  And when you came to boot camp, when you got recruited and came in the Navy, you had to sign a piece of paper that said you would lose this amount of weight in boot camp, or we'll throw you out.  And so--
Speaker 1: So, you didn't want to, you didn't mind attrition up to a certain point, so--
Speaker 2: Oh, no.
Speaker 1: But you didn't want to lose some young man or woman, you know, by suicide, you know.  It's--
Speaker 2: That was my biggest, that was my biggest worry.  Other than that, that tour was very fun.  I got a, we had graduations every week.  We invited distinguished people from, mostly from the Chicago area, to come and become part of the ceremonies, including Mayor Daley, okay--including Leroy Martin.  And I've lost track of Leroy Martin.  He's a former superintendent of police.
Speaker 1: That's right.
Speaker 2: Don't know if you remember the name.
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Okay.  And a gentleman who owns, what's the black food chain?  Piggly something, pigs.
Speaker 1: Hecky's in Evanston?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: I'm only guessing.
Speaker 2: In South Chicago.
Speaker 1: Moo 'n Oink.
Speaker 2: Moo 'n Oink, that's it, okay.  He came.  And a lot of distinguished folks.
Story_ID: 36324
Speaker 1: And in 19--, in that same year, I think you said off-camera that you met your future wife.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I met my wife in October of 1991.
Speaker 1: And what's her name?
Speaker 2: Her name is Carolyn [Eason].
Speaker 1: And you became married in?
Speaker 2: July of 2007.  I'm slow.   But it was the second time around for both of us.  So, besides the lengthy dating, we needed to make sure that there was some compatibility issues as far as knowing this is the right decision we both wanted to make.  She'll tell you I took too long in deciding.  I probably did.
Speaker 1: You met her in the Chicago [Illinois] area?
Speaker 2: I met her at a function in North Chicago at, we had a team called the Angel Drill Team, which I developed a relationship with.  And that relation continued after I left Great Lakes [Naval Station, Illinois].  Because when I left command, I explained the background behind the Angel Drill Team.  And I asked the guy that relieved me, you know, please do not shut the Angel Drill Team out of here just because I'm leaving.  Because I was black, and they're black.  And the next two or three commanding officers allowed the Angel Drill Team to continue their practices at the drill hall.
Speaker 1: The Angel Drill Team was--
Speaker 2: It was all female, and they participated in competition all over the world.  They had been literally all over the world.  And just last year, the originator, his name is Chief Nate Hamilton, passed away.  And their headquarters were in Waukegan [Illinois].
Story_ID: 36325
Speaker 1: 1994.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Is that when you retired [from the U.S. Navy]?
Speaker 2: That's when I retired.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: How many years?
Speaker 2: Twenty-six [years].
Speaker 1: Twenty-six years.  Did you ever miss going back to the subs [submarines]?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, the day I left--(laughter) the day after I left.  There's a saying that your worse day in command is better than any day you'll ever have after command.  And that saying is true.  It doesn't have to do with the submarine, it has to do with the at sea command experience.
Speaker 1: Right.  I'm going to give you a couple of dates to think about, and maybe get your thoughts.  1994, if we've got our dates correct, Anthony Watkins becomes the first rear admiral for the black--it was in the submarine area.
Speaker 2: Correct.
Speaker 1: We've already achieved African American admirals beforehand.
Speaker 2: That's correct.
Speaker 1: And you were talking about the [U.S. Navy's] Centennial Seven [African-American officers to command submarines in the 20th Century].
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Could you tell, just tell us more about that group?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  The Centennial Seven, the submarine anniversary is in April.  And the submarine force was established in April of 1900.  And in 2000, that was the first hundred years.  So, between 1900 and 2000--and you really don't want to count pre-World War II.  But the bottom line is--I already told you earlier, in the surface Navy, we've had black commanding officers starting with Admiral [Samuel] Gravely, okay.  But in submarines, essentially with me being the first--from 1983 to 2000 we had seven black commanding officers, five of nuclear submarines, and two of diesel submarines, okay.  Somehow, I think it was Admiral Williams, got the idea.  We affiliate, we began affiliation with a career communications group, Tyrone Tabor.  And I don't know if you've heard of him.  He publishes the 'U.S. Black Engineering Magazine'.  And they sponsor the Black Engineer STEM [science, technology, engineering, mathematics] Conference every year, and a Women of Color STEM Conference, two major conferences, a lot of big sponsors.  And we ended up coining ourselves as the Centennial Seven.  And we ended up going to the Black Engineer Conferences, and primarily making ourselves available to present ourselves as role models to young black officers who might have an interest in the submarine force, primarily those currently attending the Naval Academy.  And so, to put things in perspective, we had us.  So, between 1983 and 2000, we had seven black commanding officers of submarines.  Between 2000 and now, 2013--two, okay.  Thirteen years, two.  And the last one, the Leaf command, was in 2009.  So, we've had no black submarine commanding officers for going on five years.
Story_ID: 36326
Speaker 1: So, now that you're out of the [U.S.] Navy, and can speak as a civilian, what's your opinion about that?
Speaker 2: Part of it is the screening for command, because the competition is high.  We've had two, and I tried to find out before coming on this interview, there's one very close to being assigned commander.  By very close, I mean if it hasn't been already, it's within the next six months.  And then we had another person fail his nuclear.  There's separate--we didn't talk about it, but there's separate intensive nuclear training you have to complete before being assigned to command a nuclear submarine.  We had a black officer fail out of that last year.  So, you have fewer submarines, which means there are fewer openings.  The competition is higher.  There's no, I don't think there's any racial issues associated with--it's just the black submarine--blacks who enter the submarine force who decide to make it a career and stay.  So, I'm thinking that in today's environment with fewer submarines, there's not as much incentive for a black officer to want to stay around and make the submarines a career.  That's just an opinion.  I don't know that.  But there's got to be an--that can be the only logical explanation why there hasn't been more than two in thirteen years.
Story_ID: 36327
Speaker 1: Going a few years forward, 1998 is the year I believe you said your father [James Chancellor Tomes] passed away?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And we're going to go back to that, because we talked about it earlier, and I said I'd bring it back.  That was probably a very emotional experience because you, just--I think the day he passed away.
Speaker 2: Oh, on the--no, it was on the drive from the funeral service to the ceremony to bury him, in the limo that was transporting my family.  We were just talking.  You know, when you go to funerals like that, you end up trying to say things that are pleasant.  You're not sad, you're telling stories and--remember this, remember that--when the subject came up about him being my real dad.
Speaker 1: So, that many years before you learned that you were adopted?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And now this moment comes about.  How was that day for you?  Well, what was that like, I mean?
Speaker 2: I was just shocked.  You know, why didn't you all ever tell me?  "Oh, we thought you knew."  And then it was afterwards when I got to having discussions with my Aunt Mildred, you know, over the phone--because she lived in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania].  The funeral was in Williamsport [Pennsylvania].  So, she lived in Philadelphia, the funeral was in Williamsport, and I lived in Illinois.  So, we had several conversations after I got back to Illinois where my aunt filled me in on the details.
Speaker 1: Has that made you closer to certain members of your family?
Speaker 2: Yeah, everybody in Philadelphia, most definitely.  And that's primarily three cousins and my Aunt Mildred.  The three cousins are called the Three Ds.  Their names are Denise, Donna and Diane.
Speaker 1: Did you ever get back to Williamsport?
Speaker 2: I haven't been back since my fiftieth high school reunion, I went to that.  It was kind of interesting.
Speaker 1: Has it changed?
Speaker 2: No, wait a minute.  Hold on, I'm sorry.  Yeah, my fiftieth reunion--did I go?  Yeah, I went to the--yes, fiftieth reunion.
Speaker 1: General perceptions, has it changed much?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.  Big difference, big difference.
Speaker 1: In what kind of ways?
Speaker 2: Some of the houses are torn down.  The only thing that's the same that I recognize is the Little League World Series baseball complex.  That's about the same.  Now, there's a couple hotels downtown that are the same.  Downtown area is pretty much not as active as far as stores and people going shopping, because the--of the shopping malls.
Story_ID: 36328
Speaker 1: I'm going to ask you a few, we describe them as legacy questions.  And in terms of looking back over your life, do you think you accomplished what you set out to do, to be, in life?
Speaker 2: Ah, no.
Speaker 1: What else?
Speaker 2: I'm obviously proud of my accomplishments in the [U.S.] Navy.  I would have really--I had an opportunity two opportunities--well, no, I don't want to blame this on my first wife [Martu Tzomes].  But it would have been nice to aspire to be a flight officer.  And back when I was on the [USS] Drum, my commanding officer told me that I had the potential to be a flight officer, but I would have to get a different wife.  And I sort of brushed that off.  And then I had another opportunity a few years later, with somebody saying the same thing.  Like I said, I don't want to say I didn't--my wife prevented me from being a flight officer--because I could have probably prevented myself from being a flight officer.  But the relationship wasn't right, and it was well known that she would not make a good admiral's wife.  So, I didn't take that advice.
Speaker 1: But you reached the level of being a captain.
Speaker 2: Captain, yeah.
Speaker 1: Which is also very impressive, I think so.
Speaker 2: Yep, yep, yep.
Speaker 1: When you look back at your life, what stands out the most, in terms of--what stands out the most?
Speaker 2: Well, it's things that I'm trying to do now. Because I don't like, I don't like what I'm seeing with the kids.  Even as recently--like off-camera.  You weren't here.  I was talking about my wife's [Carolyn Eason] grandson spending the summer with us, okay.  And he is just preoccupied.  I don't even know what a [Nintendo] DS is, but he's pretty occupied with a DS and television, okay.  And I tutor during the school year.  And I cannot get this kid motivated to want to learn math this summer.  That's a disappointment.  But what I try to do is, even from when I was in the Navy--but since I've been out, especially since I started tutoring--is try to impress upon people, you need an education.  You're not going to get anywhere, you're not going to get a decent job unless you go to college, okay.  To do that, you got to get good grades.  To get grades, you got to study, you got to listen to people.  You can't watch ten hours of TV a day and not study and succeed.  I see myself over the past ten or fifteen years or so as being very vocal about that, whenever I get an opportunity around young kids.  And when we precede this with my first African American CO [commanding officer] status, that's the attention-getter for me to get up in front of the kids for them to halfway listen.  I had a, it was kind of neat.  Black History Month, I went to an elementary school in Davenport, Iowa and those kids knew more about me than I knew about myself.  They had a little program on before I talked, and each one of them had to talk about it.  They had seven of them.  And they lined them up, and they had to each tell a story about Captain Tzomes.  And it was kind of neat.  But then that set the stage with me getting in front of them talking to them about grades.  I brought a picture of that session.  There was something in there about taking pictures of pictures?
Speaker 1: Yes.  Afterwards, we'll go through some of your pictures.
Story_ID: 36329
Speaker 1: You've kind of touched on it, but what are some of your hopes or concerns for the African American community itself, looking forward?  You mentioned that the grand--.
Speaker 2: I'm saying education.  I can't, I'm, single parents have a challenge.  I'm going through that with my wife's family right now.  That's a challenge.  Teaching the kids the, you know, right from wrong.  Teaching the kids to develop some goals other than [Nintendo] DS's and playing these games, these hand-held games.  I really haven't paid attention.  I mean, I see all the press about the, you know, the size of the black prison population and things like that.  But if we had fewer single parents, or even if the single parents had the ability to do more in raising their kids or getting a role model around their kids--and I'm starting to appreciate that.  And my wife just, as recently as yesterday, thanked me for some of the things that I did with her grandson because he doesn't have any male influences in Chicago [Illinois], okay.  So, when I say I'm going through some sort of single parent experience, I'm starting to see what some of the challenges are and how if you don't handle that right, your kids can go in the wrong direction.  The, and then I see--you know, where I tutor, the parents don't care.  Or when a kid gets in trouble in school...  Like I had a recent experience with a fourth grader who can't read above second grade, but his math is on grade level.  And his schoolteacher tried to advise his parents to put him on medication.  I contacted a friend of mine who's also a schoolteacher and they said schoolteachers can't do that.  And if the kid is doing well in math, and not well in reading, there's another issue there, and medication isn't going to do anything about it.  But yet this woman's mother--rather than get involved, the young man's grandmother is trying to look out for him--including this summer--because he can't read at a second grade level.  She sent him to a special session that she paid for, as the grandmother, not the mother, to try to bring this kid's reading skills up.  And I'm seeing that, you know, in the Quad Cities as far as mothers--parents, not getting involved with their kids' learning.  Or they drop them off at tutoring, and expect you to do their work.  And we only tutor two days a week, so.
Speaker 1: And the Quad Cities are out in northwestern Illinois?
Speaker 2: Western, it's due west of Chicago.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: It's on the Mississippi River.  You have--quad means four.  So, you have Bettendorf, Iowa; Davenport, Iowa, on one side of the Mississippi; Moline; and Rock Island, Illinois.  However, there's another town called East Moline.  And several years ago there was some sort of legislation that made East Moline one of the Quad Cities.  So, like even when you're driving to East Moline, there's a big sign that says, "Welcome to East Moline, one of the Quad Cities."  So, the Quad Cities is five towns, even though quad means four.
Speaker 1: Okay, thank you.
Story_ID: 36330
Speaker 1: What, what do you want your legacy to be?
Speaker 2: I'd say that I made a difference in helping people succeed, both in the Navy--and since the [U.S.] Navy, with these young kids.  And in the Navy, you know, we talked about a little bit about mentoring with the National Naval Officer's Association as part, because that was primarily black officers.  And I've had some degree of success by occasional emails and Facebook encounters that I get, that makes me feel pretty good.
Speaker 1: Is there anything else you'd like to add that we didn't talk about or, I didn't ask?
Speaker 2: I don't think so.  Ah, maybe the--yeah, there was something that I talked during the Black History Month thing that made me feel kind of special.  Because there was a lot of hoopla around the black community, both in Norfolk [Virginia] and in San Diego [California] when I took over the command.  A big party in Norfolk, a lot of family and friends attended.  And then when I came to San Diego, there was a portion of the black community that knew about me, and they got passes to come on the base to welcome me when the submarine first arrived.  And I'll never forget, because it was like nine or ten o'clock at night.  And we had these people on the pier, and when we came approaching the pier, they all applauded.  And that was, that was a special moment.  I didn't talk about it here, but I talked about it in the earlier interview. That made me feel good.  And a lot of people, like I said, today still reach out and try to communicate with me, and thank me for something that I did.
Speaker 1: Anything else?
Speaker 2: I don't think so.
Speaker 1: Well, it's been an honor to have interviewed you, and thank you for taking the time to come to HistoryMakers.  And we very much appreciate what you've done today and what you've accomplished.
Speaker 2: Thank you.
Story_ID: 36331
Speaker 1: Okay.  Go ahead, Sir.  We can set some of this up.
Speaker 2: That's my home I grew up in Williamsport, Pennsylvania.  And that's my father and my brother in the foreground.
Speaker 1: Hold on one second.  The only thing you have to do is just make sure I tell you we're clear.  Sometimes a photo will take a little longer than the others.  Okay, good.  Next--.
Speaker 2: Will you please do something for me?
Speaker 1: Sure, yeah.
Speaker 2: Place the (unclear).  Brilliant.  (unclear)  That's what I always do when I'm doing what you're doing.
Speaker 1: That's a photo of me when I was an (unclear), shortly after I graduated from the Naval Academy; That's my mother and father on their fiftieth wedding anniversary.  My Aunt Mildred that I talked about treated them to a cruise, and that's them on their cruise; I did not mention that, but I was selected for Black Engineer of the Year in the government field for the work that I did on the Navy's, when I was the Director of Navy Equal Opportunity.  And when I got back to Great Lakes, that was the sign for me; That's me in the Little League baseball I alluded to earlier about me being, they called me Little Campy.  And that picture appeared along with my baseball coach in the local newspaper; The person sitting down is Wesley Brown.  That picture was taken about six or seven years ago.  He's the first African-American graduate with the United States Naval Academy, and he passed away a couple of years ago.  But that's, obviously he had a lot of impact on me, and I enjoyed every time we had an opportunity to talk; That's my professional picture at Exelon.  That's taken inside a simulator for our nuclear power plant.
Speaker 2: This, sideways?  (unclear)
Speaker 1: That's a picture taken during Christmas of 2012 with myself, my son Chancelor, and my granddaughter, Marianna.
Speaker 2: That's?
Speaker 1: That's a picture of me in 2006.  I received the, there were three awards given called Military Stars and Stripes.  And that was the first year for that award, and I was one of the recipients.
Speaker 2: If you know a year or a decade that you're able to tell us, go ahead and do that.
Speaker 1: That's a picture in 2006--Admiral Tony Watson, my wife and myself, the same ceremony where I got the Stars and Stripes Award;  That's me and my wife on our honeymoon in 2007.  As you can see, she's a very lovely lady; That's a picture of me coming to the podium at my Change of Command Ceremony when I left the Drum in 1986.  Excuse me, left the Houston in 1986; That's a picture of me in 1983 with my brother who passed away in 2001, at my Change of Command when I took over.  No, when I was leaving the Houston;  That's a picture of the Centennial Seven that we talked about.  That picture was taken in 2008.  That's the last time all seven of us have been together under one roof.  And as you can see, we're lined up.  I'm on the left, being the first, and Admiral Grooms that I talked about during the interview, is the last on the right.  And Admiral Williams is the one in the middle.  He's the one that I told you I was sort of  his brainchild;  That's my high school graduation picture;  That was a picture of me,   I was involved as a guest speaker in Newark, New Jersey, and they declared a day, Pete Tzomes Day, in Newark, New Jersey.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Try to give us a timeframe if you can.
Speaker 1: That's a picture of me, I believe when I was at Sub Pac in the 1987 timeframe.
Speaker 2: Go ahead, thanks.
Speaker 1: That's my official senior picture for the Naval Academy.  That's what you'll see in the yearbook; That's me receiving my Dolphin.  The Dolphins are the gold insignia.  It's a special qualification process that you go through, and that's the squadron commander pinning my dolphins on me.
Speaker 2: About what timeframe was that?
Speaker 1: That would have been in 19--, come on Tzomes. That would have been in 19...  when I get to the Will Rogers.  I'm losing it.  That would have been 1969;  That's a picture of me, looks like it was probably taken around 1991, '92' [1992] timeframe;  That's a picture of six of the Centennial Seven with Tyrone... that's alright... that's a picture of--
Speaker 2: Go ahead.
Speaker 1: --six of the Centennial Seven with Tyrone Tabor on the right.  Tyrone Tabor is a true American patriot who appreciates all the contributions that blacks have made in all the military services, which he shows every year during the Black Engineer of the Year Award Ceremony; That's a picture of a Los Angeles submarine doing what we call an emergency surface.  It's kind of exciting to see those kinds of pictures come out of water, out of nowhere.  It's also fun to do one of those.  It scares everybody around you when they see you come up; And now that's a picture of the Houston, the submarine that I had command of, along with our emblem, our patch.
Speaker 2: That's it.  Thank you.
