Story_ID: 31851
Speaker 1: All right, my name is Larry Crowe. I'm interviewer today with The HistoryMakers. Our videographer is Matthew Hickey. Sir, can you please state your full name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: Yes, my name is Edward Weldon Tunstel, Jr. [HistoryMaker Edward Tunstel]. That's E-D-W-A-R-D, W-E-L-D-O-N, T-U-N-S-T-E-L, Jr.
Speaker 1: And, sir, what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: November 29, 1963, New York City, New York.
Speaker 1: And what is your occupation and title?
Speaker 2: I am an engineer and more specifically, I'm a robotics engineer, a senior roboticist at the Johns Hopkins University Applied Physics Laboratory [Laurel, Maryland].
Speaker 1: Okay, and what is today's date?
Speaker 2: What is today's date? Today's date is September 15th, 2012.
Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: We are--
Speaker 1: And you don't have to give your address, but--
Speaker 2: Sure, we're in Laurel, Maryland, which is effectively about midway between Baltimore, Maryland and Washington, D.C.
Story_ID: 31852
Speaker 1: Okay, now, before we go into depth, there are five lightweight questions we ask as kind of a warm up. And they only require a short answer. The first one is, do you have a favorite food?
Speaker 2: Ah, not really. Interestingly enough, my favorite food, if I might call one out, would be actually, arguably not a food, would be cookies (laughter). And so, yeah, that's pretty much it. I mean even from being a young boy when my mom [Agnes Solomon Tunstel] and dad [Edward Tunstel, Sr.] might go away for any period of time, my mom would make sure I was left back with some cookies.
Speaker 1: Okay (laughter). Does this have anything to do with 'Sesame Street' or--
Speaker 2: No, no, it doesn't, no it doesn't.
Speaker 1: All right, all right.
Speaker 2: Just the palate, I guess (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay, alright. Do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: Brown.
Speaker 1: Okay, a favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: I would say spring, yeah.
Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: If I did, I don't really have a strong preference, but Monterey, California is sort of a favorite of my wife's [Jan Tunstel] and has, over the years, become somewhat of a favorite of mine as well.
Speaker 1: Okay, and the last one is, do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: You know, when I was thinking about whether that was the case, I asked my wife about that. What do I often say a lot? And she says that I say, what is it? "Keep it moving," a lot. Now, I usually say that when we're, you know, bogged down in discussion or argument or debate or if something's not terribly important in my view. And I'll just say, "Keep it moving." Otherwise, I'm saying things like, "Fair enough, fair enough." I use that phrase often in discussions, but otherwise, no philosophical saying that I have that I normally use a lot.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 31853
Speaker 1: Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: Ah, let's see. My mother's full name is Agnes Louvenia Tunstel, maiden name Solomon [Agnes Solomon Tunstel]. So Agnes is spelled, A-G-N-E-S. Louvenia is spelled, L-O-U-V-E-N-I-A, and last name is Tunstel as I spelled earlier. Her maiden name is spelled S-O-L-O-M-O-N, Solomon.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what is her date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: November 24th, 1929. And she was born in Henderson, North Carolina, more accurately Sandy Creek Township [North Carolina].
Speaker 1: Okay, now, what can you tell us about the ancestors on your mother's side? How far back can you trace her side and what were they doing? Are there any stories about them?
Speaker 2: Well, unfortunately, don't know very far back in terms of my mom's or my dad's [Edward Tunstel, Sr.] ancestry. I haven't gone through what's now becoming a more common exercise that individuals can do now in terms of actually tracing their ancestry through the various means that are available. But from what I know growing up, effectively up to my grandmother, my mom's mother, is as far back as I know.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, what was your grandmother's name?
Speaker 2: Her name was Elizabeth, Elizabeth Williams [Elizabeth Williams Solomon] is her--Williams is her maiden name. And Elizabeth Solomon is her name.
Speaker 1: Okay. And, well, so she's, she was born in that same town, Sandy Creek--
Speaker 2: Yes, effectively, in and around Henderson, North Carolina.
Speaker 1: Okay, so there're not any stories in the family about the family being anywhere else other than Henderson?
Speaker 2: There are not, at least none that were shared with me, yeah. So, you know, North Carolina is sort of as far as we know. Prior to that, we have, we can speculate about where our family sort of branched off, for example, through the slave trade. But we don't have any real and hard data as to, you know, exactly where--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --and certainly not where we might have originated from in Africa either.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, are there any--so your grandmother was probably, she was born around the turn of the century, I would suppose, right?
Speaker 2: Yes, in fact, she was born, should have been around 19--I'm sorry, 1888.
Speaker 1: Oh, 1888, okay.
Speaker 2: My grandmother was ninety-six when she passed away in 1976 or so.
Speaker 1: Okay, 1888. So she was probably the next generation after slavery, (unclear) generation?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes, and so, you know, I guess what was missing here is that any stories shared about, for example, her parents or her grandparents, with her kids, perhaps just didn't make it to me or perhaps, you know, when things were being discussed as I was coming up, I had not known exactly what was being talked about and really never retained what those stories might have been.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But, certainly, you know, she would know, you know, to some degree, where things came from, more accurately than I can be able to tell you at this point.
Speaker 1: So your mother doesn't have any stories about her grandmother?
Speaker 2: None that she communicated to me.
Speaker 1: Okay. Well, all right, now, did you know your grandfather?
Speaker 2: No, my grandfather passed away before I was born, actually. His name was Ernest Solomon.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I do know that he was a farmer in the, in Henderson, North Carolina area.
Speaker 1: Okay. Now, did your grandmother own land in Henderson?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes, in fact, they had a farm on which they lived and worked. Several of my aunts and uncles worked along with my grandfather there. There were ten siblings in that household, and my mom was the youngest one.
Speaker 1: Okay. So it's possible that your mother didn't know her grandmother because she probably, she might have not been around.
Speaker 2: That is possible, that is possible. I would imagine that she had some idea or, you know, of her grandparents' life and so forth through her siblings at least and from her mom and dad directly. But, again, none was shared with me.
Story_ID: 31854
Speaker 1: Okay, now, did your mother [Agnes Solomon Tunstel] talk about growing up and the kind of community she was raised in, and what went on there?
Speaker 2: Yes, she did, but a lot of the stories tended to be--you always had the impression that it was a small, you know, sort of township [Sandy Creek Township, North Carolina] that they lived in, other farms nearby. Growing up was mostly around her own siblings and on occasion, around other kids. They all sort of didn't go, get much schooling. In fact, my mom effectively went through to high school, and that was it. I think some of her older siblings had not gotten even that far. And it was really, you know, stories about farm life, church life and such. And that was really, you know, the sort of highlights that I remember hearing her and my aunts talk about.
Speaker 1: Okay, well, what are some of the stories about farm life that they--anything come to mind that they related?
Speaker 2: Oh, my--well, so the things that I tend to remember are things that would contrast with the way that I was growing up when I would hear about these things. And so that would have to do with, for example, the existence, the very close proximity of certain animals that would be in and around the farm, be it mules or what have you, cows and such. And so stories I would hear might be related to things involving milking cows and somehow tending farm, you know. Oftentimes, those discussions or those stories were within the context of worth ethic, you know, a good comparison between the work ethic of our generations (laughter). And so I'd hear stories about how much they worked and some of the things that they did. Church stories were not unlike church stories that you might hear in modern times, just having to do with particular ministers and how they would preach and so forth, the fact that they would make it to church pretty religiously, no pun intended, weekly, week-by-week, sometimes daily and so forth. So church was a big part of the culture, certainly part of the daily living.
Speaker 1: Okay. But these things are important though 'cause they make the difference between the generation, you know.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, I would agree.
Speaker 1: Yeah, when your mother grew, just a whole different place and a different time.
Speaker 2: That's right, that's right.
Speaker 1: It's interesting, you know, I think a lot of us have heard these motivational comparisons. So when I was young I had to do this and I had to do that.
Speaker 2: Exactly.
Speaker 1: Yeah, the struggle was different.
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: So, okay, so your mother finished high school. Do you know the name of her high school?
Speaker 2: I don't, don't know it.
Speaker 1: And I ask because a lot of times, the name of the high school is, you know, a segregated community, which it was, undoubtedly.
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: The name of the high school would be the name of prominent black person that founded the school.
Speaker 2: I see, interesting, interesting, yeah.
Speaker 1: You know, who really was heroic in some sense, you know, for doing that.
Speaker 2: Right, right.
Speaker 1: Sometimes, it's not, but often it is.
Speaker 2: Right, yeah, I think you're right about that.
Speaker 1: So at any rate, so your mother, and she finished high school. Now, did she have an aspiration, a career that she wanted to pursue or an object, a place to go that she wanted to go after high school?
Speaker 2: Well, I don't know that she did. So before, shortly after high school, she, and interestingly, many of her siblings moved north around that time, to New York [New York], in fact. And it was, that's where I was born. And in New York, she did have an occupation. She would work on occasion in supermarkets and such. So she worked in grocery stores. At one point, she started a catering business, and that was briefly lived. But for the most part, she was involved in the grocery business. And then when she had my older sisters and myself, most of those years, she was a homemaker.
Story_ID: 31855
Speaker 1: Can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: Yes, my father's full name is the same as mine, but senior, Edward Weldon Tunstel, Sr. [Edward Tunstel, Sr.].
Speaker 1: Right. Okay. And what is his date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: His date of birth is May 2nd, and the year is escaping me at the moment. I know I've written it down in documentation I've given you.
Speaker 1: Okay, is he much older than your mother [Agnes Solomon Tunstel]?
Speaker 2: He's actually, let's see. My dad is actually six years younger than my mother.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, so that would make it, what? Around 1935.
Speaker 1: Younger? Oh, younger, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, younger, yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, 1935, you're right, okay. And where was your father born?
Speaker 2: Memphis, Tennessee.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, what can you tell us about his side of the family?
Speaker 2: Well, my father's side of the family, unlike my mother's side of the family, is actually quite small. He was an only child, in fact. So I have no aunts and uncles on his side to speak of, and his parents were effectively members of very small families as well. There in Memphis, Tennessee, in fact, he didn't spend a lot of time there. In his early years. He ended up being brought, along with his parents to New York [New York], when he was a boy still. And so really a large part of his growing up was in the New York area, in and around Harlem [New York, New York], actually.
Speaker 1: Okay. Now, did your mother settle in Harlem too or--
Speaker 2: Yes, when she came to New York, she came to Harlem.
Speaker 1: All right. So your father grows up in Harlem. Now, did he have a chance to finish school too?
Speaker 2: My dad finished high school as well.
Speaker 1: Okay, and do you know which one he came out of in Harlem?
Speaker 2: It was one of the, one of the public schools in New York City, P.S. with some number. I don't recall the number.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, are there any stories about his ancestors in Memphis. Do they have, is there a tradition that they're from somewhere other than Memphis, like out in the country in Mississippi or Arkansas or someplace else?
Speaker 2: Well, not that I'm aware of. But interestingly, my grandfather on my father's side, his name is Benjamin Tunstel, there's some indication, not a lot of hard facts about it or around it, that he and his lineage come through the West Indies. And how he ended up in the Memphis area is something I don't know about, but in terms of, you know, where that side of the family sort of comes through, that's one hint. My, my grandmother's family is from in and around Memphis still, in fact. But beyond Memphis or before Memphis, I don't know about.
Speaker 1: When I heard the name, I thought it had a West Indian kind of, it has that--
Speaker 2: Is that right?
Speaker 1: --British sound, Tunstel.
Speaker 2: Yeah, it, you know, as far as what I know about the name, I do know that it's an English name which makes sense for West Indies as well in terms of the settlers there. Interestingly, there are still, there are town and areas in England still with the name Tunstel. And another sort of interesting fact is, you recall the story of Billy the Kid. Billy the Kid worked on a ranch in New Mexico for a guy, an Englishman named John Tunstall, interestingly enough. It's also known that on that ranch, that Billy the Kid worked with a number of black cowboys. That small connection often makes me wonder, but I have no actual connection to point to. But in terms of looking at where the name comes from, these are some of these sorts of things that I've come to know.
Speaker 1: That's interesting.
Speaker 2: It is interesting.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Something that I, you know, would like to look into more deeply in the future. I had gone to school in New Mexico, in fact, and this, the Tunstall Ranch, where Billy the Kid worked is still there in Lincoln County, New Mexico. So there's some work for me to do yet in trying to chase down whether there's any remote connection.
Speaker 1: Okay, that's interesting and who knows?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So, oh, what was your grandmother's name on your father's side?
Speaker 2: Her name was Lela, L-E-L-A, Earline McKellen [Lela McKellen Tunstel], M-C-K-E-L-L-E-N.
Speaker 1: Okay, so she has, there are relatives of hers that are still in, you said, in Memphis, right?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Descendants, okay. Now, what did your father's parents do for a living?
Speaker 2: My grandmother was a nurse pretty much all of her career life as far as I understand it. My grandfather, I don't know. I do know that he was involved in a number of different trades, and as I understand it, he got around quite a bit in terms of traveling. But I never really fully knew and understood what he did.
Story_ID: 31856
Speaker 1: When your father [Edward Tunstel, Sr.] graduates from high school, he comes out of high school then in, what in the '50s [1950s], I guess, right?
Speaker 2: Yes, it should have been (unclear), yeah, close to 1950.
Speaker 1: Right, so what did he do after high school?
Speaker 2: After high school, he got odd jobs, ended up eventually in the supermarket business, where he became, for the most part, his career became a butcher. And so he worked in that field for years until he retired in various, either managerial as part of the butcher component or supermarkets or as a butcher himself.
Speaker 1: Do you know what, did he work for a particular chain of supermarkets?
Speaker 2: Numerous, actually. Those that I recall, Key Food [Key Food Stores Co-operative, Inc.] in the New York [New York] area, another store called Sea Town [Sea Town Supermarket, New York, New York]. Almost, most of the popular supermarket chains in New York, it seems like he worked for at one point or another. Often he'd be working at a particular one, and over some number of years, the name of the same place would change, you know, to another supermarket chain, for example. But, yeah, that was what he did.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: In fact, I would say that my first jobs as a young boy were in some of those supermarkets, doing odd jobs. And so, you know, I often say my first career was a grocery clerk.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 31857
Speaker 1: Is there a story about how your parents met?
Speaker 2: Well, you see it coming together, I guess--
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: --somewhere in and around a supermarket, right (laughter). But, yeah, indeed, that was basically how they met. I don't know if it was on the job or, you know, if one of them or the other one was, happened to be in the supermarket where the other one worked or what have you. But that was the venue or the scenario in which they met. Both are young individuals coming up in Harlem [New York, New York] and happened to be often around supermarkets (laughter). And they met, and they began to date, and eventually got married.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right. So, now, when did your parents get married? Do you know?
Speaker 2: Ah, man. Ah, these dates, let's see. Think about that for a minute. I would say it must have been around 1953 or '54 [1954], mid-1950s is probably as accurate as I could get it at the moment.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Now, when you consider your parents' personalities, their dispositions, their talents, their hobbies, how they walk and talk, who do you take after the most?
Speaker 2: Good question. I think I probably draw from both of them, to some degree. My, so my father [Edward Tunstel, Sr.] is a hands on individual. And I think that I certainly get that from him. Related to that is a desire to understand how things work. My mother [Agnes Solomon Tunstel], on the other hand, is a, well, my mother was more of a thinker, someone who deeply cared about issues and people and so forth. I think that I would get, that I get a certain deliberation from her. I'm a thinker, myself, often through types of issues, whether it's related to work or even through daily life. I deliberate, probably a bit more than I need to. And I think that I get that from her. So I would have to say, I can't really point to one or the other as to where I really, you know, whom I really take after. I think it really is some sort of a combination.
Story_ID: 31858
Speaker 1: Now, do you have brothers and sisters?
Speaker 2: I have sisters, and I have a stepbrother that, from my dad [Edward Tunstel, Sr.], who had a son late in his life. And so I have, let's see, I have six sisters and one younger brother.
Speaker 1: Now, where do you fall in the--can you name them and--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --tell us about order and put yourself in the order.
Speaker 2: Sure, so let's see, my oldest sister is Barbara, Barbara Green [Barbara Tunstel Green]. She was, let's see, Barbara was, is old enough to have known what the life was like down in Henderson [North Carolina] because she would visit often while she was a child. My other sister, younger than her, is Sheila. Her name is Sheila Holmes [Sheila Tunstel Holmes] now. And likewise, her and Barbara were, among all of us, those two were the ones who would frequent Henderson and are quite more familiar with it than the rest of us. Between Barbara and Sheila, there was a gap of probably about, maybe about six years maybe before my sister, Tina, was born. And her name is Tina Norton [Tina Tunstel Norton] now. And she is a minister and pastor in New York [New York] these days. Right behind her, one year later, my sister, Edwina. Her name is Edwina Giddons [Edwina Tunstel Giddons] right now. And she lives here in Maryland. And right after her, one year later, was myself.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Then there was another gap of about, I guess it was four years or was it--wait. Or was it more than that, actually? Closer to six years, actually, when my sister, Audrey, was born. Her name is Audrey Jones [Audrey Tunstel Jones], and she lives in Maryland as well. And for quite some time, there were only us, myself and five sisters. Later in life, my dad had another daughter. Her name was Ashley Tunstel, and then a son, Justin Tunstel.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And they're all in Maryland now as well.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, did your parents split at some point or--
Speaker 2: At some point, yes, they did. But my dad didn't remarry until after my mom [Agnes Solomon Tunstel] passed away. She passed away in 2001.
Story_ID: 31859
Speaker 1: Now, do you have an earliest childhood memory?
Speaker 2: Well, let's see. I don't have a lot of details around my earliest childhood memory, but the earliest thing I remember when I really try to think back, is I recall that I must have been three years old, and I was sitting on the floor in the living room of our apartment in Harlem [New York, New York], trying to actually reach up to the window, to look out. The only thing that I recall about that is that I knew that other individuals in the house could do that, and I couldn't. And I remember one time, one particular day. It was kind of a sunny day like this one, trying to do the same thing. I wasn't moving much. I didn't try to get on my feet. I was just sitting there, looking, and I must have been there a long time because that might be why I manifest this memory so much (laughter). But I was sitting there, just looking at this window sill and looking around and trying to figure things out. That's the earliest thing that I can remember, don't know any significance around it or any more detail.
Speaker 1: Well, that's good. I mean that's the kind of thing I think you might remember at that age.
Story_ID: 31860
Speaker 1: How long were you in Harlem [New York, New York]?
Speaker 2: Yes so, so the first move I personally made as part of the family, yes. That was, that would have been 1973. So I was about ten years old when we moved from Harlem to Queens [New York].
Speaker 1: Okay, so you grew up, you know, partially in Harlem early years, and then you finished high, you know, I guess the rest of grade school [St. Catherine of Siena School] and high school [Springfield Gardens High School] in Queens?
Speaker 2: That's correct.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right. So, since your consciousness starts at three--it's almost an equal amount of time, right--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --in each place.
Speaker 2: Yeah, pretty much.
Speaker 1: In the sense of what you're actually aware of.
Speaker 2: Yeah, exactly. I mean I do have, you know, good and fond memories of my childhood in Harlem before moving out to Queens and certainly, many more memories after that. But, yeah, that would have been roughly around the same amount of time.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, can you describe where you grew up, the neighborhood you grew up in, where it was, and what were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up?
Speaker 2: In Harlem, we, I grew up on 139th Street, between Lenox [Lenox Avenue; Malcolm X Boulevard] and Fifth Avenue, in a set of apartment buildings that was, at that time called Delano Village [Savoy Park, New York, New York] after Franklin Delano [President Franklin Delano Roosevelt]. And our buildings at that time were considered, you know, somewhat like skyscrapers. They were the big and very voluminous apartment buildings. Right across the street from us were the older, sort of tenement row house like apartment buildings as well as a school, P.S. 100 [sic.], as I recall. That was my local environment. Mostly, playing in and around the playgrounds that that apartment complex provided, as well as venturing off on occasion into what we considered relatively speaking, rougher parts of Harlem. You know, we felt, I think that, because we were in sort of the skyscraper apartment buildings, the relatively modern ones at the time, that things were a little bit safer in our really small gated, but most gates open, community.
Story_ID: 31861
Speaker 1: You were talking about the sights and sounds and smells of growing up.
Speaker 2: Right, and so, you know, again, I played in the playgrounds mostly in that apartment complex [Delano Village; Savoy Park, New York, New York]. And those were well kept playgrounds. And so on occasion, we would also venture off into that we considered the rougher part of Harlem [New York, New York]. And I had fun in those various places as well.
Speaker 1: Now, what would you consider the rougher part?
Speaker 2: Well, that's an interesting question because really, it's not well qualified. And really, the best that I could say is it was a relative term, relative to what we thought was this, somehow, upper class apartment living that we enjoyed, you know, and you step off and--and really, I guess, part of what we might attribute it to was also, we would encounter more frequently the shadier individuals in the community than we would in our own apartment complex. And that, you know, again, made us call it rougher.
Speaker 1: So this is near 125th [Street] or what?
Speaker 2: Not even that far down, you know, a couple of blocks over, for example, you know, 137th Street, you know. It depended on where you were really. I recall around, when I was growing up, maybe I was about seven, eight or so, and that particular local area of Harlem did have a number of so called street gangs. You know, there were street gangs, called, for example, The Black Spades and I can't remember some of the others at the moment. But just one block away on 138th Street lived a number of young guys, one of whom was a member of one of these gangs. And he had a much younger brother who was around my age. And his younger brother would come to our apartment complex and play with us quite frequently. And we had this sort of artificial gang that was sort of emulating this younger--I mean this older one. And that one was simply called Little Rudy's Gang [ph.]. His name was Rudy [ph.], right, you know, there's no sense in it, but, you know, this is what we did as part of our adventure, if you will. But, yeah, so even just a block away, were living individuals who you might consider were rough and tough and in street gangs. This was never really a problem as far as I recall. We never felt threatened, per se. If anything, the prey or the mischief that the--the prey of such individuals in the community were other than us, us being young guys who maybe perhaps they thought might be future recruits maybe. I don't know. Maybe that's why they didn't mess with us. But we never really felt threatened. So we ventured out into so called rougher areas without much regard to feeling unsafe really. I recall we used to go to movie theaters, walking through Harlem. We also would walk to the Apollo Theater [New York, New York], for example, on quite frequent occasions. And so those are some of the sights at least that I recall. Smells and such, not too many come to mind, but there's also, always the occasional smell of garbage in New York (laughter) when (clears throat), excuse me, when garbage basically is piled up pretty high on the curve, depending on where you're living, and for the sanitation trucks to come through and pick it up. But, you know, that smell is something that I remember. Also the smells that were somewhat like that smell in various alleyways in between buildings, and we would cut through a lot--
Speaker 1: Now, that can be--I remember being there during the time you were growing up, a couple of times when there was garbage strikes.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: When John Lindsay was the mayor--
Speaker 2: That's right. There were a number of strikes.
Speaker 1: --and a couple--
Speaker 2: Yeah, indeed, indeed.
Speaker 1: And the stuff would just pile up.
Speaker 2: That's right, that's right. And so I remember that sort of thing. Another thing I remember is, you know, I mentioned again rougher part of the local area. There were some buildings, blocks away, that were effectively abandoned. And we, you know, under good advice or not, would actually go and play in those areas. I mean they were basically, became to some degree, our playgrounds, rubble and such, dangerous staircases, you probably really wouldn't want to go up and down as an adult. But these were pretty adventurous to us, and we would in and around in these, these dangerous structures and effectively play. If you had a, if you found yourself a blank, pretty smooth brick wall with a flat ground in front of it, that might be your handball court for the day, you know, or, you know, some structure that wasn't terribly high that you could hang a basket onto with a, the bottom of the basket hogged out, you might have that as a basketball court (laughter) for the day as well. So we, we did a lot of interesting and useful things, I thought, to entertain ourselves with what was around us. You know, again, as in the apartment complex I grew up in, there were more manicured, if you will, areas to play. But this was just another aspect of growing up and getting around that I remember.
Story_ID: 31862
Speaker 1: I read that you liked art when you were growing up?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes. I would draw on occasion. I don't know if it started out of boredom or not or if I just, you know, one day picked up a pen and pencil and looked at something in the immediate environment and tried to draw it. Whatever the case was, it was something that I did enjoy, and I would do quite frequently, to the point where eventually, I would actually start to buy art supplies, even if it was just a simple drawing pad in which to draw various things and keep my drawings as something of a library, if you will. I didn't really, I never took formal training to draw or anything like that, but I did try to pick up various techniques that artists tended to use, for example, those who would draw and sketch in charcoal and things like that, I would emulate by using pencil and smudging it with my finger in certain ways and get certain types of shading and such. So, I put to it an effort, from a perspective where I felt like an artist without being a formally trained artist. And I think I did quite well. Later in life, I started to draw more what you might refer to as man made inventions or inventions or structures, machines and buildings and such. And I think that's what got me interested eventually in architecture. In particular, growing up in New York [New York], and having on occasion the opportunity to go downtown, Manhattan [New York], where you'd see a number of different types of tall and oddly shaped or, in some cases, not so oddly shaped and pretty generic buildings, but nonetheless, that's pretty impressive. And some of those, I would remember and try to draw. Maybe I'd see them in a magazine, and I'd draw it from the picture. We certainly didn't have Internet at that time. So I couldn't pull up something online and check it out and try to draw it. So most of what I tried to draw was in my immediate environment or from some publication, some book, some magazine, some newspaper. Machines, I got into drawing machines, airplanes, cars and such. I think that that influenced the path that I ultimately took in terms of engineering. I went from drawing various things, having a partial interest in architecture through most of high school [Springfield Gardens High School, Queens, New York], actually, and it wasn't until my junior year of high school when I had the occasion to go to the New York Academy of Science [sic. The New York Academy of Sciences, New York, New York] and listen to a seminar given by a panel of engineers and architects. And I came out of that seminar with a better appreciation for what engineers and architects do, but, in particular, I was more impressed with what the engineers had to say that they did. And I realized that perhaps what I ought to do is go into engineering and not architecture. But somehow, I tried to still combine the two. I ultimately got into the field of robotics, and in my own view, my perspective of looking at that and trying to imagine how I really got from growing up to going into this, I consider robots the type of art that I used to draw in a certain portion of my life, drawing machines and such, but, in particular, art that moves. And that, so this was a sort of mix of art, creativity, engineering that is really pervasive in what I do now.
Story_ID: 31863
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Let me just ask you, now, were you in--were you a science fiction fan at all as a kid?
Speaker 2: Well, to the extent that I enjoyed science fiction movies, and I did, I was quite a comic book fan at some point. And so at that level, yeah, I would say so.
Speaker 1: Yeah, 'cause you, I'm thinking you grew up during the age when it was like a lot of big science fiction, you know, being produced, you know, to a level where I think, maybe more so than ever before at some point.
Speaker 2: Yeah, probably so. One of the big deals, of course, at that time was the TV series 'Star Trek' which I was a pretty avid, you know, watcher of. But, again, I think more than television which I'm not so sure I watched a whole bunch, it was, you know, comic books. I was, my head was in comic books quite a bit. And some of the characters in those comic books, most of whom, most which they've made modern day movies about now, and, in particular, Iron Man was something that really, really got me going. I thought that I could grow up to be this guy, Tony Stark. You know, I had, I had images of--when I imagined who I would become, without being influenced by my actual career in any sense, one thing that I thought I wanted to become was a wealthy guy, living in a penthouse on Park Avenue in Manhattan [New York] and being able to do the types of things that this guy Ton Starks could do. Now, I didn't really have aspirations to go out and make a suit, and, you know, fly around doing heroic things. But it was the connection to technology that this guy, Tony Stark, seemed to have. And Iron Man was just one instauration of his ingenuity, if you will. But I wanted to have that sort of, be in a situation where I had sufficient wealth to do what I wanted to do. And part of what I would ever wanna do would probably be creating things on my own that were really cool and interesting.
Speaker 1: It's interesting when you think about comic, especially the Marvel comic books, and you referenced Iron Man and Tony Stark, but the Hulk is a scientist--
Speaker 2: Yes--
Speaker 1: Batman man--
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: Peter Parker is a scientist.
Speaker 2: Exactly.
Speaker 1: Spiderman.
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: Reed Richards of the Fantastic Four, he's a scientist.
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: And they all live in New York (laughter).
Speaker 2: How about that, how about that? So, you know, so if anything, if it wasn't the fact that they lived in New York that ever had an impact on me, certainly, I probably viewed New York as a sphere, the extent of sphere, you know, given those sorts of things, associating comic book characters with the city, Batman, included (laughter), right, Gotham City and such. But, yeah, the connection between those sorts of super human things and science surely had an impact on me. More so than the science itself was probably the fact that you could learn and master some of these things and do something with it, you know. You could create. And you will, it was almost limitless what you could do. You could become, for example, some of the adversaries in those comic books, use science for bad (laughter), if you chose to. But the thing was, if you mastered it, if you knew some aspect of it, you could do something with it, and that's a certain level of power.
Speaker 1: Did you know any architects or scientists growing up?
Speaker 2: No, I didn't. The first architects I ever encountered were those at that seminar I mentioned. Scientists and such, I had known of some, never knew any personally. So I can't say I've ever sat down and had a conversation with a scientist or engineer while growing up actually.
Speaker 1: Okay, so the comic book world where there are scientists was one source of scientists, I guess. TV and someplace else might have been--
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: --but you didn't know any in your community?
Speaker 2: Not at all--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --not at all.
Story_ID: 31864
Speaker 1: You came along at a time, I guess, where they started trying to teach some black history in the schools and talk about black inventors and that sort of thing (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: Certainly.
Speaker 1: They probably did it in Harlem [New York, New York], I would guess, but were you introduced to any of the--
Speaker 2: Ah, yeah, so I'm sure that I was introduced to some of the more common stories among them, like Elijah McCoy, for example. Certainly, George Washington Carver and such, but I never directly identified--I mean I always thought those were good and interesting stories and very good to know about. I didn't immediately make any connection that I could be similar necessarily or I was never directly influenced to follow the path. It was always more of a, I guess, an existence proof to me at least, that they did that. I could probably do that too, but I never really, it didn't translate directly from that to, well, now, let me go and try to do that. I think I thought a whole lot more independently and somehow it came full circle back around to a point later in my life where looking back at those examples probably would have had a much greater impact. And I think they actually do. I mean I have looked back at some of those individuals. I used to do, and this might have been high school [Springfield Gardens High School, Queens, New York], maybe even at some point in early college [Howard University, Washington, D.C.], book reports and such or reports of people's biographies. And I did Lewis Latimer [Lewis Howard Latimer] at some point. And I was, I did that because at that point I was definitely interested and influenced by not only that being yet another one of those stories, but, in particular, here was a guy who was African American and working closely with Thomas Edison and was really, truly instrumental in the fact that we have the light bulbs we use today. But this was, again, was at a time when I was now thinking about being one of these types of people. And I could get more out of those stories. But before it was more of just, oh, it's interesting to know, wow. They're very, very good. Later it was more of, you know, I can probably draw something from that person's experience as reported in this book or this story. So, yeah, it's different perspectives, I guess.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I've heard recently someone, there was a program or youth saying that they thought that all the black scientists were dead--
Speaker 2: Hm, interesting.
Speaker 1: --because of the, the way (unclear) in history.
Speaker 2: Right, right.
Speaker 1: Well--
Story_ID: 31865
Speaker 1: Where did you start school? What was your first school?
Speaker 2: My first school was the school I mentioned earlier, which was right across the street from us in Harlem [New York, New York], P.S. 100 [ph.]. I went to kindergarten there, but I didn't stay there after that. I then went and started first grade in a school one block away on 138th Street called St. Mark the Evangelist School [New York, New York]. So this was a Catholic school. And interestingly, that school is still there today. And while I didn't know it while I was going to school there at the time, later in life, looking back at it, I learned that that particular school has a particular mission in Harlem. And it was and has been and still is, to educate the African American community, the youngsters in Harlem, basically give them a good footing on their way through life at the elementary school level. I wish I had known that when I was there. Maybe someone did mention it, but that's a nice thing to know. But that's where I went from first grade through fourth grade. After fourth grade, that's when we, the family moved from Harlem to Queens [New York].
Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Let me just talk about that for a minute.
Speaker 2: Sure.
Speaker 1: Those schools, now, St. Mark the Evangelist, did your parents [Agnes Solomon Tunstel and Edward Tunstel, Sr.] have to pay tuition?
Speaker 2: Yes, they did.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And so they had to make a real commitment to give you a better education, I guess, than you'd get in the public schools?
Speaker 2: Absolutely, and that was, I'm sure, their motivation. In fact, my two older sisters [Barbara Tunstel Green and Sheila Tunstel Holmes], as I mentioned earlier, we were all one year apart, my sister, Tina [Tina Tunstel Norton], Edwina [Edwina Tunstel Giddens] and myself. And so we all went to, to St. Mark the Evangelist. And so they were paying tuition for the three of us. So, yeah, they made that commitment, and they continued it, in fact, when we moved from there to Queens. So we also continued through Catholic school, or at least through eighth grade.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 31866
Speaker 1: What was your favorite subject in school?
Speaker 2: I'd have to say science was my favorite subject, you know. And science is so general, you know, you learn about so many different things. I found most of them pretty interesting more consistently than in other areas. Math was interesting but on occasion math can give you some headache, and you sometimes--you become less of a fan depending on what part of math you're studying. You know, it wasn't that way for me with science. Science, there was always something quite interesting that kept my, my interest level pretty high. And so I'd have to say science was the favorite subject.
Speaker 1: Now, there are a lot of great sights to go to in New York [New York]. Did your school take you on field trips frequently?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I don't remember them all. I do remember a field trip to the Empire State Building [New York, New York], for example, Statute of Liberty [New York, New York], you know, mostly sights like that. I don't recall too many field trips that had--well, I was gonna say that had sort of a science theme except now I'm recalling a trip to one of the museums.
Speaker 1: The Natural History [American Museum of Natural History, New York, New York]?
Speaker 2: I think it was Natural History. That's where we saw, you know, the huge dinosaur skeletons and such, very interesting and hugely impactful to me at that time, I think.
Speaker 1: Did they ever take you to the Hayden Planetarium [New York, New York]?
Speaker 2: I don't recall ever going to the Hayden Planetarium. Interestingly, these days, you know, I've met the director in recent years, and I knew he also had grown up in New York. And it made me think why I never really knew about the Hayden Planetarium all those years. I still don't have a good answer to that. But, no, I don't recall ever having gone there growing up.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I'm kind of surprised because I would think that the nuns in the school or the teachers would have a, if they're trying to bring an enriched experience to Harlem--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: --would take the kids out to those things.
Speaker 2: It would make sense, yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: But, so did you have a favorite teacher?
Speaker 2: At that stage in St. Mark, no, not in particular. I did have one in the following school, which was also a Catholic school out in Queens [New York], and her name was Mrs. Yard [ph.].
Story_ID: 31867
Speaker 1: So you all moved, you were, let's see this would be, the fourth grade, you would be what?
Speaker 2: Nine, ten years old.
Speaker 1: Yeah, this would be 1972--
Speaker 2: Yeah, '73 [1973], yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, 1973, okay. So were you excited about moving to Queens [New York]?
Speaker 2: Let's see. I do recall having some thoughts about that. And what were they? Not particularly. I was, I knew that it was going to be different. That was my understanding about it. And I didn't really know necessarily what I would be missing from my old neighborhood, so it did sound and seem to me like more of an adventure, something new to experience. And so I guess to that degree, I was excited, but not, you know, in a way that I was anxiously looking forward to it, really.
Speaker 1: Okay, so were you all moving to a house?
Speaker 2: Yes, in fact. Now, that was a new thing as well. So the way we viewed that or the way it was sort of presented to us and maybe this might have been through comments from extended family about the move, we thought we were moving to the country (laughter). We thought we were moving to the country. And when we got there, relatively speaking it still, that still held. You know, we still could consider it the country. It was just a suburban neighborhood in Jamaica, Queens [New York]. Houses, relatively close to one another, a very small lawn up in front, you know, garage and so on in the back. But relative to where we were living, that was the country.
Speaker 1: That's funny. Only New York people would consider that the country.
Speaker 2: Yeah, pretty much, pretty much. But, certainly, the country feel wore off really quickly, and we came to know and understand that it's still the city, just a suburb to the city proper. But, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, now what part of Queens? Is this Jamaica, Queens or--
Speaker 2: Yeah, it's Jamaica, Queens, more specifically, Laurelton [Queens, New York].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 31868
Speaker 1: You played sports. You played basketball, right?
Speaker 2: Yes, I did.
Speaker 1: And you seem to be proud. You had a lot of trophies and a picture back there, so--
Speaker 2: Right, yeah, so basketball was I think significant because at least for some period of my time, I thought that that would be my profession or at least I thought that I wanted it to be. And so I was, I was pretty good at the game. I played mostly either school teams or neighborhood teams and whole lot out in the neighborhoods and around New York [New York]. I was a New York Knicks fan. I thought that I could easily become a replacement for Walt Frazier or Earl Monroe at the time. So this is, those were the two guys who were sort of the big guys in my mind growing up. And I would try to emulate them, emulate their game. They were, of course, guards in the game, but as, growing up, I was typically, usually a little bit taller than my, the folks who were the same age as myself. I guess I grew up really quickly stopped (laughter). And so on the teams that I would play on, I often played the forward. So I found a little bit of a dichotomy to try to emulate Walt Frazier and Earl Monroe at that position. But nonetheless, out in the playground, I did so (laughter). Now, I got into high school [Springfield Gardens High School, Queens, New York] and by then had already, for the most part, stopped growing and was now what others might consider a guard, but with a forward's game and it didn't quite fit the high school team really, you know. And we had a couple of, as I recall, just before me, a couple of upperclassmen who were twins on the team. And they were, I think, close to seven foot, if not seven feet. So, yeah, so things didn't quite line up well for me. But in any case, I still played a lot, still was, considered myself quite good and to some degree, I thought, you know, okay, maybe not the NBA [National Basketball Association], but maybe I'll be involved in sport some way or another, but that whole thing really started to fade as my interest in things technical, you know, started to really just take over. I still played basketball, you know, all through college and so on, as something to do. But I was really much more engaged in this thing, this path toward engineering though.
Speaker 1: Now, did the game of basketball have, influence your development in terms of organization and that sort of thing 'cause you played in the Catholic leagues, I suppose?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah, that's what I thought, okay--
Speaker 2: Yeah, so I would think so. I, basketball has influenced a lot for me. I mean the way I get through an airport even (laughter), I navigate crowds with the same approach that, you know, it's almost like, I think it's definitely things I've learned on the basketball court.
Speaker 1: You set picks on people in the airport (laughter).
Speaker 2: Probably so, maybe not terribly explicitly, but, yeah, I mean and that, as well as I recall, you know, moving around at anything like a fast pace in downtown New York City is similar to a crowded basketball court as well. And I would use the same approaches, you know, getting around through a crowd that I would use on the basketball court. But in terms of organization, I think more so the teamwork aspect of basketball, probably still lives in me pretty strongly. You know, the teams I work on, the technical teams of engineers and scientists, if I'm in a room where I have the privilege of giving direction or managing some aspect of the team and what we're doing, it's almost the way I used to operate on the basketball court, you know, passing things off to people as their responsibility, knowing what someone else is really good in. And while I could do that at this moment, the better thing would be to pass the ball and let that person do it, and as a team, we're gonna do it. You know, that's gonna be more effective. You know, so in a lot of different ways, I think it impacts me.
Speaker 1: Okay, did you have a particular coach or anything that you remember that--
Speaker 2: Yeah, I remember most of the coaches, but I can't say they all, anyone stands out in particular. Yeah, yeah, so--I don't know. I guess maybe I viewed the coaches then as more of a generic part of the organization. But I didn't have a really strong influence, in particular, from any one of them.
Story_ID: 31869
Speaker 1: Now what was the name of your school in Queens [New York]?
Speaker 2: The name of that school was called St. Catherine of Siena [St. Catherine of Siena School] and that was in St. Albans, Queens [New York].
Speaker 1: St. Catherine of Siena. Okay. Now, was this school run by the same order of--
Speaker 2: No, so it was in, well, let me think about that. So the Catholic schools in New York [New York], as I recall, they're all run by different diocese of the Catholic church organizations, and that was run by the Diocese of Brooklyn [New York, New York]. And for some reason, I'm thinking that the St. Mark the Evangelist [St. Mark the Evangelist School, New York, New York] was not run by the diocese, but I don't remember which one.
Speaker 1: Okay, well, did you like St. Catherine's better or it was about the same or--
Speaker 2: I'd have to say about the same. You know, it was, school was school sort of a thing, you know.
Speaker 1: Were most of the students black at St. Catherine's?
Speaker 2: Yes, actually, yes. And certainly in St. Mark as well being right there in Harlem [New York, New York].
Speaker 1: And the teachers, were they, what about the teachers of St. Mark or St. Catherine's were they--
Speaker 2: Right, so the teachers at St. Mark were, in that case, were mostly nuns, and if not 100 percent, certainly over 90 percent were Caucasian. And St. Catherine, there were maybe 50 percent, maybe even less of the actual teachers were nuns, whereas the rest were non-nuns and individuals teachers from across New York. And they had a pretty diverse makeup in terms of, from Caucasian to African American, West Indian and what have you.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you had black teachers there for the first time, I guess (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Story_ID: 31870
Speaker 1: Now by this time, had you, had you determined that you were gonna be an architect by the time you were there?
Speaker 2: Not quite yet.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: At that stage, so that was fifth through eighth grade. And I was certainly into drawing and that sort of thing as one of my major hobbies and certainly, sports as well. I don't think I had formulated yet what I might do as a future career, although around that timeframe was probably when I did have this sort of aspir- the comic book inspired aspiration to be a wealthy guy on Park Avenue (laughter), in one, you know, way, shape or form. But no particular career choice at that point.
Speaker 1: But it was to be a guy who--
Speaker 2: To be, yeah.
Speaker 1: --who was involved in science?
Speaker 2: That's right, that's right. Something along that line, just couldn't, certainly couldn't put my finger on it at that time. And I should mention, you know, I had, throughout all those years, up to that point and subsequently, I had good grades the whole way. And so I always felt, I think that was a nice reinforcer, (clears throat) excuse me, a nice reinforcement for my, for me in terms of even thinking about going into something technical or something scientific. I never had any major doubt that I probably could do such a thing because I had a good track record of good grades.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, did you impress your parents [Agnes Solomon Tunstel and Edward Tunstel, Sr.] and teachers as being special in that regard?
Speaker 2: I think so. My parents, certainly relative to all my sisters, while they got good grades as well, I certainly, I think I stood out. To my teachers, it depends, maybe, maybe not. I mean there were certainly other students that were performing at a comparable level. And so whether or not they saw me as particularly special, maybe in some instances and not in others.
Story_ID: 31871
Speaker 1: Okay, now, did your parents [Agnes Solomon Tunstel and Edward Tunstel, Sr.] like make an attempt to bring books into the home for you to peruse and, you know, like--and this happens sometimes. You know, sometimes if a certain kid is--
Speaker 2: Yeah, I know what you mean. And I think, I think not actually. I think what, the best thing and the most proactive thing I think my parents did during those years was to provide a level of nurturing and a level of sort of endless possibility, if you will. They never really, that I can recall, did anything explicit to steer me in any particular direction as opposed to just ensuring that I had no doubt, you know, regarding whether I could achieve whatever I wanted to do.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, did your reading expand maybe as you got older to, did you go to the library and look, you know, check magazines out about how things are made and done?
Speaker 2: Yeah, certainly, certainly. And those days, unlike today, we did spend a lot more time in actual libraries in the neighborhood and what have you. And I would spend a lot of time in libraries and certainly, in checking out books to bring home. Often I would be, you know, I might, the fact that I would end up physically in a library often had to do with a school assignment. But aside from that, on a good amount of occasions, I would actually do something supplementary, you know. So I was there to do an assignment, get a particular book or read a particular reference in order to do the assignment, but put that down for a second, go on a different aisle in the library and check something else out that I was interested in. Same thing in the magazine stands in grocery stores. You know, I think I still do this to this day. I'll go over and check out the science related magazines. I used to do that back then and just kind of page through a bit, and mostly guided by pictures, maybe zone in on a particular story or something. I guess at that time, it was just mostly interesting, as opposed to any sort of influence towards something I thought I would do myself. In a sense, now that I think about it, I might have viewed some of that content as more mature comic books, you know. They were real life, but yet they had some of the things that were exciting on a similar level to the things that I thought were exciting in the comic books. And so, therefore, it was just interesting.
Story_ID: 31872
Speaker 1: Okay, now, you were six years old when Neil Armstrong walked on the moon. Do you have any recollection of that at all and--
Speaker 2: Vague, I have vague recollections of black and white images on small TV screens, and a really coarse radio like voice talking about a story that I didn't understand.
Speaker 1: Okay. But now, did you follow the space program when you got older?
Speaker 2: Later, in later years, I began to follow any--anytime there was news about what astronauts were doing, I tuned in with whatever medium I could and followed, probably not as closely as many others, you know. I think it did inspire me enough to, on occasion, if I happened to be out at night or could see the moon out of a window at night, you know, it would make me recall and start to wonder pretty deeply, at least for that moment, even if that moment was a minute, you know, how in the world did they do that? You know, I'm looking at this white dot in the sky, and I'm like, how in the world, you know, so that sort of a lingering curiosity about the space program is that, that's what the space program did for me as a youngster. It made me wonder, you know, how's this possible, you know, and different aspects of it, even the, the images that came back and showed up on our TV screens. How did that happen? How did that come from there, you know? I think at that stage, I was also getting a little bit familiar with the fact of, you know, how people do TV, you know, that somebody with a camera--for every image you see, somebody's gotten behind a camera. And so, you know, I probably imagined that there's somebody behind a camera (laughter) on the moon, you know, and this is the feed coming back. But how? You know, so the space program was a huge how for me, and it still is to some degree. You know, there are things that I still don't understand how we do them. I might know some engineers or some scientists who do know how, and I'll ask questions from time to time, but it's, it's basically a wonderment that the space program has instilled in me. Back then, the astronauts were a big deal because they were humans doing this interesting thing out in space, you know, sort of aliens almost, you know, but human. But I never really aspired, necessarily to be an astronaut, per se. I was more interested in, you know, how it was possible for an astronaut to exist and do what they do, you know, these individuals, these humans that are not unlike any other human I see around. Perhaps they have a special skill, but more importantly, to me, how did we get a human being onto that white dot and back? So for me, it was about the science and the technology and engineering as opposed to the humans who actually, you know, the face of it all.
Story_ID: 31873
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Now, were there any special teachers at St. Catherine's [St. Catherine of Siena School, Queens, New York]?
Speaker 2: Ms. Yard [ph.], whom I mentioned.
Speaker 1: Okay, Ms. Yard, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, Mrs. Yard was--I don't know why she stood out necessarily, but maybe it was the, the apparent interest that she had in the success of her students, and she seemed to have a knack for knowing how to handle individual students who were different, you know. One student needs something different than another one in order to make that next step. And somehow that came through and was apparent to me. And she, she certainly--I don't know that I was wanting for any particular special treatment, but I just remember having a good experience in her classes.
Speaker 1: Okay, was she a classroom teacher?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yes, so she taught different subjects, depending on the year and so forth. So I had her a number of times.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 31874
Speaker 1: Did you go to a junior high school or middle school?
Speaker 2: No, so my Catholic school [St. Catherine of Siena School, Queens, New York] went through eighth grade. And so high school was after that.
Speaker 1: Okay, and so, your high school was--
Speaker 2: Is it Springfield Gardens High School [Queens, New York].
Speaker 1: Right, right, Springfield Gardens High School. Well, okay, so I take it you're in a--they had a tracking system, right? You probably were in a college track, I guess?
Speaker 2: They didn't have such a thing that I can recall.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: You know, it was more or less a generic high school as far as I could tell, right there in Springfield Gardens, New York [Queens, New York], also part of Jamaica, New York, Jamaica, Queens [New York] rather. Let's see, so Springfield Gardens, that was an interesting shift to me because I had come out of, of course, eight years of Catholic school. And so this was my first, well, since kindergarten, one year of kindergarten, my first public school.
Story_ID: 31875
Speaker 1: I didn't ask before, but what was your family's church affiliation? Was it a Catholic church?
Speaker 2: It was Baptist--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --which was also interesting, right. And so, going to Catholic school, I think, was a deliberate investment by my parents, having known of a certain quality of those schools. And so they put us through even though our affiliation, if you will, was with the Baptist church. Now, for us kids, the most interesting aspect of that was when, you know, as a--and in Catholic school, one of your subjects in addition to math and science and so forth, is religion. Now, there was no issue there because for the most part, the religious beliefs and so forth were parallel with what we believed as Baptist. What was different was some of the, the worship practices such, involved with mass, for example. So as a Catholic student, for example, on a Ash Wednesday, you do actually go from the classroom at some point in the day to the sanctuary and go through the--it's not quite a Mass, but an acknowledgement of Ash Wednesday, and you get the ashes right there on your forehead, and you go back to class. No big deal. We understood it, and we understood what it was, and what the motivation was. We didn't practice such a thing as Baptist, but, you know, so we, on occasion did have, you know, a few ceremonies. And I guess the most that that does to us as individuals, as young people, is just give us an appreciation for different lifestyles, you know. But because the different affiliations were not terribly different, I guess there were no huge questions as to one versus the other. But that was part of our experience.
Speaker 1: Okay, was church important in your family in terms of your upbringing and did you go a lot and--
Speaker 2: Yes, it was, yes. So, now, in, in Harlem [New York, New York], we were not going to church on a regular basis as a family. In Queens [New York], we began to and never stopped. So it was very pervasive to, in our family life. My family ended up taking on many of the roles in our, in our church. We went to a church called Merrick Park Baptist Church in Queens. And, in fact, my sister who I mentioned earlier, Tina Norton [Tina Tunstel Norton], she married the pastor's son, and they both are ministers and pastors of their own church now. My father [Edward Tunstel, Sr.] was a deacon in the church at various times. My mother [Agnes Solomon Tunstel] was a deaconess, chairman of the deaconess board. Us kids, we were all in one choir or another. And so I think to some degree, we probably came full circle back to a church lifestyle that my mother enjoyed when she was growing up in North Carolina where you were in church more than just Sunday, but not necessarily seven days a week, but certainly church activity was a part of our daily life.
Story_ID: 31876
Speaker 1: All right, now, at Springfield Gardens [Springfield Gardens High School, Queens, New York], was there--so you start really to take, I guess, more advanced science courses, I guess (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: Indeed, yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: Now, up to this point, had you participated in science fairs?
Speaker 2: Yeah, on an occasion or two there was an opportunity to do a science fair and a, you know, a simple experiment or investigation. I don't recall them much, though, you know. I have a vague memory of, doing something with a battery and a light bulb, you know. But I think I did it more out of, it was an encouraged activity by the school, something I was interested in, something I thought my parents would be proud about. But my stock in it wasn't much more than that, really. I think later science fairs was a bit more, and I think that might be just indicative of my becoming more serious about it versus it being just an assignment before. So, yes, so I certainly got involved in some science fairs and did various, different experiments.
Speaker 1: Now, was there any one particular aspect of science that excited you the most in high school?
Speaker 2: Probably physics. There were different aspects of physics that, again, I think it comes back to the power of what you can do with the knowledge. In physics, maybe because that came to me more readily than, say, chemistry, for example. You got an understanding of things that you could verify if you wanted to in your regular life, you know, the dropping of an apple from a certain height and the time at which it will hit the ground. You got an understanding of why it, you know, you could analyze that. You understood an equation for, that governs the behavior, and you could try it at home, you know. So it was sort of this relationship between what you were learning and gaining a better understanding about and could go away from the classroom and use it if you wanted to. This got back to the parallel I was making earlier with what I saw in comic book characters in terms of, they were able to do something in particular with their science, you know, and some pretty interesting things, you know. And so, yeah, physics was probably the topic that did that for me in high school.
Speaker 1: Okay, did you have a good physics teacher?
Speaker 2: Not really (laughter), actually, and I say that only because most students shared that opinion. You know, you hear from other students on occasion that, you know, Teacher X, Teacher Y are terrible or one way or another that's negative. And personally, I never really formed an opinion about a teacher that, in such a way. I acknowledged that different people teach things different ways, different students learn things different ways. So I don't really, in my own vernacular, had something I called a bad teacher, you know. But I would hear it from other people and say, okay, well, yeah, I guess bad teacher, you know (laughter). But in my own interaction with whomever that teacher might be, I get out of it what I can and move forward. But there was no particular physics teacher that really stood out particularly. Almost as was the case with NASA [National Aeronautics and Space Administration] and the astronauts, for me it was more the, what's behind it as opposed to the face it represents. So it was the physics material more than the teacher, I guess.
Story_ID: 31877
Speaker 1: What were the demographics of Springfield Gardens High School [Queens, New York]?
Speaker 2: Ah, that was another interesting aspect. I'm glad you asked that. So Springfield Gardens High School was probably 50/50 African Americans and Caucasians.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And it's, it gets even more interesting because it speaks to the local demographic of the neighborhoods. So I lived in Laurelton, as I mentioned, it's part of Jamaica, Queens [New York]. It sits up or ends, one border of, if you will, is the Belt Parkway, one of the highways in New York [New York]. And on the other side of that parkway is another town called Rosedale [Queens, New York]. And when I moved to Laurelton in the early 1970s, it was mostly a Jewish community. But over the years, quickly over the years, like maybe five years, more and more people--there was basically an exodus, if you will, or an urban sprawl moment or something where people from the Bronx [New York], Harlem [New York, New York], certain parts of Brooklyn [New York] were moving to the so called suburbs, and the folks from the suburbs were moving to Long Island [New York] or New Jersey or what have you. Maybe it was a good economic moment where everyone got a little bit more that they could spend. But in any case, the dynamic created that, and so this Jewish community that I first moved into became a community with a lot of different folks from Brooklyn, Queens--I'm sorry, Brooklyn, the Bronx and, and various parts of Manhattan [New York]. But Rosedale, this town across the highway, was not like that and had stayed for a long time, a largely Caucasian neighborhood. Most of the students in Springfield Gardens High School who were Caucasian came from that neighborhood. And most of the folks who were African American came from Springfield Gardens, Laurelton, St. Albans [Queens, New York] and such. But, yeah, that was the makeup of the school, pretty much 50/50.
Speaker 1: Okay, and was it a stable 50/50 or--
Speaker 2: I think so, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I think so 'cause that, you know, certainly through my four years there, and if you wanna count the additional years my sisters ahead of me, when they went through the school. And actually, one of my sisters went to a different high school, a vocational high school, my sister, Edwina [Edwina Tunstel Giddens]. But myself and Tina [Tina Tunstel Norton], we went to Springfield Gardens High School and the demographic was pretty much the same. As I understand it, years after I left, it was as well. Today, it might be mostly African American.
Story_ID: 31878
Speaker 1: You were sixteen when you went to The New York Academy of Sciences?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Right, now, this is a summer program or--
Speaker 2: It was a singular event (clears throat), excuse me, a singular event that happened to be held at The New York Academy of Sciences headquarters in Manhattan [New York], that I believe I had heard about from a guidance counselor in high school [Springfield Gardens High School, Queens, New York], you know. So had it not been mentioned to me by someone who thought that it might be good to attend, I would never have known about it. And so it was just a day where I knew when it was scheduled and where it was, and I got on the subway and the buses and so forth and got myself there.
Speaker 1: Okay, and this is where you heard the panel discussion, right?
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: Architects and the engineers?
Speaker 2: Exactly, exactly. And that was pretty significant. It, you know, it, at least in that moment, changed my direction, and interestingly, prior to that I didn't really pay a lot of attention to engineering. I didn't really, even now, you know, a lot of folks will think engineering and they don't really have a grasp of what it really represents. So I certainly didn't at that time. I probably would have been like a number of other folks who thought an engineer was just the guy on the train (laughter), right, with the really interesting hat. But that seminar not only changed my direction, it also encouraged me to look more deeply into the various parts and aspects of engineering because on that panel, there were different types of engineers. And so I not only felt like I could resonate with what they described as what their job was like, but I didn't know which area of engineering might be best for me. So that sparked my sort of investigation into it, wherever I could find information about it. And so over the course of the next year, I pretty much figured all that out and had determined that I wanted to go into mechanical engineering.
Story_ID: 31879
Speaker 1: Did you take any leadership positions in high school [Springfield Gardens High School, Queens, New York]? Did you run for the student council or--
Speaker 2: No, I was, in that respect, I was a pretty generic student. Also, one thing that I hadn't mentioned in all of this so far is I was a pretty quiet kid, you know, growing up. And so, you know, I would say I was probably much of an introvert, and so anything, at least at the high school level, like taking on an office, in a club, treasurer, president, what have you, was probably beyond my (laughter), my, my limit of, of introvert, extrovert boundary, you know. And so I never really went after such a thing. Now, I would join clubs and participate, but, yeah, I never really stepped out in front in those days.
Speaker 1: Now, how are your grades in high school? What kind of grades were getting?
Speaker 2: Very good, very good, so consistently, you know, continuing the trend from grade school. It was pretty good, which, you know, I, I shortly after came across an interesting experience which was, I think I had been by that time, getting out of high school, I had been somehow conditioned to put forth a certain amount of effort and get really good grades. I didn't have to work terribly hard. But that affected me when I got into college [Howard University, Washington, D.C.].
Story_ID: 31880
Speaker 1: Did you have good counseling at school [Springfield Gardens High School, Queens, New York] or did it come from some other, some outside sources?
Speaker 2: I had, I think, good counseling, as counseling goes at the high school level in terms of someone who would make you aware of what's out there and what's available. And I got a really good piece of advice that turned out to affect the direction I took. It wasn't really a concrete piece of advice as much as it was a, an awareness of yet another opportunity that was available. So I learned about Howard University [Washington, D.C.] from my guidance counselor. Prior to that, yeah, I might have heard about it, but I might not had considered going there necessarily. I, I went through the process of choosing college partly based on what I thought I wanted to go into, so the field. But I was kind of zoned in on relatively nearby schools in the New York [New York] area, maybe as far as upstate New York, maybe Syracuse [Syracuse University, Syracuse, New York], for example. But beyond that, you know, going outside the state, while it was interesting, I didn't have a lot of knowledge about, you know, what would be the best places to go. But I was alerted to Howard University by my guidance counselor, and I looked into, which didn't take me long to understand what it stood for and what its standing was in terms of an educational institution. And that, you know, it really just sort of resonated with me, made me quite interested in what it might be like. I mean at that time, people would refer to it, for example, as the, as the black Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts], right? And so there was a certain level of academic prestige, a certain level of cultural intrigue and so on. It was a nice combination of things about that school that was different than any other school I was looking at. And so I applied.
Story_ID: 31881
Speaker 1: All right, so, now had you explored Howard's [Howard University, Washington, D.C.] engineering department, I mean--?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yes, to the extent that I knew which areas of engineering they offered as a major. I didn't go much deeper than that because by that time, I had sort of already come to grips with what the different areas were, and enough, knew enough to know that I wanted to go into mechanical engineering. And so ensuring that Howard had that was really the, the first step. And then I also looked, did look a little bit deeper into, I guess I found some information on some of the faculty and the deans and so forth. And I was struck actually, as I recall, by--I can't remember where I got this information, but there was, the information was about the engineering school and they had a number of faculty who were also African American, but, in particular, the dean. And not only just the dean at the time, but a lineage of deans, you know. And so this again was feeding into, you know, what this university was all about, but not only that, it then now took a slightly different flavor to me in terms of impact, which was the prospect of having these individuals as instant role models in the classroom, people who were existence proofs for you right there that, you know, whatever you're trying to do, look at these guys. They've done it already to some extent, and it's not just one. In the next classroom, there's another one. And then on the walls in the, you know, the dean's office, there's a lineage of them, you know.
Speaker 1: What was the lineage and, at that time, and--
Speaker 2: Well, also the school had started with, in fact, the name of the engineering school is the Lewis K. Downing engineering school [Lewis K. Downing Hall, Washington, D.C.]. And Lewis K. Downing was an engineer, African American, who was the first dean. Now, I couldn't, I don't think I can remember the actual names in order here, but one after another, all the way down to [HistoryMaker] Lucius Walker who was the dean when I was there, all African American engineers.
Speaker 1: Yeah, we interviewed [HistoryMaker] Percy Pierre yesterday.
Speaker 2: Ah, yes.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Exactly, him as well.
Speaker 1: Percy Pierre, Lucius Walker, we interviewed him.
Speaker 2: Did you really? Okay, all right, all right.
Speaker 1: Yeah, so it's interesting when you do have that kind of a lineage, it's interesting, and you focused on it at that point.
Speaker 2: Yeah, it was different. I had never seen anything like that before in any other institution and so forth. So, in many ways, a lot of the things that I had encountered or became aware of outside of the limited sphere of New York [New York] that I had known was really just drastically new to me. And so anything like that at least would give me a moment of pause to kind of look into and try to understand.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 31882
Speaker 1: All right, so, well, what was it like? What was Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.] like? Now, this is an all-black environment, I mean teachers, pretty much.
Speaker 2: Pretty much.
Speaker 1: You know, there're other teachers, but--
Speaker 2: That's right, other teachers and other students who were non black as well. But majority, by and large, yeah, across the board, not only just students and teachers, but administrators and so forth, security, (laughter) what have you.
Speaker 1: James A. Cheek [sic.] was the president.
Speaker 2: That's right, that's right.
Speaker 1: James E. Cheek [HistoryMaker James Cheek], rather.
Speaker 2: Yeah, E. Cheek, that's right. And so your question was how was Howard or--
Speaker 1: Yeah, how did you like it?
Speaker 2: Howard was a great experience in many different ways. I mean one of the first things that, you know, had you asked me this question after my freshman year, it would have been a more sort of self serving type of comment such as all the women that are at Howard, right, you know (laughter). You know, you go into the university knowing at least at that time and not very different now, that there's something like a seven to one ratio, you know. You also come into the university knowing or having heard some stories about it being a party school, right? Well, I mean that might be compelling to some, but to me, that was more of a challenge, you know. Could I exist in such an environment and enjoy that to a certain extent and still succeed, you know? So that, I always viewed that as kind of a challenge. But, so Howard was both fun in that sort of respect, but it was also so rich in aspects of, I'd say African American and African, but in addition, American history unlike anything that I had experienced before at any one location. So at Howard, you know, while you could indulge in the social life of Howard, the academic life of Howard, you could also lose yourself in the library of Howard, you know, the regular library and then the Moorland-Spingarn Library [Moorland-Spingarn Research Center, Washington, D.C.] which is the library that really cultivates the history of the African American in the country, right? And so that was a very interesting place to even go in and, you know, just sit down and look at anything.
Speaker 1: Yeah, now, when you were there, [HistoryMaker] Thomas Battle was a librarian there.
Speaker 2: Yes--
Speaker 1: Did you know him?
Speaker 2: --that's right. No, I never really got to know him, but, yeah, he was there, and, you know, I spent a little time in that library.
Speaker 1: And Mrs. Hansberry [HistoryMaker Gail A. Hansberry] who was the daughter of William Leo Hansberry, I think worked there at some point. Paul Coates [W. Paul Coates], did you--
Speaker 2: I remember that name. I remember that name, yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: I think when you were there, they had wrote the--is when they wrote the biography of Schomburg [Arthur Alfonso Schomburg]--
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: --for the Elinor Des Verney [Elinor Des Verney Sinnette] (unclear)--
Speaker 2: Um-hm. So, yeah, so I mean that was a staple, you know, and, you know, it's--a lot of folks don't know, outside of Howard, don't really know about that gem. But, you know, having the, having access to it, ready access was, was key. These days, I wish I had spent more time in it, actually. But, so it had so many facets that you could enjoy from just, you know, garden variety fun, to really intellectual, you know, and cultural goodies, if you will. And then there was a level of, you know, while I was there, you know, Howard had a tradition already of various types of protests movements and such over diverse issues. And some of that happened while I was there too. And I don't know, just whether you would desire such a thing as part of your experience or not, that added to the richness of being present at the university.
Story_ID: 31883
Speaker 1: Now, what were issues, were the protest issues at Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.], I guess, when you were there?
Speaker 2: Well, mainly at that time, there was, you might recall Lee Atwater [Harvey LeRoy Atwater], it was part of the government. They were really cracking down on things that were gonna affect student loans and such, not unlike things we're dealing with today. But there were, that was one of the main issues that sparked a number of different protests. You know, at times, they would protest against particular individuals and their actions in the government, but by and large, the underlying issues, was the impact on the university and the student population. And so, or, you had more local situations such as how the, you know, disagreements, if you will, between the direction of the university, between the administration and the student body that would also spark what you might call more local protests, but nonetheless, protests that would cause students to rise up and take over the administration building (laughter), if you will. And those--
Speaker 1: So this is 1981, just to be--
Speaker 2: Yeah, this is during 1981 through 1985-ish, yeah. And, you know, so now whether or not you had a strong opinion or not as part of what was going on, you were there and you were, these things were happening around you, whether or not you were part of the students who were taking over a building or, you know, just a bystander, it was still a part of a rich experience. We had at that time, as I recall, the son [Amiri Baraka, Jr.] of Amiri Baraka was a student at the time. And unlike his, I mean like his dad, he was vocal, you know. And so he was sort of a, one of the representative, vocal voices for the student body. And, yet again, just another connection to the past in that respect and being able to experience that. You don't really get that at too many places other than Howard. You can almost guarantee that you go to Howard in any year or any period of years and something that you didn't experience in the past will come back in some form, you know, and maybe you'll get a sense for what it was like. That's the sense I got, whether it was protests or whether it was something else, celebration even, at Howard was that those things that you heard about, you read about that were interesting points in your relatively recent history as a people in the country, those things come back in other forms, and you maybe get a sense for what it was like. You know, you get another dimension for what you could appreciate about what happened previously before.
Story_ID: 31884
Speaker 1: Now, were they still doing African Liberation Day when you were there?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes. You know, and so, yeah, and so the campus was a venue for a lot of interesting things as well. So they, in so many different ways, I could talk for a long time about how good the experience was at Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.], you know, aside, ever aside from the academic aspects. But along the line of the academic aspects, one of the things that I put high on my list though really is the, you know, seeing folks who look like you as professors and many of them, quite accomplished professors, you know. And this is even, not just in engineering. It's across all the schools, you know. And that had a major impact, you know. Again, the baseline thing is that it gives you a feeling that what you're trying to do, you know, in terms of getting this degree and maybe doing something useful with it afterwards, is in reach, whereas, if you didn't have these physical examples in front of you, which I hadn't had prior to coming to Howard, it's more of a question, you know. Maybe you're still confident that you can do various things, but I think it's more of a question. And I think that question is totally dispelled in that environment.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It's more, it's like, you know, and if you can't succeed at what you're trying to do, it's really probably yourself and not, you know, the fact that you're not, somehow not capable, you know, 'cause you got too many examples, good examples around you.
Speaker 1: Okay, so, now, who were some of the professors that were there that you're reminded (unclear)--
Speaker 2: Well, [HistoryMaker] Lucius Walker was one of 'em. At a time when I was there, I had worked, I was doing work study, and I had, was working for the dean's office, in fact, doing things like the, the school of engineering mail and stuff like that. But what it did is, it allowed me to spend more time than otherwise in and out of--in and around the dean's office. So I got a chance to, in some sense, you know, watch him work or watch him interact. He was also teaching courses at the time, so I got a view of him as a professor, and I got a view of him as a dean, and I had a view of him in interactions with the administration in his office, a more, sort of interpersonal view. He was always very impressive to me. He was sort of an example of someone, I guess my iconic example of a scholar, right, an accomplished scholar. And I thought, I hadn't had particular aspirations at that time necessarily of becoming a professor or anything like that. But he was my example of it, you know. That's what it is. It's that guy, and so he was, he had a certain type--that sort of influence on me, that sort of impact. There were other professors as well. Professor Emmanuel Glapke [sic. Emmanuel Glakpe]. His name is spelled G-L-A-P-K-E [sic.]. And he was a, he taught in the mechanical engineering department. His main area was an area called heat transfer. Now, he mostly stood out to me, I think, because he was an example to me of, sort of engineering excellence, if you will, someone who really, really, really knew his field, but not only that, could really communicate it well, whether he was teaching it or whether he was just talking about it to the laymen. And I always thought that was a pretty impressive--now, he always had a pretty good relationship with the students as well, on the personal level--
Speaker 1: Oh, I'm sorry. What was his ethnicity?
Speaker 2: He was, I believe he was--I don't know. I don't remember which country from directly, but from Africa.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But he had been in America for quite some time by the time I had encountered him. So I don't know if he was, you know, he was probably first generation, but probably came to America when he was much younger.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 31885
Speaker 1: Okay, so, in terms of your studies, now, were you well prepared for the department at Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.]?
Speaker 2: In some ways. So earlier I mentioned how I had a pretty good track record of good grades, and in that sense, I was prepared. You know, I would, coming out of New York [New York] school system, you have to take these Regents Exams [Regents Examination]. And so these are standardized tests that, in effect, you know, they might be considered the SAT, but for New York (laughter). And I did well on those, and I think that that gave me a sense that I was prepared for, you know, any particular rigor that a college had to offer. And, indeed, I was, but I had to change my study habits or my approach to performing in academic settings. And the reason I say that is my first semester at Howard, I ended up on academic probation, which was a really strange thing to me. I thought, in fact, when I initially got my grades, I thought someone made a mistake because throughout the whole semester, I'd get feedback from time to time on an exam or a quiz or what have you, and I felt like I was doing fine. I was approaching classes and so forth in the same way that I did through high school and so forth, put forth a certain amount of effort and get the great reward in the grade. But this time, the great reward in the grade didn't come. And I realized I needed to do something a little bit differently than I had been doing for the last twelve years. So I had to quickly adapt to how do you perform to a level that gets you the grades that you need in college? Looking back, I can't exactly pinpoint exactly what I changed, but I know I changed something and things fell into place. So to the question of whether I was prepared, I think I was, but my habits were, just needed an adjustment.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 31886
Speaker 1: What aspect of engineering did you, you know, focus on at Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.]?
Speaker 2: Mechanical engineering, yeah, and the reason there was I was more, like I say, I could identify more with things that were on a macro scale, things you could touch and see and, you know, and feel, which is different from some aspects of electrical engineering where, you know, you're dealing with electricity, voltage and current and things that you don't really touch and feel and manipulate with your hands. And so mechanical engineering is what I gravitated to. I had, for a moment, interest in civil engineering which is more related to the building of large engineering structures like bridges and so forth. But I was more interested in it potentially because there was some overlap with architecture, you know, civil engineers engine buildings and buildings are something I used to draw. And I thought, okay, that might be a nice, easy connection but ultimately decided on mechanical engineering instead.
Speaker 1: Okay. Now, did, I know when we interviewed Professor Walker [HistoryMaker Lucius Walker], he showed us some photos of cars that students built and other vehicles and that sort of thing. Were you involved in building any vehicles?
Speaker 2: No vehicles while I was there, although, yeah, so we, I recall we had an aircraft simulator on the bottom floor of the engineering building. But while I was there, we didn't have much of that activity where the students actually did such a large scale, if you will project. We had some smaller scale projects and at that time--again, this is when robotics was just coming on the scene in academia. And we had a few projects in that area that I was involved in.
Story_ID: 31887
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now, now tell us about, so this is your first experiences with robotics, right?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes. I didn't step my first footprints on the Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.] campus knowing about robotics. So I was tuned in to some degree to this really large and general area of mechanical engineering. And so I think what got me interested in robotics was really the first course that I took on it at Howard, that was an introduction to robotics class. And really, it was, it was somewhat manufacturing focused in terms of how you can use robots in the manufacturing arena and how to understand, you know, analytically, how they move and how they operate and that sort of thing. But in addition, there was another dimension which also pulled me further in which was this dimension of computer programming. Again, there's this, this power in your own hands to do something creative. So here's a machine which a lot of people get really excited about, and here's a computer that you can do something in this computer to make this thing do something interesting, right. And that really intrigued me. Again, you know, back to something like Tony Stark or whatever. You know, I could use my own creative juices to decide what I wanted this thing to do and, or make it do something better.
Speaker 1: Nineteen eighty-one [1981], now, this is the dawn of the personal computer of the smaller, scaled down size computer--
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: --and so what were you using in the lab in those days?
Speaker 2: So the computers for, well, in the lab, so we had some computer programming courses and so forth. They were big mainframes, you know, that had terminals. So anything you did was, you know, you sat at the terminal screen that was tapped into a big mainframe. We even, I was, also was there at the very beginning of my years at Howard at overlap between using the punch cards you know, that you have to, you know, program your computer, your program on to, between the transition from that to not having to use the punch cards. So that was interesting. We eventually started using a lot of the punch card related stuff as scrap paper and all (laughter). But in any case, yeah, the computers were big and so forth. Anything that was connected to a robot that we finally got, maybe in my junior or senior year, was also a separate big computer, you know, that was connected to this big machine through cabling. So the idea and the notion of programming it was always the notion of going to some terminal, writing a program and in some way downloading it, you know, to something that was resident on the robot platform. So, but, yeah, it was the course that really drew me in. Prior to that class, the intro to robotics class, I had taken some computer programming classes as well, and I really realized that I liked doing that, programming. Again, you know, it's a resource, something you can do something with, but something you can create with.
Speaker 1: Okay, what was, now, in those days robots were used on assembly lines, right--
Speaker 2: Just beginning, really, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, well, what could a robot do and, you know, what kind of things were you programming a robot to do in class in those days?
Speaker 2: Yeah, so it was mainly things that you might consider related to the manufacturing assembly line. You know, so it was picking up something from one place, moving it to another and dropping it, inserting something, a peg into a hole which was a big problem at that time, you know, how to really get a robot to accurately do that. Maybe putting a marker of some sort in the robot script or making it write, you know. So the control that you have to learn how to do in order to make that sort of thing happen, so it was that sort of thing. Everything, all the robots were just arm with a gripper of some sort--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --and a stationary base and, and they were all like that in one way, shape or form. We didn't really, we hadn't yet begun to consider the robots that could move around, you know, from place to place.
Speaker 1: Okay, I--
Speaker 2: And so everything was manufacturing related application.
Speaker 1: Okay, and people were imagining those. I think two of the most popular characters in fiction were the R2D2 and--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: 'Star Wars' ['Star Wars: Episode IV - A New Hope'] had come out in '77 [1977], I think--
Speaker 2: That's about right.
Speaker 1: --and people were looking at that kind of thing and thinking robots. And then, but the real robots were the arm--
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: --with some tools on the end.
Speaker 2: Exactly, and in the assembly plants today, still so. It's, you know, they're much better and much more efficient and everything, but they're really effectively a fixed base, with an arm or more attached to it. And, again, that's one different sector, if you will now, of what is the up and coming robotics industry, that manufacturing sector. We're moving now towards an era where the robots will change in their form even in the manufacturing arena and so forth. I know that GM [General Motors Company] is currently doing some interesting work along that line.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, did you, did the class actually construct the robot from scratch or anything like that?
Speaker 2: No, not at that time. We had, there were a couple of robots on the market that were considered educational robots. So they would end up in university classrooms and so forth. And these would come partially or fully assembled, and you'd have to set them up in terms of their computer connection, their programming and such. And there were things you could do that were canned exercises, but you could also learn the programming language and then do, make it do almost anything that it might be capable of. And so, we didn't really do much building of these devices as we did programming them or maybe having, programming them to build something else that was pretty simple, you know. So you might have a number of pieces of something you might consider a product, you know. Maybe it's a box with some pieces in it at certain places, and you'd have that come along the assembly line, program a robot to pick up the pieces and put them in the right places. And that was really the extent of it.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Story_ID: 31888
Speaker 1: Now, this is 1986, you earned your bachelor's degree from Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.] with a concentration in robotics?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So basically, by the time, after that course, it was pretty much, the vector was drawn as to what direction I was going in, and I began, even my computer programming assignments in other classes--we had, for example, a class called computer applications in which you oftentimes got not only the assignments that were assigned to every other student, but also an opportunity to write a program and do something that you thought of. And I would invariably target it to something that was related to robotics, whenever I had that latitude. And so I was already starting to gear up and really start to focus on trying to get deeper in, a deeper understanding of the field as well as deeper into it.
Speaker 1: Okay, so, now, you stayed on to work on your master's in engineering at Howard?
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: Now, when you graduated in '86 [1986], were you an honors graduate?
Speaker 2: No, I graduated with a, something like a 3.1 GPA [grade point average], and if you recall that first semester when I was on probation, that was a result.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So climbing up from that, I climbed out of that hole really quickly, but getting high grades forever more was always impacted by that one semester, that first beginning. And so that's where I ended in up, in the low, 3.0s.
Speaker 1: So anybody starting school today, the message is start out good (laughter).
Speaker 2: Absolutely, start out good and stay good so you, you know, as much as you possibly can throughout.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you're working on your master's degree in mechanical engineering. Who is kind of like your mentor through all this or an advisor?
Speaker 2: Right, so if there was anyone at that time it was my master's thesis advisor. So he was at that time, the only individual or the individual who I knew who was closest to this field in the sense that he, not only did he teach at Howard as a professor, but he also worked part time at the, what was called the National Bureau of Standards at that time. It's currently the National Institute of Standards and Technology [Gaithersburg, Maryland]. And there, they had a big robotics laboratory, and he was part of that. And so he would bring that experience to some degree into the classroom or into the assignments that we had. In addition, he was, of course, advising my research as a master's degree student, which was focused on robotics. And so, again, ever since that class as an undergraduate, I really never look back. In my master's degree, my thesis was in the robotics area as well.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, who was your advisor?
Speaker 2: His name is Professor Naren [Naren Vira], N-A-R-E-N, Vira, V-I-R-A.
Speaker 1: Okay, V-I-R-A, okay. Now, was he an Indian or Pakistani?
Speaker 2: Indian.
Speaker 1: Indian?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: All right.
Story_ID: 674407
Speaker 1: Yeah, we were just talking off camera about the, some of the social challenges in D.C. [Washington, D.C.] in those days.  I think this was when one of the first communities to be hit with the crack epidemic--
Speaker 2: Indeed.
Speaker 1: --and lots of shootings in Northwest, D.C. [Washington, D.C.] and Southeast [Washington, D.C.] and other places.
Speaker 2: Um-hm, um-hm.
Speaker 1: Did you, I mean I know you were in the laboratory (laughter)--
Speaker 2: Indeed, yes, yes.
Speaker 1: But--
Speaker 2: But certainly the, between the laboratory and the dormitory was, were those streets.  You know, the dormitory I was in, my upper classman days and certainly--while I was doing my master's [degree], I actually lived in apartments in and around the university [Howard University, Washington, D.C.].  So I was, certainly had to go through the neighborhoods of D.C. when all these things were going on.  Now, on the campus and around the campus, I didn't really think much about the chaos that was happening in the city.  You felt relatively safe and on occasion something would happen near the university, but it didn't really throw you, you know, into a particular panic.  Out in the street, there was a definite threat, you know, to any individual because of the variety of crime that was happening throughout the city.  So you had to be at least sensitive to it.  I fared well, I think.  I don't think that I was overly concerned, and I think that part of the reason is growing in New York City [New York, New York], you know, it was always, I mean the world in general was always, had a certain level of danger that if you weren't necessarily, felt like you were protected or somehow, you know, immune to it, you were aware.  And so you carried yourself with a certain awareness and a certain demeanor in certain situations, something that would maybe, you know, keep you out of trouble or keep you away from trouble somehow.  And during that time in D.C., I guess I sort of just went into that mode whenever I needed to.  And it was just, you know, it wasn't--it was a terrible environment to have to worry about and be concerned about, but it never really impacted me in terms of throwing me off what I was doing.  I was able to engage in business as usual which was studying and trying to get those things taken care of.  Meanwhile, between the university and the dormitory or my apartment or what have you, just the awareness is what got me through.
Story_ID: 674408
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now, what was the relationship like between the people who live in the neighborhood around Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.] and the students, you know?
Speaker 2: Interesting, interesting.  So, it was definitely a--looking for a good word that describes it here, a--for lack of a better word, a clash.  Without talking to too many of the people in the actual community specifically about this relationship, it's easy for you to view it as coming from a, a level of resentment or envy for the students at the university as being somehow more privileged, to have the opportunity to get the education or what have you or maybe even a feeling that they feel like they are better than the folks in the local community.  So just stemming from that, there were clashes from time to time.  There were, you know, harassments by the local residents of the Howard students, physical interactions, thefts and so forth, general harassment.  And this was just a phenomenon that the students knew about and knew that we had to deal with in one way or another.  There was a subset of the local community that had a particular term among the Howard culture.  It was block boys, right, watch out for the block boys.  And who were the block boys?  These were people just like us, but they happened to be not enrolled (laughter), and for whatever reason had a chip on their shoulder when you encountered them, you know.  And so it was that sort of a thing.  And I think that that's probably the case in many university communities, you know.  So it's just something we dealt with, and it was part of the experience.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I think Spike Lee even portrayed that in 'School Daze'--
Speaker 2: Absolutely, absolutely, yeah.
Speaker 1: --in the townies and the students.
Story_ID: 674409
Speaker 1: What was your thesis [at Howard University, Washington, D.C.] about, your--?
Speaker 2: My master's thesis was, let's see.  So it was about, it was a combination of computer science and mechanical engineering for robots.  And basically, what it was, was a pretty sophisticated computer program that could be used to design robots, basically, different--there's different sorts of aspects of mathematics that are involved with analyzing and controlling the way robots work.  And in order to come up with the proper formulations that you need to do that work, it's very intense.  If you sat down with a pencil and a piece of paper, it would take you multiple pages and a considerable amount of time.  And so my master's thesis was geared towards making that a more efficient process by using some artificial intelligence-based computer programming to do a good portion of those mathematical derivations that would, in effect, give you the formulations that you're after without having you sit down for many pages and some hours to go through it.  And so it was different aspects of that type of analytical material that you need to do some robotics work and the thesis looked at how to produce a number of those different things through computer programming.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, now, this is--what kind of computers were you working with at this juncture?
Speaker 2: Yes, so these were--
Speaker 1: This is 1989, right?
Speaker 2: That's right, nineteen eighty--between 1986 and 1989.  I was still working with mainframes, right, and so on the mainframe was the main computer program that I was using, the application, if you will.  Think of it as, you know, PowerPoint or whatever it is you do your stuff with.  So there was a program called Macsyma, and Macsyma--so that's spelled M-A-C-S-Y-M-A.  And this was a program developed at MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts] some years prior.  And what it allowed you to do was what we refer to as symbolic processing or symbolic manipulation, effectively dealing with characters, mathematical characters rather than numbers solely.  So you could do what you might do on a piece of paper by using a program.  There's a very popular program nowadays called Mathematica [Wolfram Mathematica] that sort of came later.  But in any case, this program was really the, the main thing that I used on a mainframe.  And I wrote a number of different programs that could make use of the symbolic manipulation capability of Macsyma in order to do what I, what I described earlier.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, so the thesis ended up becoming a collection of those such programs, integrated into one with a nice menu for someone to actually pull up and use.  And all that was done on a mainframe.
Story_ID: 674410
Speaker 1: Now, you were recruited by the Jet Propulsion Laboratory [Jet Propulsion Laboratory, Pasadena, California], am I right?
Speaker 2: That's correct, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So when I was about to, getting close to finishing my master's degree, the Jet Propulsion Laboratory--incidentally, years prior, they would come to the Howard, the campus of Howard University [Washington, D.C.] to recruit students.  But for some period of time, they had stopped coming.  When I interviewed with them was the first time they came back after their hiatus.  And I interviewed with them on campus, but also I had known about the Jet Propulsion Laboratory prior because they were at the forefront at that time of robotics, pretty much, worldwide.  And I had an interest in working there because of that because they worked on challenging problems and were the foremost robotics organization.  And so I knew what they did, and, in fact, the selection of the problem that I worked on for my thesis was intentionally selected because it was, had some relationship to what I knew they did at Jet Propulsion Laboratories, JPL.  So, yeah, so when I got that opportunity to interview, that went quite well.  I ended up with a invitation to come out to Pasadena, California.  About a week later, I got that.  So they went back and deliberated and determined that I was of sufficient interest for a follow-up interview.  And basically, that's, that's all she wrote, pretty much.  What I was doing as a master's degree, it happened to be of some use to one of the projects that was going on at JPL at the time.  They were looking at the use of two robot arms that could be used eventually in orbit around the earth to stop a spinning satellite and work on it, to do some sort of repair.  And at that time, the state of the art in terms of doing that, there were industrial robot arms such as the ones that can operate in factories on assembly lines that you could program to do these things.  It was just pretty complicated.  And some of what you needed in order to facilitate that job were the types of things that my program would produce or at least it would make the job easier.  And so that was of interest.  They knew I had an understanding of how robots worked in that sense and some level of skill in actually writing the programs related to doing that work.  And so I was a pretty attractive prospect as an employee.
Story_ID: 674411
Speaker 1: So you were assigned to a subgroup of JPL [Jet Propulsion Laboratory, Pasadena, California], right, to work on this project?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: What was your title, what were the--
Speaker 2: So, I started on, they were pretty generic titles at the time there at JPL such as member of the technical staff or senior member of the technical staff.  On occasion, you'd end up with a more special title such as robotics engineer or what have you, more discipline oriented.  So when I started out, I was a member of the technical staff. And I was working in a computer applications section within JPL's information systems division.  And, in particular, there were two groups.  One was the artificial intelligence group and one was the robotic intelligence group, very related.  Of course, the robotic intelligence group was more focused on robots as the actual platforms whereas the artificial intelligence group was focused on more broad applications.  So I was a member of the robotics intelligence group, and at that time, we were doing work related to what I mentioned with the two arms handling a satellite as well as the beginnings of what is now well known as the planetary rovers.  We were just beginning to do that work out of that group as well, as well as the--there was one third group called the robotic vehicles group.  And all of these three groups worked together in those various areas.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, so robot intelligence, now what--so you, we interviewed [HistoryMaker] Ayanna Howard, I think, who is working--I think she worked with artificial intelligence, right, at the same (simultaneous)--?
Speaker 2: That's correct, that's correct.
Speaker 1: Was she there when you got there?
Speaker 2: Oh, yes, yes.  She's a very close colleague of mine, actually.  We, in later years--so I started there in '89 [1989], and I believe she came a good number of years later when she started at least.  So before she came to JPL, we were doing a lot of the work leading up to the rovers, and the intelligence part of it was really just the application of artificial intelligence techniques to the way that the rovers would operate, mainly in getting around on their own, driving on their own and so forth.  Ayanna Howard and I, she ended up working in a group called the telerobotics group, and all these groups are pretty much related when you get into the robotics area, with differences being maybe particular expertise in the group and so forth.  But when it comes to something like a general set of techniques, one might call artificial intelligence, individuals in multiple groups might use that.  And so Ayanna was one of those who used artificial intelligence to make telerobot systems smarter.  And telerobots are basically robots that you communicate with over a distance.  Rovers are a type of telerobot as well.  And Ayanna studied a number of different fields within artificial intelligence, neuro networks and so forth, fuzzy logic, as did I.  And I think when I went for my Ph.D. [University of New Mexico, Albuquerque, New Mexico], I really focused on that, and she was also doing a master's and then a Ph.D. at University of Southern California [Los Angeles, California], again focusing on these techniques.  So when we were done with our terminal degrees, our interests were very, very mutual.  And we ended up working on a number of different projects together, applying artificial intelligence to robots and in her case, more so to vision systems as well, computer vision.  And she's still doing lots of really good work in that area now.
Speaker 1: Right, she's at Georgia Tech [Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, Georgia] now, I think.
Speaker 2: That's correct.
Story_ID: 674412
Speaker 1: Now, you worked, well, you described the environment [at Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL), Pasadena, California]--here in my notes, it says that you, you said, it was a campus-like environment, populated by thousands of engineers and scientists--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --working on and conceiving projects of space exploration.
Speaker 2: That's correct.
Speaker 1: So, was this like heaven for an engineer (laughter)?
Speaker 2: You could call it, you could say that.  You could say that.  I mean and engineers of many different types, you know, those who come to work with flip flops on and very long hair to those who like to wear suits and ties.  But in every corner you would look in there was something interesting going on in terms of something that would keep an engineer or a scientist very compelled and engaged in their work.  And so that was really what the place was like, by and large, and still is like.  There's something about such a place, I mean, as an individual contributing individually, you also have at ready access smart minds in so many other fields that, you know, if you ever hit a snag in what you're trying to do or you ever need to learn something new, you've got plenty of resources around.  That's really one of the, the often unspoken advantages to such a place.  And really, if you think about it, why such a place can really succeed and do great things.  You've got so, such a diversity of intellect and ways to approach problems.  It was a very, very interesting place to be.
Story_ID: 674413
Speaker 1: Now, one of your--your first assignment was, I believe the AI [artificial intelligence] robotics, as a AI robotics researcher for the Robby, Rocky series rovers.
Speaker 2: Ah, yes, right.  So these were the first prototypes of robotic vehicles that NASA [National Aeronautics and Space Administration] had envisioned at the time that it would send on future missions to Mars.  We looked at various types of vehicles.  Some were, some had four wheels, some had six wheels, some had a robotic arm, some had more cameras than others, these sorts of different configurations.  And those robots, you mentioned some names of different robots.  Robby was a really huge, huge at the time, robot that had six wheels, and each wheel was about the size of a wheel on an SUV today.  So it was a pretty big vehicle, had a huge stack of computers on it, whereas nowadays, we tend to use a much smaller, single computer or multiple really small computers.  But that one had a big tower of computers on it and a big, industrial robot arm.  And that was one of my first projects.  We worked on trying to program different ways for it to actually use that big arm, to pick up rocks and such after it had driven around to an interesting location.  The Rocky robot, that was the first in a series of smaller, six wheel vehicles that ultimately became the type that we ended up sending to Mars first.  So there was an interesting time when we had--we were working on big vehicles and small vehicles and trying to apply them to do a similar task at Mars sometime in the future.  And the way that the technologies evolved and the solutions evolved on these different types of prototypes, basically ended up going in the direction of the smaller vehicles.  And we ended up concentrating more on that to the point where we developed a workable concept that could actually be flown to Mars and that became the Sojourner rover on the Mars Pathfinder mission in 1997.  And so a lot of that work that we were doing on these different configurations led to the fact that NASA could actually fly that capability some years later.
Speaker 1: Okay, so the Robby robot was the big one and the Rocky was the little one?
Speaker 2: That's right, that's right, and Rocky ended up becoming a series, Rocky 1, Rocky 2, Rocky 3 and so forth, all the way up to Rocky 4 and then we started giving them names, like what would have been I guess Rocky 5 was named FIDO instead, and it stood for Field Integrated Operations--no, Field Integrated Design and Operations rover because we got to a point where we would start to take these vehicles out to the deserts in the Southwest of the United States to terrains that were similar to terrains on Mars.  And that's where we would prove out some of the technology we were developing on these vehicles.  So FIDO was the first one that we built a whole infield operation structure around and it became more of a system for doing that kind of work out in the desert with remote satellite links back to JPL [Jet Propulsion Laboratory, Pasadena, California] and so forth, basically, emulating a Mars mission.
Story_ID: 674414
Speaker 1: Kind, kind of give us a brief, maybe summary of missions to--these kinds of missions.  I don't know if we started with the moon or (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Right, so, yes, you could go all the way back to the moon, and when you think about--let's limit it to say, robotic spacecraft that have landed on other planetary bodies.  And so NASA [National Aeronautics and Space Administration] has sent a number of landers called Surveyor landers to the moon and--in the very beginning.  This preceded the Apollo [Project Apollo] era.  And this is how the, the sort of exploration of space, deep space, really goes.  It's sort of a paradigm where you send robotic spacecraft to, in effect, do reconnaissance and teach us more about these environments so that we know how to design the future human missions that might go.  And so the Surveyor Landers were sent to the moon to gain more information about it so that we could eventually send astronauts there.
Speaker 1: And what was that device like?
Speaker 2: That was basically a small, small in the sense of about the size of a Volkswagen car, lander, that was landed on the surface, using thrusters and once it landed, it didn't move around.  So we call it a lander and not a rover.  But it would have on it some suite of instruments, science instruments that would collect data about whether, it might have been the radiation environment, the temperature and so forth.  One of the surveyor landers also had a relatively simple robotic arm that had a scoop at the end.  And it would actually scoop at the dirt on, the soil on the lunar surface to understand some of its soil properties and things like that.  So all of the landers have some suite of instruments and maybe something mechanical like an arm, to help us gain the information we're trying to get.  So there was a surveyor lander sent to the moon that preceded the Apollo era.  Then at least on a couple of the Apollo missions, there was a lunar rover.  But that was a vehicle designed for driving on the moon, but driven by astronauts, as opposed to robotically.  It should be noted that around that same timeframe, the Russians did land a robotic vehicle on the moon, two, in fact, that they could operate in effect, by a joystick from earth, so called teleoperation.  And later, then there was a big gap in time between those sorts of missions to the moon and when we were able to actually send the first landed robotic vehicle to Mars.  Landers preceded the rovers at Mars as well.  The most well known are the Viking landers.  There was a Viking lander 1 [Viking 1], Viking lander 2 [Viking 2].  Similar to the ones that were landed on the moon, these are craft that could be landed by thrusters onto the surface of the planet, and they stay stationary but they have a suite of instruments to learn more about the environment.  The Viking landers also had a robotic arm to do something similar to what the surveyor landers did on the moon, to basically learn about the soil properties.  So it wasn't until--so that was in the early 1970s.  It wasn't until the 1990s when we finally went back with something that landed on the surface.  And this time, for the first time, actually drove around without a human on board.  And that was the Mars Pathfinder rover.
Story_ID: 674415
Speaker 1: What year is Pathfinder [Mars Pathfinder]?
Speaker 2: That was 1997.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, and a lot of the work that I had mentioned, when I got there [Jet Propulsion Laboratory, Pasadena, California] in '89 [1989], we were working--we began to work towards the technologies that enabled that mission.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So you were, well, I guess, just kind of summarize your contribution to, I guess, Pathfinder?
Speaker 2: So basically, so Pathfinder, again, it was the--so my focus area in all of this has been navigation of these surface vehicles, these vehicles that drive along the surface, but under computer control using whatever sensors they might have.  And so prior to Sojourner, that period also included my doctoral thesis work [at the University of New Mexico, Albuquerque, New Mexico], which was focused on the navigation of planetary rovers.  And so I was always doing something that was advancing the state of the art and capability for those types of vehicles.
Speaker 1: Okay, well, just for the record, now, you're out in New Mexico with JPL, right?
Speaker 2: With, JPL is in Pasadena [California].
Speaker 1: Pasadena.
Story_ID: 674416
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) But in '92 [1992] is when I went from there [Jet Propulsion Laboratory, Pasadena, California] to New Mexico for my doctorate.
Speaker 2: Okay, now, this is on a JPL Minority Fellowship [JPL Minority Fellowship Program], I think?
Speaker 1: That's correct, that's correct.  JPL had a very good program at that time that was looking to establish stronger relationships with historically black colleges and universities [HBCUs] as well as minority institutions around the country.  And the way it would work is that it would send an employee to one of these schools for an advanced degree.  And through the course of that employee working with the professors and so forth to earn their degree, but in particular, digging deep on a research project, that would begin to be the beginning of JPL's relationship, hopefully long term relationship, with that university as well.  And so it was an interesting program.  I was fortunate to be able to participate, and, in fact, help establish a strong relationship with the University of New Mexico [Albuquerque, New Mexico] at that time and JPL.  But it was that work as well as other work that I had done at JPL on the Rocky series of robots that led to the technologies on Sojourner--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --and indeed, on the later Mars Exploration Rovers [MER] and Curiosity vehicles that are on Mars now.
Speaker 2: Okay, now, advisor at, this is the University of New Mexico where you got your Ph.D.
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Your advisor was Professor Mo Jamshidi.
Speaker 1: Yes, more accurately, Mohammad Jamshidi.
Speaker 2: Okay.  All right, now, we have Mo down here.  I don't know why--I mean I understand it stands--did he call himself Mo?
Speaker 1: Yes, he did, yes, he did.  His friends and probably people who were not his friends, know him as Mo.  He's very well known as Mo.
Speaker 2: Okay, is he a devote Muslim or is he a practicing Muslim or (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Well, I've been around him on many an occasion.  I don't know that I've really witnessed much of a religious lifestyle, but I do know that he is Muslim, and they are practicing Muslims.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And so, but, yes, he's --I think what, you know, he goes by Mo, in a similar way that Asians who come to America might take on an American name that's similar to their Chinese name.  And so Mo was easy from Mohammad.  And so, you know, he actually went to, he got his Ph.D. in the United States.  So he was here as a student more or less, and he went to school in Oregon [Oregon State University, Corvallis, Oregon], for example.  And I'm sure he started calling himself Mo at that time.
Story_ID: 674417
Speaker 1: Okay, so we were talking about your dissertation, and so working on your dissertation and working at JPL [Jet Propulsion Laboratory, Pasadena, California] at the same time, you basically are working on ways to control these landing craft, I mean these rovers.
Speaker 2: That's correct, that's correct.  And so the nature of the fellowship [JPL Minority Fellowship Program] that I was on that allowed me to pursue my doctorate [at the University of New Mexico, Albuquerque, New Mexico] as a JPL employee was such that the research that I would focus on would be related to what I do on the job.  And I chose an area, I was still very interested in the planetary robotic vehicle area that I wanted to do something that I could take back with me to JPL when I was done.  And, indeed, that's what I did.  I ended up working on and focusing on an area that we sometimes refer to as intelligent control.  This is an area of control systems that uses aspects of artificial intelligence, and applying that, along with another technique that falls under the same umbrella called fuzzy logic.  So this is a way to sort of reason about things, for a computer to reason about things in a way that allows it to make decisions without requiring precise information.  And it's sort of an emulation of how we think humans reason.  One very good example is, we don't necessarily say that when we drive down the street and stop at a red light, we're going to stop three feet ahead of the red light.  Such a precise number is not what we need.  We operate on something differently.  Also, we refer to people as tall, but don't have to say, for example, 5'11" and over.  That's a little bit too precise.  So we operate more on so-called fuzzy notions.  And it's, there's some advantage to having computers be able to do something similar when you're trying to get things that move around an environment to operate intelligently.  And so I took on to that, this intelligent control sort of approach or area for applying artificial intelligence techniques to how you control motors and things that make up robots along with this fuzzy logic concept.  How can we get this system to reason about its environment and use that to navigate intelligently within it.  And so that was really the crux of the, the focus of my research.  And I applied that to robotic vehicles such as the ones that we would operate on Mars, mainly from the point of view of how can they get from point A to point B, through some terrain with obstacles without requiring a human to help them do it.
Story_ID: 674418
Speaker 1: Now, tell us about the LOBOT?
Speaker 2: Oh, the LOBOT, yes, so, the University of New Mexico's mascot is the Lobo, right?  And so we, the LOBOT is a robot that we built at the University of New Mexico [Albuquerque, New Mexico], myself and other undergraduate and graduate students at the time.  And LOBOT was just an appropriate name.  We joked around about other names like lobotomy (laughter), and, indeed, later, a sort of descendent, if you will, of robot was a robot that we called Lobotomist [ph.].  So LOBOT and autonomous robot, sort of, you know.  But in any case, that's what LOBOT is.  LOBOT was the central piece of my piece of my actual research eventually.  We first built it, this collection of students to compete in a robot competition that college students engage in which is sponsored by the American Association for Artificial Intelligence [Association for the Advancement of Artificial Intelligence].  And we did actually build it, we did actually compete.  But my, I had, of course, an ulterior motive, in running the project as a sort of project manager, corralling the students and associating different pieces of that project with their class work and so on.  And so students would do a class project out of which, what they did as a project would become a piece that goes on the robot.  And so we, we built this thing for the competition, competed in the competition and then I finally had this platform that I could do my doctoral research on.  We had to go that route because the department at the time, the electrical engineering and computer engineering department [Electrical and Computer Engineering Department] at the University of New Mexico didn't have the research funds to invest in buying a comparable vehicle, very expensive, tens of thousands of dollars.  And so that was the route that we took to get me a platform that was suitable for the research.  And I used LOBOT the rest of those years to actually develop and test and evaluate and ultimately, write the results of my dissertation.
Story_ID: 674419
Speaker 1: All right, so you earned your Ph.D. [at the University of New Mexico, Albuquerque, New Mexico] in 1996.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: And so, this is a year away from the Pathfinder [Mars Pathfinder], right?
Speaker 2: That's right, that's right.  So by then, by then, the technologies that would become part of Pathfinder were settled, in fact, before, around the time that I went and started my Ph.D., the period of time between, say 1992, you know, '93 [1993] up until 1996 when Pathfinder was ready to be launched was the time period during which the whole flight system was being developed.  The actual hardware, the spacecraft, the airbag systems that would deploy and all that.  And so while I was away doing the doctoral research, a lot of that engineering and fabrication and manufacturing was going on, leading up to the actual launch.
Speaker 1: Now, were you involved in any proj- I know they were experimenting on various kinds of rovers.  You know, there was one that could, like, when you said LOBOT, I thought about four legged rover, a model for one I'd seen at some point.  I don't think that was it, but I'm just saying it was a four legged one, one based on how insect legs moved and--
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: --and various configurations of wheels, and arrangements like that.
Speaker 2: That's right.  So there are many varieties, and we, in fact, had investigated a number of types of varieties, leading up to what we ended up flying.  And even though we flew Sojourner as a six-wheel vehicle, those investigations into other configurations still continued and continue today.  So I've worked on other vehicles, all the way down to a small vehicle that was four wheels, that could basically fit in your hand.  You could hold it like this.  And that one was intended, although it never really flew into space, it was intended for deployment onto an asteroid surface.  And it was, again, a small device that a spacecraft that visits an asteroid would actually drop, if you will, onto an asteroid surface where it's extremely low gravity.  So even if you dropped it on, it would drift down ever so slowly, finally hit the surface, bounce a bit and eventually settle down.  And this vehicle could land on its back or on its stomach and it could move its wheels around and get up and still drive around.  So that was one of the vehicles I worked on; worked on some legged vehicles as well, different problems, as you might imagine, in trying to get those things to be controlled and stable on very rough terrain.  But, yeah, there's been a variety of other robots, and this is, that work falls primarily in the, the research realm of the whole job.  You've got the research that's always ongoing and always forwarding looking.  And then on occasion, you've got the actual flight project that is really more of a production type of environment where you're trying to get something designed and built in a particular way to go to a particular destination.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, one of the problems you've worked upon, I mean to solve is different types of challenging terrain?
Speaker 2: That's right, that's right.  And so, you know, with Mars being a varied environment, not only in terms of sandy types of terrains, very rocky terrains, but also gradual and steep slopes.  We've always struggled with how can we design systems that can handle all these different terrains and in some cases, really extreme terrains, like trying to get a rover to access a cliff face, for example.  We've looked at a lot of those different types of problems, using different configurations.  And usually, the way things work is that you never really get far down the path of looking at these solutions until there's a particular mission that really requires a particular capability.  And so far, our missions have only required the ability to be mobile on relatively flat surfaces that could be sandy and rocky and rough.  Not yet have we tried an actual mission to go onto a steep cliff face or otherwise steep terrain.  But that's coming.  You know, in recent times, there's been, some of the Mars orbiter missions, the satellites that orbit Mars, they've taken enough data and images to suggest that the cliff faces, very vertical or near vertical walls on different locations in Mars are scientifically compelling because they look like over recent times that they have, you can see fluid flow down these, these faces.  And, of course, one of the big holy grails for exploration of Mars, is any sort of fluid, water or otherwise.  And so we're still intent on trying to come up with ways to create robotic vehicles that can access those really rough parts of the terrain.  So that's a big part of the job, looking at the different capabilities for different destinations.
Story_ID: 674420
Speaker 1: Now, in 2000, you were the lead system engineer for the Field Integrated Design and Operations rover or FIDO [at the Jet Propulsion Laboratory, Pasadena, California] that you were referring to earlier?
Speaker 2: Exactly, yes.  And so that entailed, that particular rover, as I mentioned earlier, was one that we would take out at least once annually, to a desert location that had some similarity terrain-wise to potential destinations on Mars.  Now, not only would we take it out there, but in between these years, during the year, if you will, we were working on various technologies that are needed for those types of rovers.  It could be computer vision related because those rovers used stereovision so to speak, to model the three-dimensional environment around them.  And they used their onboard computers then to navigate through those three-dimensional environments.  So there's different, a number of different ways you can do those, those types of tasks and different solutions you can program, different techniques you can use and different algorithms.  So we spend, you know, the course of a year working on something that becomes ready to be tested on an actual vehicle and an actual environment.  And then we would take FIDO out to those environments and actually do what we call field trials or field tests where we test the various technologies we've been working on.  And, again, that could span into computer vision, to ways to use the robotic arm, how to navigate on slopes and so forth, just a plethora of different types of technologies.  So that was a platform that we used that for, and I was the systems engineer for that which basically meant that I had to be aware of most of the technologies across the board that ran on the vehicle and manage, if you will, the team of engineers that actually worked on the different parts.  So we had a guy who, or more, or gal who were computer vision specialists or someone who was very much involved in the robotic arm.  And it was my job as systems engineer to ensure that all of their different pieces of work would work well with the rest of the vehicle and also to make sure we were ready for field tests and so forth, deal with the logistics, work with the folks with the, who handled things out in the desert somewhere and make sure we could bring vehicles out there and such.  So it was a big job, but that was really the crux of it.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, we were talking when we came in and just as we look at this in a simplified form, I guess, ideally a rover has got to, you've got like, it's powered by solar energy, right?
Speaker 2: Most of them so far.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It doesn't have to be.  But most of them so far have been powered by solar power.
Speaker 1: So are their batteries strong enough to keep it running long enough to do a mission without any--
Speaker 2: So far, no.  The, but they, for example, the Mars Exploration Rovers [MER], Spirit and Opportunity, they have batteries onboard, but they have, they serve the purpose of, in part, keeping the vehicles warm overnight, but also keeping instruments running if we want to run them overnight when we don't have the solar power.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But they aren't sufficient to actually use during the day to drive the vehicle and do a lot of its other capabilities.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, so that's why the solar power is really the primary power for the vehicle, whereas some of them do have batteries for other purposes.
Speaker 1: Okay, and the issue of temperature is one that you raise (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Oh, indeed.
Speaker 1: --because when it gets cold on Mars, it gets really cold, right?
Speaker 2: That's right, that's right.  It can get very cold in one location at Mars, and kind of warm at the other extreme.  There's some, some educational materials that you might find that is often given to young students when they try to teach them about Mars, and, you'll see a character, for example, standing on the surface of Mars with sandals on their feet and a parka up top (laughter) to give the sense for the actual range of temperatures that one can find at a particular location.
Speaker 1: Say, if you're in the shade, you can get really cold, I suppose?
Speaker 2: Well, in, for most of the day on a given location on Mars, even in the sun, you're terribly cold.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, it's only a very, very brief portion of the day when it's what we might consider comfortable.  And so you've got, typically the systems that we send and land on the surface of Mars, some aspect of their electronics or otherwise, their electromechanical makeup can survive certain temperature ranges.  Rarely can they all survive the same temperature ranges, and so given what time of day it is, you're either treating some subsystem in the rover specially or not.  In the very early morning at Mars, when the rovers start to do their work, at least on Spirit and Opportunity, for example, we have to run some heaters that are on the motors and the wheels first to heat them up to a temperature where they like to operate.  If we try to run it without running those motors, it's too cold and the motors won't run very well.  So it's that sort of thing that happens throughout these types of systems in order to deal with the external temperature.
Story_ID: 674421
Speaker 1: Now, you did--in 2001, you worked as a flight systems engineer for the MER Surface Mission Phase team [at the Jet Propulsion Laboratory, Pasadena, California].  So, again, you're coordinating the--
Speaker 2: Well, in that case, yeah, so I had a sort of cognizance, if you will, over a certain area of the flight system development as we call it.  The flight system for these missions is a huge thing.  So you have, some people are working on the landers system, some people are working on the airbag system and so forth.  I was one of the individuals working on the rover system.  But in particular, I was the flight system engineer for the autonomous navigation capability on the vehicle.  So this is now the hardware and software behind what makes the vehicle capable of driving on its own from one location to another.  And in order to do that, it needs to use the cameras.  It needs to use a certain amount of sophisticated software that can process the camera images into 3D maps.  It needs to then use some sort of algorithm to plant a path through that 3D environment, and then it needs to use the wheels now in order to actually do that.  So everything associated with that was an area that I had some cognizance over and working with the people who were writing actual software for different pieces of it and basically helping to bring the whole system together, including how we were going to test it on earth to understand or at least convince ourselves that it was ready for the actual mission and would actually operate reliably.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So that's what that role was about.
Speaker 1: Now, you were also enhancing, it says here, fuzzy robot navigation systems by mimicking human visual perception of natural terrain and traversibility?
Speaker 2: Yes.  Now, that's a mouthful, but what--that's, in fact, one of the main projects I worked on with [HistoryMaker] Ayanna Howard.  And what we were doing there was we were, this was a peripheral to some extent to the Mars Exploration Rovers [MER] project in the sense that it was forward looking to how can we make those types of robots even better for future missions.  And the idea was associated with using the cameras on a vehicle in much the same way that we already did, as I described a little bit earlier, but in processing that camera data in order to come up with a 3D map which is a lot of processing, there's other ways you might do it.  If you, imagine a human when we drive.  And suppose we're driving through a very rocky off road terrain, and there're boulders there and so forth, we do some processing ourselves, using our vision system, but we don't do it as precisely and it certainly doesn't take as much processing as the Mars Exploration Rovers do, for example.  There are techniques that you can use to look at camera data and look at the imagery in such a way that mimics how humans do it.  You know, how do humans decide what a different, what is an obstacle and how to avoid it?  So this is the interplay between the fuzzy logic, which is the reasoning I talked about earlier, that mimics human reasoning, and using that to reason about camera images, that ultimately determine the directions that our vehicle will turn and move and drive through an obstacle field.  And so that's what that work was about.  So another way to use, sort of artificial intelligence techniques, in particular, fuzzy logic, in that respect to make these vehicles smarter and operate more efficiently.
Story_ID: 674422
Speaker 1: Now, you were involved in the, in 2003, involved with the Mars Exploration Rover, the MER.  And so I don't know if we should go over every mission, but what did you do on that, in 2003?
Speaker 2: That was, so 2003 is actually when the, those rovers were launched.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And so what that work was, prior to getting to that point, we had some sixty scientists that were effectively going to be the team of scientists that conducted this mission, the scientific aspect of it, right.  So these are the folks who were gonna operate Spirit and Opportunity.  And so we were engaged in taking prototypes like the FIDO [Field Integrated Design and Operations] rover I mentioned earlier, out to a desert and mimicking an actual mission.  So you've got some, a room of some sixty scientists at JPL [Jet Propulsion Laboratory, Pasadena, California] who only can see the environment that they're trying to explore through the sensors and cameras of a prototype robot.  And we set things up so that they would operate that robot on earth at a remote location some 180 miles away, in the same way that they would operate the actual Mars mission.  And in effect, it was a way to train those scientists who had never done this type of mission before and train them in how to use the capabilities of the vehicle to act as a remote field geologist as well as get them familiar with the limitations of using such a vehicle, so that they don't try to get it to do things that it's--are beyond its capability or somehow too dangerous for the vehicle.  And so my involvement in that was that, as the systems engineer for that whole operation of the FIDO vehicle as well as the atomics navigation systems engineer on the Mars exploration rover system development, I was pretty involved in both sides of that equation, how we tested out in the field as well as how we're gonna operate it on the mission.  And so I was basically doing a similar job in making sure we knew how to do the field tests and making sure the scientists were trained, if you will, in how they would actually operate that asset on the surface of Mars.
Speaker 1: Okay, so, as you were saying Spirit and Opportunity were launched in 2003--
Speaker 2: That's correct.
Speaker 1: --July the 8th.  They arrived in January of 2004?
Speaker 2: That's correct.
Speaker 1: Okay, and, well, there's a little--how did they, I know Spirit got stuck at some point, right?
Speaker 2: That's right, that's right.  So, so from January, they, they landed about three weeks apart in January of 2004 and on opposite sides, effectively, of Mars, so at two different locations.  Spirit is, they both continued to operate well beyond their three month mission duration, intended mission duration for years.  Spirit effectively almost about two years ago now, stopped operating, finally got to the end of her life.  Enough hardware broke down eventually, that should have broken down in as far as our earlier predictions, much earlier, finally broke down.  And after a good Martian winter, we couldn't communicate any further with Spirit, which prior to that winter, it was also stuck in some terrain that was difficult to get it out of.  And so Spirit effectively died a couple of years ago.  Opportunity is still going, and is still exploring Mars, and still uncovering data and images of interesting features on the surface of Mars that are perplexing the scientists today.  And so this is also overlapping now with the latest rover that was just landed on Mars last month, and it's about to start a different investigation.
Story_ID: 674423
Speaker 1: Now, what is the difference between, what are the main differences between Spirit and Opportunity and did those differences lead to Spirit being trapped and not going--even though they were both only supposed to serve for about three months--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --and then what is the difference between the current rover [Curiosity] and Opportunity?
Speaker 2: Right.  So Spirit and Opportunity are effectively identical in their design.  What's different in their missions is really the, the physical nature of their locations where they landed.  Spirit landed in a large crater that was believed to once have been a crater lake.  And the terrain was very rocky, very rough, sandy in certain locations and lots of slopes and hills.  Opportunity landed in a location that was almost like beach sand, as far as the eye could see, an occasional rock to avoid driving over but also a number of deep craters as well, that Opportunity drove down into, some of them, but not all the way down to the bottom.  So Opportunity has had a much lighter load, if you will, in terms of driving around in its environment than Spirit did.  Spirit's hardware was really taken to task in driving around a really rough environment, and that's part of the reason that it could more likely than not, or more likely than Opportunity end up into a stuck type of situation.
Speaker 1: Now, what size rocks could, you know, Spirit, you know, navigate over?
Speaker 2: Spirit could navigate over rocks that are as tall as one and a half, the diameter of the wheel.  So if you imagine one wheel, you go up about half more of that, that size rock is how big that vehicle can drive over.
Speaker 1: How big are wheels of Spirit?
Speaker 2: The wheels are about 25 centimeters in diameter for Spirit and Opportunity.  And so roughly a, close to 40 centimeter rock is something that they can actually drive over.  Anything else, they have to drive around.  And they have that capability by virtue of the atomics navigation software that runs on it.
Speaker 1: Okay, so these tires are about the size of a, it's wheels are about the size of an SUV wheel or something?
Speaker 2: Not quite that big.  Probably about the size of, let's see, well, maybe about the size of a basketball.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: All right, so about the size of a basketball is as tall as those wheels are on Spirit and Opportunity.  So, and that's the main differences between the two.  They're basically identical, but different, terribly different environments.
Story_ID: 674424
Speaker 1: Now, the latest rover that was recently, that landed on Mars on August 5th of 2012, is called, named Curiosity.  This is a much bigger rover.  This rover is about the size of a small car.  And its wheels are much bigger than Spirit and Opportunity's, approaching the size of an SUV wheel.  That vehicle, the main difference between it and Spirit and Opportunity is, it's much more capable, in addition to being much bigger.  It has a lot more instruments on its arm that are used for different science measurements.  And it's purpose is to detect what we would refer to as organics in the Martian environment.  So anything that might be a sign of ancient past life, whether it's microbial or more complex than that, but organic in some way, whereas Spirit and Opportunity didn't have the capability or the sensors or instruments to detect that, they could only detect signs of past water activity with their instruments.  And they pretty much, they verified what we didn't know before which is that water once flowed on the surface of Mars, probably flowed many times periodically.  What we don't know is how much.  But over the course of the area on the surface of the planet that they've traveled individually, we know to that scale, whether we see signs of it at the beginning and the end.  So there's still more investigation to do in terms of scientific discovery, but the major discovery of that mission was that there was once water that flowed on the surface of Mars.  And now, Curiosity, the latest rover, is going to tell us, based on its measurements, whether or not there are organics in the environment or signs that organics were ever there.  So once question is, was there liquid water on the surface of Mars?  The other question is, if there was, could anything or did anything actually live in it.
Story_ID: 674425
Speaker 1: Yeah, we were just talking off camera about some interesting questions that our videographer [Matthew Hickey] raised about the, the range finding capacity of the vehicle and how it's done.
Speaker 2: Right, yeah, so the rovers, to date, they've used stereo images from two cameras.  In fact, they have multiple sets of two cameras to do the same thing at different vantage points on the vehicle.  And those are their primary means of, in fact, seeing in 3D their environment.  And they use the two cameras to do what we call ranging by triangulation.  And so for every image, you take the same, you take an image at the same point in time, with two cameras.  And those cameras are separated by a known distance.  And so if you can correlate the pixels in one image to an object in the scene, to the pixels in the other image to that same object, you can then calculate how far away that object is.  And that's done for every pixel in each image that actually has, is in the overlap between the two images.  This is the same way or similar that our own stereo vision works, in the fact that we have two eyes.  I don't know the actual accuracy of this, but I've heard that young children, babies, toddlers don't really get good at their depth perception until after a certain number of months.  And so they're, in effect, their neuro network allows them to learn that.  But whatever it is that they learn is a corollary to what we do computationally using computers that operate on camera images.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So this is how the rovers see.  To do that, if you could image almost on every pixel of images that may have a thousand pixels, and you're doing a complex computation, it takes some time, and it accounts for a lot of the processing necessary to do stereo vision on those vehicles.  That also slows down the vehicle's speed.  If you can imagine driving along and every so often having to do this processing, you can't go terribly fast or it'd be unsafe.  Another thing that limits the, the speed of the vehicle at large in using stereo vision and, in fact, doesn't allow the stereo vision to be processed extremely fast, is that the vehicles use pretty slow computers compared to the ones that we actually use in our daily lives be it our laptops our desktops, even our cell phones.  The computers on the Mars exploration rovers, for example, run at twenty-five megahertz.  And most of our (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: That's why we were asking why (laughter)--?
Speaker 2: That's right, and so the question, why is it that they run such a slow processor?  And incidentally, I believe the computer on the Curiosity rover is in the hundreds of megahertz, not quite gigahertz, which is what we're used to now.  Well, part of the reason is that those computers that run on these vehicles have to be radiation hardened.  And what that means is that they have to be able to operate in the radiation environments that we find in space, you know, in other planetary surfaces.  To give an example of what could happen if they were not radiation hardened, other than at some point just not working or getting, in effect, zapped with radiation and some electronic components fusing together, radiation can cause a zero in a computer to turn to a one, and if you--as you may know, the computer programs at the very, very lowest level are zeros and ones.
Speaker 1: Yeah, so this would not cause fuzzy logic, but fuzzy behavior (laughter).
Speaker 2: In fact, most definitely.  It will change your program, and so to protect against this radiation, there are special computer chips that you can use that, in certain radiation, environments of different levels of radiation can protect your computing and your ones and zeroes, if you will, to a certain level of high reliability.  These are the types of processors and computer chips that these vehicles use, but they're not produced in mass quantity.  They're certainly not produced at speed levels approaching gigahertz.  So currently, the state of the art for producing radiation hard computers still has them in the hundreds of megahertz.  Now, the industry at large, the companies that build these chips, the Intels [Intel Corporation], the HPs [Hewlett-Packard Company] and so forth, the IBMs [International Business Machines Corporation], they don't really have a market for space radiation hardened chips.  And therefore, not too many product lines.
Story_ID: 674426
Speaker 1: Well, you've been involved with three [FIDO, Spirit and Opportunity rovers] that have gone up, right (laughter)?
Speaker 2: That's right, for example.
Speaker 1: In the course of the last ten years so that's--
Speaker 2: That's right, and indeed, you know, satellites that are in Earth orbit to some degree have these specialized processors as well, some of them.  And so you just can't find these things readily.  You can't find, for one, fast radiation hardened computers, and even the slow ones are not plentiful.  Now, on occasion what the space program does is it can and does have the technology to actually produce their own computer chips and attempt to make a faster radiation hardened chip for a particular mission.  But because they don't produce them in mass quantity, it's terribly expensive, so expensive that it can compete with the actual budget of the mission.  And so in many cases, in most cases, in fact, it makes more sense to buy what's available off the shelf from a vendor who knows how to do it and then to work your system within that.  One thing that this creates environmentally for an engineer is that it limits or puts certain constraints on your creativity.  In fact, it forces more creativity because you're trying to imbed a significant capability such as autonomous navigations and stereo vision into a really slow computer.  And so your programs have to be very efficient rather than some number of millions of lines of code, you need to have something that's some number of hundreds of thousands of code or less, you know, smaller programs that can do things more efficiently and better than you might take the time to make them do in a much better computer or a much faster computer.  So it stresses and challenges the engineers to come up with really, really creative solutions.  And this is why some of the best engineers you will find are at places like NASA [National Aeronautics and Space Administration] that have really challenged to come up with solutions under really constrained environments and really constrained equipment.
Story_ID: 674427
Speaker 1: Now, I imagine a project like this, I mean like the MER [Mars Exploration Rover] is labor intensive when it's up there, and you're trying to get feedback from it.  And I was reading that your hours correspond to the Martian day, right?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And which can change, I mean, kind of explain that concept?
Speaker 2: Yeah, so, so the, a day on Mars is about forty minutes longer than our twenty-four hour day.  And so on the Mars landed missions, at least beginning with MER for the most part, we found it necessary to work as a team of people operating the mission on earth with the vehicles on Mars during their Martian day.  So what that meant is, and effectively, the rovers, they begin their day around ten a.m. their time, right.  And so, effectively, that means that you start at ten a.m., at Mars at that location where the rover is, and then the next day, you start at 10:40 or really ten a.m. there still, but forty minutes later on earth.  And then 40 minutes later the next day on earth and forty--and you actually march around the clock on earth.  So there were times when I was going into work at 3:00 a.m., 3:40 a.m., and so on, 4:40--what was it, 4:10 a.m., and so on.  So I would march around the clock in terms of when I was going to work.  Now, the way this worked--we only did that for the first three months of the mission because it really is disruptive to your normal life, doctor's appointments, time with family.  If you can imagine, you're coming home and the family's sleep, right, and so on, all the way around the clock.  And so we only did it for three months.  When we really got into the groove of operating the rovers, and then we went back to a regular shifted day.  But the other things that it brings up in terms of interesting complications is that your work environment.  You know, so we had, in our mission control room, which had windows to the outside of the building, we had the black cover shades, so that you would be not sensitive to what time of day it is, you know.  So lunchtime is for you, you know, coming up in a half an hour, and that could have been any time during our actual clock, right?  And so there were sort psychological things that we had to do in our work environment in order to sustain working on so called Mars time.  And so that happened for both Spirit and Opportunity with both their clocks, if you will, being roughly twelve hours apart.  And as engineers and scientists, some of us worked, from time to time, on Spirit or--and Opportunity.
Speaker 1: So they were opposite sides of Mars?
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And so, so we might work a week on Spirit, and then another week on Opportunity, for example, some of us.  Many of us only worked on one vehicle throughout much of the time.  So it got more, even more interesting as you might imagine.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, now, on Mars, is it warmer in certain latitudes than it is in others or is that--
Speaker 2: Yes, so similar to earth--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous ) (unclear) on earth?
Speaker 2: Yeah, similar to earth, so where the equator is, you're gonna get more sunlight.  And up at the poles, you're gonna get a lot less.  And so the same thing on Mars.  In fact, this is also a reason why a lot of the solar powered rovers or landers are sent to locations near the equator because they get maximum sunlight.  When there was discussion about the latest rover, Curiosity, where it was going to land, its landing possibilities in terms of location is wide open because it's not dependent on sunlight.  That rover actually has a nuclear power source.  And so we could have sent it to a polar latitude without, you know, worrying much at all about power, whereas Spirit and Opportunity would be a really bad idea to send to a polar latitude.  And, so, yeah, the temperatures do vary as you might imagine between the pole and equator.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, 2006, you worked on a project that followed up on the Mars rover project.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: And you said before Curiosity, I mean Opportunity is still, you know, sending data back.
Story_ID: 674428
Speaker 1: So 2006 was your last year with JPL [Jet Propulsion Laboratory, Pasadena, California], right?
Speaker 2: Two thousand seven [2007], effectively.  I left there in, effectively, August, September of 2007.
Speaker 1: Okay, well, why would you leave JPL, I--you know?
Speaker 2: Good question, good question.  So JPL, as special as it is and as good a time as I was having there, and at the peak of my career really with this Mars Exploration Rover [MER] mission, I had something else pulling at me over the years.  And that was all of my family and all of my wife's [Jan Tunstel] family are on the East Coast of the United States.  And all those years--I was out a JPL for eighteen years, all those years, we were effectively isolated out there on the West Coast.  We'd visit on occasion and so forth, but we had young kids growing up, largely without a strong enough connection to their extended family.  And we wanted to, we had always wanted to correct that by coming back to the East Coast.  And so with that, the timing--one issue with actually just uprooting from JPL was the fact that I liked it too much.  And there were not too many places elsewhere where I could find a job doing something comparable.  And so that kept me out there even longer than, you know, even knowing that we would like to eventually get back to the East Coast.  Well, eventually, an opportunity came along with the Johns Hopkins University Applied Physics Laboratory [Laurel, Maryland] and its space department to do or continue doing effectively what I had been doing, and what I like to do.  A position opened up for a space robotics lead engineer.  And, of course, that's the area that I work in and wanted to continue working in.  And so this created an opportunity on the East Coast to potentially take advantage of the fact that we wanted to get the kids back to extended family in the first place.  But in addition, relative to the time at JPL, I felt like the Mars Exploration Rover mission might actually be sort of the peak of what I could do at JPL.  You know, I felt like this was so great of an achievement as a project, as a nation and so forth, what's next for me at JPL?  Could it be even greater than this or not?  And I bet on the notion that it might not be better because that was so great.  And so I felt like, similar to, I likened it to the Super Bowl, if you will, for a football player.  You work so hard to get to it, and for some of them, they get to it near the end of their career, and it's a great way to go out so to speak.
Speaker 1: Sort of like [HistoryMaker] Doug Williams in '87 [1987] (laughter).
Speaker 2: That's right, that's right.  And so I kind of had that partial view of it too.  You know, the Mars Exploration Rovers mission was the Super Bowl, and we won, you know.  And this was a good time and (unclear) to this new opportunity, to continue doing what I liked to do and also satisfy a, sort of a familial objective that I had.
Speaker 1: And I've heard other people, other engineers and scientists say that, you know, intense research is a young man's activity.
Speaker 2: Yes, I would, I would agree with that, yeah, especially if over the years of intense research, you have not really enjoyed great reward on a major, you know, advancement or project or discovery.  You're just still in the trenches trying to make it happen, you know.  And so that could really become, wear someone out, I think, at later ages.
Speaker 1: Yeah, it was the intensity of it and the--
Speaker 2: Absolutely.
Speaker 1: --physical demands of it, stand up long--
Speaker 2: Oh, indeed, indeed.
Speaker 1: --periods of time and--
Speaker 2: That's right.
Story_ID: 674429
Speaker 1: So anyway, so in 2007, you came here to work at Johns Hopkins, and it's basically in Baltimore [Maryland], right?
Speaker 2: Well, the Johns Hopkins University proper where the, you know, academic branch of the institution is in Baltimore.  The Johns Hopkins University Applied Physics Laboratory is a separate facility that's in Laurel, Maryland, yeah.  And while it does have ties to the academic portion in the sense that a lot of the engineers and scientists there also teach classes as professors on occasion, it is a national laboratory that does a lot of, solves a lot of problems for the government agencies, including NASA [National Aeronautics and Space Administration].
Speaker 1: Okay, so you're right here in Laurel with Johns Hopkins APL.  Okay.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And, what--describe your work here and some of the, some of your associates and the projects you're working on.
Speaker 2: Yes, so here, we have a space department within Johns Hopkins University Applied Physics Laboratory that also does work similar to what JPL [Jet Propulsion Laboratory, Pasadena, California] does in that it conceives, develops spacecraft for and operates spacecraft for NASA missions, many of which are in deep space.  And so the space department at APL currently has a spacecraft orbiting planet Mercury, a spacecraft on its way to planet Pluto and so forth, a plethora of other missions.  So it's kind of a mini-JPL in the sense that you've got about a department of maybe seven hundred or so people versus a whole laboratory of about five thousand people at JPL.  On the other hand, the Applied Physic Laboratory in total is about fourteen people, about seven hundred which focus on space and the rest focus on other areas of national defense and security and such.  So what I do within the space department, I was serving as the space robotics lead at a time when we were interested in going from the missions that we currently do which are deep space probes or spacecraft that fly by planets and take data or they go into orbit around planets and study them up close.  From that to systems like those at JPL that land on, on surfaces and actually do missions on the actual surface.  There's a particular interest among the APL scientists, for example, in asteroids as well.  And so there was some intent to actually land spacecraft of various varieties onto asteroids to study them up close.  So this is an area that I was brought in to effectively build up the engineering capability to be able to actually do, which was, of course, a nice continuation from the type of work I was doing at JPL.  In addition, because APL is broader in its sponsor base, if you will, the fact that it addresses problems of the military [U.S. Army], homeland defense and so forth, U.S. treasury [U.S. Department of the Treasury], there's a wide scope of problems that an engineer or a scientist could work on.  And so I also do robotics work in other areas for NASA security, such as robots that keep soldiers, if you will, from having to go into harm's way when they're trying to investigate whether or not there's a bomb that may explode.  Robots are being used more and more for that sort of thing and they have a certain level of technology that needs to be developed to make them do it better.  And so I have an opportunity to work in that area as well.  And so relative to my work at JPL, I believe the biggest difference is that I have a broader scope now to apply the things that I know how to do and can learn how to do, to robot technology.
Story_ID: 674430
Speaker 1: Tell us about the Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers?
Speaker 2: That's a very large international professional society for electrical engineers, electronics engineers and folks who do similar work.  It's large in the sense that it's currently somewhere upwards of close to four hundred thousand members across the world.  So it's one of the largest technical organizations in engineering certainly and probably in some of the sciences.  So it's an organization that an engineering student can join from the time they're a student all the way through their career.  It's helpful to your career in certain networking senses as well as anything from discounts to go to professional conferences and what have you.  But for myself, it's a way to stay connected, not only to my field and the experts within the field around the world, but also a way to expand a network, understand how other people are solving problems as well as professional development.  I was recently awarded a, the highest grade of membership within IEEE, which is the IEEE Fellow.  And that's a particularly prestigious honor.  It's rare in that less than one-tenth of one percent of the membership of this huge organization get elevated to that level.  And in order to do so, you're basically, it's acknowledged that you've made some significant contributions to the field and not only that, contributions to the field that have in some significant way impacted society.  And so in my case, it's related to the work that I was able to do over the years that impacted the space program [at the National Aeronautics and Space Administration] and our understanding of the solar system.
Speaker 1: Okay, and I just wanted to point out here that in 2011, you served as--and you may still be serving, as general chair of the IEEE International Conference on Systems, Man and Cybernetics, or you did serve that in 2011 (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: I did, in fact, yeah.  So that's a, so, yeah, I mentioned the IEEE as a large organization.  It, electrical engineering and electronics engineering is so very broad that there are within the IEEE a number of societies, as we call them.  So if your topic area of focus is topic X, there may be an IEEE society or it's an IEEE X society for that, of engineers around the world that focus on that.  I'm a member of a couple of the societies, but I'm mostly active in the IEEE Systems Man and Cybernetics Society.  This is a society of individuals that focus on systems engineering, human machine systems, so systems in which humans are a major integral part as well as a field called cybernetics which is sometimes misunderstood, but basically involves communications and control and maybe even some aspects of biological systems, whether you're trying to emulate biological systems or, in fact, interface computers and control systems to biological systems.  And so the android or the cyborg is kind of an iconic image of a product of cybernetics.  But the field is much broader than that.  Artificial intelligence, for example, as it pertains to robots, falls in the realm of cybernetics.  So this is the society that I contribute to the most.  And I was the chair of its annual conference in 2011 held in Anchorage, Alaska.  We have a conference that goes around the world annually.  Next year it's, in fact, this year it's in Seoul, Korea [South Korea], for example, year after that in the UK [United Kingdom] in Manchester.  So I had the opportunity to put my own stamp on the conference in 2011 when it was held in Anchorage, Alaska.  Basically, being the general chair means that you're responsible for and you chart the direction for how the conference will be organized and the folks, the huge committees of people around the world that will help you actually pull it off.  And so it was a big, sort of project management opportunity, on behalf of the society, it's main flagship conference, if you will, that it sponsors every year.
Story_ID: 674431
Speaker 1: What are, from that conference in Anchorage [Alaska], what are some of the highlights of development in terms of cybernetics and robotics now and where does the United States stand in relationship to the rest of the world?  I know we often see in news programs, the Japanese versions of computers that seem to be more humanoid than anything here (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: But does that really say that they're ahead of us or what?
Speaker 2: I wouldn't say it means they're ahead of us.  They certainly, as a--I would say their government certainly invests more currently.  But they also have another driving force that we don't currently have or that we don't currently put energies into as much here in the United States, and that is, the need to take care of, if you will, a growing part of their elderly population in Japan.  So, they have an increasing population of elderly that need to be cared for.  And one of their approaches is to use robotics technology.  This is probably why many of their robots are built in humanoid form, and not just two arms, two legs and a head, but even the actual human appearance in some cases.  They've put a lot of research and development over a good couple of decades already by now into developing these technologies and they've gotten very good at it.  The United States has not done similarly.  We don't have the same driving force, and we don't always--we also don't invest as much capital into actually developing robots and robot systems.  That's changing, however, in recent years.  The best way to kind of give you a sense for what we saw at the conference in 2011 was we had a set of keynote speakers from around the world.  And these are experts doing very active work in their areas, and if we even just think about what they came to the conference to talk about, that gives you a sense for, answers to your question.  We had one professor from Korea, who came and talked about a project related to eldercare, in fact, using a robot that they call HelpMate [HelpMate Robotics, Inc.].  And this is a, not exactly humanoid looking robot, but it's a robot that would operate in the home and that could interact with humans and help elders in the things that, their daily activities around the home.  On the other hand, we had from America, we had an engineer from NASA [National Aeronautics and Space Administration] who came and talked about their robot, Robonaut.  Robonaut is a half humanoid robot, that is, it doesn't have legs yet.  But it's, from the waist up, it's got two arms, a torso and a head, in more or less, humanoid form.  This robot is currently on the International Space Station in space.  And it's operating inside the space station as an assistant to astronauts.  Eventually, it will operate on the outside of the space station and be able to do some of the so called space walks and spacewalk activities that astronauts currently do now.  This will be a way to reduce the risk of having astronauts to go out and do some of those activities by having a system or robot that can actually use the same tools that the astronauts use because it's got five fingered hands and such to do these things instead.  And so we heard about the current state of the art with that particular robot from America.  Interestingly enough, that robot was also developed with GM, General Motors [General Motors Company], because General Motors is looking to use similar technology, humanoid formed robot for robots that work in their factories alongside humans in the future.  And so America is as advanced in terms of the actual technology associated with these types of robots.  But we have a different motivation for attempting to work on them.
Story_ID: 31889
Speaker 1: Yes, sir, and, okay, so we were talking about some, do you, are you, yourself, currently working on any personal robotic device for your household?
Speaker 2: Well, to the extent that I can actually find the time to, I would say, yes. When you ask me if, don't ask me about progress, however (laughter), because progress is extremely slow. At home, I tinker with various pieces of, of robot systems. I have a bunch of pieces. I have some cameras. I have some motors. I have some mobile platforms that could be used as a body, if you will, for a robot, and I have these aspirations to build up a lot of this hardware into robots that I could use around the house to do various things, mostly for entertainment purposes, but also because I, I really enjoy robotics as a hobby. Between doing robotics as a job and doing it as a hobby, I tend to find less time for the hobby. And so the progress of these projects doesn't go as fast as I would like. But I'd like to basically end up having a robot that I can reconfigure after I'm tired of it doing one particular type of thing and remake to do something else. And this might even extend to the outdoors, to robots that do the lawn, for example. Those currently exist. You can buy them today, but there might be something that I might want to do specially outdoors with the robot. And I feel like I have the capability to do it. I just gotta find the time.
Speaker 1: Okay, and today people can buy a, basically, a robotic vacuum cleaner today--
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: --they can, you know--
Speaker 2: Exactly.
Speaker 1: --vacuum their home, you know.
Speaker 2: Yeah (simultaneous).
Story_ID: 31890
Speaker 1: What's the, what future practical uses do you see for robots that we're not envisioning today?
Speaker 2: Well, let's see, that we're not envisioning.
Speaker 1: Or we don't have today?
Speaker 2: Right, okay, okay. Well, there're certain services that we currently have, and, you know, people envision robots capable of taking over some of these services, although this may not be the greatest idea. One of them is things like bartending, right? Now, there's already been recently, I think out of a university project, with college students, they've created a robot bartender, not the body of one, but something that can mechanically take the right mixtures of different types of alcohol and mix drinks. So you can imagine going from that to something that can actually deliver that to a human who asks for it. Some people may not want something like that because of the personal and interpersonal interaction with the bartender that many of us enjoy. But I foresee many areas and services, in particular, where robots would eventually contribute. I hesitate to use the words take over because almost behind every robot you ever see, there's typically a human nearby, and often that human is necessary for the robot to continue to work properly or even to know what it should do. The robots on Mars, for example, can do nothing unless we tell them to everyday and so forth. But other areas, we're already seeing this now actually, robots to do precision surgery, surgeries in the cases where the oscillation or vibration of a surgeon's hand can be somewhat critical. The steady hand and the accurate hand of the robot mechanism is sometimes looked at as an advantage in those cases. But not solely--that's already happening, robotic surgery. But robots can also be used over distance so that the capabilities of a master surgeon in some country for example can be used to outdo some master operation on someone in a very remote part of the planet by actually having this--taking that system there, the surgeon doesn't have to go, but through that teleoperation mechanism, they can actually do the surgery remotely using a robot on the other end. And some of that's already started as well. What I see in the future is the ability to increase the distances between which that can actually occur. And that's, I think, is very promising, particularly for regions where, that don't have access to major medical care like that. So that's another area. Another aspect is, we're already becoming pretty fully networked as a society with our own computers, our cellular devices, the internet and so on. We have different applications like Facebook and what have you that are connecting people more and more and more. I think where we're going and what's gonna happen in addition to that is that robots are gonna become part of this network too. It's an interesting thing that one company has done--a robotics company, they've figure out a way to automate a warehouse that delivers goods to a front desk that fills orders. This company has recently been bought by Amazon [Amazon.com, Inc.], for example, so that they can use that system to fill their orders. This is a system where the network, the robots are networked, effectively. And an order comes in and needs to be fulfilled, it's somehow input to the system, and behind this curtain, if you will, is an army of robots that carry the products on them in bins. And they move around the warehouse to the point where the robots that have the products that are ordered come near the front, open up the curtain, human picks up the object, puts it in the package, and it's off to the shipment. So the ability to network robots, I think we're gonna find other ways to use that capability whether it's a robot in your home that supplements your security system by being able to walk around, and when there's something that occurs that's not savory or maybe a water leak or something like that, something you need to be alerted to, it's instantly networked to you somewhere. You could be in France. And so I see robots becoming part of a larger network that we're already cultivating. You might imagine that there's some undesirable associated with fully networking everything. You start to get into the science fiction of the robot takeover sorts of (laughter) concepts in movies and such. So there's something to watch out for, at least, but I think we're headed, at least more in that direction than we are today.
Story_ID: 31891
Speaker 1: In terms of artificial intelligence, how close are we to really having a robot that can learn something substantial on its own and adapt, you know, to it?
Speaker 2: Right, I think we're still quite a ways away. It's, it's a difficult problem. There have been some constraining problems within which some success has been made, a number of successes, in fact. And there's a learning, you know, computer programs that learn are pretty pervasive now and some of them are running on the Internet, some of 'em on our devices, in fact. But their learning capacity is limited when you compare to what you might imagine wanting a robot to learn and to be able to learn a new skill or what have you. So it's hard to predict when we'd ever get there, if we'd ever get there, in fact. I would imagine that we might get close to that and then have to make a decision as to whether we wanna go any further because, again, it could become unwieldy. But current day's technology, we're quite a ways away. We can get robots to learn relatively simple things or relative--things that are limited in scope. But things that we can call broad intelligence, it will be awhile.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, so those science fiction stories of Isaac Asimov are not gonna take place yet (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: Indeed. That's right.
Story_ID: 31892
Speaker 1: So, sir, when you look back on everything you've done to this point, is there any major thing that you would do differently?
Speaker 2: Yeah, so it's hard to say that I'd do anything differently because you might imagine that that would mean that certain accomplishments, certain experiences may not have occurred. But I think if I had, I think this is probably a general thing that a lot of us experience, maybe, and that is that in retrospect, sometimes we wish we had done something different in the past based on information we were given. For example, when elders give you a piece of advice or something that you don't heed, and you realize later that had you probably--had you heeded that particular piece of advice, something might have been different. On occasion, I think about that sort of thing and just wonder if that might have made me make a different turn at some different point. Maybe I could have achieved something earlier than I finally did achieve it. But I can't pinpoint anything in particular that I would like to change drastically. Things have been, I think I've had a good ride so far, and it's put me at a good place to continue doing interesting things in the future. And so no major regrets.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: There's probably things that I haven't done that perhaps I would wanna do in the future.
Story_ID: 31893
Speaker 1: What are some of your hopes and concerns for the African American community today?
Speaker 2: Well, my hope is that, I try to, when I think about the African American community, it has different flavors. It's sort of a local flavor or the types of folks I grew up around, and then I acknowledge that there's an African American community that I don't really know very well, that grew up very different from me throughout the country. And, you know, they may have different sorts of aspirations or whatever, but I, so I try to think of it as a whole. And I try to think about what I imagine were what is sometimes referred to as "glory days" for our ancestors in Africa, for example, when folks were kings and so forth and things were good, and you had the, for example, the, a population or society as advanced as the ancient Egyptians and so on. And I think about, okay, what were some of the characteristics that enabled great things among ancestors of African Americans? And how can we recover those things? I tend to lean more towards hoping that we recover excellence and greatness in various areas. And so my hopes, sort of going forward, are kind of general in that respect, you know, that we, as a community, prosper and that we excel and that we have an impact, you know, on society at large outside of the African American community, but also impacting that community, you know. Something that puts us in a position where we don't really necessarily find any need at all to refer to ourselves as African Americans. We're just contributors on the planet, like everybody else, you know. And I think there's a level of, of things that we would admire from the past that we don't have today amongst our community, and I would like to see us get that back. And then, however you would look at it, it speaks to excellence. It speaks to, you know, prosperity, those sorts of general terms, you know. So I'd like to see us move more towards those types of things.
Story_ID: 31894
Speaker 1: I think we were discussing before we started the interview the, we were discussing the Japanese use of robots as a, to solve a problem with an increasingly aging population to serve them. And, you know, I was wondering out loud, you know, what, if robots are the future of service, then what future do service jobs have amongst the unskilled and un--you know, untrained, I mean those who can't be engineers and can't do some of the things that educated folks are doing?
Speaker 2: That's right, that's right. That's a key question, and that's, you know, part of the whole sort of socio-economics, socio-technical things that we have to think about. There are analogies that we might extrapolate from such as, what happened to the folks who did, who used to be on the assembly line before the robots came, right? They're somewhere or they're nowhere, right, so but looking at what happened to them, you know, might give us a clue because there is, certainly is some displacement. Some people argue on one side of the coin that individuals who are displaced by automation must, if you will, learn new skills in order to become the folks who help to maintain that automation or do something else. But everybody can't do that. You know, everybody can't actually, suddenly stop and learn a new skill in order to fit in with a new society. And so, surely, they must, there must be some folks who fall by the wayside. And that's an issue. So I don't have the answers, you know, but, again, you know, when I talk about what I see happening in the future, that's why I always try to, you know, to give it some measure of caution in terms of there might be decision points where we decide, okay, do we want to go further down this path because of socio, you know, economic and socio-technical hard questions. So, yeah, that's, so you bring a really strong point up there.
Story_ID: 31895
Speaker 1: As before, when I, as we look through your career, through today, you're still a fairly young man, what today would you consider to be your legacy?
Speaker 2: So I have what I might consider a personal legacy and more of a vocational legacy, if I could call them legacies at this point. But one is I don't think I ever had an actual enemy, someone who didn't like me. I, I valued the perceived, the perception of being likeable. As a legacy, a sort of personal legacy, I'd like to remain the case, to have been known as someone who was likeable and also was very interested in helping other people. And it really doesn't get more complicated than that. On a vocational side, I would say that to date, if I could, had any--did anything that could be called a legacy, it would probably be a body of work that enabled technological advancement of a certain type. And that would be in the area of sort of the human extension through robots to be able to explore space; certainly, didn't do that alone. So it would be a shared legacy, but I do have concrete and direct personal contributions to it, and at this point, I would say that that would be sort of the vocational legacy. But I hope to do more and greater things going forward, and, you know, have something--for example, I've always, some people over the years have asked if I wanted to teach as a professor. And my answer for a long time had been, I'm not sure. Before that I'd like to do something that gets my name into textbooks that learn from, right? Now, you know, the Tunstel law or something, right? The Tunstel theorem or something. And then I'll feel like I've done a sufficient amount in that realm of individual contribution to come back and then share as a professor. The other thing I would say is that, I would tell people is that, oh, maybe one of these days when there's a lot more gray in my hair, right? Well, that's already occurring (laughter), and so, you know, I have thought recently, you know, in recent years about perhaps going to teach. I've told that I would be a good teacher and so forth, and so that thought is around. So maybe that's part of what I might do in the future or somehow form more of a legacy around me. We'll see.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 31896
Speaker 1: Now, you have a family. Tell us about your family. You were married at a certain point, and we went past that, but tell us how you met your wife and tell us about your children?
Speaker 2: Okay, so I met my wife, Jan [Jan Tunstel], in, while I was in California. And, let's see. I was working at JPL [Jet Propulsion Laboratory, Pasadena, California]. I actually met her at, at a nightclub, one of the worst places to meet, you know (laughter) what might be your potential spouse (laughter). But nonetheless, we met at a nightclub. She's from Greensboro, North Carolina, happened to be living in California at the time. And we basically just hit it off and began dating and so forth. Shortly after was around the time when I was thinking of going back for my Ph.D. and into the fellowship program [JPL Minority Fellowship Program] that took me to Albuquerque [New Mexico] to the University of New Mexico. And we were still together at that time, and thinking about getting married, and, but that was sort of a milestone in our sort of relationship at that point. Would I leave to go to Albuquerque and would she stay in California or come along for the ride. And we were close that, close enough to go along for the ride, and we basically got married very shortly after, in fact, in Albuquerque. So that's, that's that, began to have kids. My first couple of children were born in Albuquerque, actually, while I was doing the Ph.D. When I go back to JPL on occasion and we talk about my progress on the fellowship, they say, "What's with these babies (laughter)? You're supposed to be doing a Ph.D." (laughter), but I'd say, well, you know, life goes on as well. But, yeah, and let's see, so I have--actually, when we got married, my wife had a daughter. So I have a stepdaughter, my oldest daughter, Ashlan [Ashlan Foster]. And so I have three kids, the three of them, Ashlan, a daughter, Janaye [Janaye Tunstel], and my youngest child is my son, Evan [Evan Tunstel]. Ashlan's now about to graduate from college, a psychology degree, and Janaye is just starting college this semester studying forensic psychology, and my son is still in high school, a couple more years to go. And we're starting to have discussions about computer science. So he may follow in my footsteps. It's interesting, years ago when I was at JPL and they would go to JPL often on the open house days and everything. So they knew quite a bit about it. But at that time, if you asked him what he wanted to do when he grew up, he would say that he wanted to work at JPL on robots (laughter). So, we'll see, we'll see. We might have another Tunstel coming up through the ranks here.
Speaker 1: Okay. All right.
Story_ID: 31897
Speaker 1: Sir, how would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: I'd like to be remembered as someone who helped as many people as he could and helped them help other people. That's how I'd like to be remembered. Anything that I do, whether it's as an engineer or just a person in the community, I'm typically engaged in sharing what I know and trying to help other people achieve what they're trying to achieve. And so, you know, if I, if no one remembers the Mars stuff or anything, I'd like for them to remember that about me.
Speaker 1: Okay, well, thank you.
Story_ID: 31898
Speaker 1: Go ahead and tell us about this picture.
Speaker 2: Okay, this is myself on the left with my father, (clears throat) excuse me, Edward Tunstel, Sr., and this was at Reagan National Airport [Washington National Airport; Ronald Reagan Washington National Airport, Arlington, Virginia] as I recall, after my first college degree, my bachelors of science in mechanical engineering. And we're just giving the father and son handshake there.
Speaker 1: And that would be in--
Speaker 2: That would be 1986.
Speaker 1: All right, this one is a picture from when I graduated with my master's degree in 1989. That's taken on the campus of Howard University [Washington, D.C.], and then in photo are my sister, starting from left, Audrey Jones [Audrey Tunstel Jones], myself, my sister, Edwina Giddens [Edwina Tunstel Giddens], and my sister, Tina Norton [Tina Tunstel Norton].
Speaker 2: All right, this photo is also from that day in 1986 at Reagan National Airport. And this is my mother, Agnes Louvenia Tunstel [Agnes Solomon Tunstel] and myself.
Speaker 1: Ah, so this is just a photo of myself, a school photo from fifth grade, and I guess that must have been--what year was that?
Speaker 2: You're ten [years old]?
Speaker 1: Ten, so about 1973, yeah.
Speaker 2: Okay, who's the other guy?
Speaker 1: (Laughter) And all these four guys, it's me again in seventh grade, also a school photo, St. Catherine of Siena School [Queens, New York] in 1975, 1975.
Speaker 2: Basketball hall of fame.
Speaker 1: Oh, yeah, right. Yeah, so this is just a collection of some of the trophies I had been awarded at that point for basketball. So I had a brief, little boyhood career as a basketball player.
Speaker 2: Alright, this is the 1989, graduation, my master's degree. That's my mother, Agnes Louvenia Tunstel, myself and my father Edward Tunstel, Sr. Others in the photo, I'm not sure who they are.
Speaker 1: Ah, this photo is from a rare opportunity that I got to attend the National, the NAACP Image Awards, actually. And this was in 2004 in Studio City, California [Los Angeles, California], and I'm standing there, on the left is astronaut [HistoryMaker] Leland Melvin, actually. And with my back turned, I'm standing next to him, and we're talking to reporters. On the far left is a JPL [Jet Propulsion Laboratory, Pasadena, California] media specialist, Natalie Godwin.
Speaker 2: Ah, this is a photo of myself in the laboratory at the University of New Mexico [Albuquerque, New Mexico] working with a couple of the robots on which I was developing navigation algorithms. On the left is the short, dark robot, that's LOBOT, and then myself in the center, and a commercial robot called a Cybermotion K2A robot.
Speaker 1: This is a family, a picture of a subset of my family here. Let's see, starting from the left in front is my sister, Sheila Holmes [Sheila Tunstel Holmes], going to the back is myself, standing there next to my sister, Audrey Jones, my sister, Edwina Giddens, my father Edward Tunstel, Sr., and on the far right, my sister, Tina Norton, and in the center, seated is my mother, Agnes Louvenia Tunstel. Incidentally, in the photo on the wall up top is my oldest sister, Barbara Green [Barbara Tunstel Green]. The year for that, I wanna say that must have been around 1988 or so.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: This is a picture from the 1989 graduation, again, my master's degree on the campus of Howard University, my father, Edward Tunstel, myself and my mother, Agnes Louvenia Tunstel.
Speaker 2: This is a photo while I was doing my doctorate at University of New Mexico where we did a lot of outreach with students. I'm standing up in front of this classroom. In back of the LOBOT robot there. Next to me, towards, going towards the right is Tanya Lippincott and Harrison Danny next to the other robot near the door. And these are students from the local public schools in New Mexico in the foreground.
Speaker 1: Ah, this is a picture with my first born child, Janaye Elise Tunstel. Incidentally, she was born on my birthday, so it's her birthday as well. So I still her my best birthday present. So that's Janaye and myself.
Speaker 2: She's born with an amazing head of hair.
Speaker 1: Yeah (laughter).
Speaker 2: This is a picture in 1999 of my son, Evan [Evan Tunstel], my dad, Edward Tunstel, Sr. and my daughter, Janaye Tunstel. This was at a big event held for my mother's birthday.
Speaker 1: This is me right before I received my doctorate degree at the University of New Mexico. I forget the professor's name who's handing that to me, but that's me in the foreground there--the background rather.
Speaker 2: Okay, so this is 1993, and myself and in the middle, the younger person is Ashlan [Ashlan Foster], my stepdaughter, and my wife is there, as well. It's on the day we, we got married.
Speaker 1: Did we get your wife's name?
Speaker 2: My wife's name is Jan Tunstel.
Speaker 1: Okay, that's it.
Speaker 2: All right.
Speaker 1: Thank you.
Speaker 2: Oh, you're welcome. My pleasure.
