Story_ID: 499124
Speaker 1: I'm Denise Gines, the interviewer for The HistoryMakers.  Scott Stearns is the videographer.  Would you state your name, and spell it for me please?
Speaker 2: My name is Frank Jefferson Toland, Sr. [HistoryMaker Frank Toland, Sr.], T-O-L-A-N-D.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what is your date of birth?
Speaker 2: I was born on June the 1st, 1920, in the town of Helena, the County of Newberry, the State of South Carolina.
Speaker 1: And what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: I am a teacher of history at Tuskegee University [Tuskegee, Alabama].
Speaker 1: And the location of this interview?
Speaker 2: This interview is in the Bioethics Center [National Center for Bioethics in Research and Health Care, Tuskegee, Alabama] building on the campus of Tuskegee University.
Speaker 1: All right; and today's date.
Speaker 2: Today's date is March the 20th, 2007.
Story_ID: 499125
Speaker 1: I'm gonna ask you what I call People magazine-ish type questions.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: What is your favorite color?
Speaker 2: Well, I like both brown and gray.
Speaker 1: All right.  And do you have a favorite food?
Speaker 2: Sweet potatoes any way you can prepare them.
Speaker 1: And what about your favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: I like spring, when the flowers burst into bloom and when I get over the winter doldrums (laughter).
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Okay.  When you go on vacation, what is your--the destination that you love the most?
Speaker 2: I love mountains, but I also like the seaside; but in general, vacations which I took as a young college teacher, I spent in towns where there were museums where I could study or observe, like the museum on the campus of Yale University [New Haven, Connecticut], University of Pennsylvania [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], University of Minnesota [University of Minnesota Twin Cities, Minneapolis, Minnesota] and, of course, all over Washington, D.C.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And the archives in Montgomery [Alabama Department of Archives and History, Montgomery, Alabama].
Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: In my involvement in the movement, I've been called an outside agitator, and my favorite expression to respond to it is that washing machines have agitators in order to shake out the dirt, and I'm a positive agitator in society in order to change the ills of society.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: But just a simple statement is, I believe in life that the best opposition is a proposition.
Story_ID: 499126
Speaker 1: Let's talk about your father.  Tell me your father's name.
Speaker 2: My father's name was Fred Toland, and he was born in Prosperity, South Carolina, and that's Newberry County.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you know what year he was born?
Speaker 2: No, I don't.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, before we talk more about your father, what information do you know about his parents?
Speaker 2: I, I know that his grandparents, or his great-grandparents; I think his grandparents were owned by a slave owner in the Prosperity area of Newberry County, whose last name was Toland.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  And that's all you know about your grandparents?
Speaker 2: That's all I know about on my father's side.
Speaker 1: On your father's side, okay.  Well, tell me about your father.
Speaker 2: My father was a jack of all trades, and he had a tremendous yearning, even with his limited education, to get rich, so he chased a few rainbows in his life, and finally ended up after Stanton, Florida in Tampa [Florida] in the tobacco industry.  Earlier, he had worked in the tobacco industry in North Carolina, and had developed a respiratory condition because he was in the curing division of the tobacco there in North Carolina.  He worked in cigar making in Tampa, and then eventually he left South Carolina and took up residence in, in New York.
Speaker 1: Okay, and you said limited education; how much education did your father have?
Speaker 2: My father had less than a high school education.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Did he ever own land in South Carolina?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, he went to New York when?
Speaker 2: Sometime in the mid-1930s, I believe.
Story_ID: 499127
Speaker 1: Let's talk about your mother.
Speaker 2: My, my moth- (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Tell me her name.
Speaker 2: My, my mother's name was Lily Mae Sligh [Lily Sligh Toland] before she married Toland [Fred Toland].
Speaker 1: Lily Mae--what's the last name?
Speaker 2: Lily Mae Sligh, S-L-I-G-H, Sligh.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And her mother's name was Annie King Sligh [Anna Sligh].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Her father's name was Levi Sligh.
Speaker 1: Now, what can you tell me about your grandparents?
Speaker 2: My grandfather was born a slave, around 1850; married, as soon as slavery ended, to his first wife who bore him five children.  And then, after the death of his first wife, he courted my grandmother who was about twenty years his junior, and to that union sixteen children were conceived.  So my grandfather fathered twenty-one children.  It was kind of a joke against him that, that the elders--that I heard from some of the elders later, who said my grandfather tried to run away.  Some rumors said slaves had been set free, and he tried to run away before there was any--a Union Army anywhere nearby, and that he was caught in the swampy area on the plantation and threatened with castration if he should ever try it again.  And so someone--the, the joke on him was that he was afraid that somebody might come along and castrate him, so he fathered as many children as he could.
Speaker 1: (Laugher) Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: My grandfather became a land owner; he--in, in the family, it is said that he had purchased some five hundred to six hundred acres of land, and he suffered a paralytic stroke.  My grandfather could not read or write; my grandmother taught him how to read and write, and he did not let her in on the business end of the farm, so that after he suffered the paralytic stroke, he was in part bedridden or he was crippled on his right side, and he could not articulate and he could not write, so that a white neighbor came forward to say that he would look out for his interest, and he looked out for them, but he looked out for them in his own behalf.  And so the land that my grandmother thought she was going to possess ended up in the hands of whites, and we--and, and she ended up with about an acre of land and the homestead--and the house.
Story_ID: 499128
Speaker 1: My [maternal] grandmother [Anna Sligh]--they said of her that she practiced medicine without a lic- without a license.  She had learned some herbal medicines, I suppose, from the slavery--from the African part of her lineage; she was part white, part black, and part Native American.
Speaker 2: Do you know who her parents were?
Speaker 1: No, no, I don't.  I know that the owner of her parents had fathered her, and in fact fathered three other children by her mother.  And of the four children, I knew just my grandmother, but my middle name is the name of her brother, Jefferson, who went white--moved from South Carolina to Ohio and became a member of the white group--white race.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And the older my grandmother got, the more she looked like the Indian [Native American] part of her ancestry.
Speaker 2: And do you know who was Indian in her family?
Speaker 1: No, I don't know, except that she was mixed with Cherokee.
Speaker 2: Cherokee?
Speaker 1: Yeah, that, that was what we arrived at.
Speaker 2: Okay, all right.  And you said she taught your grandfather [Levi Sligh] to read and write.
Speaker 1: Yes, she did.
Speaker 2: How much education did she have?
Speaker 1: My grandmother had less than a high school education, but she, she, she learned well what she was taught; she was taught missionary type education so that she taught her children until they were able to go to college.  I think all of her children had what we now call a head start (laughter), see?  And of course she was a devout student of the Bible and she taught us all Bible, including her grandchildren.  And growing in the--and growing up across a fence from her house, she had us all--all of the grandchildren of her children had to spend some time with her in bible study, and she wanted to get a preacher out of her sons and she didn't succeed, and then she went after the grandsons and focused on me because on Sunday, when you couldn't do various things because you considered them sinful, we would go down to the barn--the grandchildren would go down to the barn, and I would be the preacher as we, as we played church.  And of course I disappointed her; I didn't become a preacher (laughter).
Speaker 2: What were some of the other things that you did at your grandmother's house?
Speaker 1: I was--my mother [Lily Sligh Toland]--both my mother and father [Fred Toland] worked, and if my mother had any kind of night duty--like she, she, she would cater the affairs--the affairs that white people had, and if she had anything--any kind of activity that would keep her away until late, we would spend that time in my grandmother's house.  She'd never take--after we--once we'd been put to bed at my grandmother's, she would never take us away.
Story_ID: 499129
Speaker 1: And it was one night, when I was between the age of three and four, that the Klan [Ku Klux Klan, KKK] came to our house looking for a young black male to teach a lesson.  The black male was a work mate of my uncle at a sawmill less than a mile from our house, and he had mumbled--the white man had cursed him and threatened him on the job, and he mumbled to himself after he--the black man mumbled to himself, and the white man (unclear) got his group together and was gonna teach him a lesson; you don't talk back to a white man.  And they may have been able to teach him a lesson but they came to the wrong house.  The, the road that ran in front of my [maternal] grandmother's [Anna Sligh] house had been abandoned because only black people lived on that road then, and they had switched the road over about a quarter of a mile to run it into the white area, and they came the original road, and therefore came to the wrong house.  If they had used the new road, they would have found the house where the young man lived, but my grandmother signaled, and one of her sons notified them that they were after him and he slipped away--he got away.  But during the conversation, my grandmother recognized the voice of one of the Klansmen; he was a young clerk in the general store where my grandparents bought their supplies for the farm, and she pulled his hood off and chastised him, and then she mounted a boycott against the general store by blacks who bought from them and forced the man to fire the young man.
Speaker 2: Really?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Story_ID: 499130
Speaker 1: Your [maternal] grandmother [Anna Sligh] wasn't afraid, huh (laughter) (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) My grandmother, my grandmother was a, a real matriarch; she had white brothers and she was the only girl--a out-of-wedlock girl, but her white brothers came, came often to visit and to bring things, and when I was in the first grade, at a two teacher school across the woods from my grandmother's house--a little rural school, I had a playmate whose last name was Davis [ph.]; I won't give his first name--the last name was Davis.  And so he said to me one day at school, "Frank [HistoryMaker Frank Toland, Sr.], why all them crackers hanging around your house?  We hate crackers; I mean black people hate crackers."  And so I asked my grandmother, "Why all these white people hanging around--why all these crackers hanging around our house?  We hate crackers."  And she--her response was, since she was part white, she said--and that made me part white; she said, "Which part of you do you hate the most?"  And then she stopped me from playing with Davis, young Davis.  And I had nothing else to do with young Davis aside fighting with him and his brother periodically (laughter), until I had finished high school [Drayton Street High School, Newberry, South Carolina] and gone off to college [Colored Normal Industrial Agricultural and Mechanical College of South Carolina; South Carolina State University, Orangeburg, South Carolina] and came back and we struck up a friendship again.
Story_ID: 499131
Speaker 1: Now, tell me about yo- your mother [Lily Sligh Toland].
Speaker 2: My mother had a limited education, too; she didn't finish high school, but she was very well liked for the things that she could do, like domestically.  She was--she had a reputation for pastry cooking and for cooking generally, and a reputation for being a seamstress.  And my mother was a kind of a generous soul for people--for the black people that she would sew for.  She would--she made clothes for her sisters and her mother [Anna Sligh], and she made the clothes for friends who would buy the cloth and bring it, and she would make the clothes and they'd give her a down payment, and often that's all she got.  And 'course when I got up some size, I would ask her, "Why you do it?"  You know.  "Why don't you make them pay?  Why don't--just keep the thing?"  'Cause I was in school.  I say, "Why don't you just keep it until they pay you?"  And she would say things like, "Oh, I couldn't do that and lose a friend."  And so she, she would do it.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: But my, my, my mother would raise two--would rear two boys after my father [Fred Toland] got the wanderlust; she would rear two boys.
Speaker 1: So you have one brother?
Speaker 2: I had one brother.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what was his name?
Speaker 2: Warren Montgomery Toland [Warren Toland].
Speaker 1: Tell me--we're still talking about your mother.  Tell me the type of mother that she was to you.  What was your relationship like?
Speaker 2: A very close--I had a very close relationship with my mother, so--and, and, and persons would say that I looked most like my mother, and my brother looked most like our father, and I took a paternal interest, I suppose, even though I was her son.  My mother could compel me to do what she wanted, or the right thing, and she would say sometimes--and I call it how a mother can take you from the cradle to the grave.  I used to tell her, "Mom, when we were growing up, you could take us from the cradle to the grave with one statement."  And the statement was something like, "When I was carrying you--and I have to do this now because if I don't, you can come to no good end" (laughter), you see?  And she'd make statements like that.  And I used to tell her that, "You made me a historian."  I always knew that I could cut up in church and get away with it on Sunday because my mother would never spank us on Sunday; she said she wouldn't allow our conduct to cut across her spirit.  But then you'd have to wait--you'd have to watch those next six days because you knew, you knew it was coming, but you didn't know when it was coming, and sometimes it would come in the morning when you were still in bed in your pajamas, and she'd snatch the cover back and gave you a lecture on your misdeeds and gave you the spanking while you crawl outta bed to try to get away (laugher), and there was no getting away.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So your mother worked in the home.
Speaker 2: No, my mother worked--she, she--well, she, she worked in the home to raise--to, to--basically to take care of her boys, but she worked outside the home, too.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: She worked in domestic service, and after hours, she did sewing and that sort of thing (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Sewing after hours, okay.
Speaker 2: --to enhance the income we got.
Story_ID: 499132
Speaker 1: I almost left school [Drayton Street High School, Newberry, South Carolina] after I completed the seventh grade because we fell upon some difficult economic times.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: The wages were low and all, and I was gonna leave school, and it was a white man that I had done some work for, and he had noticed that I had considerable knowledge at my age, and he told me, please don't, don't stop school. That you can't make enough money without an education to make any difference in the income.  And he was right because the summers that I did work, because of the competition from other young blacks for summer jobs, I worked for as little as five cents an hour, ten hours a day cutting grass and painting houses and all.  I painted--I did house painting, brick laying and carpentry for ten cents an hour.  And so that when the minimum wage came to twenty-five cents an hour, it was good for me; in my first job when the wages went to the eight hour--when it went to the eight hour day, twenty-five cents an hour, time and a-half for overtime, and double time on Sundays and holidays, I did highway construction the first summer that I could get a job for twenty-five cents an hour.
Story_ID: 499133
Speaker 1: Let's go back to your elementary years.  Tell me about school.  You had talked about the two room school--
Speaker 2: Yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) across from your [maternal] grandmother [Anna Sligh].
Speaker 2: Yeah.  The, the school was really a large hall--a two story large hall, and the first through the fifth grade was taught by one teacher on the first floor, and the six, seven, eighth grades were taught on the second floor by one teacher, and you didn't have desks, you had benches--church type benches, and the students would be seated on a bench according to the grade level, and a teacher would take turns teaching eighth grade level, and because I would sit there attentive like, I was advanced for my grade, my grade unit, and my mother [Lily Sligh Toland] decided that she was going to move to the City of Newberry [South Carolina] so she would get a better job in the City of Newberry, and would have a better school for her two sons to attend.  And so I transferred from--or we transferred me from that two teacher school to the Drayton Street, D-R-A-Y-T-O-N, Drayton Street High School [Newberry, South Carolina] when I was in third grade.  It was a, a school that was--that carried students from the first grade through the eleventh grade because in South Carolina at the time, you spent two years in the first grade; it was called first and advanced first, and of course when they went to twelfth- twelve grades, that advanced first simply became second, and you were up the level through the twelfth.
Speaker 1: Was there a name for the first school that you attended?
Speaker 2: No, I, I don't, I don't remember a name for it--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --but it was located in Helena, South Carolina, H-E-L-E-N-A, Helena, South Carolina.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: And of course there was no indoor plumbing, but we did have daylight.  I never saw any electric lights in the place, but then we never had classes when it was dark.
Speaker 1: All right.  What about books?  Since you didn't have a desk did you have a slate (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) We, we--at that stage, at that stage, the parents had to buy the books.  In case--in my family, I had an aunt who was several grades ahead of me, and the books were bought for her until her death, or before she got to high school, and I inherited the books first.  Or, say as soon as she would complete a class--she was several grades ahead of me; when she'd complete a class, all of the books would be brought to me and put under my bed so that I could look at them, and that sort of thing.  And then when I completed the use of the books, I passed them to a cousin, and when he completed the use of the books, he passed them to my brother [Warren Toland].
Story_ID: 499134
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) We were talking about the books that--actually your--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --aunt purchased the books?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  As long as my aunt lived, she got the new books first, and I got the second--I got them second.  After my aunt passed--my aunt died from pneumonia, and after she died, then I got the new books--
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: --and then I passed them on to my cousin Eugene [ph.], and my cousin Eugene passed them on to my brother Warren [Warren Toland].
Speaker 1: Right.  And we were talking off camera about the fact that a lot of people that I have spoke to during this time in school received books from white schools, and then they were passed on to the black schools, and you were explaining to me about that (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah. The, the time that I was in school, we bought the books.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: In the generation of students which followed me, the state supplied textbooks, and they had this textbook warehouse, but the new books went first to the white school, and after those books had been used by the white students, the white students knew in the county that those books were going to come next to blacks, and sometimes they would write in the books, and sometimes they would tear pages out of the books, and those were the books that the generation of students after me got.  But from my, from my generation after my aunt, I got the new books--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --and, and, and kept them and passed them on to my cousin Eugene.
Story_ID: 499135
Speaker 1: Now, you went to school in the first grade but you could read before you went to school, is that right?
Speaker 2: Yes, I could read before I went to school.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And tell me how that came about (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And the reason I could read was that I was curious about the, the, the, the words that went with the pictures of the little Sunday school cards, and I had an aunt, and my mother [Lily Sligh Toland] and my grandmother [Anna Sligh] would read these to me and they would make up--today, you can buy these cards--the A, B, Cs and what have you, and a picture by it.  At that stage, if you couldn't buy them, they didn't, but they would write the alphabet, and then they would write the word so that I could associate A, or a B with bat, A with apple, and C with cat, and that sort of thing; they would write it so I could do that, and so I learned how to read.
Story_ID: 499136
Speaker 1: Now, tell me about the area, the community in which you lived--
Speaker 2: The--
Speaker 1: --during that time.
Speaker 2: Yes.  It was a sawmill community as long as there were trees nearby that could be cut and hauled to the sawmill, and the black population thinned out after the sawmill closed, but they went into farm jobs, doing farm labor for the white planters or the white farmers, basically, nearby, and I recall that after my [maternal] grandfather's [Levi Sligh] farm was lost, and the sawmill closed, that some of my uncles went to work on the white man's place, and my grandmother [Anna Sligh] wanted to be sure that they got a warm meal in the middle of the day, and so the older grandchildren had the responsibility in the summer of taking the lunch buckets to our uncles in the field, and something happened when I was less than eleven years old.  We had to pass this white woman's place to take the food to our family's workers in fa- on the farm, and so one day she made us pick her blackberries.  She had blackberries--tame blackberry bushes right near the house and around her, her cattle lot, and so she made us--we, we didn't have any shoes on and she made us pick the blackberries, and I must have gotten twenty odd briers in my feet.  And then when we got through picking the blackberries, she gave us a--one of those--they used to put flour in print flour sacks, and so she gave each one of us a printed flour sack and told us, "Take this home and tell your mammy to make you some draws 'cause I bet you ain't got no draws on."  Well, it took them--after I got home, they sterilized a needle and started picking those briers outta my feet.  And so after that, when we would have to pass her house, we would run because--run by her house because we knew that if the white woman wanted you to do something, that she could trump up charges on little black kids and get us in trouble with white people, and we had learned that early; we learned that as a black male, you do not look directly at a white woman, and this is why black men, perhaps following black youngsters, developed a kind of downcast or a far away look.  When a white person was talking to you, you looked down at the ground--a white woman talking to you, you looked down at the ground, or you looked way off (gesture) like you saw something over there 'cause you were scared if she said, do it, or not to do it.  But I guess, I can tell it now; we accidentally got our revenge on her because the older boys were trying to learn how to smoke, and so they would take turns stealing a match, you see, so that you could only--and they were gonna teach us how to smoke, and you could--tobacco wrapped in brown paper bag--brown paper, and you could only get one match without arousing some--we thought--without arousing the elders to think what happened to these matches.  And so, in order to be sure that we all got a light from it, we started--some--one of the older boys started a little straw fire on the embankment, and we--up against the bank getting us a draw, and next thing we know--it's August and it's, it's hot, and this fire has taken off across this lady's field (laughter), and it's burning up some of her crop.  And we couldn't go that way again, and the only way we were gonna get to our uncles in the field was to go at least a half mile out of the way, and so we start pressing the women who were doing the cooking and putting the buckets together for these men--pressing them to give us a little more time 'cause it was hot; and we couldn't tell them why we wanted a little more time, so it meant that by the time we got that food to keep the men from fussing that we didn't get the food there on time, we'd have to run a part of the way to make up for about that half-a-mile that we had to go out of the way, and we sort of like took a blood oath, we're never gonna talk about how we set that woman's field on fire 'cause we were scared that she might figure out that the field caught on fire because it was set on fire, but it was accidental.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Okay.
Speaker 2: So, apparently she, she, she didn't think it was set on fire; maybe she thought the heat set it on fire, the hot--the hot weather.
Story_ID: 499137
Speaker 1: In the third grade now, you move to, to--
Speaker 2: Drayton Street High School [Newberry, South Carolina] (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) Drayton Street.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And you are now living in the City of Newberry [South Carolina] (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I was living in the City of Newberry.
Speaker 1: Newberry.
Speaker 2: --on Speer Street [sic. Speers Street]--919 Speer, S-P-E-E-R, Speer Street.
Speaker 1: How was that different from living in Helena [South Carolina]?
Speaker 2: Well, if we continued to live in Helena, I could not have transferred to this school in town until I had completed the eighth grade, but by moving to, to town, I could then go to school at Drayton Street, and that's--that was two reasons why my mother [Lily Sligh Toland] moved; one was to get us a better school for her sons, and the other was to get closer to where there were more jobs available in domestic service.
Story_ID: 499138
Speaker 1: How was the community different?
Speaker 2: In, in our ca- in my case, the house we moved into was owned by a white woman--by a white family, and one room of the house was reserved for the cook for that white family; she had reared this person from a child, and had worked--this lady had worked with her from a child, so one room had to be reserved for her, and that was separated from the rest of the house, which my mother [Lily Sligh Toland] could rent for us; that house was owned by whites.  Across the street was the only house of three houses on the street--the only one owned by a black family.  The black family had bought the house before the area turned white; after the area turned white, two houses were bought by whites.  Two houses previously occupied by blacks was bought by whites, and whites rented them to blacks, but all of the kids except the three sons of the couple across the street and the young--the other lady's daughter and my mother's two children were six children in that neighborhood--six black children in the neighborhood.  And when the city paved the street, it only paved that section of the street where white people lived, and the rest of it they left unpaved and dusty--became a quagmire of mud in the winter, and a dust bowl in the summer, and we resented it; as young blacks, we resented it, and so when we got up old enough to start driving, we would start driving on the black side of the--on the black end of the street, and just after we would pass the black houses, we would gun the car and kick up dust and carry it towards the white people, and eventually--and, and, and in order to cut the dust down in the blackest part of it, we would get used motor oil and spread it on the street, and then if you walked on the street, you'd pick up this motor oil on the soles of your shoe so that when you got to your house, you'd have to take your shoes off and clean them off at the steps so you wouldn't track that into your mother's house.  But after we started kicking that dust on those white families, the city paved our part of the street, and so it, so it worked.
Story_ID: 499139
Speaker 1: Tell me the--about the difference in the schools.
Speaker 2: Our school [Drayton Street High School, Newberry, South Carolina] was a segregated school with a chimney.  It's one building, three stories tall, and we had stoves; no central heating in the school--stoves, and one janitor, and the other people involved in bringing coal in and starting fires were the older students.  And when we outgrew the size of the school that we had, the white superintendent told the black supervisor of Negro schools that if the colored people wanted a high school, they had to prove it by raising some of the money.  And so we were given begging cards to ask people for money, and an incident that happened to me made me a non-beggar, because since I worked at this barbershop sometimes, sweeping up the hair and, and that sort of thing--Jake's Sons Barbershop [ph.].  And since I worked there, I thought I would ask one of the customers to give me some money, a white customer, and he started cursing and I thought he was cursing me and I responded.  I, I suppose if it had been somebody other than him, I would have risked being whipped or beaten, but I took as much as I could take of his ranting, and then he said to me, "Boy, I'm not talking to you, I'm talking about how white people treat you colored people here."  But that, that was one beg with the whites that I didn't beg any white person anymore.  But we had a family, a leading family in the community, that lived about a block away from us in this big house with her maid and her apartment over the garage for her maid and all, and so since I knew--the family was an undertaker family, and so they had buried some of my relatives, so I--the company had, Williams Undertaker [ph.], so I went to the front door and--to ask for some money, and the cook, or the maid, chastised me and told me, don't ever come to that front door. If I needed anything from them to come to the back door, and that, that, that struck me that a black person was so high and mighty that another black person could not come to the front door.  When her husband had been in the undertaker business, he had died and she was now running the business with her two sons, and so I wouldn't go to the back door; I didn't get any money.  But the very next day after the encounter--two encounters in one day was more than I could take, so I took that card with them few dimes I had collected, and I gave it to the teacher, and I never begged again for anything there.
Story_ID: 499140
Speaker 1: Do you remember any of your teachers in elementary school [Drayton Street High School, Newberry, South Carolina]?
Speaker 2: Yes, Miss Gilliam--Miss Gilliam [ph.] was my fifth grade teacher and I became her pet (laughter), teacher's pet.  And my seventh grade teacher was Nancy Penn, P-E-N-N, Singleton [Nancy Penn], and her son and I were competitors for academic honors; friends but competitors for academic honors.  And when we--she taught seventh grade, and when I gradu- when I was promoted from sixth grade to seventh grade, he was promoted from sixth grade to eighth grade so that he would not have to study under his mother.  And so I was a good student, and what she would do, she would ask a question, and by roll call she would go around the class until somebody in the class could answer the question, and then she'd raise another question and go down some more, waiting for students to answer it.  And she never called on me if I raised my hand, and so I figured it out that if I don't raise my hand, she'll think I don't know the answer to the question and she'll call on me.  One day in American history, she asked a question about the importance of the Mississippi River and its valley, and it went all the way around the class until it got to Toland [HistoryMaker Frank Toland, Sr.], and I answered the question. The nation which controlled the Mississippi River would dominate central America; that is the central part of the North American continent, and would therefore dominate the region that became the United States.  And that was the answer.  And so I was applauded and she said, "Y'all think that Frank Toland's the smartest student in this class but he's not; Bo Clark [ph.] is."  And I was determined that I was gonna be the smartest student, and so when I graduated from high school, I was the valedictorian.
Story_ID: 499141
Speaker 1: The year--well, the year after you went to this school [Drayton Street High School] in, in Newberry [South Carolina] began the Depression [Great Depression].
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Tell me about those years.
Speaker 2: Economically, very difficult years--
Speaker 1: Were they--
Speaker 2: --and I think, I think it probably put a strain on my, my mother [Lily Sligh Toland] and my father's [Fred Toland] relationship.  My father, as I remembered him, was a domineering kind of man--the man of the house sort of thing, and while he was seeking his fortune, he wanted my mother to stay put, and so when he returned home and we were not living in the house near my grandmother [Anna Sligh], he was upset about it and--a little argument, that he had told her to stay there and this sort of thing; and so my mother, strong like her mother, nobody told her what to do.  You can ask her, and she would decide whether she was going to do it or not (laughter), and so that was the strain on the relationship--put a strain on it.  They were never divorced, but eventually they went their separate ways.
Story_ID: 499142
Speaker 1: In school, like in--at my new school [Drayton Street High School, Newberry, South Carolina], like happens in new schools, there was a test of wills, and the test came because in those days, you had to take your lunch to school, and my mother [Lily Sligh Toland] would never let her sons go without a lunch, and so Gilbert Pettys, who was the biggest boy in class, took it upon himself to, to, to demand part of my lunch every day, and a person in the class, Bo Clark [ph.]--who was about my size--and Gilbert, got into a fight at recess, and Bo whipped Gilbert, and the next day--and I had whipped Bo earlier (laughter), so I figured this, that if I whipped Bo, Bo whipped Gilbert, I could whip Gilbert, and so the next time Gilbert came up and demanded part of my lunch, I wouldn't give it to him, and so he threatened me and before he could make a move, I dropped him (laugher).  And of course, since I started the fight, you know who was gonna get the worse whipping outta the fight from the teacher--I was, you know, and there's no business trying to explain why it happened or anything like that; you started it, you got whipped.  Well, it was a good move on my part because Gilbert and I became fast friends for the rest of our journey through high school.
Story_ID: 499143
Speaker 1: After the Depression [Great Depression] started, the school [Drayton Street High School, Newberry, South Carolina] started serving lunch, is that right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, after Roosevelt [President Franklin Delano Roosevelt] got to be president and they started these agricultural support programs, you had this surplus pork where they didn't kill the pig but they bought some of them to keep the price up, so surplus meat was given to persons who needed it, and then you had flour; there was a flour mill in our, in our town, and they would give you what they call seconds, the part of the wheat they were gonna make the white flour out of, and then you'd have these, these left over--this left over--these seconds, and they would give families the seconds until they discovered that those seconds made pretty good bread.  Today, that's what could be good healthy eating, so my family--my, my mother [Lily Sligh Toland] got some of those.  And then there was a chicken plucking plant that got started back in the town, and to begin with, all the chicken feet would be given to anybody who came by, and they'd get a big bag of chicken feet until the owner of the plant discovered that black folk knew how to cook those chicken feet; cut those toenails off and boil those chicken feet and put some rice on them. It'd be some pretty nice eating.  And I insist that black people taught white people how to make white potato soup because--and of course this is probably a joke--because you could take a few white potatoes and cook them in a big pot of water, and add some floured thickening, and you would have--the floured thickening water would taste like potatoes, like white potatoes, and you get a taste of white potatoes along with some potato soup and some crumbled cornbread or something of that type.
Story_ID: 499144
Speaker 1: It was a difficult period, but it was--during the '30s [1930s] when I was working, first cutting grass and that sort of thing, for five cents an hour in the summer because of competition, and ten cents an hour when the competition was less.  And it was during that period that a, a white woman--they called her a Yankee white woman--married a local white person, or a local business white person, and she opened a tea room that didn't fare well because there was jealousy among some of those local whites that he had gone up to New York, or someplace up north, and married a wife.  So she was kind of lonesome, and she had a rose garden and I stopped by looking for work, and she gave me a job taking care of her, her roses that summer, and she started giving me lunch.  I'd work a ten hour day for a dollar, but she started giving me lunch at midday on the back porch, and then she would sit in the door of the kitchen off to the back porch and talk with me, and then she started having--had started taking me to town with her to the white only library to go in and pick up the books that she'd called in that she wanted them--that she wanted to read.  And then one day she said, "Frank [HistoryMaker Frank Toland, Sr.], I can get you a book if you promise to take good care of it."  And that's how I probably became one of the first blacks to read a book out of the white only public library in the City of Newberry [South Carolina].  And I, I would be the one that--she would sit in the car, and I would go in to get the books, and I was always that respectful little black kid, or black person.  I'd stand and I'd wait while the white customers--white clients were dealt with, and then she would call--the librarian would call me up to get these books, and she never knew that some of it--that one of those books each time was a book for me.
Speaker 2: Do you remember what you were reading at that time--what books you were reading?
Speaker 1: No, not really.  I liked--I, I, I know about some of them, I just don't remember names--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --but I liked Zane Grey's book, and one that sticks out in my mind, I believe, was called 'Riders of the Purple Sage' [Zane Grey] and I liked the western books written by Ernest Haycox, H-A-Y-C-O-X, so Zane Grey and Haycox were two authors that I remember.  And then there was a mystery writer, and I think his last name was Van Dine [S.S. Van Dine]; those mysteries I, I could read.
Speaker 2: What were some of the other activities during high school [Drayton Street High School, Newberry, South Carolina] that you participated in?
Speaker 1: I--during high school I tried to play basketball briefly; I was good shoot, no guard.
Story_ID: 499145
Speaker 1: I tried to play high school basketball.  We did not have any indoor basketball court. We had two goals that were set up like it was a court, and then it was marked; the, the basketball court itself was marked on the ground on packed clay, and that's, that was our basketball.  And you can imagine in cool weather in basketball shorts how, how breezy it could be.  And the spectators who came to our games lined around the court--stood around the court.  The same thing, but basically, would happen for several games.  I tried to play football, and we didn't have a football field, so the principal of the school [Drayton Street High School, Newberry, South Carolina] owned a piece of land next to the school, or back of the school where he grew a corn crop, and so we wanted to play football and so he told us that we could use his field, which meant that we had to dig out the cornstalks, rake the ground level, fill in all the holes in over the soil that's already there, and then lay us out a football field.  And we played on that--our home games played on that until the spring--couldn't, couldn't use it in the spring because he's gonna plant it again, so we really used it one season before we decided we were being used to clear the land for him for the next year's crop.  And it was--we're playing a game, a high school game in Clinton, South Carolina.  Clinton and Laurens [South Carolina], north of Newberry [South Carolina], were considered really difficult places for blacks, and when we played them basketball--played the black school--black high school basketball, we could not win there; when we played them--and I was only in one football game there before I quit the team, but I was a running back and I broke free and it looked like I was gonna score a touchdown, and a white spectator--white spectators on one side of the field--started screaming, "Kill that nigger, kill that nigger."  And on the other side of the field black spectators, to be on the right track, echoed, "Kill that nigger" (laughter), and a white spectator tackled me, yeah, and there was no penalty against the, the team we were playing--none at all from spec- because spectators did it.  I got pretty beat up that night, and so I asked the coach at one point--look like every time I got that ball somebody was off--I, I said they were off sides but they didn't call it; the officials didn't call it.  Look like every time I got that ball I was on the ground.  And so after being beat up a little bit, I asked the coach to please let me come out, and the coach told me that I had to play when he said play.  That night, after that game, when I got home, I put that football equipment on my front step, and the next day I turned it in; that was the last of my football career.  Now, the equipment we were using was the practice equipment for the white high school that they gave to the black high school.
Story_ID: 499146
Speaker 1: Now, in school, as far as study was concerned, the first two years of high school [Drayton Street High School, Newberry, South Carolina], I took a trade; I took the, the trade to learn more about brick laying and a little carpentry and those sorts of things--for two years, and some of the students took agricultural studies upstairs, over in the trades building for two years, but those of us who took the trades education, our teacher wanted us to have practical experience, and so he got jobs for us to practice in the white community, and once in the black community near the school.  And one of the jobs he got for us--we were going to build a one car garage at the high school--the white high school.  The white high school was maybe about two and a-half blocks from where I lived, and I would walk--we would walk over a mile to the high school for several hours of work, and then we would have to walk back to the school to be dismissed.  And I began to resent that the white kids had all of this good stuff that I could see, and there we were building a garage for the white school.  So, when I completed the two years of compulsory training--'cause they didn't have anything else for you to take.  For the last two years of high school, they had Latin; Latin was the language that we took because the English teacher was trained in Latin.  They didn't hire a French teacher or somebody to teach Spanish, so we, we--she taught us Latin.  So I took two years of high school Latin in order to get out of roaming all around town working for white people under the guise that we were, we were getting on the job training.
Speaker 2: Your trade- trades teacher, he was black? Is that right (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, the trade teacher was black--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --was Mr. Logan [T.E. Logan]; last name was Logan.
Story_ID: 499147
Speaker 1: So you graduate from high school [Drayton Street High School, Newberry, South Carolina] in 1939--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And--
Speaker 2: And I was the valedictorian of the class.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Had you thought about college a lot before then (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, I, I, I had thought about college, and I thought about college because of the inspiration provided by my fifth grade teacher, who was completing her college education in the summer at Benedict College [Columbia, South Carolina]; she had started teaching after completing two years of college, and then she started--then she would go to school in the summer until she got her degree; she in, she inspired me.  Another person who inspired me, whose name I cannot remember, she had graduated from Howard University [Washington, D.C.], and came to Newberry [South Carolina] to teach one year, and I was a good history student--she taught history--I was a good history student.  And so she took an interest in me, and of course there's one time that she sort of like insulted my sensibilities, was when I wanted to make a report.  I had just finished reading--I had been introduced to 'Up From Slavery' [Booker T. Washington] and I had finished reading it, and for Negro History Week [Black History Month] I wanted to make a report on it to a ninth grade history class, and she referred to Dr. Washington as an Uncle Tom and, and, and said that I didn't need to talk about Uncle Tom--the Uncle Tom in class.  And it turned out that Mr. Neely [Alvin J. Neely], Deacon Neely had a son who was the dean of men at Tuskegee Institute [Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, Alabama], and when he learned that I read 'Up From Slavery,' he told me that if I kept my grades up, he was going to have his son give me a work scholarship at Tuskegee Institute.
Story_ID: 499148
Speaker 1: But after I graduated from high school [Drayton Street High School, Newberry, South Carolina], my mother [Lily Sligh Toland] did not want me to come to Tuskegee Institute [Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, Alabama] because you had had the incident of the Scottsboro Boys cases up in Scottsboro, Alabama where some black youth hoboing had been accused of raping two white women on a train up in the Scottsboro area.  And what perhaps helped to contribute to it was that I had been confronted in a case of mistaken identity by six white, six white high school kids when I was coming home from school one day.  I came through town to pick up some food for our dinner, and these six white boys started harassing me, and then finally one of the grabbed me, and it was six of them and one of me.  Well, we had had some encounters as black students with white students over near the school, and some of us had started carrying ice picks or switchblade knives to school and hiding them in case we had to fight after school.  And in order to get them off--possibility of attacking me, I grabbed one of them about the neck; I locked my arm around his neck and he started changing colors 'cause I was choking him real good.  But I lightened up on his throat to tell him to make them leave me alone, and so they did until I turned up Speer Street [sic. Speers Street] right by the white home on the corner where I had done some yard work and where my mother had cooked for a party they had, and she was a high school English teacher, and some of these boys were in her class.  Now, she never saw the beginning of the conflict, which started on Cline Street one block down; all she saw was that when I turned my back to come up Speer Street that they started running after me, and I turned and I hit one of them and almost--it was a dangerous blow because I struck him near a jugular vein in his, in his neck, and blood popped.  She then chastised them for bothering me, and when my mother went downtown to talk to the police, the--they were entering an election and the chief told her that he could not get caught up in any Negro thing until the election was over.  And so my mother said that if they came after me again, that nobody messes with me, and nobody messes with my money and my chaps--that somebody gonna die.  Well, that night, my uncle and some of his friends came with their shotguns, and we camped out in the backyard expecting whites to come, and they never came. But we lived so close to the street that if they'd come and they'd shot into the house, they could have done us some damage unless we were lying on the floor or something.  If they'd shot in at a level where we were standing, they could have hurt some of us.  But they never came, and so my mother was afraid 'cause I was kind of volatile; if you hit me, I hit you back, and if I couldn't hit you back then, because you had the advantage, I wait until I had the advantage and I hit you back.
Speaker 2: So that's--so, she was ready for you to not go to Tuskegee (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Not come to Tuskegee.
Story_ID: 499149
Speaker 1: But instead I went to South Carolina State [Colored Normal Industrial Agricultural and Mechanical College of South Carolina; South Carolina State University, Orangeburg, South Carolina], and I, I pretty much worked odd jobs to get into my sophomore year.  There was a really--it was a really inexpensive education because, as a state student, I paid thirty dollars a semester for tuition, and twelve dollars a month for room and board.  And my second year, sophomore year, I worked odd jobs in the--I started working in my freshman year but I worked odd jobs in the city.  And then I stopped at this flower shop, and she needed someone to help her with her flowers; she was a florist--the Acacia Shop [Acacia Flower Shop, Inc., Orangeburg, South Carolina], and so she taught me how to make boutonnieres, corsages, and funeral wreaths; but she didn't pay me but three dollars or three dollars and a-half a week, but she gave me, gave me two meals a day.
Story_ID: 499150
Speaker 1: Were you exposed to music or the arts at all?
Speaker 2: In, in, in the church I was a member of the youth choir.
Speaker 1: What church was this?
Speaker 2: This was Bethlehem Baptist Church [Newberry, South Carolina].
Speaker 1: Okay.  Was in the choir?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I was in the choir, and while I was still a teenager I became the clerk of the church before I finished high school [Drayton Street High School, Newberry, South Carolina] because I could write fast and I, I knew the members.  In those days, they came and put their collection on the table, the collection table, and then they passed by the clerk's table and told me how much they put in, and I'd write it down in my book.  And those small contributions--I wrote a many-dime or a many-quarter contribution.  It was good occasionally to suggest some folded money go down--a dollar--yeah.
Speaker 1: What music did you like to listen to?
Speaker 2: I, I liked the blues and I, I would find--and 'course I wasn't supposed to do the blues after I was baptized.  I was not baptized early; I was in the church early, but it took about two years of periodic visits to the mourners' bench (laughter) before I, I joined the church.  The standards of the elders in the church, and in my family, too, they were praying for me to find the Lord to be converted, and I would go to the mourners' bench 'cause I had to because the revival preachers were tricky; they would--after you'd warm the church up with singing and praying, then the revival preacher would come in and he would say that we needed to stand and rest ourselves, or something--stretch ourselves.  And then we would stand, and then he would say, "All who are saved sit down."  Which would leave us standing (laughter); real tricky.  And then those who were left standing had to come to the mourners' bench to be prayed over and to be preached over, and this went on with me for at least four revivals (laughter) to a year.  And so--and they were saying about me that Frank [HistoryMaker Frank Toland, Sr.] is the ringleader, that if Frank would join the church--if he come in, his little friends will come in also.  And they were about right.  It was a Friday night, and they were singing something like, this may be the last time; if we get together children, last time we pray together--this sort of thing, and then after that, the preacher got up and he preached hell, fire, and damnation, and whatever hell I had in me, he scared it out that night.  So, I got up at the end of the sermon and I went up; as the preacher stretched his hand out, I gave him my hand and he got, he got a lot of youth that night--the fellows, young men--because seven or eight of my friends joined that same night because they couldn't dare go home to their mothers when I had joined and they hadn't (laughter).  But that same week, my cousin Eugene [ph.] had his spiritual experience; he saw angels in the ceiling of the church--not Bethlehem, but a, a church in Helena [South Carolina] whose name has slipped by me now.  But he saw angels on the ceilings and he prayed and all; he shook the church up 'cause he's seeing these things.  So, when I get to see my [maternal] grandmother [Anna Sligh], my grandmother says this, she says, "Eugene was converted," and then she would pause and then she'd say, "And Frank joined the church" (laughter), making the distinction.  So, what her statement did, though, was to make me determined to try to be a good Christian.  And I love the blues, and I'd find myself whistling the blues and singing the blues and--by myself sometimes; sometimes I'd turn it off and go into a hymn, like that's what I was really getting into, but I loved those blues and I still, I still do; I still like blues.  In fact, I, I wrote a couple of blues numbers in my college years.
Story_ID: 499151
Speaker 1: So, did you listen to the radio--baseball or any of the soap operas (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, I listened--no, I listened--growing up, I listened to 'The Lone Ranger' on radio; we didn't have a television.  We listened to 'The Lone Ranger,' and I never missed a Joe Louis fight.  In fact, I collected--in that period of my life, I made a s- Joe Louis scrapbook and I still have it--a Joe Louis scrapbook.
Story_ID: 499152
Speaker 1: So, how long did you work at the flower shop [Acacia Flower Shop, Inc., Orangeburg, South Carolina]?
Speaker 2: I worked there--well, one school year.
Speaker 1: One school year.
Speaker 2: Yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay.
Speaker 2: And in addition to doing those flowers, I also became a salesperson selling corsages and boutonnieres to my college schoolmates for the parties.
Speaker 1: What was your major?
Speaker 2: I majored--I started out majoring in English because I wanted to be a writer, and then I switched into history and into political science.  And so when I graduated from South Carolina State [Colored Normal Industrial Agricultural and Mechanical College of South Carolina; South Carolina State University, Orangeburg, South Carolina]--when I finished four years at South Carolina State, interrupted by forty, about forty-two months of [U.S.] military service, when I finished the four year program in English, I got a part-time teaching position at the Wilkinson High School [Orangeburg-Wilkinson High School, Orangeburg, South Carolina] teaching English.
Speaker 1: I'm sorry, what's the name of the school?
Speaker 2: Wilkinson, W-I-L-K-I-N-S-O-N, the Wilkinson High School, teaching English, and I enrolled for twelve additional hours beyond graduation at South Carolina State.  And I ended up with enough hours to have been declared a major in English, history, and political science.
Story_ID: 499153
Speaker 1: And when I took the Graduates Records Examination [sic. Graduate Record Examination], I already knew that I didn't wanna be an English teacher, but I had more training in English so I took the Graduate Records Exam in English, and I applied to the University of Pennsylvania [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] and was accepted based on the graduate records in English.  When I got to the University of Pennsylvania, I registered for the master's [degree] program in history, and I was notified that my admission into the history department was a conditional admission, and that after the first semester, I would need to take the Graduate Records Exam in history, but I did so well that first semester in history that they abandoned the idea that I needed to take a Graduates Records Examination because I really didn't have any kind of social life, I was just tied in to the books.  When I, when I went into the history section of the library at the University of Pennsylvania, they had more books in the history section than I'd seen in my whole library in college [Colored Normal Industrial Agricultural and Mechanical College of South Carolina; South Carolina State University, Orangeburg, South Carolina].  And when we were interviewed, those graduate students in the master's program who had taken courses at Princeton [Princeton University, Princeton, New Jersey] and Yale [Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut] and Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts], they just had all of those history hours, but at my school, you had a major in history if you took thirty-six hours in history; six of those hours were your freshman history hours required of all students.  So that in addition to the required six hours, you took thirty hours of advance work in history.  So there I sat, thirty-six hours in history, and they're talking seventy and eighty hours as undergraduates in, in history.  So when I was interviewed--they were interviewing all these persons in my presence; I'm the only black person there.  I was an only black seeking an advance degree in history at the University of Pennsylvania when I went.  And so what I did instead of talking about how much training I'd had in history, I said that I have always had an interest in history, and a few other noncommittal comments, and let it go at that.  But then they had social life; I didn't have any.  What I did was to live in the history stacks.  You weren't supposed to take food in to the stacks.  I, I sucked so many Life Savers that I should have turned into one because you could just put those in your pocket and go into the stack, no lunch, and I would spend hours on end going through history books.  What I discovered was that in the professional journals you had these book reviews, and so I'd just take about a half-a-dozen of the American Historical [American Historical Association] reviews, or the Mississippi Valley Historical [Mississippi Valley Historical Association; Organization of American Historians] reviews, and I would read the book reviews only, so that I became familiar with the literature by reading those book reviews.  And then in class I could do reasonably well as a graduate student.
Story_ID: 499154
Speaker 1: Okay, I just wanna go over the years that we're talking about.  You received your B.A. in English in 1939- you started (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Started working (unclear) in '39 [1939].
Speaker 1: In '39 [1939], and--
Speaker 2: And then in the summer of 1942, I was drafted into the [U.S.] military.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And after you came out of the military, then--
Speaker 2: In January, following my military service, I re-entered South Carolina State [Colored Normal Industrial Agricultural and Mechanical College of South Carolina; South Carolina State University, Orangeburg, South Carolina].
Speaker 1: Okay.  And you received your M.A. in English.
Speaker 2: In English.
Speaker 1: Okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, I got my bachelor's [degree] in English.
Speaker 1: Okay, and your master's [degree]--
Speaker 2: --M.A. in history.
Speaker 1: --in history, okay, and that was about 1948.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And then you went to the University of Minnesota [University of Minnesota Twin Cities, Minneapolis, Minnesota] in 1954 for your doctorial associates.
Speaker 2: Yeah, right, doctoral studies.
Speaker 1: Okay, we got that on the record.  Let's go back and talk about you being drafted.  Tell me what that experience was like.
Speaker 2: Yeah, well, it was an interesting experience because--for me because I was the first person in my family to go to college, and when Pearl Harbor occurred, I was working at the Acacia Flower Shop [Acacia Flower Shop, Inc., Orangeburg, South Carolina], and when I returned to my dormitory in Thomas E. Miller's Hall [Thomas E. Miller Hall] on the South Carolina State college campus, students were huddled around the television and they were talking about the bombing of Pearl Harbor [Naval Station Pearl Harbor, Hawaii], and they didn't know where it was until I told them what Pearl Harbor was 'cause I was a student of history.  And I gave it no thought because I knew that under certain programs you get a draft--
Speaker 1: Deferment (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) deferment.  But, when I went home for Christmas, that quickly, a draft notice had been sent.  Now, the bombing was on the 7th, and very quickly, before I left for my, left for my Christmas break, here was this draft notice that I should go to the draft board, and I did, but then one of the policies they had was you registered for the draft; if you were not going to be available in the area where you register for the draft, then you transferred your draft status to where you would be, and so I transferred my draft status from Newberry [South Carolina] to Orangeburg, South Carolina notifying the draft board there that I was there, knowing that it was not likely that they would draft me in Orangeburg, to fill a quota in Orangeburg, since my residence was Newberry.  All right, following that school--the completion of that school year, I went to work with the Thomasville company [Thomasville Chair Company; Thomasville Furniture Industries] in Thomasville, North Carolina, and I transferred my draft status to Thomasville, North Carolina (laughter).  Then, when I left, knowing they weren't gonna draft me, I left Thomasville, I transferred my draft status to Newberry, South Carolina where I was going to be for several weeks before heading to Orangeburg, and I transferred it from Newberry back to Orangeburg, and that's when they stopped me from transferring, when they indicated that I was going to be drafted, and indicating where I must come for the physical examination and all.  So, I go to Fort Jackson in Columbia, South Carolina for the physical examination, and I figure that I had astigmatism in one eye and that I'm gonna get out 'cause I can't see too well, but they notified me that: "You have worn glasses; we can see that you have worn glasses, and the military will supply you glasses."  Well, apparently my attitude was transmitting a message to them so that when it came time for me, along with others drafted in Newberry, to go to--to come to Fort Benning, Georgia for the processing, they made me the co-leader of the contingent to, to come to Fort Benning.
Story_ID: 499155
Speaker 1: Well, the person who was in charge of the draft board, my mother [Lily Sligh Toland] had done a party for his family so he knew me, and so I was told that my attitude--that I was gonna need to change my attitude 'cause I was resentful.  Part of the reason, I think, that I was resentful was that I read in The Columbia Record, the newspaper, that persons who were going into the [U.S.] military could vote absentee, so I tried to get a so-called black leader in the town to let's get--let's go to the registrar's office and go to the courthouse and let us get registered.  They wouldn't do it; he wouldn't do it.  He tried to get my mother to keep me from going, and I went, but when I showed up, I was the only black person showing up at the Newberry [South Carolina] county courthouse talking about getting registered to vote.  I walk into the place and the one white woman there--elderly white woman, and I knew that it was a setup but I was gonna go through with it.  When I went up the steps to the registrar's room, there was a policeman standing at the foot of the steps, but I knew the policeman because I had played with his son as a youngster.  In fact, I was the only black kid who would shoot marbles with his son; he loved to shoot marbles but he always wanted to shoot for fun, and I wouldn't shoot for fun, I'd shoot for keeps, and he was a poor marble shooter so I could win marbles and didn't have to buy them.  But--so when I saw Officer Krell, K-R-E-L-L, I spoke to him and went on up, and when I got to the window of the white--only white registrar, and I knew I'd read the law; there should be two present before registration, official registration, can take place.  So I'm assuming that there's another one present somewhere in the courtroom, but when she asked me--she says, "What do you want, boy?"  And I said, "Madam, I came to register to vote."  And so she gave me the application; that surprised me, I guess--should have.  She gave me the application to fill out, and I filled it out and then I gave it back to her, and she gave me the [U.S.] Constitution and told me which section to read.  I'd been studying political history and government, and I'd been fascinated studying the Constitution, so I pushed the book back to her and I recited the section; I started to recite the section, and she said, "You are a smart alecky nigger."  And I said, "No, madam."
Story_ID: 499156
Speaker 1: And then she asked me, "What that mean, boy?"  And I said, "According to constitutional authorities Corwin [Edward S. Corwin] and Peltason [J.W. Peltason], this--," and that's as far as I got.  She picked up the phone and it was already pre-arranged I guess, and the cops started up the steps.  I didn't run but I walked real fast; I went down those steps two and three at a time, and instead of stopping at home, I went into the woods near my grandmother's [Anna Sligh] house over a mile away and head out 'cause I thought they might be trying to get me, and when I heard one of the neighbors come through the path whistling, I called to him that I was in trouble, to get my uncle, and so my uncle then transported me to Whitmire, South Carolina, eleven miles away, and bought a train ticket for me to get to Atlanta [Georgia], and gave me some money so I'd have something to eat; I don't know where I was gonna stay since I didn't know Atlanta.  But I figured the train was going from Whitmire to Atlanta; instead, the train came right back through Newberry [South Carolina] from which I had gone, and when I knew it was coming to Newberry, I locked myself in the bathroom, and so I was--the, the, the person tried to get me to come out and he said, "Well, don't flush it."  Well, all I was doing was looking around to see what my escape path would be in case they came on the train to get me.  And I got off the train in Columbia, South Carolina where I knew--had some contacts in Columbia, and caught a bus, gave up the train ride, never collected the money for the rest of that ticket, and took the bus in Orangeburg, South Carolina to my school, my old school [Colored Normal Industrial Agricultural and Mechanical College of South Carolina; South Carolina State University, Orangeburg, South Carolina], and I stayed there.  I notified my mother [Lily Sligh Toland] of where I was, and then the head of the draft board called my mother and told her that, "Frank [HistoryMaker Frank Toland, Sr.], your son, is scheduled to be drafted, and if he doesn't return so he can be drafted, we're gonna have to put him in jail."  And so I came back to Newberry to be drafted so I wouldn't have to go to jail.
Speaker 2: Wow.
Speaker 1: And in, into, and then into the [U.S.] military.
Story_ID: 499157
Speaker 1: The [U.S.] military was still segregated at that time?
Speaker 2: Rigidly segregated, rigidly segregated.  I don't know--once I got into the military, I determined that that twenty-one dollars a month that they were gonna pay--that I needed to do better than that, and so I was gonna be a good soldier.  They transferred me from induction in Fort Benning, Columbus, Georgia to Camp Lee [Fort Lee] near Petersburg, Virginia to be trained.  And because of the scores that I'd made on the intelligence test, the IQ test, they decided that I could be a clerk typist.  But then they opened the possibility of blacks becoming trained as ninety day wonders--ninety days of training to be a second lieutenant.  But they were interested in having more blacks qualify for the infantry--the 93rd Division [93rd Infantry Division], I think it was then; they had a 92nd [92nd Infantry Division], 93rd at World War II [WWII], and was stationed at Fort Huachuca, Arizona.  Well, I didn't wanna be shot at, so I applied to attend school for adjutant generals; I wanted to do law 'cause I had wanted to do law--I was training to go to law school; in my last year I wanted to go to law school.  And they said, "No," that "the only vacancies we have for Negro candidates is the infantry."  I say, "Well, my second choice would be the quartermaster [U.S. Army Quartermaster Corps]." That way you don't get shot at as much.  They said, "No, the infantry."  So I elected not to go to OCS [Officer Candidate School] but to stay in the quartermaster.
Story_ID: 499158
Speaker 1: Overseas I did several things that were considered heroic; I don't know whether, why, whether they were or not, but any rate, the commanding officer--my first commanding officer--white--was from California; my second commanding officer--white--was from Augusta, Georgia.  And it shows you how you can misperceive.  I figured to have a better--you figure to have a better deal under a white from California, but in point of fact, the white major from Augusta, Georgia had had more association with black troops.  When he first came to the outfit, he was strictly military.  Whatever we were doing when it was announced that he was coming, we stopped doing it and snapped to attention until he told us, "At ease."  It was interfering with work; you're in a battle region and you gotta stop to salute an officer.  So, I was chosen as the one most articulate to go talk to him and I did; I went and I--and, and, and did all the things that the [U.S.] military should do--snap to attention, the salute, and all of that stuff, and the necessary arrangements of the sirs in your speech.  And then he decided that what I proposed was reasonable, and he let us do it.  But I attracted his attention, and so he arranged for me to return to the states for two weeks; he arranged for me to be recommended for the Bronze Star [Bronze Star Medal].  I didn't get it, but somewhere in my papers I got the recommendation (laughter) for the Bronze Star, but I also have the rejection letter on the Bronze Star.  So, I returned--and, and overseas I did some shooting to protect our convoys, and a lot of reading of secret documents for the outfit--documents that you had to read and then destroy.  I was the only non-commissioned person, black, who had access to it from my outfit of over five hundred men.
Story_ID: 499159
Speaker 1: And when I returned to the states, the commander of the returning unit was a white major from Florence, Alabama who hated--Florence, South Carolina, who hated black people.  And he'd loud talk--he would loud talk with the white soldiers that: "These niggers are getting beside themselves--niggers messing around with white women.  And when I get home, I'm gonna run for sheriff so I can straighten some niggers out."  And I don't know whether he ran for sheriff or not, but there were six of us black people in the group.  We arrived at Fort Devens in Massachusetts after being overseas, and they attempt to shift us to the back of the barracks away from the white soldiers--that was his idea.  When we are transferred from Fort Devens to Fort Dix [New Jersey] to be returned overseas, German POWs [prisoners of war] were serving on the food line; the blacks among us were shifted to a corner of the dining room at Fort Dix.  The German prisoners, when they came off the serving line, went and sat in the midst of the white soldiers.  I was really mad at the treatment.  I'd been overseas, I'd been hauling German soldiers, I'd been guarding German soldiers, and now I was being discriminated against, and here the enemies were being treated like white people in America.  So when I got back to my outfit--and then on top of that, one of the, one of the blacks in the outfit he got peeved with, he called him a big black nigger in the presence of us, and this guy was a big guy, and he was so mad he was trembling, you know, and I thought he was gonna hit him, but instead he didn't, he controlled himself.  And when we got overseas, back to the outfit, I wrote a letter describing these events to mail to the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] back in the states.  The major whom I had worked with, and helped to train, was the person who would read the mail to determine whether it could go through.  I figured since I'd been working with him reading mail, I would slip this one through.  Soon as he saw that letter, the NAACP hit him in the face, and he opened it and read it and he said that I could not send the letter, and he ordered me to tear it up; I refused to tear it up, saying that I was assisting, I was not in charge.  He threatened me but it didn't go any farther than that, any further than that.  So I had one more white person to start hating (laughter), even though I worked with him.
Story_ID: 499160
Speaker 1: And when I got back to the states, or after I was discharged over in Georgia and returned home, after I'd done a semester at school [Colored Normal Industrial Agricultural and Mechanical College of South Carolina; South Carolina State University, Orangeburg, South Carolina], I was entitled to--like all soldiers, we were entitled to what they call the 52-20, meaning for fifty-two weeks, if we didn't have a job, we could collect twenty dollars per week, and so after I had spent a semester in school.  I didn't have a job for the summer, and so I went to the state employment office in town and indicated what my qualifications were because according to the law, we were to be given a job in our MOS, our military occupational specialty.  I indicated my specialty, and after a couple of weeks, I go back to get my payment, my check, and he tells me that he's got a job for me cutting and hauling pulpwood.  And I said, "You don't have a job for me; I can get a job as an administrative assistant, as a clerk typist," and he said to me that, "You just faking, you don't want a job."  And he--and, and, and it made me mad.  I slammed my fist into the counter and I profaned him.  And I said, "I was also almost a sharp shooter with the weapons machine gun and rifle.  Do you have any So and So body you want me to kill?"  (Laughter) See, what made it effective was that one of our friends had come out of the [U.S.] military and he was battle stressed in Newberry [South Carolina], and he'd hear sirens and things like that and he'd try to dig foxholes in the concrete with his bare hands and, and there was no help for him--nobody to help him.  And so he went on a rampage; he killed his mother, he killed his wife because he was highly stressed out, but they understand those circumstances now.  So it was right in that climate that I asked him if he had anybody he wanted me to kill, and so they never bothered me again about my 52-20 (laughter).
Story_ID: 499161
Speaker 1: You go to work at--where do you go to work when you do find a job after--
Speaker 2: Oh I come--
Speaker 1: --after college [Colored Normal Industrial Agricultural and Mechanical College of South Carolina; South Carolina State University, Orangeburg, South Carolina]?
Speaker 2: While I was in graduate school [University of Pennsylvania] in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], I knew a black Republican from Orangeburg, South Carolina who opened a school in Philadelphia called William Penn Business Institute [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], William Penn Business Institute, and so he hired me while I was in graduate school.  He hired me for one-half of a year to teach English and business math--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --and to get me involved as a ward heeler for the Republican Party; that's a person who gets out the vote--they call them ward heelers (laughter), the terminology they use to get out the vote.  But, one of the responsibilities was to find out some of the needs that people might have that you could contact--that you could give them some help, or the party would give them some help, and later, when an election would come up, you would remind them of what the party had done for them in the expectation that they would vote for the Republican candidate at a time when the Republican Party was dominant in, in, in, in local politics in Philadelphia.
Speaker 1: And--
Speaker 2: And I've already done my sackcloth and ashes.
Story_ID: 499162
Speaker 1: So, when you leave Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], you go to work in the (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Tuskegee [Tuskegee Institute; Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, Alabama].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Tuskegee.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And tell me about that.
Speaker 2: When I came to Tuskegee as the last person hired, I was assigned five classes in world civilization.  I had not had world civilization since my first year in college [Colored Normal Industrial Agricultural and Mechanical College of South Carolina; South Carolina State University, Orangeburg, South Carolina], and so what confronted me my first quarter was to study ahead of the students and prepare to be ready to teach the students, and I did that.  I came to Tuskegee on a ten year--a ten month contract.  At the time I came to Tuskegee, I was offered a better job in Maryland for more money, but I had this desire to come to Booker Washington [Booker T. Washington] school for a year, and I got here--I was interviewing persons who knew Dr. Washington or had studied under Dr. Washington or had studied under Dr. Carver [George Washington Carver]; those were two people I was interested in, and I did find an old gentleman, Jalice Purdue [ph.], who had studied under Dr. Washington and had begun working at Tuskegee under Dr. Washington, Dr. Moton [Robert Russa Moton]; and so when I told him that I was only in Tuskegee for a year to conduct these interviews and to do these classes, he said to me, "Son, you are never going to leave Tuskegee.  Don't you know that when white people die, they want to go to heaven, but when colored people die, they wanna go to Tuskegee?"  And so here I am in Tuskegee.  Now, I did meet people who knew Dr. Was- a few people who studied under Dr. Washington, and among them was my future father-in-law [Levander Dew], and my future mother-in-law [Ettie Dew] was the mail person who delivered the mail to Dr. Carver.  My future father-in-law had studied under Booker Washington and was the personal friend with Dr. Carver, so I got tied into that history, and my wife [Maree Morse Toland]--Dr. Carver was friendly with my wife.
Story_ID: 499163
Speaker 1: What is your wife's name?
Speaker 2: Maree Nelsina Morse [Maree Morse Toland], M-O-R-S-E.
Speaker 1: How do you spell her first name?
Speaker 2: M-A--M-A-R-E-E, N.  Don't put that Nelsina there, she'll shoot me (laughter). Maree N. Morse, M-O-R-S-E.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And she graduated from Tuskegee [Tuskegee Institute; Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, Alabama] in 1942.
Speaker 1: And what year did you marry?
Speaker 2: I married her August the 16th, 1950--quick work.
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: August the 16th, 1950. And we have three children--two daughters and one son.
Speaker 1: What are your children's names?
Speaker 2: Shirley DeeAnn Toland [Shirley Toland Dix]--
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: --and Marilyn N. Toland [Marilyn Toland], and Frank J. Toland, Jr. [Frank Toland, Jr.], and I have--and we have two grandchildren.
Speaker 1: What are their names?
Speaker 2: A granddaughter Farisai [Farisai Dix Broughton], F-A-R-I-S-A-I--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --and a grandson [Jamal Dix].
Speaker 1: What is his name?
Speaker 2: Grandson--oh boy (laughter); name slipped out of--slipped on me.
Story_ID: 499164
Speaker 1: So you were telling me your grandson's name.
Speaker 2: Oh, my grandson's name is Jamal Dix--
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: --and he is a senior at Morehouse College [Atlanta, Georgia], majoring in business.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, where are (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) My, my granddaughter [Farisai Dix Broughton] has made us--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --made us great-grandparents; we have a great-grandson named David [David Broughton], and we're expecting a great-granddaughter this summer.
Speaker 1: Right.  Do you wanna tell me about your son-in-laws?
Speaker 2: About?
Speaker 1: Your son-in-laws, or daughter-in-laws?
Speaker 2: Yeah--I don't have a daughter-in-law.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I have a son-in-law, Ernest Dix.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: He was a high school basketball player, college basketball player, and they have two children--
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: --my only two grandchildren.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: My daughter Marilyn [Marilyn Toland] is an attorney--is a practicing attorney in her own business in Connecticut--her own firm in Connecticut.
Story_ID: 499165
Speaker 1: Now, we were probably in 1954--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --and you were (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Let me step back a moment--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --because when I came to Tuskegee [Tuskegee Institute; Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, Alabama], I intended to stay a year, and then I met my future wife [Maree Morse Toland]--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --and I decided I'd stay an additional year, but in the process, she was to get a driver's license, and in the fall of 1950, I took her to the courthouse to get a driver's license.  I had no difficulty getting a driver's license, but the policy of the state trooper was to give the written examination, and then in the examination of the actual driving test, he would take all of the whites--no matter what time the whites came in, he would take all of them for their driving test, and then any black persons he had not tested would have to come back.  On the third trip, still she had not been given the driving test.  I challenged the officer for his discrimination; he said to me that I was messing with him at his job, doing his job, and I said to him, "Since I own property in the state--in the county, I help to pay your salary."  He said to me, in a threatening way, that I was messing with him trying to do his job, and he reached for his pistol and I had a sinking feeling that he might shoot me, a feeling I would have some more times in Alabama.  But when he did that to me, what it did was to really raise my anger level against the system, and I decided that I was gonna stay and fight.  So, in 1968, when I was elected unanimously, no opposition, as a member of the city council of Tuskegee [Alabama], the sheriff of the county was a person I had taught, and I insisted that I was going to be sworn in by him in the jury room on the spot where the officer had threatened to shoot me, so that I would get the last laugh.  Well, after the officer threatened to shoot me in 1950, I came back to the campus, and my co-worker whom I had known in graduate school [University of Pennsylvania] in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], when I told him about it, he said that there was a person on campus I should meet, Charles G. Gomillion--C.G. Gomillion.  When I met Dr. Gomillion and told him what had happened, Dr. Gomillion interceded on my behalf with Governor Folsom [Jim Folsom]--Big Jim--and Big Jim transferred this offending officer from the Macon County district [Alabama] to the Opelika district [Alabama].
Story_ID: 499166
Speaker 1: But I became very determined in the movement, and went on to become head of the membership committee, became the political--chairman of the political education committee, and one of the vice presidents of the Tuskegee Civic Association.  Here in the community, I got involved in interlocking organizations, the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People], which I had been a member of since I was eleven years old back in South Carolina, that my mother [Lily Sligh Toland] had brought--helped to bring there, the Macon County Democratic Club, which was the black organization of Democratic Party here, and the Tuskegee Civic Association.  And I went vigorously at it; a passion--it was like a passion to change things.  I got nasty telephone calls because they would trace my tag through the state licensing bureau, and thereby get my name out of the telephone book and telephone number, and they would call and to threaten me, and they called late at night and it was really getting on me nerves, my nerves.  So, on this one night, I sat by the telephone, and as soon as the telephone rang, I started cussing South Carolina style, and I must have used five minutes of cursing combinations, and the person on the other end listened until I put his mama in the dozens, and he slammed the phone down and never called again.  So it worked.
Story_ID: 499167
Speaker 1: Now, another incident took place was that when we had our Crusade for Civic Democracy going on, after the state legislature had gerrymandered the City of Tuskegee [Alabama], changing it from a four sided city to a twenty-seven or twenty-nine sided city, a real monstrosity, and had introduced legislation to abolish Macon County [Alabama] and divide it among five surrounding counties.  And it turns out that none of the counties wanted to accept the Veterans Administration hospital [Tuskegee Veterans Administration Medical Center; Central Alabama Veterans Health Care System East Campus, Tuskegee, Alabama] or Tuskegee Institute [Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, Alabama], this hot bed of radicalism.  Now, I must say for two presidents, President Patterson [Frederick D. Patterson] and President Foster [Luther Foster, Jr.], they were in the midst of this struggle--in the midst of our struggle but they were presidents over here (gesture).  Dr. Patterson had called us in, and he said that we had every right to exercise our rights as citizens, but don't bring Tuskegee Institute into the mix--don't bring it in.  Well, you couldn't avoid bringing it in because everywhere we went to agitate, or to speak, or whatever, they introduced us as being from Booker Washington [Booker T. Washington] school, or from Tuskegee Institute, so you couldn't get away from that.  And Dr. Foster would take the same position, that we had every right to do what we were doing.  Now, along the way, or in this struggle, or here in, in Macon County, I was to do some voter education work for the National Urban League in, in Lowndes County [Alabama], and the Sunday that I went to open my activities in Lowndes County speaking at the local school in Lowndes County, Hayneville [Alabama], H-A-Y-N-E-V-I-L-L-E, Hayneville, a reporter from Channel 12 [WSFA-TV]--TV Channel 12, Montgomery [Alabama], who was also a reporter, photographer for the state sovereignty commission [Alabama Sovereignty Commission], and that commission had taken to following some of us around, and he had followed me to Lowndes County--to Hayneville.  And I was speaking with some blacks there, and he came up; he was listening from the side, and then he came up and he said to me, "You are nothing but a black George Wallace," and I said, "I beg your pardon?"  And he said it again, and that's when I said that, "George Wallace is a white [HistoryMaker] Frank Toland, since I'm smarter than George Wash- George Wallace."  And I said a few other things which are unprintable, and he fled the scene.  But he's--that's the only time I've ever been called a black George Wallace.
Story_ID: 499168
Speaker 1: And now, I did teach the cla- teach those persons, and some of them became politicians.  But when I went down to deliver the commencement address to the group I had taught, I didn't know the location of the church 'cause it was, it was not the place where I'd been teaching them, and so I stopped at the bus--at the store which served as a bus station across from the county courthouse, and Lowndes County [Alabama] had hired two black deputies, big fellows, who could only arrest black persons.  So, when I asked the direction to the church, the citizen I asked wasn't gonna tell me--black citizen I asked wasn't gonna tell me in the presence of this black deputy.  What I didn't know was that the word of the graduation had gotten out to these deputies, and to the whites, that the NAPC--NAACP--the NAPC [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] was gonna have a rally; it wasn't true, it was a graduation of persons I had taught on behalf of the National Urban League and voter, in voter and political affairs.  And so I asked him--I asked this black deputy and he said, "There ain't gonna be no NAPC meeting here tonight."  And as a council member, I had a councilman's badge; it looks like a police badge, and I also had a card where Sheriff Amison [ph.], whom I had taught, had made me a special deputy sheriff, and so what I did was to flash this councilman badge in front of him, and he thought that I was a law enforcement officer, and I was going over to the church in order to check on these, these radical agitators over there, and so he gave me a police escort to the church, sirens flaring (laughter), and people wondering, what on earth is this?  And I go inside and I don't say anything until he leaves, and somebody's watching to see him leave, and then they say, "Doc, he's gone; give them crackers hell!"  (Laughter) And so, and so I delivered, I delivered the commencement address.
Story_ID: 499169
Speaker 1: Now, another time in Lowndes County [Alabama], when I was doing this work, I was--I had to visit a home, and I thought I knew where it was, but I got lost on this country road in Lowndes County.  And the policy that we used, that I had developed for myself, was that if I came into a confrontation with a white person who might shoot me, I was going make them shoot me in front, not going away from them so they could say that I'd committed some act and they were shooting me 'cause I was trying to get away.  But on this particular night, I knew--we, we, we sort of like operated this way, that if you get lost in these roads, go to the worst looking house and get help, get direction.  So the worst looking house I could see had a ramshackle porch that was--the roof was, was tilting one side, and it had a single light bulb on the porch.  So I go up these rickety steps to this porch and I knock.  The white man comes to the door and he said, "What you want, nigger?"  I think quickly.  I say, in a southern a voice as I could maintain, I said, "I'm an insurance salesman and I'm looking for--," and I made up a quick name.  He said, "They ain't no such niggers that around here."  I apologized profusely and I backed off those steps, and I got in that little old Comet I was driving, and I roamed those roads until I found my way out, but when I found my way out, I was in Montgomery County [Alabama] (laughter).  And so I came on in home; I never made it to my location that night.
Story_ID: 499170
Speaker 1: Another time that I was threatened was standing on highway 280 [U.S. Route 280] in the area where--in, in the city where you're going, Birmingham [Alabama].  I don't know anybody knew I was going to the high school there to, to do a little speaking--a little citizen speaking, and so I figured if they could--and I didn't know how to get there--I'd lost the way, so I stopped right on highway 280, and I asked a patrolman directing traffic, a policeman directing traffic, as politely as I could, how to get to downtown Birmingham; now if I get to downtown Birmingham, I know the way to the school.  And he must have had a bad day 'cause I don't know how he, how he turned on me like he did.  He put his hand on his pistol, he turned to me, and he said, "Nigger, you don't know how to talk to white people," and all I had said was, "Officer, sir, could you--," and that was the time that I had that sinking feeling--one more of those times I had that sinking feeling, because my attitude had always been in the movement, no matter what the danger was, that I was living for a cause; I didn't wanna die for it, I wanted to live for it.  And that was my attitude.  Another time, I was coming from the Highlander Folk School [Highland Research and Education Center, New Market, Tennessee] where I was supposed to have been on a panel with Eleanor Roosevelt, and we got to Monteagle, Tennessee, and the State of Tennessee had closed the Highlander Folk School on the grounds that it was selling without a license.  And what happened at the school was that they would fill the drink section, you know, with beer and all legal stuff, and it was on a basis, you know, honor basis; you would get a drink and you would leave a donation so that more drinks could be bought and all, and they called that selling, and they closed the school.  So, Gomillion [Charles G. Gomillion] goes on to Washington [D.C.]--we go up together, and I drive--I'm driving back to Tuskegee [Alabama] and in, in Decatur, Alabama, but northern Alabama, right after I cross the Tennessee line, I thought I wanted gasoline so I wouldn't have to stop in Jefferson County [Alabama]; we were calling Birmingham Bombingham then (laughter)--Bombingham. And so I stopped to get the gas and I looked up, and there on the window of the filling station was a gun rack with a gun, and beneath it a sign that said, "We don't sell to niggers," and so I figured that I'd act like I didn't see it, but somebody had seen me see it I guess; he comes out, and I say, "Fill it up, sir,"  and he said, "G.D. nigger, can't you read?"  And I said, "What are you talking about, sir?"  And he said--he pointed to his sign, "I bet you can read."  And he went into the filling station and reached up and got the gun.  I was gone.  When he reached up, I took off.  And from Decatur to Birmingham, I didn't let anything pass me; if they were gonna shoot me, they were gonna have to catch me coming from the other end (laugher).  And I stopped at a filling station just outside Birmingham coming south, and got the gasoline without any difficulty at all.
Story_ID: 499171
Speaker 1: The years of the Montgomery boycott through say '68 [1968]; we have the boycott, we have the march from Selma [Alabama] to Montgomery [Alabama]--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --the March on Washington, Kennedy's [President John Fitzgerald Kennedy] death, King's [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] death.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Tell me about what you're thinking about during this era, and some of the things that you might have been doing besides the voter registration; I know you were doing that.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.  I never marched because after the movement started in  Montgomery with the Montgomery Improvement Association, and Dr. King became the president of the group, I already knew something about Montgomery because Dexter Avenue Church [Dexter Avenue Baptist Church; Dexter Avenue King Memorial Baptist Church, Montgomery, Alabama] was the only place that the YWCA [Young Women's Christian Association] could hold a mixed-race meeting, and my wife [Maree Morse Toland] was YWCA directress on the campus, and so I knew the area there and I had--and I knew Ralph Abernathy, and it is through Ralph that I met Dr. King when he became the pastor of Dexter Avenue.  And our pastor, Raymond Francis Harvey, knew Dr. King's father [Reverend Martin Luther King, Sr.], and when Dr. King was in the first stages of the Montgomery Bus Boycott, we were having our movement through the Tuskegee Civic Association here, and we were supporting the Kin- we were supporting the Montgomery Improvement Association with visits to Montgomery in attendance, and planning--talking with some of the people.  And so Dr. King came over, along with Abernathy and one other person; for the life of me, I can't remember the name of but three f- three men.  And so Ralph and I were talking in one part of the parsonage, and Dr. King was talking with Reverend Raymond Francis Harvey in another, and I spoke too loudly, and what I said to Abernathy was, I said, "Ralph, we're fooling the hell outta these white people; they going to think we are nonviolent, and when they raise a foot to kick us, we're gonna throw them to the ground and beat hell out of them," and Dr. King heard it, and he came over and mildly chastised me and said that I needed some training in nonviolence, and so I agreed that I needed some training but I never got it, but I went to the sessions where Dr. King--where you could open it up with music and prayers--that is the singing and the praying, and then Dr. King would do the speech.  And we would go over, and after the meetings, we'd go to the hotel--the black hotel in town, the Hotel Ben Moore [Ben Moore Hotel, Montgomery, Alabama], and rehash things, have a little refreshments, and rehash.  Whenever the movement arrived at its destination, I would show up, but I did not march from Selma to Montgomery, but I was in Montgomery at the end of the march because they were--Dr. King was right; I was not ready for that.  My whole attitude had been that if someone attacks you--someone attacks me, then I'm gonna fight them back, and that kept me from coming to Tuskegee [Alabama] 'cause my mother [Lily Sligh Toland] knew that.
Story_ID: 499172
Speaker 1: What were your thoughts when King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] was killed?  What were your thoughts when King was killed?
Speaker 2: Oh, lord, it was devastating to me, and of all things, I was at church; we were having a bible study, and when we stepped outside at the conclusion of the bible study, that's what we were told; someone had heard it on television and had rushed over to the church where we were for the bible study, and they told us that he was shot and he was dead.  Now, after Dr. King was shot, I was in--had a position in city government, and so I went to this store across the street, and the proprietor didn't know I was in the store 'cause we did business--the city did business with him.  He didn't know I was in the store, and so he said to a white customer in there, he said, "Now that that damn nigger King is dead, what will the niggers do?"  And--well, in the first place, it sort of surprised me, as much business as he got from blacks, that he would say this, but then he didn't know I was in the store.  And so what I did was I, I, I, I showed myself and I said to him, "Now that Nixon [President Richard Milhous Nixon] has disgraced himself, what will the honkies do for leadership?"  And I left the store and I never went back--to this day.  The store is there; I don't know who runs it, but I'll never go back.
Story_ID: 499173
Speaker 1: Because you did so much work in voter registration, after Kennedy [President John Fitzgerald Kennedy] was killed and, and Johnson [President Lyndon Baines Johnson] stepped in there and became president, and the Voting Rights Act [Voting Rights Act of 1965] was upon us, what were your thoughts about that?
Speaker 2: Let me go back just a little bit further because (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay.
Speaker 2: --here in Macon County [Alabama], we got the right to more freely register and vote by court action--the supreme court.  What happened here is that we had to sue with the aid of the justice department.  The policy, when I first came to Tuskegee [Alabama], was that for a black person to become registered, he had to have a white voucher, a white person who would vouch that this is a good Negro.  And so when I--and that was a long application, about three pages of an application, and you had to be--had to file a perfect application in order to get to any other part of the process, and the application had a confusing statement on it--unless you read it carefully.
