Story_ID: 14032
Speaker 1: My name is Racine Tucker-Hamilton, and I am the interviewer.  And Edgar Carey Lane is the videographer.  And this interview is taking place on Tuesday, June 15th, in the Corals Room at Morgan State University in Baltimore, Maryland.  And if you would, please, for the record, please tell us your full name and spell it.
Speaker 2: Rosalyn Marian Terborg-Penn.  R-O-S-A-L-Y-N, M-A-R-I-A-N, T-E-R-B-O-R-G, hyphen-P-E-N-N.
Speaker 1: And could you please tell us the date and location of your birth?
Speaker 2: October 22nd, 1941, Brooklyn, New York.
Story_ID: 14033
Speaker 1: Share with us your favorite food.
Speaker 2: I don't have a favorite food.
Speaker 1: Your favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: I guess springtime.
Speaker 1: Your favorite color?
Speaker 2: Purple.
Speaker 1: Your favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Virgin Gorda in the British Virgin Islands.
Speaker 1: Your favorite phrase or saying.  Do you have one?
Speaker 2: "What goes around, comes around."
Story_ID: 14034
Speaker 1: Please tell me about your mother, starting with her name and her background, and how she grew up, that kind of thing.
Speaker 2: My mother's name is Jeanne Van Horn Terborg.  And she's from Indianapolis, Indiana.  And she was born in 1916.  And she went to Crispus Attucks High School which was the first black high school in Indianapolis, which, when she was a kid was a segregated town.  She went to Indiana Business College [Indiana], I think for a while.  And after marriage, she moved to New York City [New York], where she lived most of her adult life.  She now lives in Columbia, Maryland.  My parents moved to Columbia, Maryland from the U.S. Virgin Islands, where they were living.  And she is eighty-seven at this point.
Speaker 1: And did she ever share any stories with you about growing up?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.  One of the things, I think that was fun for a lot of middle-class kids, especially if they were light in complexion, was trying to pass for white to go to the movies, or just to "Cheat the white folks," as they would say.  So you would--and it was what we would call intermittent passing, 'cause you wouldn't really pass.  You lived in a black community so you didn't--you went to a black church.  So you didn't really pass, but it was making yourself up and getting all whatever, and buying a ticket so you could sit in the orchestra.  And it wasn't necessarily because that was the best seat, but this was getting over.  And they loved to do that.  She talked about that.
Speaker 1: And how would you describe your mother?
Speaker 2: She's a very family person, loves children, babies in particular, likes to boss, likes to be in control.
Story_ID: 14035
Speaker 1: Let's talk a little bit about your father.  Could you start by telling us his name and where he grew up and where he was born?
Speaker 2: All right, his name was Jacques Arnold Terborg.
Speaker 1: Could you spell Jacques for us?
Speaker 2: J-A-C-Q-U-E-S.  And he was born in 1909 in Suriname, in South America.  And his parents [Delia Bierman Terborg, Adrian Wilhelm Jacques Terborg] had migrated to the U.S. when he--when my grandmother conceived him, she went back home.  So that's why he was born there.  And so he lived between Suriname and New York, Brooklyn, New York for a lot of time in his life, and then eventually he came back when he finished secondary school to live in the states.  And he ended up being a jazz musician with Tiny Bradshaw's band in the 1930s, and that's how he met my mother.  They were on a tour in Indianapolis.  I think they used to tour mostly the South, but they would go as far west as Chicago [Illinois], Indianapolis [Indiana], that, that region.  And he met her at a cabaret.  And the next time he was in town, they visited, and so on and so forth, and so that's how they met, when he was on tour with Tiny Bradshaw.
Speaker 1: Did he ever share any stories with you about Tiny Bradshaw and the band?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.  It also had--a lot of it had to do with living in a segregated environment and going to the South, in fact, going to--I think Chicago was probably the only place where they went where things were not segregated, and having to live in rooming houses instead of hotels.  But usually they were in rooming houses where whoever ran it was usually a woman who was a wonderful cook, you know, that kind of thing.  But they toured on a bus, and the bus would have to stop, of course.  And if it was in the South, there was a question of where do you go to the bathroom, and where do you eat, and the challenges that they made with people.  And my father was a little hot-headed, and his fellow musicians would say, "Man, just calm down, just calm down."  You know, "You don't want us in jail.  Don't tell these folks off."  So he used to tell me about that.
Speaker 1: And how would you describe your father?
Speaker 2: My mother's [Jeanne Van Horn Terborg] kind of shy in public.  My father's more outgoing, and an intellectual.  He went to NYU [New York University, New York, New York] once he came to the states, and likes history.  He and--let me get her name now, isn't that awful, Dorothy Height, were in college together.  And they organized what we would consider now, the Black Student Union, but it was called the, I think it was called the Phoenix Club.  I don't remember exactly.  But it was an organization to promote intellectual ideas about black life and black history.  And so he talks, he talks about that.  And they have seen one another in their later years.  She was the president, he was the treasurer.
Speaker 1: And did he ever share any other stories about Dorothy Height?
Speaker 2: Not really, but he talked about [W.E.B.] DuBois coming and talking to the group, and how pleased he was to be a student of DuBois, you know, that kind of thing.
Story_ID: 14036
Speaker 1: Tell me a little bit about your ancestors.  How far back can you trace your ancestors?  Were they slaves,or free people?  Can you trace them back that far?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I can trace them back, especially on my mother's side.  Everybody was a slave originally, the ones that I can trace back to the late eighteenth century, I would gather, the Van Horns I can trace that far back.  My grandfather's [Earl Freeman Van Horn] grandfather was James Van Horn from Kentucky, Pendleton County, Kentucky.  He escaped as a young man, eventually went to Southern Indiana and settled in Connersville, Indiana.  And that's how the family eventually got to Indianapolis [Indiana].  He, he didn't.  He died in Connersville, but his sons migrated to Indianapolis.  But they were farmers.  They had a big farm in Connersville.  My mother's mother's [Mabel Knox Van Horn] people were also from Kentucky.  They were from the state capital, Frankfort.  And eventually, they migrated to various parts of the, of the South and middle West and finally settled in Indianapolis.  And that's how my grandparents met.
Speaker 1: And tell me a little bit about your grandparents on your mother's side starting with their names?
Speaker 2: Okay, my grandfather's name was Earl Freeman Van Horn, and my grandmother's name was Mabel Knox and then Van Horn.
Speaker 1: Can you spell Van Horn for us to make sure we have it correct?
Speaker 2: V-A-N, capital H-O-R-N.  She worked at home as a dressmaker and a caterer.  And she also worked at the Flanner House which was a black settlement house in Indianapolis.  And she taught hat making.  So it's interesting how she was, what, I guess a petty entrepreneur.  My grandfather's brother and father owned a house painting company.  And during the Depression, instead of being a Republican [political party] like most black people were in Indianapolis, my grandfather astutely joined the Democratic [political] party and campaigned for [Franklin Delano] Roosevelt.  And when Roosevelt became President, he got the contract to maintain the [Indiana] State House, to paint it and to be in charge of, of maintenance.  So during the Depression, he was what we would call a gatekeeper.  So a lot of black people got jobs because they knew Mr. Van Horn.  And so I thought that was a very interesting connection.  But they had started the business in Connersville, and when they moved to Indianapolis, they continued this Van Horn Painting Company.
Speaker 1: And do you have any stories about growing up with your grandparents?  Did you spend a lot of time with them?
Speaker 2: Oh, just a couple of weeks every summer.  And I had lots and lots of cousins--well, not lots and lots.  There must have been about eight or nine of us.  And most of us were in the same age range, the top, I'd say six or eight of us were.  And these were my mother's sisters' children.  She has two sisters.  She also has a brother, but his children in the lower range.  So, so we were not--those weren't the ones that I grew up playing with.  And they lived in Lockefield Gardens which is now kind of a celebrated, old black community in Indianapolis, not too far from where the Walker building, the Madame C. J. Walker [Sarah Breedlove McWilliams Walker] building is on Northwestern Avenue [sic, Indiana Avenue].  And they had preserved some of this.  But I remember playing in Lockefield, which at the time would be a lower-middle-class black community, specifically designed for lower-income and up to middle-income black people.  And it was a very interesting place, because housing was almost impossible in the late '40s [1940s] and early '50s [1950s] in Indianapolis, so everybody who was anybody lived in Lockefield Gardens.  And so I remember that, playing in Lockefield, and being with my cousins.
Speaker 1: And what can you tell us about your grandparents on your father's side?
Speaker 2: Okay--.
Speaker 1: Starting with their names.
Speaker 2: Their names, okay.  My grandfather's name was Adrian, A-D-R, A-D-R-I-A-N, Wilhelm, I can't--I have to see it, but I can't tell you right now.  But Adrian Wilhelm Jacques Terborg.  And he was born in the 1870s.  My grandmother's name was Delia, D-E-L-I-A, Elizabeth Bierman, B-I-E-R-M-A-N.  And they lived in Suriname, and from the stories that I have heard--and they were both children of mixed parentage.  I don't know anything about my grandfather's mother, other than she died when he was young.  And the father did not relate to them at all.  And he was very angry because here his mother is dead and his father has married, married now, a white woman.  So he has siblings who are white, but he would not relate to them.  He was very angry about that.  So that's really all I know about his family.  But the Bierman family, is interesting, the--my grandmother's father was a Jewish merchant from Suriname, whose family had migrated during the, I guess seventeenth, maybe sixteenth, seventeenth century, when they were kicked out of Spain and Portugal. They settled in Suri--his group settled in Suriname.  And almost all of his relatives had either black consorts, concubines, whatever you call them, and only a handful of them married them.  But this man was a merchant and had a lot of money.  And his consort, of course, consort, he never married anyone else.  So this was his, I guess you'd say his wife, had three children.  My grandmother was the youngest, and then died in child birth.  So his sisters raised these children.  So unlike my grandfather, this man acknowledged his children, took care of them, raised them, educated them, and that's how that went.  Now, my grandfather migrated from--Adrian, migrated from Suriname early part of the twentieth century, to go to Wayland Seminary which is now the seminary at Virginia Union [University] in Richmond [Virginia].  And it was a black seminary.  He married my grandmother through proxy so that she could then migrate as his wife to the states, and they settled in New York City [New York].  I guess this would be about 1907, 1908, something like that.  And then--my father was born in 1909.  And they went back and forth between Suriname and New York.
Story_ID: 14037
Speaker 1: Can you share with us your earliest memory of growing up?
Speaker 2: Climbing up on the refrigerator to get something in the apartment in Brooklyn [New York] and getting yelled at because I almost fell off, you know, that kind of stuff (laughter).  I remember living in Brooklyn, and when my brother [Jacques Arnold Terborg, Jr.] was a baby--my brother's two years younger than I am, and relatives coming.  My grandmother from Indianapolis [Indiana] would come, came when my mother was pregnant and apparently, she came when I was born too, but, of course, I don't remember that.  But I remember also spending every Sunday at my father's parents' [Delia Bierman Terborg, Adrian Wilhelm Jacques Terborg] house where we had Sunday dinner.  So I remember growing up in Brooklyn.
Speaker 1: And tell me a little about what growing up was like.  What was a typical day like for you as a child?
Speaker 2: Well, we lived in a black community, and we lived in what is now looked upon as a--negatively, I think, Bedford-Stuyvesant, which was a very nice, middle-class community when I was growing up.  And there were lots of kids on the street where my grandparents lived.  And we eventually moved into that big brownstone with them.  So St. Claire Bourne, the filmmaker, was one of the kids on the block, and William Pickens who was with the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People], a little older, but was on the block.  So there were lots of people on the block who you would consider to middle-class professionals.  And it was a very nice environment, and I remember going to PS 70 [Public School No. 70, Brooklyn, New York], which was the public school, and regretting it when we left and when I was in fifth grade to move to Queens [New York].
Story_ID: 14038
Speaker 1: Tell me a little bit about holidays, special occasions, that kind of thing in your family? What were like?
Speaker 2: I was--I'm thinking.  They varied.  We used to go to my grandparent, my father's family for all big holidays, dinners, 'cause my grandmother [Delia Bierman Terborg] would cook--my mother [Jeanne Van Horn Terborg] would help, but she would cook 'cause my father's [Jacques Arnold Terborg, Sr.] an only child.  And then as they got older, then it shifted to my parents' house.  And then my grandmother would come and help my mother do all of that.  So most of the holidays were with my grandparents, my grandmother's younger brot--well, he was older.  But the younger of her two older brothers, and my brother [Jacques Arnold Terborg, Jr.] and my father and my mother.  So it was small for the most part.  But then in the summertime, we would go to Indianapolis [Indiana], and sometimes we'd spend Fourth of July there or family members from Indianapolis would come to New York.  So summer holidays, we would spend with the Van Horns, but during the year, regular year, we were with the Terborg family.
Speaker 1: And could you please give us your sibling's name and birth order, including yourself?
Speaker 2: I'm the oldest.  My brother is two and a half years younger than I, and his name is Jacques Arnold Terborg, Jr.
Story_ID: 14039
Speaker 1: And I know you talked a little bit about your block, but do you remember the name of the street that you lived on?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. MacDonough Street, between Patchen and Reed.
Speaker 1: And can you tell us a little bit more about what your community was like?
Speaker 2: Well, that was the Brooklyn [New York] community.  We left there when I was ten and moved to Queens [New York] to a neighborhood in transition.  And this was more of a working-class rather than a professional neighborhood.  So we were, the black people who were moving into what was then called South Ozone Park and later became redistricted as Jamaica, we were, these were working-class white people who were very upset about this black encroachment.  So we had a very hard time as kids on the block.  The kids wouldn't play with us, until they learned that my brother [Jacques Arnold Terborg, Jr.] and I were both good at sports.  And we, my father [Jacques Arnold Terborg, Sr.] was a baseball enthusiast, so we went to games and things like that.  So we knew how to play softball.  So that's how I remember my early days in Queens from about ten to twelve or thirteen, is playing stickball in the street with the white guys, who only liked my brother and me because we were good players.  But the girls had a hard time--.
Speaker 1: Why did the family move?
Speaker 2: Well, Bedford-Stuyvesant was in transition then too, and a lot of the middle-class families were beginning to move out.  The houses were beginning to deteriorate, and it was just they--a lot of them thought it was time to go.  Now, most of them moved to another area of Brooklyn.  Why my family moved to Queens, I don't know.  But, so we were like the vanguard of this up and coming black community in, what later became Jamaica.  St. Albans [New York] was still for the wealthy entertainers.  So there was no, I mean we couldn't get a house in, in St. Albans at that time.  So we ended up in this area.
Speaker 1: Dr. Penn, can you tell me what sights, sounds and smells remind you of growing up?
Speaker 2: That's interesting.  It wasn't until I moved to Maryland that I realized how I missed the noise of New York, you know, cars, trucks, planes, people, trains, subways, those kinds of things.  So that reminds me of growing up, even though I wasn't aware of it at the time.  I remember the church that we went to in Brooklyn, Nazarene Congregational Church.  It was on the corner MacDonough and Patchen.  And the young minister who was there, who left when a number of his congregants moved to Queens.  And then we founded a new church in St. Albans, as it turned out, called St. Albans Congregational Church.  That, I think, was key to part of my socialization process, both in Brooklyn and Queens, because a lot of the people we knew from church in Brooklyn moved to Queens.  So it was almost like an extension of this church.
Speaker 1: So would the church be a site?
Speaker 2: Yeah, both of them would be, the Brooklyn church as well as the Queens church that developed later.  I mean in Queens, we were in a theater for a while until we raised enough money to build the triangle churches, they call it, in St. Albans.
Story_ID: 14040
Speaker 1: What was church like for your family?
Speaker 2: Well, in Brooklyn [New York], I don't remember significant participation other than going, as congregants.  In Queens [New York], my father [Jacques Arnold Terborg, Sr.] was a deacon [at St. Albans Congregational Church, St. Albans, New York] and then a trustee.  And so we were, and we were also charter members of the church.  I used to sing in the choir for a while, and my mother [Jeanne Van Horn Terborg] was involved in like the flower club, and hostess club and things like that.  So I do remember that church was also very community involved, Reverend Robert Ross Johnson was the minister.  He's passed now, but Andrew Young was an assistant minister for a while.  So we were very civil rights oriented, and I do remember the church participating in a picket, a boy--we were blocking the development of a housing community in Queens because there were no blacks--and this is in the sixties [1960s]--there were no blacks with contracts to work.  So it was an activist church, and, and I think that was very important to me.
Speaker 1: What was the young minister, Andy Young, like?
Speaker 2: Well, he was, you know, starting a family.  He had young children.  I think two of his children were born there, the two daughters and his wife, Jean was--I know she was at Queens College [New York, New York] when I was at Queens College.  She was an older student who was returning.  And he would preach every now and then, and he's a dynamic preacher.  I liked his, his preaching.  And then shortly after that, they left.  So they might have been, they were there in the very beginning of the church, and maybe within, oh, three years or so, three or four years, they left.  But I do remember him specifically, and then later on, you know, in Atlanta [Georgia], I said, oh, I know him, I know them.
Story_ID: 14041
Speaker 1: You talked a little bit about PS 70 [Public School No. 70, Brooklyn, New York], your elementary school.  While you were an elementary school student, did any of your teachers influence you?  What was elementary school like for you?
Speaker 2: Oh, it was interesting.  My favorite teacher, I think, was Ms. Whitehead, young black woman who student taught when I was in first grade.  And then when I moved on to second, was our teacher.  And she was full of energy and, you know, reminded me of when I was a young college professor, you know, full of energy and got us involved in things.  And I do remember the talent show, they had a talent show at PS 70 every year.  And she insisted on organizing two quartets from her class, a boys' quartet and a girls' quartet, and somehow I managed to get in the girls' quartet.  And that was, and everybody just, you know, oh, look at these little cute kids, you know, 'cause we were the little ones.  Most of the kids in the talent show were like fifth and sixth graders, you know, and here we've got two groups of second graders.  So, I remember that, and giving us confidence about how we can do almost anything we want to do.  And the black teachers at, at PS 70, for the most part, did that, but my mother did tell me that my first grade teacher, who was a Jewish woman, Mrs. Rosenbaum, who I didn't particularly like, 'cause she was stern, told her at a parent-teacher meeting once, "Now, your child is very smart.  I don't want her to become a cleaning lady," which I thought was very interesting.  She said, "So you make sure she goes to college.  She can be a teacher, but I don't want her to have to do day's work."  And my mother, of course, came home almost--she was offended that this woman would assume that this would happen.  But that was the general assumption, even in middle-class black communities, outsiders thought that, you know, black kids were gonna drop out of school, end up doing the only thing they could qualify to do and that would be clean house.
Speaker 1: What do you think Mrs. Rosenbaum would think of you now?
Speaker 2: Oh, I think she'd be very pleased.
Speaker 1: Tell me a little bit about what type of student you were in elementary school?
Speaker 2: Well, I was a gregarious student, and I can remember in kindergarten, so excited about going to school and being with all these people that I was "Bad."  But the teachers liked me, you know.  I was not fresh or rude, but I just couldn't be quiet.  So then I calmed down, and, of course, my parents made sure that I was a good student.  So I was a good student.  I was always a good student.
Speaker 1: And at that time in elementary school, did you have dreams and aspirations?
Speaker 2: No, no, I just wanted to have fun.
Story_ID: 14042
Speaker 1: This is a picture of my grandfather, Earl Van Horn in the far right and his father, Charles Van Horn and two of his aunts.  And I would say this was taken in the late 1920s in Indianapolis [Indiana].
Speaker 2: [Rosalyn Terborg-Penn's grandfather, Earl Freeman Van Horn (far right), great-grandfather, Charles Van Horn, and two great-aunts, Indianapolis, Indiana, ca. 1920s.  From the collection of Rosalyn Terborg-Penn.]
Story_ID: 14043
Speaker 1: Where did you attend junior high school?
Speaker 2: Shimer Junior High School, [P.S.] Number 142 [later the Queens School for Career Development, Jamaica, New York].
Speaker 1: Could you spell that for us, please?
Speaker 2: S-H-I-R-M-E-R, Shirmer, yeah, S-H-I-R-M-E-R.
Speaker 1: And what was junior high school like?
Speaker 2: No, no, no, I'm sorry, S-H-I-M-E-R, there's no "r".  Oh, man, that was a trip.  That's what made me decide that I did not want to be a teacher.
Speaker 1: Why?
Speaker 2: Kids were, I mean, I mean hormones are flying, and kids are acting crazy.  There was tension between the black and white students when I got there in seventh grade.  And then by the time I finished, almost all the white students were gone.  There were primarily Italian and black students at this school.  And there was always something going.  And the teachers did not like the Italian or the black students, so they picked on us a lot, even when we weren't doing anything.  It would be, "Oh, well, this class has to stay after school."  I had a couple of nice teachers, but for the most part, junior high school--now, I did take a shop class, which I'm glad I took, which we had to take called electrical wiring.  And that has helped me around my house, you know, 'cause I can, I can change the broken switches and I can replace the wires on the lamps and put in, you know, easy stuff like that.  But other than that.
Speaker 1: Who were some of your friends in junior high school?
Speaker 2: I don't even remember.
Speaker 1: Okay--.
Speaker 2: Oh, I do, yes, I do remember.  One man, who I talked to just last night as it comes, is Doyle Whittaker, who was a very, very good sprinter, went to the Penn Relays [track and field competition held at the University of Pennsylvania], did a lot of things, and then had an accident and pulled, did something and couldn't run anymore.  No, I don't know, not too many.  One of the problems was, when we left junior high school, half of us went to one high school and the other half went to another high school.  So a lot of the people who I was pretty friendly with went to a different high school, so I kind of lost track of them.  But junior high was not really a--I've kind of repressed most of that.
Story_ID: 14044
Speaker 1: What was the name of your high school?
Speaker 2: John Adams High School [Ozone Park, New York].
Speaker 1: And what was high school like for you?
Speaker 2: Well, I did make some friends in high school, even though in this high school, only about twenty percent of the students were black.  It was a working-class environment.  In fact, I'll tell you the name of the community in a minute, the community where they ran--two black guys were looking for a car, and they came to this--it's something beach in, in Queens.
Speaker 1: Howard Beach [Queens, New York]?
Speaker 2: Howard Beach.  Howard Beach students went to my school.  So you can understand the class differences that you would find there.
Speaker 1: What were some of the class differences?
Speaker 2: Oh, you had a lot of working-class, the majority of the white students were working-class, and some of the black students too.  Most of the middle-class students ended up in what we, what was the honors section.  So I was in an honors class, and I say that because I think we came more prepared.  It wasn't that we were so much smarter, but we came more prepared.  And it was interesting the makeup of the two honors sections that, it was section one and section two, and there were maybe fourteen sections in each grade.  About 20 percent of the students were black.  So it was, it kind of reflected the--we had a significant Jewish minority too, so there were about twenty percent of the students in the classes were Jewish.  And those were the places where people were aspiring to go to college. The majority of the students couldn't wait to get out of high school so they could get a job.  And a lot of them dropped out of high school for various reasons, a death in the family, a parent died.  I have to drop out of high school to help my mother, that kind of thing.
Speaker 1: And did you have dreams and aspirations in high school?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, that was interesting.  I wanted to be an architect, 'cause I liked to draw.  I liked to design.  I was good in math.  It was the kinds of things that, that would lend itself to that.  And I had a very older person, who looked like she must have been ready to retire soon, as my guidance counselor, Mrs. Sargent.  "You don't want to be an architect because it, there'll just be boys in your class.  You don't want to be in a class just with boys.  You know, they'll tease you, and, and it'll just be hard."  And she intimidated me so badly that I decided, well, okay, I won't be an architect.  But I still didn't know what I wanted to be.  But then I later realized that what she was saying is, it's gonna be very hard for a woman to make it in the profession, but she couldn't quite say that.  So she went with the old clichés, "Oh, you don't want to be in a class with boys."  Well, I didn't have problem with boys, but she really intimidated me with that.  So I got the feeling that we were discouraged, a lot of us were discouraged.  My support system was at home.  My father [Jacques Arnold Terborg, Sr.] and my grandfather [Adrian Wilhelm Jacques Terborg]--and his father used to debate at the dinner table on Sunday as to whether I was gonna be a doctor or lawyer, not that I wanted to be either.  But the idea was that I was gonna be a professional of some kind.  And there was no--there was a presumption that my brother [Jacques Arnold Terborg, Jr.] and I were going to college.  But I didn't get that in either junior high [at Shimer Junior High School, P.S. Number 142, Queens, New York] school or high school.
Speaker 1: And what kinds of things did you enjoy doing in high school, and what kind of young lady were you?  What kind of young woman were you developing into?
Speaker 2: Roller skating, rink skating.  I liked to do that.  We lived near Baisley Park [Queens, New York], which had a nice lake.  And it would freeze, and we would ice skate in the winter there.  I also played handball, which was a very interesting sport because most of the schoolyards had handball courts in New York City [New York], and I learned to play handball.  So I was sports--I didn't date.  I'd go out in groups.  I had a club called the Cameos, a girls' club, and that we formed when I was in high school.  And some of us knew one another from junior high.  So some of the girls went to Andrew Jackson High School [Queens, New York], and some of us went to John Adams High School.  So the social life was not school-based.  It was outside of school.  The other thing is I was in Jack and Jill [of America, Inc.] and had been in Jack and Jill since we lived in Brooklyn.  So most of, a lot of--I shouldn't say most, a lot of my friends lived in Brooklyn [New York] or Manhattan [New York] and I met them through Jack and Jill.
Speaker 1: What about high school?  Were you involved in any clubs or activities in school?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I was in the cheering section.  I wasn't a cheerleader, didn't make cheerleader.  One of the reasons was there was only one black cheerleader allowed on the team.  They didn't tell us that, but it was kind of like the judges would decide which one they wanted, and then the rest of us, our votes would, the votes would be skewed.  And so if you didn't make cheerleader, then you could be in the cheering squad, and we accompanied the cheerleaders.  Now, what was interesting--I forgot about this--kids that I knew from Brooklyn, by the time I got to high school, were migrating to Queens.  So here I run into people that I knew in Brooklyn, who were a little older, especially men, they were male students that I knew.  And they were good athletes.  So they made the basketball team shine, and that, there was tension there too because the whites students who had originally dominated the basketball teams were being pushed out because these black guys were so much better.  So I do remember that.
Story_ID: 14045
Speaker 1: How did you make the decision about where you would go to college?
Speaker 2: Well, my parents [Jeanne Van Horn Terborg and Jacques Arnold Terborg, Sr.] made it.  I'm diabetic, childhood--juvenile diabetic.  And they didn't want me to go on campus.  They were afraid.  I wanted to go to a black school, somewhere away from home, but I ended up right there in Queens, at Queens College [New York, New York], as a commuting student.  And that way, my mother, in particular, could keep track of me better.
Speaker 1: And what were your experiences like at Queens College?
Speaker 2: Oh, it was almost an extension of everything else.  You know, racism; some teachers who liked you and pushed you.  I met--well, one of my closest friends I met in high school, Andrea Benton Rushing.  And the other close friend, Celestine Evans Grimes, well, really, Austin Evans Grimes, I met in college.  And those are my two longest, endearing friends, I mean friends who I've known forever, and we're still friends, even though they don't live in the area.  We still keep close.  So I did meet some interesting people in college.  We were interested in the Civil Rights Movement.  There were only about a hundred black students on the campus in the day.  There were more in the evening.  Out of a school of three thousand, only a hundred black students.  So we all knew one another.  But there was also a significant number of militant white students.  And we organized in the late, latter part of my years, like in my junior and senior years at college.  We were really organizing.  And in my senior year, we were sending students to Prince Edward County in Virginia to tutor, and a lot of the students got involved in SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee] and went South.
Speaker 1: Were you involved in SNCC?
Speaker 2: No, un-un.
Speaker 1: Well, why Prince Edward County?
Speaker 2: Well, that's when they were--they shut down the high school.  And some of the people in education, who taught education, who were very appalled by this, suggested to our civil--we were, really it was an NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] group on campus, that we needed to send students down there.  So what we did, in fact, my church [St. Albans Congregational Church, St. Albans, New York] was very involved in this, as, as most of these young white students had, didn't interact with black people at all, other than the handful of us that they knew from college.  So the summer before they went, they came to my church to work with black kids in the day camp, so that they would know how to interact with them.  Of course, what they didn't realize was they were gonna be dealing with middle-class black kids, who are Northerners, urban, and when you go down to Farmville [Virginia], you know, you're gonna be with rural kids, black kids who are, are not as, as profession--their families are not as professional.  I'm not saying everybody was that case, but you're gonna be dealing with a different kind of people all together.  But at least they knew how to interact, not fright--they were not frightened of dealing with black kids.
Speaker 1: And interestingly enough, there has been a publicity the last couple of years about what happened in Prince Edward County in Farmville, and many of those students have now been awarded their high school degrees and that kind of thing, who had to leave the county to go to school.  What are some of your thoughts, and especially as we look at the fiftieth anniversary of Brown versus the Board of Education [of Topeka Kansas, 1954]?
Speaker 2: What are my thoughts about all of that?
Speaker 1: And being involved, you know, at that very early stage?
Speaker 2: I'll tell you, Brown didn't hit me.  What hit me more than Brown was [the murder of] Emmett Till [1955], you know.  I remember seeing his picture in 'Jet' magazine, and he was either my age or just a little older.  I'm not sure, but, you know, I could see myself, oh, my goodness, you know.  And I would go to the summer to a,a--not really segregated, but it was kind of still segregated, Indianapolis [Indiana].  It wasn't the South, but it may as well have been an extension of it.  So my thought was, "Oh, my goodness, suppose my brother [Jacques Arnold Terborg, Jr.] and I are in Indianapolis, and we say the wrong thing and then somebody's gonna lynch us."  So I was more focused on, I was traumatized by Emmett Till.  The Brown case didn't affect me personally at the time because we were in integrated schools.  I mean, neighborhoods weren't necessarily integrated, but there was no rule saying that we couldn't go to school with the white kids in our community.  So it wasn't 'til later that I really thought about Brown.  I remember the, hearing about the Montgomery [Alabama] bus boycott.  The big thing we did in college, and that's where I really remember most of my direct action, was most of us got involved in the Northern Student Movement.  And if you recall, the Woolworth's [discount store] boycotts started in 1960 when I was a freshman, and that's when our chapter of the NAACP sent kids--we'd get on the subway.  We'd go to the biggest Woolworth's in Manhattan [New York], and we would picket that every Saturday all day long.  So we did that as a support.  And there was tension, because folks were very upset.  And the police were mad because they had to be detailed to protect us.  But I do recall that we were kind of a support group for the civil rights kids who went South.  We either raised money for them, helped train them, mobilized other communities to get involved.
Speaker 1: Why didn't you go South?
Speaker 2: Well, my parents didn't want me to leave New York cause they were afraid, you know, and in a way they were right, I, you know--I could see myself packing my insulin and trying to, to give my injection and have the police stop me and say, "Oh, no, you're a drug addict, you know."  So, I think because of my physical disability at the time, it was just not a question, not an issue.  I mean if my parents wouldn't let me go to Howard University [Washington, D.C.] just to be a student, you know they would have screamed if I had tried to go, if I had the audacity to drop out of college and go South, even though a friend of mine did, a couple of friends of mine that I knew from New York, who ended up at Howard, got very involved.  Jean Wheeler Smith is a good example of somebody who, who did.
Speaker 1: And were you at all just as equally astonished at what was happening in Prince Edward County, Virginia, since you were active with that, in terms of that they would shut down the schools, just close them?
Speaker 2: Nothing surprised us.  No, no, I wasn't surprised.  I mean, they tried to keep us from having Malcolm X come on campus.
Speaker 1: Did you have him, was he able to attend?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: What year was that?  Do you remember?
Speaker 2: It was in the '60s [1960s], some time, maybe '62 [1962], '62 [1962], '63 [1963].  And then there was Gus, communist, secretary of the Communist Party in New York, black guy.  His first name is Gus.  I want to say Davis, but I'm not sure.  The young socialists on campus wanted to bring him, and, oh, you would not believe.  The Veterans of Foreign Wars were very furious because we wanted to bring this black man who was a militant Muslim, not a Christian, and then this other black man who was a communist.  So the campus struck.  We had a boycott at Queens College, and I think about eighty percent of the students participated, despite the fact that teachers scheduled exams on that day to make us not go, and intimidated us.
Speaker 1: What year was this?  1962?
Speaker 2: I think about, '62 [1962], yeah.  This was the same year that we--and, of course, we won.  And there was so much publicity 'cause, of course, the T.V.s--cameras were there and everything, that the president of the college finally relented and said, "Okay."  And our argument was, "This is against academic freedom, you know.  You stand for academic freedom, you know."  So that was very good, but it was an uphill battle constantly.
Story_ID: 14046
Speaker 1: And after you graduated from Queens College [New York, New York], what did you do next?
Speaker 2: Well, my parents [Jeanne Van Horn Terborg and Jacques Arnold Terborg, Sr.] already knew I should get a Master's degree, and I agreed because I was a history major, and you really couldn't do that much with history then, without a Master's.
Speaker 1: What were you thinking that you wanted to do?  Were you thinking that you wanted to teach?
Speaker 2: No, oh no.  I knew I didn't want to teach, even though it's interesting, that's what I ended up doing.  But, oh, no, teaching, all those bad children, no, no.  I originally went to college believing that I was going to be a biology major, and I'd become a research scientist, and find the cure to some disease.  But when I got to Queens College, I found that most of my cohorts who were science majors had gone to one of the, the special science schools, like Brooklyn Tech [Technical High School, Brooklyn, New York] or Stuyvesant [High School, New York, New York] or Bronx High School of Science [Bronx, New York].  And they came with pre-college training, and the teachers were teaching them.  So those of us who just came from normal schools like John Adams High School [Ozone Park, New York] were falling through the cracks.  So I changed my major to sociology 'cause I was gonna become a social worker, and save the downtrodden kids.  I had seen 'West Side Story,' you know, so, you know, we were, we were gonna help these kids who were culturally deprived.  And I found the teachers to be racist.  And they were very upset with the boycott on campus.  So in my junior year, I met with my friend, Andrea, on her kitchen table, and she said, "What do you want to do?"  "I don't know, I don't know."  She said, "Well, let's look through the catalog and see what you're good at, and she got to history, and she said, you're good in history."  "History, nobody majors in history."  She said, "Well, yeah, they have a major."  She said, "All you want to do is graduate.  So major in what you're good at."  Well, I ended up being very good in history.  And so that's how I graduated with a BA in History.  But my parents said, "Now, you know you need to go to graduate school cause you can't do anything with just this bachelor's degree in History."
Story_ID: 14047
Speaker 1: I went to George Washington University in Washington [D.C.].  I had family who had, were at Howard [University, Washington, D.C.].  And that was a good place to go cause I had a network.  And I ended up at GW.
Speaker 2: And what year was this?
Speaker 1: '63 [1963].  And they didn't know I was black till I got there.
Speaker 2: And what was that experience like?
Speaker 1: Oh, man, "Are you sure you're in the right place?  Who did you say you were again?"  And in those days you had to send a photograph.  And you see, if you send one of those little cheap black and white things that reproduce, you know, so everything light looks white, everything dark look dark so, black, so I sent this photograph.  I went to a school that had a very large Jewish population.  Terborg, they didn't know what that was.  They thought it Terberg.  So, you know, when I got there, they assumed that I wasn't black, and then when they saw me, here it is August, and my hair's standing all over my head.  I'd been out in the sun playing whatever sport I was playing at the time.  And they were shocked.  But I managed to--but then you see, the following year was the '64 [1964], 1964 Civil Rights Act.  And what I heard through the grapevine later was that they were so glad that they had this black student, that they were not gonna persecute me any more, and they wanted me to finish so that they could say, "Oh, we have a black student," you know.  So, it was, that was interesting.
Speaker 2: What was it like for you being in Washington, D.C. during the Civil Rights Movement?
Speaker 1: I was in this group called D.C. Students for Civil Rights.  And we came from all over, and all the campuses were pulled into this particular group.  And we ended up lobbying for the 1964 Civil Rights Bill.  And that, that I thought was interesting.  It was another leg of Northern Student Movement, and met my first husband involved--there.  We broke up shortly after, after we got married, but it was an interesting thing.  And what I found was that some of the students who joined the group, were children of [U.S.] Congressmen, who were really slumming, in rebellion, you know.  And they liked to party, but they really weren't on the picket lines.  I think, I thought that was a very--that's when I realized, to some extent, that privilege--privileged people are in another category all to themselves.  And they can get in trouble and get away with it or get just a little slap on the wrist.  And they can rebel, and not have to pay the consequences.
Story_ID: 14048
Speaker 1: So you earned your Master's degree [from George Washington University, Washington, D.C.] in 1967, and at that point, what were you thinking you were going to do?
Speaker 2: I wasn't sure.  Here I am in Washington, D.C., couldn't get a job, looked all around.  The kinds of jobs that were open were with the CIA [Central Intelligence Agency], please.  And, 'cause, you know, they had a board on campus for jobs available.  So there were government kind of jobs you could get.  And the CIA was recruiting history majors.  Anyway, a friend of mine from Queens College [New York, New York] was also at George Washington working on her Ph.D. and she told me about this job at Friendship House Association, which is a settlement house in Washington, and that they were looking for a daycare teacher.  And luckily I had worked in my church in day camp.  And in my senior year in college, I had worked at the Queensboro Children's Shelter, so I had some experience working with kids.  So that's how I got my first professional job.  Plus, they knew I had a minor in sociology, so, you know, all those kind of, kind of fell in place.  The history had nothing to do with it, but all my other previous experience.  And that was an interesting--.
Speaker 1: What was that like for you?
Speaker 2: I liked Friendship House.  The poverty program was starting.  So there was a wing of the poverty program in there.  I liked working with these pre-schoolers, met some very nice people, met my second husband [William Penn] there.  And I liked Friendship House.
Story_ID: 14049
Speaker 1: We then tried to look for a house, couldn't find a house we could afford in [Washington] D.C., so Columbia was opening up, Columbia, Maryland, which is a planned city.  And so my husband [William Penn] said, "Why don't we go out there?"  And I said, "I'm not commuting from Columbia to Washington."  So he said, "Well, if I can get you a job in Baltimore [Maryland], which is closer, would you?"  I said, like an idiot, I said, "Oh, yeah, sure," not thinking what it would be.  He said, "You know, a friend of mine's husband works at Morgan State University--it was college then, Morgan State College [Baltimore, Maryland].  Maybe you could get a job teaching history."  "Sure," you know.  Well, lo and behold, this was when baby boomers were in college, and they needed teachers.  And since I had my Master's, and I had done a little writing, and I had a good reference from the person that I was working with who knew the chair of the history department, I got the job.  So it's who you know sometimes.  And I've been at Morgan since 1969.
Speaker 2: And tell me a little bit about how Morgan has changed over the years?  What has been the biggest change you think?
Speaker 1: Oh, who knows?  I mean--.
Speaker 2: Has the biggest change been with students or been with the university itself?
Speaker 1: Well, the bigger an institution gets, the more bureaucracy there is.  So when I went to Morgan, it was a college, with one dean and the president who walked the campus all the time.  You'd see him anywhere, in the building, in the field house, in the canteen.  You knew you'd better be on your Ps and Qs if you saw the president.  So that was, it was a different time altogether; very smart kids there in the '60s [1960s].  And when he left, shortly after I got there, in fact, he left at the end of the academic year--.
Speaker 2: Who was the president when you came?
Speaker 1: Martin Jenkins, who had been there thirty-five years or so.  We had a series of interim presidents and presidents that were coming and going and whatever for, oh, a long time.  Integration was beginning to take in, strike in, in the '70s [1970s], very much so, but black students who would have gone to black schools, were now being recruited to go to black--to white schools.  So we didn't have the quality of students for a long time, but they have recycled back, I'd say, by the mid-'80s [1980s].  The kids who had gone to white schools who had children decided, we're sending our kids to black schools.  So half of New York and New Jersey seemed to be at Morgan at this point in time.  And a lot of those--because friends of mine had gone to Morgan from high school, and a lot of those people were kids who had gone to Morgan in the '60s [1960s] who by the '80s [1980s] were ready to send their children there.
Speaker 2: And when did you begin to become involved in women's studies, and more particularly, black women's studies?
Speaker 1: Okay, one of the mandates that we received as teachers coming in, and we taught the survey courses, I taught U.S. History, was that you had to integrate the black experience into the course.  And most of the textbooks did not do that.  So Benjamin Quarles had written 'The Negro in the Making of America', specifically, as the book to use to integrate the black experience.  He talked about black women.  And it was really the first time that I really noticed that people actually wrote about it.  So I tried to integrate that into my students' assignments.  But there were very few resources for them to find, other than what he had talked about.  So I set out, when I went to get my Ph.D., cause they encouraged me, Dr. Quarles did and Dr. McConnell, the chair of the department, if you ever want to get tenure and stay here, you have to get your Ph.D.  So when I went to Howard [University, Washington, D.C.] to get it, I decided I wanted to do something on black women's history.  I didn't know what, but I wanted to do that, not knowing that I'd be the first student at Howard to want to do that.
Story_ID: 14050
Speaker 1: Dr. Penn, once you got to Howard [University, Washington, D.C.] to work on your Ph.D., how did you determine what you were gonna do it on?
Speaker 2: Well, you had to pick a, a major.  And I selected U.S. History, before the Civil War, as my major.  And then you had to have three minors and whatever.  But you could concentrate in African American History, and that's why I picked that.  I also had a minor in African History and Twentieth Century U.S. History.  I wasn't sure what I wanted to do, but the first year, I wrote a paper in a class, a U.S. History class before the Civil War, was the time period.  And I was exploring women, and it won a contest.  It won the Rayford Logan Essay Contest for graduate students.  So from there, I extended it, and that became my first successfully published article, which people still use, which I found, which I find interesting, 'Discrimination Against African American Women in the Woman's Movement' [sic, 'Discrimination Against Afro-American Women in the Woman's Movement, 1830-1920']  And from there, I narrowed the women's movement down to women's suffrage.  So that's how I started that.
Speaker 1: And what did you discover about discrimination against African American women in the women's movement?
Speaker 2: That white women did not really want black women in, except in the very beginning when they didn't have supporters, they took the ones that they could get.  I also found that they preferred black men, to white--to black women.  I found it very interesting, and I'm still critiqued because this theme of discrimination is something I find all the time.  I mean it's, it's everywhere, all the time.
Speaker 1: Critiqued by whom?
Speaker 2: Primarily white scholars who say, "Oh, no, no, no, no, all, all women are disenfranchised, all women are victims of patriarchy."  I mean it's that kind of argument that you don't admit that down the road, your ancestors didn't like us either, you know.  So there's this, a defensiveness.  And when I "Call a spade a spade," as my father [Jacques Arnold Terborg, Sr.] used to say, they don't like it.  You know, so, but, hey, that's the way it goes.
Speaker 1: And who's fault do you think it is?  Do you think that African American women should have been more involved and demanded their rightful place?
Speaker 2: They did.  They did, but they'd be--they were invisible.  And I mean it's like today.  I mean there are things that black people, other--not only black people, just marginalized people do that never make it to the newspaper, never make it to the television, you know.  And what I found, to everybody's surprise, was that black women were very involved in the women's suffrage movement from the early days to, till 1920, when the Nineteenth Amendment was ratified.
Speaker 1: How--can you give us some examples, and tell us some stories?
Speaker 2: Well, a lot of the women's names we don't know, but, you know, there were groups of women who, whose leaders we probably know.  The National Association of Colored Women was very active, and Mary Church Terrell from Washington, D.C. was a significant leader in that.  Nannie Helen Burroughs, also from the Washington area, was very involved in the suffrage movement.  I found a lot of women in the Washington area who were cohorts, either in terms of their high school or college education or organizations they belonged to, supported it.  But I also found Southern women, like the women at Tuskegee [University, Tuskegee, Alabama] who were significant supporters of women's suffrage.  A good example would be Adele Alexander who's a historian, who lives in Washington's grandmother, Adella Hunt Logan, who was from Tuskegee, was a major women's suffrage advocate.  Lena Horne talks about her grandmother--who lived in Brooklyn, New York, in my grandmother's [Delia Bierman Terborg] neighborhood--was, who was a supporter of women's suffrage.  So it's information that you learn by the way.  It's not the kind of stuff that you find in the books.  What I was finding was the argument in the '70s [1970s] that black women were, really not committed to suffrage, and that black men were against black--against women wanting the vote all together.  So what I had to do was prove that was wrong.  So that was my job, to find that this was wrong; that maybe here and there, there might have been some people who didn't support it.  But the overall number who talked about suffrage, supported it for women.
Story_ID: 14051
Speaker 1: What is it that you hope your work in this area, that you hope people will gain from it, more particularly, women of color?
Speaker 2: Well, that politics is important, and that if you take it for granted, you'll be out in the cold 'cause public policy will not be for you.  It'll be for somebody else.  I think women are beginning, black women in particular, are beginning to learn about this.  And the more and more we have, like public television shows that reflect things, like the Ida B. Wells video ['Ida B. Wells: A Passion for Justice'] that was very influential--in fact, they use it in the classrooms now.  It's so funny, and this is a slight aside, I went to my daughter's [Jeanna Carolyn Terborg-Penn] high school for something, and one of the teachers, her history teacher said to me a few years--this was a couple of years later, when I was tutoring.  "Oh, yeah, I remember you.  You're Jeanna's mother, right?  Well, I showed a video on Ida B. Wells to my class," and, you know, the kids were kind of--and she said, all of a sudden one of the boys got up, "That's Mrs. Penn, that's, she's my neighbor, look at her, she's--."  I mean they were all, and then all the kids started watching, and then every now and then, oh, there she is again.  You know, it was an interesting, interesting thing.  And these were little boys, you know, in the class who were--and so they kind of picked up from that.  They didn't take things for granted.  They kind of looked because you never know when you might see somebody that you know on one of these videos, even if you don't know what they're talking about.  It's just the idea that, maybe it is, maybe you have to look at what black women are doing.  Now, I don't know if they thought of me as a black woman.  They thought of me as a neighborhood mother, but, but it was, it was interesting.
Speaker 1: And in your more than thirty years of teaching, and teaching particularly in this area, what are some of the changes that you've seen in terms of black women and, and the way that it's influenced your teaching style?
Speaker 2: I've found that when I introduced courses on black women at Morgan [State University, Baltimore, Maryland], that I got a significant number of men and women to take the course.  So it's not just the women.  Men took the course.  They were interested in, oh, let me see what this is about.  And then they were converted once they took the course.  I always include gender, a gender analysis in everything that I teach.  And I think that's something that's often missing.  And so what has happened is the students who I have produced who've gone on to get their Master's degrees or later to get their Ph.D.s have included black women in what they do.  It's like I learned from [Benjamin] Quarles, they're learning from me, and we're passing this message on.  Of course, it's on a more sophisticated level now because there's more analysis that deals with gender and black women in particular, 'cause it's not just women.  You have to say, black women, because black women are sometimes different than black men. Black women are sometimes different than white women.  And this is true of all ethnicities, I think.
Speaker 1: Did you meet some resistance here at Morgan when you first wanted to begin introducing women's courses?
Speaker 2: Not as much as I met at Howard [University, Washington, D.C.].
Speaker 1: Tell me about some of the differences.
Speaker 2: When I spoke up about wanting to do a dissertation on black women at Howard, to some of the male teachers in particular, who are gone now, by the way.  Oh, in fact, one guy said, "What kind of Mickey Mouse topic is that?"  I mean there was, it was a joke.  So luckily, Lorraine Williams was chair of the history department.  And she did not like this idea of joking about women, 'cause women are serious.  She didn't do women's history, but the idea that someone would want to resist studying black women or want to resist a student who wanted to study about black women.  So she was very helpful in paving the way so that I didn't have the resistance other than the little jokes that would go every now and then.  And finally, it worked.  At Morgan, Quarles was here in the early days.  And he liked the idea.  So if he liked the idea, nobody was gonna say to him, to somebody he was supporting, "You must be crazy."  So I didn't have any resistance here.  And by the time he left, others had picked up on what I was doing.  So I didn't have any problem that I can really recall, introducing courses on women.
Story_ID: 14052
Speaker 1: You have written innumerable things about women, women's history, black women, books, articles, etc.. Out of all the things you've written, what has been your favorite and most rewarding?
Speaker 2: Oh, that's hard.  Well, I like my [1998] book 'African American Women in the Struggle for the Vote [1850-1920]', which was a take on my dissertation.  My dissertation was about black men and women.  It wasn't just about women.  And so I almost rewrote the whole dissertation to include more black women, 'cause I knew there were more out there.  So the book evolved from the dissertation into something completely different.  And it became an award-winning book.  So I'm pleased about that.  I'm moving into African diaspora women's studies now.  And I have published a couple of pieces for that, in that genre, that I'm excited about.  I did a piece on women in politics, in the diaspora, around the question of the vote, and I looked at places like Puerto Rico, the Virgin Islands, which are the areas that I studied for the most part, and compared them to black women in the U.S.  So those--I don't really have any favorites, but if you compartmentalize the kinds of things I've worked on, I might have a favorite one in each compartment.
Story_ID: 14053
Speaker 1: How does the child who knew when she grew up and knew her whole life she was not going to become a teacher, become a teacher and a college professor?
Speaker 2: I think if I had gone to a predominantly white school, I would not have stayed.  After a while, you get a calling, and despite the fact that I publish a lot, I think I mentor more.  And mentoring is important in black life.  And I've been able to mentor here [at Morgan State University, Baltimore, Maryland], all kinds of students, even though I think my calling is to help black students.  But I just help whatever students who come here and want to study with me.  And even though I have resisted non-black students, I've given in because they've been persistent, "No, no, no, I want to study with you."  So it--they fan my ego, you know.  But mentoring is very important.  I was mentored.  If I hadn't been mentored, I wouldn't have made it.  So I think that that's important.
Speaker 1: Do you ever regret not studying architecture?
Speaker 2: Not really.
Speaker 1: What do you think your life would have been like had you not had that guidance counselor?
Speaker 2: I would have gone to Howard University [Washington, D.C.] in architecture school, become an architect and beat my head against a stone wall, because I think the men would have given me a hard time.
Speaker 1: And why did you want to share your story?  Why did you want to tell your story?
Speaker 2: I don't know.  I guess at a certain point in your life, you have to be a role model, and telling my story, I think it helps other women, younger women.  They see what you have to go through to get there, that it's not an easy path.  But it also lets them know that if you prevail, you'll do well, and you can make a mark.  And I think that that's what's important.
Speaker 1: And make the path a little easier for--.
Speaker 2: --those who come.
Speaker 1: --and you have certainly done that.
Speaker 2: Well, thank you.
Speaker 1: For those going into this particular field, history, women's, history, women's studies, what advice do you have for them?
Speaker 2: Do your homework, you know, understand whatever the methodological policies of your discipline are.  If you're in literature or sociology, history or whatever, understand the methodology, and follow the path so that you can do a good scholarly job.  You can do, you know, little magazine articles, that's one thing.  But if you want to really become a scholar, you have to do your homework, and get the correct information and analyze it properly.
Story_ID: 14054
Speaker 1: What is it that you haven't done yet that you'd still like to do?
Speaker 2: Win a major research grant, so that I can travel where I want to go, and have the resources available to me so that I can get the job done without having to juggle fifty things at one time, trying to scrape together the money to do the things that I need to do.
Speaker 1: What type of research would you most like to do?
Speaker 2: I would, I would continue doing African diaspora women's history, 'cause I find that to be very challenging cause it includes African American women, but then it also includes women of African descent in other parts of the world.  And since I like to travel, I'm involved in the Association of Caribbean Historians, 'cause I do a lot of Caribbean history.  I have found that to be very, very nice.  You get a chance to go out of the country and see a new place, a new culture and see it's not that much different, to some extent, than the culture you come from, which is black based.
Speaker 1: And if you were to win that research grant, where would you like to go first, and what would you like to study first?
Speaker 2: Oh, I don't know.  I haven't even thought that far.  You know, it's like let's get it--a MacArthur [Foundation grant] would be wonderful, you know, let's get it first, and then move on.  I'm not sure where I'd like to study first, but there's a world out there.
Story_ID: 14055
Speaker 1: What are some of hopes and current concerns for the African American community?
Speaker 2: That we have to take education more seriously and not settle, and know that it's gonna be an uphill battle, that you're gonna have to challenge the powers that be, but you have to continue to do it, to continue to do it.  And I want parents, in particular, to be serious about helping their kids, whether they're little or whether they're older, because if you don't provide some kind of support, and I don't mean financial, I don't mean buy them a car, give the money, and let them go.  But you have to continually support them emotionally, encourage them, make a way so they can find things that they're interested in and not tell them, well, you're gonna be a such and such, you know.  Find out what they like, encourage them to try things that will allow them to decide whether they want this profession or not.  But to assume, like the men in my family assumed about me, that I will be a professional of some kind, just make sure they understand, you're gonna be a professional.  Now, what kind of professional is something else.  But you're going to have to get some training.
Speaker 1: And how, how much have you seen over your years of teaching the change in terms of more colleges and universities offering courses in women's studies, more particularly, black studies, etc.?  Are you satisfied with what's being offered now?
Speaker 2: It ebbs, there's an ebb and a flow.  I'm not sure what the cycle is that we're in now.  But I think we're moving more and more into a period of renewed interest in black life, and that's because--this is just my opinion, the non-black topics, they're running out of.  The new research.  There's no new--not, there's very little new research in, let's say, straight U.S. history topics.  So what is happening is scholars, not black scholars necessarily, are saying, "Okay, let's go into black history," black women's history, in particular.  So there's a significant competitiveness now, and black women who, like the women in the Association of Black Women Historians, are finding it harder and harder to get positions in universities, because they're competing with non-black students, who are given an edge, or have an edge for whatever.  They have priv--they have privilege which allows doors to open for them.  And that's very upsetting to me.  So on the one hand, there's more available, but we're not often getting access to it.  The other thing, of course is--and I'm not a student who says, of this, that black--white people can't teach black history.  I, I don't believe that.  But lots of times students want black role models, and if all the role models who are teaching in the black studies program you're going to are not, don't look like you, whether in gender or in color, then there's a problem.  So we really need to look at this.  So there's some good things happening, but then there's some not-so-good things happening at the same time, and it's scary.
Story_ID: 14056
Speaker 1: How would you like to remembered?
Speaker 2: As a mentor.
Speaker 1: And what are you hoping your legacy will be?
Speaker 2: Well, I don't know.  I think I've been important in my sorority.  I'm an AKA [Alpha Kappa Alpha].  I think I've been important in associations that deal with women, and women scholars, the Association of Black Women Historians.  I've also been a chair of the committee on women historians for the American Historical Association.  But all of that comes together to some extent in networking with women and mentoring one another.  And I think that's how I want to be remembered by all those groups.  Oh, yeah, she was good.  She made a difference.  I'd like to be remembered that way.
Speaker 1: And why do you think that history is important?
Speaker 2: 'Cause history is everything that happened yesterday, or before--I mean everything yesterday and back, from yesterday on.  Everything we do becomes something in the past, and historians study the past.
Story_ID: 14057
Speaker 1: This is my wedding, a picture from my wedding in 1965, and my two bridesmaids, Andrea Benton Rushing on the left and Celestine Austin Grimes on the right.
Speaker 2: [Rosalyn Terborg-Penn (center) at her wedding with bridesmaids, Andrea Benton Rushing (left) and Celestine Austin Grimes (right), 1965. From the collection of Rosalyn Terborg-Penn.]
Story_ID: 14058
Speaker 1: This is my second husband, William Penn, in the background, and my daughter, Jeanna Carolyn Terborg-Penn [sic, Penn].
Speaker 2: About what year?
Speaker 1: 1972.
Speaker 2: [Rosalyn Terborg-Penn (right) with her second husband William Penn and daugher Jeanna Carolyn Penn, 1972. From the collection of Rosalyn Terborg-Penn.]
Story_ID: 14059
Speaker 1: Okay.  This is a group shot of my parents, as they're older.  I guess 1996, maybe.
Speaker 2: And could you say their names again?
Speaker 1: Okay, Jacques Arnold Terborg, Sr., Jeanne Van Horn Terborg, and in the back behind Jeanne is my daughter, Jeanna Penn.
Speaker 2: [Rosalyn Terborg-Penn with her parents Jacques Arnold Terborg, Sr. and Jeanne Van Horn Terborg and daughter Jeanna Carolyn Penn, 1996. From the collection of Rosalyn Terborg-Penn.]
Story_ID: 14060
Speaker 1: C. Michael Terry.  We've been partners longer than I've been married to anybody else.
Speaker 2: About what year was that one taken?
Speaker 1: I'd say maybe seventy, no maybe '79 [1979], '80 [1980].
Speaker 2: [Rosalyn Terborg-Penn and partner C. Michael Terry, ca. 1979-1980. From the collection of Rosalyn Terborg-Penn.]
Story_ID: 14061
Speaker 1: My daughter [Jeanna Carolyn Penn] is on the right, far right, and that's Oprah Winfrey and her friend Dianna is on the left.  And this is when Oprah had a talk show in Baltimore [Maryland].
Speaker 2: About what year?
Speaker 1: Oh--.
Speaker 2: 1980s?
Speaker 1: In the '80s [1980s], yeah.
Speaker 2: [Rosalyn Terborg-Penn's daughter, Jeanna Carolyn Penn (right) with Oprah Winfrey and friend, Baltimore, Maryland, ca. 1980s. From the collection of Rosalyn Terborg-Penn.]
Story_ID: 14062
Speaker 1: This was at the Southern, the Southern Historical Association meeting in, I think, 2001.  I was the guest speaker at the Southern Association of Women Historians, and Darlene Clark Hine is in the background, and Jacqueline Rouse who was president of the group that year is on the right.
Speaker 2: [Rosalyn Terborg-Penn (left) with Darlene Clark Hine (middle) and Jacqueline Rouse (right), at a conference of the Southern Association of Women Historians, 2001. From the collection of Rosalyn Terborg-Penn.]
Story_ID: 14063
Speaker 1: Okay, that's my brother Jacques Arnold Terborg, Jr., and me.  And this might have been, oh, late '40s [1940s], I'd say.
Speaker 2: [Rosalyn Terborg-Penn with her brother Jacques Arnold Terborg, Jr., ca. late 1940s. From the collection of Rosalyn Terborg-Penn.]
Story_ID: 14064
Speaker 1: This is in front of my parents' house in St. Albans [New York].  I'm standing with my daughter, Jeanna.  This is when she's a little girl.
Speaker 2: [Rosalyn Terborg-Penn with her daughter Jeanna Carolyn Penn, St. Albans, New York, ca. 1975. From the collection of Rosalyn Terborg-Penn.]
Story_ID: 14065
Speaker 1: And this is my mother [Jeanne Van Horn Terborg] and me.  I guess this would be mid '40s, 1940s, at my grandparents' house in Brooklyn [New York].
Speaker 2: [Rosalyn Terborg-Penn and her mother Jeanne Van Horn Terborg, Brooklyn, New York, ca. 1940s. From the collection of Rosalyn Terborg-Penn.]
Story_ID: 14066
Speaker 1: My father [Jacques Arnold Terborg, Sr.] and his parents [Delia Bierman Terborg, Adrian Wilhelm Jacques Terborg] on their fiftieth wedding anniversary.  And that would have been some time in the late '50s [1950s].
Speaker 2: [Rosalyn Terborg-Penn's father, Jacques Arnold Terborg, Sr. (left) and his parents, Delia Elizabeth Bierman Terborg and Adrian Wilhelm Jacques Terborg, celebrating their fiftieth wedding anniversary, ca. 1955-1959. From the collection of Rosalyn Terborg-Penn.]
Story_ID: 14067
Speaker 1: My mother's [Jeanne Van HornTerborg] parents, Mabel and Earl Van Horn, taken in Indianapolis [Indiana], also in the early '60s [1960s].
Speaker 2: [Rosalyn Terborg-Penn's grandparents Mabel Knox Van Horn and Earl Freeman Van Horn, Indianapolis, Indiana, early 1960s. From the collection of Rosalyn Terborg-Penn.]
Story_ID: 14068
Speaker 1: This is my college [Queens College, New York] graduation picture.  I finished in 1963.
Speaker 2: [Rosalyn Terborg-Penn's graduation photo from Queens College, New York, New York, 1963.  From the collection of Rosalyn Terborg-Penn.]
Story_ID: 14069
Speaker 1: And that's my baby picture.  I don't know, when would this be?  Maybe--how old?
Speaker 2: You look like you're about, maybe three.  You look like you're about two or three.
Speaker 1: Two or three.  I'd say more two, so I'd say maybe 1943, '44 [1944] maybe.
Speaker 2: [Rosalyn Terborg-Penn, ca. 1943-1944. From the collection of Rosalyn Terborg-Penn.]
Story_ID: 14070
Speaker 1: Okay, this is when I worked at Friendship House in Washington, D.C., and that's [First Lady] Lady Bird Johnson on the right.  She'd come to beautify our settlement house.
Speaker 2: And I'm sorry, you said the year, didn't you?
Speaker 1: No, I didn't, did I?  Let me think.
Speaker 2: Nineteen sixty-four?
Speaker 1: I'd say more like '64 [1964], '65 [1965], yeah.
Speaker 2: [Rosalyn Terborg-Penn (seated) with U.S. First Lady 'Lady Bird' Johnson and unidentified children, ca. 1964-1965.  From the collection of Rosalyn Terborg-Penn.]
Story_ID: 14071
Speaker 1: This is at Morgan State University [Baltimore, Maryland], a fundraiser we had, and Ossie Davis is on the right, and my partner, C. Michael Terry on the left.  And this would have been the early '90s [1990s], '92 [1992] maybe.
Speaker 2: [Rosalyn Terborg-Penn (center) with actor Ossie Davis (right) and C. Michael Terry (left), Baltimore, Maryland, ca. 1992.  From the collection of Rosalyn Terborg-Penn.]
Story_ID: 14072
Speaker 1: Okay, this is when I was in high school [at John Adams High School, Ozone Park, New York].  As you can, this is a, a conference at Xenos, Phi Delta Kappa sorority had a high school sorority called Xenos.  And we are panelists.  I'm--.
Speaker 2: This is you right here?
Speaker 1: Right, no, next to it.  To--the other way.  That one, that's me, right.
Speaker 2: And about what year?
Speaker 1: Oh, '57 [1957], '58 [1958].
Speaker 2: [Rosalyn Terborg-Penn (second from right) with other Phi Delta Kappa Xeno members, Ozone Park, Queens, New York, ca. 1957-1958. From the collection of Rosalyn Terborg-Penn.]
Story_ID: 14073
Speaker 1: My father's [Jacques Arnold Terborg, Sr.] the guitarist, and this is the percussion section of Tiny Bradshaw's band in the late '30s [1930s], I'd say, maybe '39 [1939].
Speaker 2: This is your father right here?
Speaker 1: Right, um-hum.
Speaker 2: [Rosalyn Terborg-Penn's father, Jacques Arnold Terborg, Sr. (left), guitarist for Tiny Bradshaw's band, ca. late 1930s. From the collection of Rosalyn Terborg-Penn.]
Story_ID: 14074
Speaker 1: And these are my cousins, my Van Horn cousins in Indianapolis [Indiana], one of the summers that we were there.  I would say mid-50's [1950s].
Speaker 2: [Rosalyn Terborg-Penn's cousins, Indianapolis, Indiana, mid 1950s. From the collection of Rosalyn Terborg-Penn.]
Story_ID: 14075
Speaker 1: This is second grade, the contest that we had at PS 70, and I can tell you the girls' names.  Barbara Roche, then I'm next--this is from left to right, Roberta Ross and Helen Nightingale.  And this would have been--I was seven, so this was maybe '48 [1948], '49 [1949].
Speaker 2: [Rosalyn Terborg-Penn (second from left) in the second grade at PS 70 with her classmates, Brooklyn, New York, ca. 1948-1949. From the collection of Rosalyn Terborg-Penn.]
Story_ID: 14076
Speaker 1: This is my parents [Jacques Arnold Terborg, Sr. and Jeanne Van Horn Terborg] wedding picture in 1940.
Speaker 2: [Rosalyn Terborg-Penn's parents, Jacques Arnold Terborg, Sr. and Jeanne Van Horn Terborg, in their wedding portrait, 1940. From the collection of Rosalyn Terborg-Penn.]
Story_ID: 14077
Speaker 1: This is my grandmother's wedding picture.  And this would have been about 1907, 1908, and the photograph on the flowers is her husband who she was marrying by proxy.  This is Delia [Elizabeth Bierman] Terborg.
Speaker 2: [Wedding portrait of Delia Elizabeth Bierman Terborg, Rosalyn Terborg-Penn's grandmother, ca. 1907-1908. From the collection of Rosalyn Terborg-Penn.]
Story_ID: 14078
Speaker 1: This is my daughter, Jeanna Penn, shortly after she graduated from Morgan State University [Baltimore, Maryland] in 1994.
Speaker 2: [Rosalyn Terborg-Penn's daughter, Jeanna Carolyn Penn, Baltimore, Maryland, 1994. From the collection of Rosalyn Terborg-Penn.]
Story_ID: 14079
Speaker 1: This is a reproduction of photo of my grandmother [Delia Elizabeth Bierman Terborg], her siblings, and their mother which was taken in Suriname in the late nineteenth century, maybe in the 1890s or so.
Speaker 2: [Rosalyn Terborg-Penn's great-grandmother, grandmother, Delia Elizabeth Bierman Terborg as an infant, and her siblings, Suriname, South America, 1890s.  From the collection of Rosalyn Terborg-Penn.]
Story_ID: 14080
Speaker 1: My mother [Jeanne Van Horn Terborg] is the one with the big bow on her hair.
Speaker 2: [Rosalyn Terborg-Penn's mother, Jeanne Van Horn Terborg (standing, right) with her grandparents, Earl Freeman Van Horn and Mabel Knox Van Horn, and her mother's siblings, not dated, from the collection of Rosalyn Terborg-Penn.]
