Story_ID: 14405
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe.  I'm interviewer for the HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Scott Stearns.  Sir, could you please state your name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: Richard Lamar Tolliver, R-I-C-H-A-R-D, L-A-M-A-R, T-O-L-L-I-V-E-R.
Speaker 1: And, sir, what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: June 26, 1945, Springfield, Ohio.
Speaker 1: And, sir, what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: I'm an Episcopal priest [at St. Edmund's Episcopal Church, Chicago, Illinois].
Story_ID: 14406
Speaker 1: What is your favorite food?
Speaker 2: My favorite food; some form of chicken.
Speaker 1: All right, now, do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: Earth tones, more often than not, beige.
Speaker 1: Okay, and do you have a favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Summer.
Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: I travel all over the world, but in terms of vacation, somewhere where there's a beach and hot--warm water.
Speaker 1: All right, and, sir, do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Oh, I forgot to do this.  What is today's date?
Speaker 2: Today's date is February the 19th, 2003.
Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: We're at St. Edmund's Episcopal Church, 6105 South Michigan Avenue, Chicago, Illinois.
Story_ID: 14407
Speaker 1: What I'd like to do is ask you about your family history, as much as you can tell us.  How far can you trace your family back and, and what do you know about them?
Speaker 2: On my mother's side, I can trace my family history back to my grandfather's grandfather, who I guess would be my great-great-grandfather.
Speaker 1: Okay, well tell us about him.
Speaker 2: I had the opportunity in 1974 to trace that family history back.  They--my great-great-grandfather was the son, illegitimate son, as they would say, of a slavemaster by the name of Abraham McGowan, who owned a plantation in Fleming County, Kentucky.  And when Abraham McGowan wrote his will in 1858, he talked about he'd lived a long life and had been an elder in the Methodist Church South, and thanked God for all of his blessings and said that upon his death, two or three of his slaves were to be given to his brother.  And his brother was to be compensated for those slaves because they were rather elderly and couldn't care for themselves.  But the remainder of the slaves were to be sent back, sent to Liberia.  And they were to be given provisions to get there, I guess financially, and provisions to live for a year.  In 1863, September, he wrote a codicil to his will which said that in the event that some of the slaves didn't want to go to Liberia, his executor was to buy land for them in the state of Ohio, no closer than 100 miles to the Ohio River.  And I assume that was so that they couldn't be snatched back into slavery.  And evidently, he died shortly thereafter because I have a deed where land was sold to my grandparents, great-great-grandparents Charles and Minerva Tolliver.  So evidently, they must have lived as husband and wife on this plantation, Charles Tolliver being the son of Abraham McGowan.  And land was sold, purchased for them by the executor of Mr. McGowan's estate near what--a little town called Summerford, Ohio, which is near London, Ohio.  And that's how my family got to Ohio.  So I would be the fifth generation of that group.
Speaker 1: Okay, there's an interesting story about how you came to conduct this research.  Can you tell us that story?
Speaker 2: Yes, when I finished seminary, I worked for a year at a church in New York City, St. Phillip's Church in Harlem, which is the second oldest Black Episcopal church, having been founded in 1810.  And there was a member of the church--when I left, I, I worked there from August '71 [1971] to August '72 [1972].  And in August '72 [1972], I was called to be the rector of a church in Boston [Massachusetts].  However, there was a member of the parish there who was very much engaged in, in black history.  And he wanted me in 1974 to say that someone he knew, by the name of Alex Haley, who was unknown at the time, had a grant from the Carnegie Foundation to trace black family lineages as far back as they could, all over the U.S.  And he asked me if I would coordinate the New England component of that project since I lived in Boston.  And the project was known as the Kinté Project.  And so we would periodically meet, and the people who were coordinating this project from throughout the country, we would meet in New York City.  And this very quiet man who said very little by the name of Alex Haley was at the table because it was his grant.  I took advantage of that to research my own family roots, even though that was not in New England.  It was in the Midwest.
Speaker 1: Okay, and you had to do quite a bit of driving and it was a detective journey.
Speaker 2: It was a detective saga.  It wasn't, it wasn't overwhelmingly hard.  It was just, involved a lot of determination.  In fact, it unfolded easier than I ever thought.  I drove from Springfield, Ohio across the Ohio River at Ripley, Ohio and went to Fleming County.  It was in August.  I very well remember.  It was on a Wednesday.  And in those days, the county courthouse, at least in that area of the country, closed on Wednesday afternoons.  And I had forgotten that.  I really didn't think about it as it related to Kentucky.  So I got there, and the courthouse was closed, but they told me to come back the next day.  And there were no computers in those days, nothing was computerized.  So I literally had to just go through wills, from--in the mid-1800s, until I came across the name Abraham McGowan.  And I discovered his father's will, by, by the way, and discovered that they had moved into Kentucky from Virginia in the late 1700s.  And I got the will, and that was all I was able to get there.  So I drove back to Ohio and drove to the county courthouse in London, Ohio which is near Summerford, and that being Madison County.  And I discovered that Madison County didn't exist in 1863 and was told at the Madison County courthouse that that area of the ctate was part of Franklin County in 1863, which means that the county seat was in Columbus [Ohio].  So I then drove to Columbus to the Franklin County courthouse.  And there I found the bill of sale for the property.  My great-great-grandparents couldn't read.  So someone had written their names.  And they had affixed their X's to the deed.  I also found, for some reason, someone was given power of attorney in 1874 for both Charles and Minerva Tolliver.  I found the death certificate for Charles Tolliver in 1878, and I also a, a death certificate for a fifteen-year old daughter in 1874 that they had named Nellie Tolliver.  And my grandfather said he had never heard of her.  One of the interesting things that I discovered doing the research is that, a couple of things. In those days, people wrote the name however it sounded to them.  So in some places, Tolliver was T-O-L-L-I-V-E-R.  In others, it was T-O-L-I-V-A-R or some variation thereof.  And so I just had to, to figure that out.  Also, I think I found a couple of birth certificates for a couple of their children.  And my grandmother pointed out to me because when she and my grandfather first married, they lived on a farm, somewhere around Summerford, that--two things, it was dependent upon the doctor to record both the death and births.  And, and that would only happen when the doctor was in the, the county seat.  So sometimes death dates and birth dates were recorded incorrectly because the doctor didn't always--the person who pronounced them dead didn't always remember the exact date or didn't remember the exact date of a birth.  So I, I did find some inconsistencies in, in some of the, in some dates with death certificates and, and birth certificates.  And sometimes births didn't get recorded if the doctor didn't take time to do it.  So there, there are, there were some gaps.
Speaker 1: Okay, before you conducted this research, you just had a couple of clues, right, from your--
Speaker 2: I just one day happened to ask my grandfather where his family came from.  And he said his father had, whose name was McGowan Tolliver, told him that his father was the son of a slave master named McGowan in Fleming County, Kentucky.  And then I asked him did he know where the name Tolliver came from.  And he said, "No."
Story_ID: 14408
Speaker 1: Now, do you know very much about your father's side?
Speaker 2: Only that he was born in Dayton, Ohio (laughs).  I know very little about his side of the family.
Speaker 1: Okay, do you know what his last name was?
Speaker 2: His, his--yes, his name was Kenneth Brown, and in fact, he, his sister was married to a Baptist pastor in Dayton.  And I met them, named Buckner, one of the Baptist, St. John Baptist Church, I think.  In fact, yeah.
Speaker 1: All right, well, tell us what you know about your--well, first of all, before we move, are there any other stories that have passed down from that period that you, that came down through the family?  Any stories about that move from Kentucky to Ohio?
Speaker 2: Well, no stories about that.  My grandmother talked about how her grandfather had fought, had been a Civil War, was a Civil War veteran.  And his name was Cyrus Turner.  And in fact, I have his sword in my possession today that I keep at home, hidden.
Speaker 1: Now that's an interesting thing because to even have a sword, you had to be in cavalry--
Speaker 2: He was in the cavalry.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  And was he, did he operate out of Camp Nelson, Kentucky?
Speaker 2: I have no idea, but he was from Springfield, Ohio, so he might have.  She didn't provide that kind of detail.
Speaker 1: I think there's a lot of Civil War history around that area and a lot of black soldiers are buried in Xenia [Ohio].
Speaker 2: He's buried in Fern Cliff Cemetery in Springfield.
Speaker 1: And what was his name again?
Speaker 2: Cyrus Turner.
Speaker 1: Cyrus Turner, okay.  And how do you spell Cyrus?
Speaker 2: I assume C-Y-R-U-S.
Speaker 1: All right.  That's interesting.  Anything else that comes down from that period that you can think of?
Speaker 2: My grandmother's aunt, whom I knew.  She was my grandmother's mother's youngest sister, was married to a dentist in Columbus, Ohio and she would tell us stories growing up in Springfield and having to pass for white to--she played the piano in the silent movie downtown, she said.  But to get that job, she had to pass for white.  She never passed for white all of the time, but she said that was a common thing that blacks like her had to do if they were fair enough in complexion to, to get a decent job.  And I always remembered her talking about that.
Story_ID: 14409
Speaker 1: Tell us something about your mother and when was she born and where was she born?  And what kind of a person is she?
Speaker 2: My mother was born in Springfield, Ohio, the 5th of six children.  She worked at Wright-Patterson Air Force Base [Ohio] for what was called FTD, the Foreign Technology Division as a librarian.  She was a--I have two sisters and I had a stepfather.  And my grandfather basically was the father figure.  So I said all of that to say, my mother was one who lived for her children.  She had, she was not pushy, but she had high expectations for them.
Speaker 1: So you're the oldest?
Speaker 2: I'm the oldest.  And she tried to expose us to all kinds of things when we were growing up.  Sundays were very typical, you know, you--in those days, you went to church.  You know, we had dinner, then we'd all pile in the car and go for a ride.  But I had cousins, four cousins, her sister's children who, when we were growing up, we were all like brothers and sisters, literally, although we knew we were cousins.  We were that close.  She was a very caring person, and she was the kind of person that, when her friends' children would have a problem, she would be the mediator.  And there have been times when a friend's child--this would be when I was older, would come and stay with her for a while, that kind of thing.  She also was very socially involved.  She was also involved in her later years politically.  She belonged to an organization called 100 Black Women of Ohio or something like that.  But I always knew her to be very socially involved also.
Speaker 1: Now, what was her date of birth?
Speaker 2: August the 27th, 1929.
Speaker 1: Okay, so, so she had a rapport with young people, I guess, and had some counseling skills, even informal, they were--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: She's seen as a person that young people could turn to.
Speaker 2: Right, where in troubled relationships with their families.
Speaker 1: Do you know much about her early education?
Speaker 2: Yes, she went to Springfield High.  And then after I was born, she went to Wilberforce [University] and Wittenberg [University, Springfield, Ohio], and she was one who was always pursuing additional education, as long as I can remember.
Speaker 1: Okay, so she went to Wilberforce University there in Wilberforce, Ohio--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --and then to Wittenberg University in Springfield.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Okay, so she was educated and--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Yes, okay.  Did she come from a large family?
Speaker 2: Well, my grandparents had six children.  And she wouldn't talk a lot about her work.  You have to remember the times.  It was the '50s [1950s] and '60s [1960s], and, and the Foreign Technology Division, she said she had a top-secret security clearance.  And she really never talked much about--although what she did talk about, I recall sometimes coming home--she coming home from work crying because she would train white women, and then they would get promoted around her.  And so racism still was rampant that, in those days for a black female to work at Wright-Patterson Air Force Base was the best job, you know, they could get, short of teaching school.  In Springfield, in those days, we knew the two black school teachers (laughs), and the female, at least.  There was one or two black males.  So it was, it was a, definitely a middle-class job by the, the standards of the time, but still they were very blatantly discriminated against.
Story_ID: 14410
Speaker 1: Was Springfield [Ohio] a very segregated town when you were--when she was--?
Speaker 2: Well, Springfield, like--yeah, it was a segregated town.  We lived in the, the middle-class black, segregated area, which was the last street before the white area started.  I didn't so much feel the segregation in those days because by the time I got ready--for example, one of the, the activities that black youth engaged in a lot was to go roller skating.  But the roller skating rink was in Urbana [Ohio].  And they had black night.  You knew that Friday and Sunday or whenever they were, I know Sunday was one of the nights.  And there was one other night that blacks went.  By the time I got to seventh grade, we could start going to the bowling alleys.  So things, we could not go to the public pool, but my aunt, my mother's sister and her husband built a swimming pool at their home.  So we didn't, we didn't miss the public pool because we always went to my cousin's house to swim.  So--and my mother never let us take trips south.  We would go on vacations, more often than not, with my grandparents.  And, but they always went west or to [Washington] D.C., and, yeah, along the way, in those days, I didn't understand, quite honestly, why you'd see a vacancy sign at a motel.  But when we would pull up, they'd say, there are no, there are no rooms.  And--so we would have to start looking for a room while it was--most people drive 'til dusk so they can drive as far as they could.  But I recall my grandfather would always start looking for a room about 4:00 in the afternoon because he didn't know how many times he was gonna be refused before he found a motel.  And this was not in the South.  This was going between here and Utah or going to D.C.  You could get to D.C. in one day.  You know, going west, not going south.  And, and often I remember when we did a room, it would be, you know, back in the back of the hotel, not, not in the front and, and substandard.  So I would say--I said we led a very, fairly middle-class lifestyle, and were pretty much protected from blatant segregation, but definitely, you know, as I look back, they were segregated times.
Story_ID: 14411
Speaker 1: Let me ask you about your father? Can you tell us about him and, you know, when was he born and what was he like?
Speaker 2: I really didn't know my father growing up.  So there's not a whole lot I can tell you about him.
Speaker 1: And you said he was from Dayton [Ohio]?
Speaker 2: He was from Dayton, but actually, he lived in Chicago [Illinois].  So I, I--he and I really didn't get to know each other until I was older.  And so I, I don't know a whole lot about him.
Speaker 1: Now, are your--I know your mother's not alive now--
Speaker 2: And he died too--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --in 1982.
Speaker 1: All right, okay.  So you basically were raised by your grandfather, you say (unclear).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Well, my grandfather would--it was, you know, extended family, grandfather, grandmother, mother.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Did everyone share the same household?
Speaker 2: We had a, a double house, when I was young.  You know, we lived on one side.  They lived on the other.  But it was like one big house.  My grandmother didn't work.  She babysat for us and for my four younger cousins.  So we'd come every day in elementary school, to lunch, and my grandmother watched us until our mothers got off.
Story_ID: 14412
Speaker 1: Can you give us an idea of some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up in the neighborhood [in Springfield, Ohio]?
Speaker 2: We had a big backyard.  And we had, I remember we had quince tree.  We had grapevines.  We had a big garage, like a three or four-car garage, I remember in the back.  And we used to have a, I used to have a pet rabbit that my grandfather had erected a cage for on the side of the garage.  And, and I'd go back--and the rabbit had a name which escapes me, but they tell me that I also had fantasized that someone lived in the garage by the name of Dolly.  And I would go back there and talk to her a lot.  There was a grocery store a block away.  So most of our play, when I was younger was in the yard.  And my cousins tell me we used to play church and I was the preacher, and I'd take up a collection.  And I don't remember that.
Speaker 1: Was the collection the best part?
Speaker 2: And I also would--I guess I had entrepreneurial interests in those days, also because I would go to the grocery store and buy candy and, and then set up a store in yard.  And they said I'd sell them the candy at a higher price than what it cost at the grocery.  My grandfather was a, a well-known minister, a Baptist minister.  So I tagged along with him a lot growing up.  My uncle was an automobile salesman.  In fact, he became the top automobile salesman in the state of Ohio.  And I remember we had the first TV on our block.  And people would come over in the afternoon to watch 'Howdy Doody' and whatever else was on in those days, 'Roy Rogers'.  And, you know, it, it was not a hard life because everybody pooled their money in an extended family style.  I mean I didn't feel any hardness.  For them, I'm sure it was a struggle.  But they did everything they could to not let us feel that struggle.  So in many ways, you know, it was a very good childhood.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, did you like to read when you were young?
Speaker 2: When I was in the third grade, the teacher came home with me to ask my mother and grandmother, what they did that caused me to read so much because I read a lot.  And they didn't do anything.  I just liked to read.  And to this day, I read prolifically.  When I was in the fourth grade, my fourth grade teacher was writing a history book of Springfield.  And she wanted to put it in words that fourth graders could understand and have it published as a text.  And so she--for some reason, she chose me.  And she would tell me a story about some historical point and ask me to tell it back to her.  And I would repeat it, and she'd write it down in the words that I repeated.  And that book is called 'It Happened in Springfield'.  I still have a copy of it, and it's still used as, you know, a history book.  So, for some reason I've always like to read.
Story_ID: 14413
Speaker 1: What grade school did you attend?
Speaker 2: I started out, I went one year--where we lived [Springfield, Ohio], I had the choice of two different elementary schools.  And I didn't go to kindergarten.  So first grade, I went to a school called Garfield, which, in fact, was the same building my grandmother had gone to elementary school in.  And Garfield was an overwhelmingly white school.  Most of the kids in my neighborhood and on my block, their family enrolled them in the other elementary school, which was overwhelmingly black.  My mother tells a story, and then I'll move on, that she walked me to school the first day.  And it was about five blocks away from home.  The second day--actually, she told this story at a party we had in '83 [1983], when I received my Ph.D. from Howard University [Washington, D.C.], the second day, I told her I wanted to walk to school by myself.  And she said she really didn't want to do that, but she didn't want to deny me the opportunity either.  So she told me, "Yes," but she followed me all the way to school.  And every time she thought I might look back, she would duck and hide in somebody's bushes in their yard so I wouldn't see her.  But she said I never looked back.  And she knew from that day on that I would always be someone who looked forward in life.  That was her story that she liked to tell.  But my second year, I decided that I wanted to go to the school where everybody in the neighborhood was going, which was the overwhelmingly black school.  So I enrolled in Fulton Elementary School.  And, and that's where I went, second through sixth grade.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, how did you like school?
Speaker 2: I loved school.  School was, I just always loved school.  And I had loved extracurricular activities.  I did well in school, and when I didn't do well, it was still that era where the principal would say, well, I'm gonna call your grandfather and, and tell X, Y or Z.  And I, I enjoyed school.  And, in fact, my sister, one sister who's two years younger than me, who, who was intelligent, but used to get tired of people saying, why aren't you like your brother, you know, rebelled, quite a bit because of that fact that I did so well.
Speaker 1: Okay, so what were your favorite subjects in school?  Did you have a--
Speaker 2: History, and at the point I could start taking foreign languages, which wasn't until some time in junior high, I took Latin for four years.  I took French for four years.  History and languages were my favorite subjects.
Speaker 1: Okay, and were there certain teachers that you remember that took a particular interest in you or were particularly helpful to you or inspired you?
Speaker 2: Not really.
Speaker 1: So there's none--nobody, you know, in grade school, you really remember?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay, but you liked all of it apparently?
Speaker 2: I liked all of it.  I, I did not like algebra and trigonometry once I got into high levels of math.  And I didn't like chemistry.  I--but the rest of it I liked.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, what kind of activities were you involved in, in grade school?
Speaker 2: Well, in grade school, there was not much opportunity to be involved in anything.  But by the--in terms of extracurricular activity, but by the time I got to junior high, there were opportunities.  I think I worked on the school newspaper.  When I got to high school--well, I did in junior high, I think I belonged to the science club or something like that.  But in high school, if you saw my high school year, a long, long list of activities.  I was on the high school tennis team.  I belonged to the Future Teachers of America.  I belonged the debate team.  I belonged to the National Thespians, some school plays.  I, in junior high, I was a manager on the football team.  I was an announcer at the basketball games in high school.
Speaker 1: Okay, were your announcing broadcasts?
Speaker 2: No, it was just broadcast in the gym.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  You have quite a few activities.  Did you run for class office or anything like that?
Speaker 2: And I, I can't remember, but I think I did run for vice president of one of the classes in high school, and I was that.
Story_ID: 14414
Speaker 1: Now, Springfield High School [Ohio], you said, I think off camera, it was the largest high school in the state of Ohio--
Speaker 2: Yeah, but I never went there because it split my first year.  They had two schools.  But up to that time, it was the largest high school in the state.  And they were always in the top five, you know, for football or basketball.
Speaker 1: So you ended up going to South or which one?
Speaker 2: I graduated from South.
Speaker 1: Okay, from Springfield South [High School, Springfield, Ohio]?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Okay, now--
Speaker 2: I spent one--when the school split, I spent one semester at North, but then I transferred to South at the end of the first semester of sophomore year.  And that's where I finished.
Speaker 1: Was South closer to your home or--
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And which one was the new one and which--
Speaker 2: [Springfield] North [High School, Ohio].
Speaker 1: North, okay.
Speaker 2: I wanted to go there because it was new.  But then I, all my friends were at South.
Speaker 1: And that makes sense.  So, so you had a lot of friends in high school?
Speaker 2: I didn't have a lot.  I was, there was just a small cadre of us who were looked upon as, you know, the, the super-achiever, nerds, and that was my group.
Speaker 1: So that didn't bother you being a super achiever, nerd-type?
Speaker 2: That didn't bother me, but, you know, sometimes people would say, you know, I thought I was better than them or whatever.  But it really didn't bother me 'cause I was having fun with the people I did hang out with.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, are there any incidents in high school that stand out as being significant that you'd like to tell us about?
Speaker 2: A couple.  I mentioned that I was a member of the high school debating team.  And I remember we went to a state tournament somewhere in Ohio.  I think it was in Columbus.  And I was a member of the affirmative team and someone on the negative team became ill.  So the coach asked me to, to participate in the round for the negative.  And we got first place in both affirmative and negative.  And the point I'm making is, he taught us to argue both sides, you know, persuasively, and I always remembered that, that I was on both teams that won, took a first place.  I don't--my first time, experienced overt racism occurred at some point in high school.  I had, there was a, a white psychiatrist and his family were, were very liberal by the standards of the day.  And their son was a classmate of mine.  And he and I became very good buddies.  And he invited me to their country club, it must have been my senior year, right after my senior year, before I went to college, to play golf with them, him.  And while we were playing golf, somebody drove up to him on a cart and said something and drove off.  And then when we finished, he said, the person on the cart worked at the country club and said to him don't ever bring another nigger back here to this club.  So my friend's father asked for a meeting of the club members and asked them to change their policy about having me, a black guest, colored, Negro, whatever it was in those days.  And they said, no, and, and his family resigned from the club.  So that was my first experience, well, it prepared me for others that I would eventually confront when I was at Miami [University, Oxford, Ohio].
Speaker 1: How'd you feel about that, I mean your experience of--
Speaker 2: Well, they were very hurt about it.  And since my mother worked at Wright-Patterson [Air Force Base, Ohio], we could play at Wright-Patterson.  So then we, we would go there and play.
Speaker 1: Did you have any mentors at Springfield South, any teachers that, you know, took a particular interest in you there or that you admired?
Speaker 2: No, I think my mentors were my grandfather and my uncle.  My grandfather was a well-known minister.  I didn't realize at the time that's who they were, but looking back, my uncle was a workaholic, automobile dealer and a fairly successful one.  So, you know, I just assumed that people worked night and day and went to meetings and, you know, lived decently, put it that way.
Speaker 1: Okay, did you spend a lot of time in church, I guess, with your--?
Speaker 2: I spent a whole lot of time in church.  I've, I, I took piano lessons and organ lessons.  And by the time I was probably a senior in high school, I was playing the organ at my grandfather's church.  I was the state president of the, whatever the title was for the Baptist Youth of Ohio, my senior year in high school.  So, yeah, I spent a lot of time at church.  And the church often sponsored the skating events, you know, we had a bus.  And we'd, the youth, you know, it didn't matter what church one went to, you know, you could ride the bus.  So church was both a social center--Springfield also was a very athletically oriented town.  So Friday nights was basketball or football, depending on the season.  I played tennis a lot.  So, you know, that was, sort of what I did.
Story_ID: 14415
Speaker 1: So when you came to your senior year and you were on the verge of graduation, what did you project as an occupation that you would pursue in adulthood?
Speaker 2: I projected either some field or foreign service or being a doctor.  So when I went to Miami [University, Oxford, Ohio], I majored initially--I didn't, I didn't--you didn't have to declare a major your freshman year, but I took courses that were pre-med in orientation.  And I hated physics, and I hated chemistry.  And in those days, registration wasn't computerized.  So you had to stand in long lines and get a card that said there was an opening in that class.  And I remember, probably in my sophomore year, going over to the administration building and the, the one line--the one area that had no line was the religion major line.  So I said, "I'm gonna major in religion.  I don't have to stand in line."  So (laughs), that's what I did.
Speaker 1: How did you choose Miami University?  It's in Oxford, Ohio--
Speaker 2: In Oxford, Ohio.
Speaker 1: --and not too far away.
Speaker 2: It was ninety miles away.  A couple reasons.  I had wanted to go to Howard [University, Washington, D.C.], and my mother--and this was '63 [1963], thought that Washington, D.C. was a big, crime-ridden city.  And she just didn't want me to go to Howard.  But I applied, and she would cry, and, "Oh, why do you want to go to Howard?"  She had co-workers whose sons and daughters were going to Miami.  Miami is a very prestigious university in Ohio.  And so she said, "Well, you know, this co-worker and that co-worker's son or daughter is going to Miami.  Why don't you go to Miami?"  And that didn't impress me.  I still wanted to go to Howard.  But then I started dating this young lady whose sister taught Latin at Miami.  And she was gonna go to Miami.  So then I said, "Well, I guess I'll go to Miami."  And that's really how it happened.  I didn't have any great feeling for Miami, but that was how it happened.
Story_ID: 14416
Speaker 1: How did you like it [Miami University, Oxford, Ohio] as a school?  I mean was it what you expected or did you--
Speaker 2: Well, it was a very preppy school.  We had to wear a coat and tie every night for dinner.  When we went to the football games, everybody wore a blazer and a tie.  It was known as the Mother of Fraternities, white fraternities.  More white fraternities were founded on that campus than any other university.  And so it was a very fraternity and sorority-oriented school.  Fraternities could have houses; sororities couldn't.  They had suites in dorms.  But it was the era when a guy would give a girl--they called it lavaliere, give the girl a, a pendant, and it's like pre-engaged.  They would serenade the girl.  And all the, the female dorms had balconies.  And guys would dress up and literally, the girl would come out on the balcony in her white dress.  And the guy, his fraternity would serenade her.  I mean it was, it was that kind of place.  But it was also--blacks were significantly in the minority.  In those days, Miami probably had around 9,000 students, seventy-five of whom were black.  And most of them were male athletes.  There was Western College for Women across the road, which only had 500 students, but it had probably twenty-five or thirty black students.  So that supplemented the black female population in Oxford.  In those days, I didn't know any better.  You know, I liked it.  But it also was where I first confronted racism on a consistent basis.  And there was a, a white minister who headed some campus association of a name of which escapes me at this point, where he took it upon himself to, to relate to students who wanted to bring about social change on the campus.  So I got involved with whatever that organization was.  I can't remember the name, and got involved in, in activities on the campus to, to make it a more racially inclusive environment.  And I took some heat for that.  I guess one of the things that I, I first didn't understand was to live in the dorm and hear some white students say they didn't want to room with that Jew.  And I looked, and they both looked white to me.  I couldn't figure out, well, you both look white.  I just didn't understand that, okay.  And then I would hear occasionally, I--my roommates were white.  I, occasionally somebody didn't want to room with somebody black.  My second year I was a, a dorm--I don't know what the title is, but like a--
Speaker 1: (Unclear) .
Speaker 2: --like a rep or whatever they call it.  So I had to deal with some of that.  I had a cousin who came the year after me, and he lived in my dorm as a freshman.  And his roommate didn't want to live with somebody black.  So, you know, that's--but what really got me is I would be befriended by some white students in the dorm, who were very friendly.  But when their parents came to campus, they'd literally walk past me and wouldn't speak because they wouldn't want their parents to know that they were friendly with somebody black.  And that just--I couldn't understand this 'cause this was the first time, you know, I really had started experiencing that kind of racism.  And I remember one of the years, one of my French teachers, no matter--and he was French, and he wasn't even American, no matter what I did, he would not give me a very good grade.  So one time I gave a white student a paper to turn in that I had already turned in and had gotten a D on.  And he turned in the exact same work later in the semester and got a B on it, just to confirm what I knew was going on.  And I might have a problem in chemistry and rather than, you know, the Professor, it was--I remember the Professor was an old man, helping me, he would say things, well, you know, like, well, you know, "You black students come here, and, you know, you're not as prepared as the white students."  Now, I graduated in the top 10 percent of my class.  He just saw a black face, knew nothing about my background.  You know, it, it was, it was socially difficult.
Story_ID: 14417
Speaker 1: In other ways, it was, it was okay.  We bonded together with a small group of blacks.  There was one black woman who worked on the campus [of Miami University, Oxford, Ohio] in the administration building.  They had, they might have had one black faculty member in those days.  I think he was in the art department.  And she was very active at the AME [African Methodist Episcopal] church in Oxford.  And they had a, an organization called The Allen Foundation, which was the counterpart to the Baptist Youth Group, growing up in the Baptist church.  And in those days, we all joined.  We're weren't Methodist AME's, but it was a way--we'd go there on Sunday nights.  It became, she became like the mother to us on campus.  And she had a daughter who had graduated--I think her daughter was a senior my freshman year.  So we all looked to her as like a mother figure.  And we would go to the Allen Foundation meetings because that was where we could all see each other.  And that was, that was very important.  I remember going to, with the minister I was talking about, to one of the vice presidents to talk about some instances of segregation on the campus.  I got there in '63 [1963].  '62 [1962] was the first year Miami had started assigning black and whites roommates.  And he said to us, "Well, my job is to reflect the will of the majority, in other words, you know, I can't be worried about your concern."  And I found that very interesting because--and I didn't find it interesting at the time.  I graduated from Miami in December of '67 [1967], and the reason for that is because I really was involved in, in a lot of activities on campus to bring about social change, but also in the surrounding towns.  Most of the people in the surrounding towns were from Appalachia or Northern Kentucky.  And so we knew the environment outside of Oxford was hostile to black people.  And I remember one Friday evening, we were--Miami was only four miles from the Indiana border.  And there was a town that sat right on the, the border; half was in Indiana and half was in Ohio, called College Corner, Ohio and College Corner, Indiana.  So this same minister took a group of black and white students over to this bar.  And it was redneck bar 'cause that's all it would be outside of, once you left Oxford.  And we walked in there on a Friday afternoon--and this had to have been about 1964 or '65 [1965], and sat down at the bar and ordered a drink.  And the bartender said, "The bar is closed."  And we said, "Well, look all these people around us are drinking."  And he said, "Well, I'm not serving you a drink."  So we left.  And we got back out, we started the car, it wouldn't go anywhere 'cause somebody--we subsequently found out, had put sand in the gas tank.  So we hitchhiked back to Oxford.  And I filed a suit with the Ohio Civil Rights Commission, a discrimination suit.  And eventually, I won it.  And the man, in illegibly written handwriting wrote me a note and said, we don't discriminate because the public--this was after--it had to have been '65 [1965] because the Public Accommodations Act was passed in '64.  So we really were trying to test that.  And, but we never went back to see if he would serve.  And I say all this to say that by the fall of my junior year and, in fact, a very wealthy white man in my hometown called my grandfather and said, "You know, Richard's getting under a lot of pressure down there.  They're really trying to do him in."  And how he knew that, I don't know.  I know he had nephews there, but I don't know how he knew that.  And I say all of that to say, so halfway through my Fall of my Junior year, I just dropped out of school, and went back in January.  So that caused me to graduate in December of '67 [1967], rather than in January.  And I remember my grandfather wrote me a letter.  And he said, you're down there to get an education, you know, you're not down there to be involved in all these causes.  And I wrote him back, and I said, well, I'm only doing what I've seen you do.  And, and he never said another word.
Speaker 2: Now, who is the minister that was the leader of that group?  Do you remember his name?
Speaker 1: His last name was Strippel, S-T-R-I-P-P-E-L.  We called him Dean Strippel.  He was tragically killed, well, actually died.  He fell asleep at the wheel, driving from somewhere back to Oxford.  And his car overturned, so we don't know if he had a heart attack or what.
Speaker 2: Was that while you were in school?
Speaker 1: That was while I was in school.
Story_ID: 14418
Speaker 1: When you were in Oxford [Ohio], when you were in school, there was this historic training of civil rights volunteers in the spring of 1964 who were on their way to Mississippi to register voters.  Do you remember any of that?
Speaker 2: Actually, that took place during the summer of '64 [1964].  So I was out on break.  I do remember saying to my mother that for spring break, I wanted to go south and help register people to vote.  And she just vehemently opposed it.  So, you know, being a student, I said, "Okay, if I can't go South, can I use your car to drive to Washington [D.C.] for spring break and New York [New York] with some friends?"  And she said yes.  So we drove to--my, my roommate at the time, that point, was black and another buddy drove to D.C. and hung out at Howard [University, Washington, D.C.].  And then we drove up to New York to see one of my aunts who lived in Manhattan.  And on our way back, this had to have been 19--, this was 1964, my roommate was driving.  And we got pulled over by the police near Lancaster, Pennsylvania.  And for some reason my roommate, not only was he speeding, but his license had expired.  And so they took us to this little justice of the peace in some little motel.  And the justice of the peace said he had to pay a certain amount of money.  He didn't have it.  So he rang his mother in Columbus, Ohio.  His father was a very prominent doctor in Columbus.  And his, his family was super, social-conscious, and I guess, you know, his father was a member of the Columbus City Council.  And so his mother said--"Oh, they took him, they put him in prison.  They put him in the Cumberland County prison in Lancaster, Pennsylvania."
Story_ID: 14419
Speaker 1: His mother, we--they took him.  We didn't have the money, whatever amount it was.  So they took him to the Cumberland County [Pennsylvania] Jail and said, he'll be locked up until we got whatever amount of money it was, was needed to pay his bond.  So he rang is mother back in Columbus [Ohio].  And his mother she was not going to Western Union to wire him any money at any prison.  And I pointed that out because of his father's position and, I guess the mother feeling, I'm going down there.  Everybody knows who I am in Columbus, blah, blah, blah.  So we said, well, will you do something, you know?  So they told us the money could be wired to a truck stop restaurant, somewhere on the outskirts of Lancaster [Pennsylvania].  So he went to jail, and my other buddy and I went to the, the restaurant, truck stop to wait for the money.  Well, it seemed--eventually, it seemed like eternity because we walked in the restaurant.  And there were signs on the wall--this was 1964, "There's no such thing as a good nigger.  A good nigger is a dead nigger."  It had to have been--it may have been '65 [1965] because that was when Stokely Carmichael--it had to have been '65 [1965] because that was when Stokely Carmichael had used the term Black Power because there was another sign in there that said, "Black Power, six niggers pushing a Volkswagen."  And so we had to sit at this restaurant and wait for the money to arrive.  And it seemed like eternity.  And the money did arrive.  And we went to the jail and got him out and drove home.  And when I got back to Ohio, I told my mother what happened.  And she was furious.  She said, first of all, she couldn't understand why my roommate's mother would not wire him the money.  And she said, "Why didn't you call me?  I would have wired you the money for him.  Don't you ever do that again, you know."  But that whole trip came about because she didn't want me to go south to register voters, but said, "Yes, you can go to [Washington] D.C. and New York."  And on the way back from New York, in Pennsylvania, we have this racist experience. (laughs)
Speaker 2: Yeah, it says something about the state of the country--
Speaker 1: Right, it says a lot about the state of the country.
Story_ID: 14420
Speaker 1: Were there any particular teachers that stood out, other than the Dean, what's his name, Dean--
Speaker 2: Strippel.
Speaker 1: Strippel, yeah.
Speaker 2: Not really.  No teachers that stick out.  I, one pivotal thing happened while I was at Miami [University, Oxford, Ohio], and that was, that's where I became an Episcopalian.  My freshman year I went, I walked to the black Baptist church, which was in the black area of Oxford, which was the opposite side of town from my dorm.  And at Miami, students couldn't have cars so we had to walk.  And the preacher preached very long and it was incomprehensible.  And that was not my experience growing up in the Baptist church.  My grandfather was not a long preacher, and he was coherent.  And so I stopped--oh, the problem became by the time the service was out, and I walked back to the dorm, the dining room was closed.  So I was missing lunch.  So I decided well, I'm not going to church.  And I didn't for the rest of my freshman year.  My sophomore year, when I was a resident advisor, RA, as they called it, a white guy in the dorm asked me if I wanted to go to church with him one Sunday.  So I said, "Yeah," I didn't know where he was going.  And it just happened to be an Episcopal church.  And this was my first experience in an Episcopal church.  And I immediately was impressed, for at least three reasons:  I liked the ritual.  I liked the fact that nobody dressed up, you know.  It was, it was the era of nonconformism and being a campus town, you know, you wore your jeans and, and shirt or turtleneck, whatever you wore, those desert boots in those days.  And that was fine.  It was also a place where they were having a lot of discussions on contemporary issues.  And at that time, the issue was the Vietnam War.  And they were organizing a march through Oxford, along with some other groups against the war.  And my experience of church had not been any of the three.  So, and the sermon was more intellectual, and it was short.  So all of the above appealed to me.  And I started going to church there.  It was an overwhelmingly white church, but I was made to feel welcome.  And it was during that time that I decided that, well, this is--I like this, and this is the church I want to join, the denomination I want to be a part of.  And I became an Episcopalian.
Speaker 1: Now, how did your grandfather react to that?
Speaker 2: Well, my mother came to Oxford for my confirmation when the bishop came.  And we decided not to tell him immediately, but eventually we did, probably a year later or so.  And he didn't react at all, not negatively at all.  And then my senior year, I told him I wanted to talk to him.  And I said, I think--no, we didn't tell him until this experience I'm getting ready to tell you now.  My senior year, I went home, and I said, "I want to talk to you."  And I said, "I'm thinking about going to the seminary."  And his comment was--I'll never forget, he says, "Well, I've known all along that you were gonna wear a robe.  We were just waiting for you to find that out."  And then I said, "But I'm not going to the Baptist ministry.  I'm an Episcopalian now."  And he said, "Well, as long as you're serving God, that's what matters most."  And then I said, "But I don't know"--I said, "I'm thinking about going to seminary, but I don't know if I can really take the ministry because I've seen how people talked about you and grandma over the years.  And I don't know if I can handle it."  And without a moment's hesitation, he said, "They talked about Jesus, so what makes you think they not gonna talk about you."  He said, "Now, the day you decide to do something with your life, be prepared to be talked about.  If you don't want to be talked about, then don't do anything with your life.  That's your decision."  And that's all he said.
Speaker 1: Okay, so he was all right with that?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 14421
Speaker 1: Where did you decide to go to school?
Speaker 2: This was the height of the Vietnam War.  So at the end of--when one graduated from college, one went to, to fight in Vietnam or one was drafted at least.  There were only two ways to get a deferment, if you were going to medical school or divinity school.  I finished Miami [University, Oxford, Ohio] in December of '67 [1967] and I decided--I wanted to go to the Episcopal Divinity School in Cambridge, Massachusetts, which is at Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts].  And, but they only accepted people in September of each year.  So I decided I was going to enroll at Howard [University, Washington, D.C.]'s School of Divinity.  I was gonna get to Howard one way or the other.  And by then, nobody had any problems with going to Washington.  And so literally, I drove up to Washington and enrolled at Howard School of Theology in January of '68 [1968].  My draft status was whatever, was the one that says, you're gonna get drafted.  And, in fact, like a week or so after I graduated, I got a notice that I was being drafted.  I also was in D.C. and so, my grandfather knew people on the draft board, and he, he talked to him.  And they changed my status to 4D, it was called in those days.  So I sent, spent a semester at Howard.  And that was a significant moment in history.  That was January to June of '68 [1968].  I still was not sure that I wanted to be an active priest--and I'll come to that in a couple of minutes.  But I need to describe Washington at the time.  Howard was going through the throes of a lot of student demonstrations.  They had a president named James Nabrit, who, along with Thurgood Marshall and others had been part of the legal team that had pleaded the 'Brown [v. Board of Education'] case.  The Nabrit family was well known.  He had another brother named Samuel Nabrit, but Dr. Nabrit was old.  And the students thought that he was not revolutionary enough.  So they were, there were lots of demonstrations on campus.  And I, in fact, ended up getting a, a work-study job, working in the admissions office in the administration building, reviewing undergraduate applications.  And I remember one day, students stormed the administration building and sat down.  And I stopped working, and I sat with them.  And so, but it was so unlike anything I'd ever experienced in Miami 'cause there were no demonstrations at Miami.  I remember once I joined the ROTC [Reserve Officers Training Corps], probably my sophomore year.  And I came to class, and I had flip flops on.  And I remember the professor say, "Oh, I see we have a hippie in class" just because I had flip flops on.  That's how conservative Miami was.  So quit ROTC.  I had taken it as an elective.  And so this was--I was caught up in all the student demonstrations at Howard.  And then I was sitting in the office--was it April 4th [1968] and [Dr.] Martin Luther King [Jr.] was killed.  Somebody ran into the building and said, "Martin Luther King has been assassinated."  And I was pledging fraternity at the time, Omega Psi Phi, and--'cause at Miami all we had were Alphas [Alpha Kappa Alpha fraternity].  And so I went around on Georgia Avenue, the front, where the school was, and I saw people looting.  And that night, my dorm, which was the dorm for Divinity School students was on Georgia Avenue.  It's called Terrell Hall, named for Mary Church Terrell.  And we had to sleep on the floor because there was a--D.C. Teachers' College [now University of the District of Columbia] was next door to our building.  And there were snipers on the roof, and we were scared of getting hit.  Well, the next day the riots continued.  And I recall, I was with some of my pledge brothers, and we decided that we were going to--we said, "Liberate some liquor from the liquor store and take it back to the fraternity house."  And we did.  And we were in the cellar of the liquor store, and I remember we came up and Stokely Carmichael came in the liquor store, and said, "Get your guns, brothers, the revolution has begun."  And I'll never forget that as long as I'm sane.  And so, you know, to look around and just see streets in flame and, and us running with this liquor back to fraternity house so we could provide our big brothers with whatever they needed for a party, and we went in other stores.  And nobody, nobody was trying to harm the proprietors, you know.  Proprietors were standing right there in the liquor store.  They were white.  Other stores put up signs, black-owned, but it was more of just like a rebellion.  And, and to drive around at night and just see whole blocks in flame.  It was incredible.  And then in June, Robert [F.] Kennedy was killed.  And I remember my mother and sisters had come to visit me in Washington.  And we had gone to Baltimore [Maryland] for some reason, and I don't remember where Kennedy's body was being brought back to Washington from.  I know he was killed in California, but he on a, it was on a train.  I remember that because we stopped somewhere between Baltimore and D.C. to watch the train go by because people were just lined up everywhere along the train tracks.  So that was--and then they built Resurrection City.  That was what Martin King was going to do.  He was gonna bring poor people of different races to Washington to make a statement about poverty and, and build tents.  Well, they did that anyway after his death.  So--
Speaker 1: They called it the Poor People's Campaign.
Speaker 2: Right, exactly.  But the place called Resurrection City.  And, and we'd go down and see these tents.  So there was a lot of turmoil in the air, unlike I had ever experienced in my life, just between June--January and June of '68 [1968].  And so in the fall, I went to Cambridge [Massachusetts], and in those days the Rockefeller Foundation offered a fellowship for two years, seminary is a three-year professional degree.
Story_ID: 14422
Speaker 1: Now, did you leave Howard [University Divinity School, Washington, D.C.] because of the, the environment down there was just too
Speaker 2: No, I always said I wanted to go to the Episcopal Divinity School [of Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts].  That was--
Speaker 1: Yeah, right.
Speaker 2: --that was my plan.  I just stayed--my plan was to be at Howard for one semester until I could go to Cambridge in the fall.
Speaker 1: Oh, you stayed for the semester.
Speaker 2: Right.  So I transferred to the Episcopal--it was called Theological School in those days.  They changed their name to the Divinity School after I graduated.  And here again, this was the era--and we could take half of our courses anywhere in Harvard that we wanted to, as long as we could pass certain comprehensive exams, you know, in New Testament, Old Testament, church history, whatever, we could take half of our courses anywhere we want.  So Harvard had just started its black studies, Afro-American Studies department.  And Dr. Guinier was the Chairman.
Speaker 1: That's right, Ewart Guinier.
Speaker 2: Right, Ewart Guinier.  It looks Ewart, but it's--
Speaker 1: E-W-A-
Speaker 2: -R-T, but they pronounced Ewart.  And he was the chairman.  And so I would always take at least one course in the Afro-American Studies department and usually would take a course in government.  They called it government, not political science.  And that's how I had Martin Kilson for a teacher 'cause he taught in the government department.  And my second year, I became a, I was named a teaching fellow in the Afro-American Studies department, which meant--and I was assigned to Dr. Ephraim Isaacs.  And the style at Harvard, a full professor lectures once to--well, lectures twice.  But then the third time, at the lower level, the students meet with the teaching fellow.  And the teaching fellow discusses the readings because the professor never lectures on the readings.  He talks about anything else but that.  And the teaching fellow grades the exams at the lower level.  So that was my job.  So I was having to read for my classes, plus read for the class that I was a teaching fellow in.  And that was a tremendous reading load.  And I, I had a part-time job.  I worked at--I felt I needed to be connected to the community, so I taught English to people who, who were basically, couldn't read at OIC, Opportunities Industrialization Center in Roxbury [Massachusetts] in the evenings.
Speaker 1: That's with Leon Sullivan.
Speaker 2: Leon Sullivan's thing.  But it was also the era of student demonstrations at Harvard, black student demonstrations.  So once again, I got caught up in the demonstrations.  And I was in some of the sit-ins.  And by then I also had joined the fraternity.  So I was very active with the Omegas [Omega Psi Phi fraternity] and it was a multi--Harvard doesn't have social fraternities.  So most of our, our fraternity brothers were at Boston University [Massachusetts] or Northeastern University [Boston, Massachusetts].  So it gave me a social outlet.  And here again, there were demonstrations, and Boston was super liberal.  There would be, you know, parades and people would be smoking reefer on the floats, you know.  That was the era that just--so I was caught once again in, in the revolution.  But the point I want to also make, I had this two-year fellowship because at the end of the second year, you had to decide whether ministry was for you or not.  At the end of my first year, I'd never been south.  The furthest south I'd been in my life was Washington, D.C.  You have to spend a summer in a, in a clinical program where you hone your counseling skills.  That's the, a graduation requirement.  It's called clinical pastoral education.  So I chose a site in Atlanta, Georgia in the Summer of '69 [1969] so I could experience the South.  And it was at a center for emotionally disturbed delinquent teenaged girls, who had been sentenced there by the state.  Most of the girls were white, and some were black.  To make a long story very short, it was the Summer of '69 [1969], working down there that I really felt that, I thought I was being called to the ministry.  So I came back to campus, and that year there was a black theologian who was teaching at Union Theological Seminary in New York [New York], young guy named James Cone.  And he had just written a book called '[A] Black Theology [of Liberation]', and he came up to our campus and spoke.  And his ideas were very radical in those days.  People were upset with him, you know, and his, his whole--in a nutshell what 'Black Theology' said was, blackness is the symbol of the outsider in our society.  Jesus identified with the oppressed and the outsider.  So to identify with the symbol of the outsider in '69 [1969], was to identify with black folk and their struggle for liberation.  And those who would take on blackness voluntarily to work for the liberation of black people were doing what Jesus came to do.  And so that provided me, that whole notion of black theology--feminist theology came after that, and Latin American liberation theology came after that, that provided me with the theological tools to help me make sense, provide a rationale for saying, yes.  And all of that came together, the experience in Atlanta and, and hearing Cone and, and learning about black theology.
Story_ID: 14423
Speaker 1: This period that you're in school [at Harvard Divinity School, Cambridge, Massachusetts], there's a lot of changes going on in the black church.  The National Baptist Convention splits earlier, but then that's something that's still fairly new then.  And you've got like people talking about African theology too now.  John Mbiti wrote his book, 'African Religion and Philosophy'.
Speaker 2: 'African Religion' John Mbiti taught at Harvard, was a visiting Professor there.  But--
Speaker 1: And he's an Episcopalian?
Speaker 2: Anglican, yes.  Right.  Yes, now John Mbiti's 'African Religion' book in that era was being critiqued as basically still using Eurocentric categories to say, look, there's a higher God in African religion, trying to, to--in other words say, we have the same Eurocentric concepts in African religion as you do in Eurocentric.  So a lot of people, the black theology people did not think highly of John Mbiti.  They thought he was still captive of, of Eurocentric models and tried to justify African religion as being comparable; look, we've got the same categories.  That was the kind of thinking that was floating around in those days about him.  We got the real thing, black theology, okay.  But here again, you know, upon further reflection down the road, [James] Cone used Eurocentric models, his main person was Karl Barth, who was a German theologian.  So he was very much grounded in the Eurocentric thinkers himself.  He just took it to another level.  So my third year in seminary, I also enrolled full time in the master's program in Afro-American Studies at Boston University [Boston, Massachusetts].  So I was enrolled in two programs, full-time, taking eight courses a semester and still being a teaching fellow, and still working at OIC [Opportunities Industrialization Center, Roxbury, Massachusetts], and still doing my internship at a church in Roxbury.  How I did it, oh, I don't know.  But I did.  And so in May of '71 [1971], I finished seminary, master of divinity and in June I got an M.A. in Afro-American Studies from Boston U [University].  And I happened to--you're talking about mentor, I just happened to read in 'Ebony' magazine about this large black church in Harlem [New York] where the minister was engaged in building housing.  He also was a founder of Carver Savings and Loan, the largest black savings to this day in the United States.  He had been a founder of Freedom National Bank, which was still alive at the time.  It went defunct eventually.  And he was a trustee of Columbia University [New York, New York], had a Ph.D. from Columbia.  He was a trustee of St. Augusta's College in Raleigh [North Carolina] and had this, this church had this long history.  I said, well, this sounds like some place I want to work.  So I drove down to New York City from Boston one weekend, and just went to church there.  And they had just built a new community center which was about to open.  They had had an old one, and, and they built a brand new one.  And I told him I was in my last semester of seminary, and I'm looking for a job.  And he said, "Well, I need somebody to be the director of teenage programs in our community center."  And he hired me.  It was just that simple.  And so I didn't even wait for graduation.  And I felt I had to get there right away, you know, that was the fervor of the time, to get involved in, in the liberation of black people.
Speaker 1: Now, what was the name of this--
Speaker 2: St. Phillips [Episcopal Church, New York, New York]--
Speaker 1: And the minister?
Speaker 2: His name was M. Moran Weston [II].  He just died last year at age ninety-two.  In fact, I have his obituary here in, in a file.  And I told friends when I read it, it was scary because reading his obituary was like reading my own.  There is a person who's a professor at Ball State University [Muncie, Indiana] name Mark Massé who's writing a book right now on religious social activists.  And I'm one of the chapters, and he has a contract with Indiana University Press.  And he's got to have the book finished by September.  The point I want to make is he, I've seen the draft of the chapter 'cause I've had to make comments on it, and he's revised it.  And in his--he came here and shadowed me for a whole week, everywhere I went, he went.  And in that chapter, he says that when I talk about Dr. Weston, I come alive in ways that he'd never--he hadn't seen me come alive when I talked about anybody else.  And I think it's been important for me, either through personal experience or through books, to attach myself to black people who made it against the odds, but who are super-intelligent.
Story_ID: 14424
Speaker 1: So it's been very important for me, and you talk about mentors, to surround myself with people I thought who had made it against the odds, who were super intelligent, who took their anger and channeled it in creative ways.  Dr. [M. Moran] Weston [II], in the obituary that appeared in the 'New York Times', when he died last year, the 'New York Times' quoted him from a previous article where they had featured him.  And he said he knew that had he stayed in North Carolina, he would have been dead.  So he came to New York.  And, in fact, when he came to New York, he got involved with the Socialist Party and a whole gamut of things.  One of my other mentor, heroes, whom I came to know through books, was Dr. Benjamin [Elijah] Mays, who for many years, as you know, was the president of Morehouse College [Atlanta, Georgia].  And I had a chance to meet him twice.  The first time was in January of 1977.  I was in Washington, D.C. at the time, I lived there then.  And I was at the corner of 16th [Street] and K Street.  It was on the eve of the inauguration of [U.S. President] Jimmy Carter.  Dr. Mays was old and retired and world renowned.  There was a snowstorm in Washington.  And as I crossed the street at 16th and K in front of the Capitol Hilton Hotel, I saw this old man trying to hail this taxi.  And I looked up, and it was Benjamin Mays.  And, you know, him being one of my heroes, I knew who he was.  He had no reason to know who I was.  So I said, "Dr. Mays, are trying to catch a taxi?"  And he said, "I've been standing out here for twenty minutes and no taxi will stop."  He says, "I'm here because Jimmy Carter invited me to sit on the dais at his inauguration tomorrow.  And I'm trying to get to a dinner party up on Wisconsin Avenue."  I said, "Well, I'll give you a ride."  And he walked with me to the parking lot where my car was, not knowing me from Adam.  And I couldn't believe it.  So one of the things I mentioned was a sermon, I had a book of his sermons.  And I said, you know, "I really like" whatever the title of the sermon was, I can't remember it right now.  If I look at the book I know I'd know it.  And he said he was always amazed at the people who will say to him, "I heard you preach somewhere" and, and recount the sermon.  I also told him about an experience I had had--you mentioned Boston [University, Massachusetts] in '72 [1972], I had just left Boston from being a rector there from '72 [1972] to the end of '76 [1976].  And that was when they desegregated the schools in Boston and had all the terrible troubles there in South Boston.  And they brought Dr. Mays up, in his eighties, to, to speak at some interracial breakfast.  And he had said, here I am, you know, in my mid-eighties, and you're bringing me up here from Atlanta [Georgia] to tell you how to desegregate your schools and live together in Boston, you know.  And I'll never forget that.  He was president of the Atlanta School Board at the time.  But anyway, driving to this restaurant, I said, well, here's my golden opportunity to ask him some questions.  So I asked him did--I told him I'd read his autobiography two or three times.  It's called 'Born to Rebel' and how much I had been impressed with it.  And I said to him, "Did you always want to be a college president?"  And he said no.  He said, when he finished his Ph.D. in history at the University of Chicago [Illinois], and he was in his mid-forties at the time, he wanted to be a past--forty-four I think, the pastor of a big Baptist church in St. Louis [Missouri].  And they said he was too young to pastor that church.  So he said, it just so happens that Mordecai Johnson, who was the president of the time, at Howard [University, Washington, D.C.], Howard's first black president, although he looked white, invited him back to be the Dean of the School of Theology because the School of Theology was about to lose its accreditation because the accrediting association said it didn't have enough volume of books in its library.  So he was called back to save the Divinity School.  And he said it just so happens that there was a white divinity school called Auburn Theological Seminary in Auburn, New York that was closing.  So they bought the entire library collection of Auburn Theological Seminary; said it didn't matter that the books may have been more antiquated.  What the accrediting association was looking for was number of volumes.  And that saved the, the School of Theology.  He wasn't there long.  And this was during the war, the Second World War.  And interestingly enough, the semester I spent at Howard, I remember the Auburn collection, but I didn't know the history of how they had those books there, you know.  This was in the '40s [1940s].  So he said, and I forget.  He, he didn't stay there very long, but Morehouse College was on the verge of closing.  They had virtually no students.  And so he was elected the president of Morehouse, once again to save the school.  And the first, one of the first things he did was lower the age of admissions.  Everybody talks about the fact [Dr.] Martin Luther King, Jr. was admitted to Morehouse at fifteen.  He said the war had taken their students.  So to get a student body, he got the board of trustees to pass a policy, implement a policy that they would take students out of their junior year, he said because what happens, what happened is, once they graduated from high school, they were drafted into the Second World War.  So they had to start this policy of admitting people after their junior year to keep, get them before they got drafted and to get student body to save Morehouse, and literally, it was on the verge of closing.  And the rest is history.  And I said to him, at the time, I thought I wanted to be college president.  And he said, "Well, always Plan A, B, C, D and leave yourself open.  You can't afford"--and he didn't mean this financially, he just said, "You can't afford to only think of one thing you want to do in life."  And I'll never forget that conversation.  Now, some years later, before he died, not long before he died--it must have been about 1980, a long-time friend of mine who was in graduate school in Boston with me, but he was Boston U [Boston University, Massachusetts] working on his Ph.D. in religion and psychology, became the first dean of the Martin Luther King [Jr.] Chapel at Morehouse.  And he's still there to this day.  And he's been there about twenty-two, twenty-three years.  I happened to be in Atlanta, and I said to him, I said, "One of the things I really would like is to see Dr. Mays."  So he took me to Benjamin Mays's house.  And he was quite old, and he has so many file folders that he had taken his two-car garage and turned it into an extension of his library.  And all it had was shelves with file folders on it.  And he took me in there and sat down at a desk he had in there.  And he says, "I'm writing my last book, and it's called 'The People Have Driven Me On'."  And a niece was taking care of him at the time.  And I have that book.  And I subsequently got it autographed by him through my friend--no, I took the book of his sermons with me.  That's the one he autographed.  And, and it's basically sayings of his over the years.  It's nothing heavy.  But I'll never forget that.  My first time I ever saw him was in the Summer of '69 [1969] when I worked in Atlanta.  And I went to Ebenezer Baptist Church to worship, and he was still the President of Morehouse at the time.  And his wife was dying of cancer.  And so Reverend [Martin Luther] King Sr., when they came in the church, had the--somebody put two posh chairs, overstuffed chairs on the pulpit and had Dr. and Mrs. Mays--her name was Sadie, come and sit on the pulpit because he knew she was ill.  But at the same time, that was the kind of respect he gave them.  So, you know, I saw him at a distance.  So that's been one of the highlights of my career.
Story_ID: 14425
Speaker 1: But let me switch back to seminary [at Episcopal Divinity School, Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] 'cause there are two pivotal things.  During my first year of seminary, when I still was feeling like I'm not sure the black church is capable of being an agent of social transformation.  There was a seminar that black students who were in various, enrolled in various theological schools throughout the Boston [Massachusetts] area attended.  And one of our speakers was Louis Farrakhan.  And Louis Farrakhan said, "Well, the Nation of Islam really can show you what the black church ought to be doing."  You know, in those days, they were very much involved in economic development activities.  And he said, "I will arrange for those of you who want to come to Boston," I mean, "To Chicago [Illinois], to spend a day with the Honorable Elijah Muhammad, and he can teach you."  And so in December of '68 [1968], a group of us flew out here.  And I, I remember it was during Ramadan because he, Elijah Muhammad had a big meal for us.  And he said that it was Ramadan and they were not supposed to eat.  But he was not well.  So he had permission to eat.  He could eat.  And he ate with us.  And he talked to us, and, and I left there feeling a bit inadequate, you know, that I didn't have the answers; that I wasn't a part of an institution that had the answers for the black community.  That was December '68 [1968].  And it wasn't until '69 [1969], after being in Atlanta [Georgia], and then after hearing [James] Cone, that I felt well I--the church has the answers.  That's critical.  Probably my third year in seminary, there was a fellow, a black fellow enrolled in the School of Education.  The School of Education at Harvard [University] is only a graduate school where he earned his doctorate.  And he was an atheist.  And he subsequently has written books, you may have seen some of his books, Vincent--and I have one of them, it's--he's written a book on black, it's called 'Black Resistance'.  He teaches at one of the universities in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania].  And he looks at--
Speaker 2: What's his name?
Speaker 1: Vincent Franklin.  And he's written this book called 'Black Resistance' and it, it looks at instances of slave resistance during the Antebellum period.  And in the book, he also looks at instances of where slaves scoffed at religion, you know.  Not everybody believed in Jesus.  But he looked at other--he also was very fair, and he looked at instances where, you know, people were very much involved in religion.  It's called 'Black Resistance', Dr. Vincent Franklin.  Well, in any event, and Vincent knew how I was working at OIC [Opportunities Industrialization Center]  in Roxbury [Massachusetts] and, and doing an internship at this black church.  One day he said to me, he said, "You're determined to make the black church relevant if it kills you, aren't you?"  And I instinctively just looked at him and said, "Yeah, I am."  And that had to have been 1970.  By then I had made the commitment.  And I think most of my ministry has been shaped around the motto that I was first exposed to in Harlem [New York] because it was there I learned that the church could build housing.  St. Phillip's [Epispocal Church] at the time had built more housing than any other church in Harlem.  When St. Phillip's was built in 1910, and Harlem was still a white suburb, they brought up black bricklayers from Tuskegee Institute [later Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, Alabama] to lay the brick for the church, a black architect designed the church, and the rector at the time bought a whole block of property in Harlem, residential property on 135th Street, from 7th Avenue to 8th--from 8th Avenue to what is now Adam Clayton Powell--Lenox Avenue, Adam Clayton Powell, no, Lenox Avenue, both sides of the street.  The Harlem Y [Young Mens Christian Association] is in that block--
Speaker 2: That's a historic block.
Speaker 1: Well, St. Phillip's owned it until--
Speaker 2: The Harlem Y is the home of the Harlem History Club and John Henry (unclear)--
Speaker 1: They owned both sides of that street.  Now, by the time I was there in '72 [1972], the property had become an albatross around their neck because New York had rent control.  And they couldn't raise the rents.  And the properties were deteriorating because they couldn't--they didn't have any income from the properties to make them an economic asset.  After I left, Dr. [M. Moran] Weston subsequently worked out something with the state and raised the money to renovate the whole block.  But the property was sold to another not-for-profit entity.  The Church Community Development Corporation no longer has it.  But they built other high rises.  They built nursing homes, etc.  But that was the only way, that was the only way the church could save itself because it owned it, and it had been cited constantly in court.  But the point is, it was that experience in Harlem that, that very much has shaped my ministry.  I then went to [Washington] D.C.  And then I was named U.S. Peace Corps Director for the east coast of Kenya, lived there.  I was country director of the U.S. Peace Corps in the Islamic Republic of Mauritania, came back--I had a Ph.D. by then, that I'd gotten in 1983 at Howard [University, Washington, D.C.].  And I taught academic year '88 [1988], '89 [1989], and was trying to decide what to do next.  I was offered a church in D.C., but it was a very posh, middle-class church in the middle-class area.  And they wanted me.  I had already pastored another church in D.C. in a very middle-class area.  But I felt I'd be bored there.  So I came out here [Chicago, Illinois] in January of '89 [1989] for an interview, and I looked around and everything needed to be done.  And I felt this was where I was being called.  And the rest is history.
Story_ID: 14426
Speaker 1: Now, the, I know the black Episcopalians formed something called the Union of Black Episcopalians in the late '60s [1960s] or early '70s [1970s].
Speaker 2: Late '60s [1960s]--early--'68 [1968].
Speaker 1: '68 [1968].
Speaker 2: But that was a new name for a whole series of organizations that had predated it.  There had been other organizations, integrationist in nature, bi-racial, that preceded the Union of Black Episcopalians, but, yeah, I was at one of their first meetings.  I was at the seminary in '68 [1968].  We met in St. Louis [Missouri].
Speaker 1: Can you give us maybe some kind of a sense of what the black participation in the Episcopal church has been, and by the Episcopal church, we're really talking about the American version of the Anglican church, the Church of England.
Speaker 2: Right, right.  Well, it's, it's been--the black participation in the Episcopal church has been there since its inception.  There were black slaves who were baptized as Anglicans.  Our first black church--well, St. Thomas Church, the oldest, founded in 1791 in Philadelphia by Absalom Jones, actually was an outgrowth from a group that left a Methodist church.  When they were tired of being discriminated against at St. George's Methodist Church, they withdrew.  And some of them wanted to be Episcopalians.  Others wanted to be Methodist.  They felt the Methodist theology and approach was more appropriately tailored to black people because it was a, as they call it, a simple way of propagating the Gospel, unlike the Anglican church.  They had a book of common prayer and a bunch of other stuff.  But there were people who remembered the bitter experience they had just had in St. George's Church, the Methodist church.  So they didn't want to be Methodist.  So rather than decide on a denomination in 1870--1787, when they walked out of St. George's, they founded the Self Help Society, the Free African Society and postponed any decision on the formation of a church.  And it was Mutual Aid Society.  They collected money for burial and other needs.  But by 1791, a group of them asked to take leave from that, and they formed St. Thomas.  St. Phillip's [Episcopal Church] in New York [New York], which was the second church founded, those were blacks who had been members of the Episcopal church.  The wealthiest Episcopal church and the wealthiest Christian church in the United States is Trinity Church on Wall Street [New York, New York].  It sits on land that was granted to them by one of the kings.  And all of lower Wall Street was, was rural area.  So they got all this land much--the New York Stock Exchange sits in a building that Trinity Church owns.  The American Stock Exchange, next door to Trinity's offices sits--it is the largest--today, it's sold a lot of its properties, but it is the largest not-for-profit property-owner in the State of New York, and owns most of--well, now, they own twenty-two buildings, high rises in lower Manhattan, I'm talking about the big ones.  Like I say, they've sold a lot of their stuff, but the point I'm getting at is, blacks were members of Trinity.
Story_ID: 14427
Speaker 1: The point I'm making is that, the first black churches, other than St. Thomas [Church, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], the ones that followed it, these people--(interruption)--these people had been members of a white church, and were tired of the discrimination and asked to leave and start their own churches.  And even when they started them, it was decades after their founding that they were formally accepted into the Episcopal church.  St. Thomas as founded in 1791.  It was not accepted as a member of the Episcopal Diocese of Pennsylvania until after the Civil War, the 1860s.  St. Phillip's [Episcopal Church, New York, New York] was founded in 1810, and in the mid-1850s--I forget the date, a committee--and they made application to be a part of the Episcopal Diocese of New York, and the issue was tabled.  And finally in the mid-1850s, it was discussed and it said these people are intelligent, they have social graces, etcetera, etcetera.  But they are not the equal of white people, and so therefore, they were not accepted.  And here again, it was after the Civil War they were officially admitted into the Episcopal Diocese of New York.
Speaker 2: Now, it was around that time when the Episcopal church had its first black bishop?
Speaker 1: No, it was much later.
Speaker 2: Much later.
Speaker 1: In the early--1917.  What happened, blacks in southern Dioceses were basically being ignored.  And there was plan afloat from the late 1800s by a group of black and white clergy to, to follow the Methodist model.  After the Civil War--the Methodist church split during the Civil War to the Methodist Church South and the Methodist Church North.  The Episcopal Church just didn't convene any national meetings during the Civil War.  So that's the only reason it didn't split.  But after the Civil War, the Methodist church formed a separate branch within--I'm not talking about AME [African Methodist Episcopal], I'm talking about the white Methodist Church, formed a separate sub-group within the larger white group, which they called the Central Jurisdiction.  And they had black bishops over black churches, but yet they were still part of the larger white Methodist church.  And it wasn't--and this was right after the Civil War, that did not change until after, until about 1968, when they did away with the Central Jurisdiction and brought all black churches under whatever white bishop happened to be in that area.  And they started appointing some black Bishops.  Well, in the 1880s, there was discussion in the Episcopal church to have the same arrangement, a separate branch within the church that would have their own black bishops.  There was a term out of the Church of England for assistant bishops called suffragan bishops.  The northern dioceses, New York, Boston and Connecticut were burgeoning with numbers.  And the bishops needed an assistant.  So they struck a compromise in the, around 1910, '12 [1912], '13 [1913], somewhere around in there, and instituted the office of suffragan bishop in the Episcopal church.  And the understanding was that the northern dioceses that needed assistance would elect a suffragan, but then southern dioceses could elect a black bishop who would be called the Suffragan for Colored Work.  He would only be in--have some oversight over black churches.  But unlike the Methodist model that had a whole separate jurisdiction, the, the black Suffragan for Colored Work really worked under the white bishop of whatever diocese he was elected.  He didn't have a separate diocese.  So in 1917, the Diocese of Arkansas elected a black suffragan.  His name was, last name was Demby, a Suffragan for Colored Work.  He had no oversight over any white churches.  And in 1918, the Diocese of North Carolina elected Bishop Henry Delaney, both of whom are in stained glass windows in this church [St. Edmund's Church, Chicago, Illinois], as the Suffragan for Colored Work.  And Bishop [Edward T.] Demby in Arkansas often complained, he didn't even know what his budget for Colored Work was.  So it was a very strained relationship.  But they had no oversight over white parishes, and they worked directly for the white bishop of that diocese.  The first black person elected a suffragan of a white diocese, was John Burgess, who was elected the Suffragan of Massachusetts some time in the early '60s [1960s] because when I went to seminary--and he had been the chaplain at Howard [University, Washington, D.C.] for about twenty years, and when I went to seminary in '68 [1968], he was the Suffragan Bishop of Massachusetts.  And he subsequently was elected the Diocesan Bishop.  He was the first black elected a Diocesan Bishop in our church.  And he was my bishop when I was a rector in Boston [Massachusetts].  He's still alive.  He's certainly someone who should be interviewed.  He's ninety-two or ninety-three, living on Martha's Vineyard [Massachusetts] in a nursing home, grew up in Grand Rapids, Michigan.  Someone needs to get to him before he dies.  The second black elected a suffragan, was John Walker in Washington, D.C.  Prior to 1954, our denomination maintained a seminary for coloreds.  It was in Petersburg, Virginia, called Bishop Payne Divinity School.  And John Walker was the first one to attend our largest white seminary.  He was admitted to the Virginia Theological Seminary in 1955 in Alexandria.  And he subsequently became the Bishop of Washington [D.C.].
Story_ID: 14428
Speaker 1: If a black wanted to be a diocesan bishop in our [Episcopalian] church, prior to John Burgess being elected the Bishop of Massachusetts in the '60s [1960s], he was elected--he became a missionary bishop.  He would either have been, was appointed to one of our overseas dioceses.  For example, the Episcopal church in Liberia was part of the American Episcopal church until, probably the '70s [1970s], even while I, since I've been a priest.  I was ordained in December of '71 [1971], and it was part of the American church then.  But if you were black, and you wanted to be a diocesan bishop, that was your only place.  And so we had a prominent church in Norfolk, Virginia, Grace Church Norfolk, and there was a man there named Robert Harris, who had been there twenty-some years.  And he was named Bishop of Liberia.  And that's where he went to serve.  When he died or retired, I don't know which came first, a rector of our church in Washington [D.C.], our very prominent black parish there that was founded by Alexander Crummel after he had come back from being a missionary in Liberia, St. Luke's Church, which was founded in the 1870s.  A man named Billy Brown, whose daughter was a priest here in, in Maywood, Virginia Brown Nolan, he wanted to be a Bishop.  He had to go be a missionary bishop.  He became the Bishop of Liberia.  The Virgin Islands was part of the American church.  So a man who lived in, a rector of our very prominent black parish in Baltimore [Maryland], St. James, his name was Cedric Mills, became the Bishop of the Virgin Islands.  But that was their, those were their only options if they wanted to be a diocesan bishop.
Speaker 2: Okay.  And you were gonna tell us about Holly.
Speaker 1: Oh, he's in a window here [St. Edmund's Church, Chicago, Illinois].  And I, I have his story in a file here, and it's been a while since I've read it.  But he was a priest here.  In fact, he has relatives here in Chicago, but decided to become a missionary to Haiti in the early 1800s.  And he went there, and his wife and children died because of illness.  And he decided to stay.  He stayed on fifty-two years.  But at some point, and I don't know all the, all the details, he was consecrated a bishop.  Who consecrated him?  I don't know, but he was consecrated to be the Bishop of Haiti.  Here, again, abroad, not on the continent.
Speaker 2: Okay, that's James Taylor Holly?
Speaker 1: James Taylor Holly.  We've had several diocesan bishops on the continent since the '60s [1960s] now.
Speaker 2: Now, was he the first Episcopal, I mean first Anglican, black Anglican Bishop in the--or does it make any--you know?
Speaker 1: The first black ordained a priest and bishop in the Anglican church was a Nigerian.  And he is also in a stained-glass window here.  And he's written, and you read about him in a lot of books, of him evangelizing the--the Yoruba people.
Speaker 2: Is that Crowther?
Speaker 1: What'd you say?
Speaker 2: Crowther.
Speaker 1: Yes, right, right, exactly.  He--
Speaker 2: Samuel Crowther.
Speaker 1: Samuel Crowther.
Speaker 2: Well--
Speaker 1: But he was through the Church of England.  So Holly would be the oldest, the first black ordained in the Episcopal Church.
Story_ID: 14429
Speaker 1: And so there is a distinction made between the Anglican Church and the Episcopal?
Speaker 2: Well, during the Colonial era, this was known, the church of--this was called the Church of England or the Anglican church.  After the Revolutionary War, the--all the previous bishops had been sent from England.  They would not ordain any priests a bishop.  Well, they broke church ties and formed what was called the Protestant Episcopal Church.  Episcopal just means you have bishops.  But the first Bishop here, Samuel Seabury, went to Scotland, and a Scottish bishop ordained him.  No one in England would ordain him.  The Anglican Church today, worldwide, consists of thirty-six independent entities, each of whom has their own chief bishop or primate as they are called.
Story_ID: 14430
Speaker 1: Thirty-six, independent branches.  They're totally autonomous of each other.  But worldwide, they make up what we call the Anglican Communion.  Most of their chief bishops are called archbishop, as Desmond Tutu was, the Archbishop of Southern Africa.  And I say Southern Africa because his territory took in more than just South Africa.  It took in parts of some near--other countries.  But our, our chief bishop is called the presiding bishop because they were very much attuned with the, the times of a revolutionary era.  And they didn't want some authoritarian title for the chief bishop, like archbishop.  So they chose presiding, which meant he was among--the chief among equals, as opposed to someone who wielded authority over the other bishops.  And the constitution is pretty much written that way.  He doesn't have a lot of authority over the other bishops of the church, although he's elected by them.  But the titular head of the worldwide Anglican Communion 70 million people is the Archbishop of Canterbury, who visited here in 1996.  He has no authority.  He is only the head of the Church of England.
Speaker 2: Okay, so he doesn't govern anything--
Speaker 1: No.  He's a symbolic head.  And today the Anglican Communion, worldwide, is predominantly black, overwhelmingly black because England took its church to Africa and the Caribbean, and, you know--so when the bishops of the church, of the Anglican Communion gather every ten years, at Lambeth Palace [London, England, United Kingdom] where the Archbishop of Canterbury lives, today, it's an overwhelmingly black gathering.
Speaker 2: And that's something that most people don't know.
Speaker 1: Most people don't realize, you know.  There are more Anglicans in, people say, in Uganda than in England, one country, okay.
Speaker 2: Now is the, so the Anglican hierarchy then is, is it predominantly black worldwide, or is it--?
Speaker 1: Well, keep, keep in mind, the hierarchy is, is what each of these thirty-six independent entities.  So the hierarchy would be predominantly black.  And, and the various island of the West Indies, we call the province--the Province of the Church of the West Indies has an Archbishop.  The Province of Central America, I mean that's what they're called.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Yeah, they're black and third world because England also went to Southeast Asia, so you've got the Bishop of Hong Kong.  And you've got the Bishop of Singapore and, you know, and Malaysia, the Bishop of Malaysia, the bishop of these various islands in the South Pacific.  They're all native bishops now, you know.  The Church of England is England, Austral--I mean the white part of the church is basically, the United States, Canada, England and Australia.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Okay, three of the thirty-six.
Story_ID: 14431
Speaker 1: Now, you were at, you say you were in the Peace Corps in Kenya.
Speaker 2: I, those were political appointments.  I was not a volunteer.  I was an administrator, right.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you were--
Speaker 2: Well, in 1984, late '84 [1984], Kenya had the largest Peace Corps population, the second-largest in '84 [1984], but the largest was in the Philippines.  Kenya had the second largest with about 360 Peace Corps volunteers.  So for purposes of administration, the country was divided into five regions.  And I was the regional director for Coast Province.  I lived in Mombasa [Kenya].  That's where my office was.  We had five offices throughout the country.  The central office was in Nairobi [Kenya], as well as two of the regional offices.  And I was responsible for the administration of all Peace Corps--I had seventy-some volunteers under me for, who served all along the east coast, as well as some of the islands, like Lamu Island [Kenya] and some of the other islands off the coast of Kenya and the Indian Ocean.  And then I left there, and was the country director of the United States Peace Corps in the Islamic Republic of Mauritania, which is north of Senegal, south of Morocco and the last country in the world to officially free slaves and slavery still exists there today, allegedly.
Speaker 1: Now, how did you find these, these are two African appointments in there, in territories that are largely Muslim, in fact, entirely Muslim, pretty much.
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Well, the, the Muslim population of Kenya, and it's not a huge population in Kenya, is all along the coast.  So I, in fact, lived in the Muslim area of Kenya.  Islam as practiced along the coast of Kenya, is a very relaxed practice of Kenya--practice of Islam.  One of the things I learned and didn't know--well, a few things I learned, but one, you know, when we think of--and I'm learning more about this in subsequent travels, when we think of the African diaspora, we traditionally show people of African descent who scattered because they were slaves and taken somewhere.  But there was a thriving slave trade on the east coast of Africa to Arabia.  So, you know, all--Saudi Arabia, all those countries in the peninsula over there had people of African descent and many Kenyans had relatives and--you know, living in those places today, working.  Afghanistan, you know, you see black folks.  That was the result of slaves that were taken there centuries ago.  We don't think about that.  We only think of West Africa.  So that was a learning.  And another learning was that Swahili is a very young language.  It was only formed in the 14th century, in the 1300s as a way that the Arab slave traders could, could talk to Africans that they bought slaves from, you know, who were captured in war from other Africans along the east coast.  So 25 percent of the Swahili words are Arab, direct Arab words.  Swahili, itself, is the Arab word meaning coast.  So in the--but the Swahili people, for the most part, look like fair complexioned black people because they are a mixture of Arab and African.  And many people thought I was a Swahili person 'til I opened my mouth.  But they can trace--but the point I'm making is, that's also a heavily tourist area of Kenya, beachfront hotels.  You certainly know about one of them got bombed recently [1998].  Because of that, the practice of Islam is very relaxed, not rigid.  My secretary, the, the garb, the outer garb that the women wear, the Swahili word for that is bui bui.  She'd wear her black bui bui to the office, take it off, throw it in a drawer, had on high heel shoes, short dress, lipstick, the whole bit.  They go to night clubs.  My best friends were DJs [disc jockeys] in the night clubs.  They were all Muslim.  So my first experience of Islam was a very relaxed one.
Story_ID: 14432
Speaker 1: Then I moved to Mauritania, which is an Islamic Republic by law.  And Mauritanians, here again, it's white Moors who enslaved black Moors.  And white Moors looked like fair-complexioned black people.  And once they leave Mauritania and go to France or the U.S, they call them black.  They think they're white in Mauritania.  But the point I'm getting at is, it's a much more orthodox practice of Islam.  Kenya, you know, my driver in Mauritania, my housekeeper, you know, at prayer time, they're gonna pull out their rug and pray.  He's driving in rural Mauritania somewhere, and it's time to pray, he's gonna pull to the side of road, and get his little bottle of water, wash his feet and hands and get on down and pray.  You don't see that in Kenya, not in Mombasa [Kenya].  Now, the more orthodox Muslims would be around the Nairobi area, but--so when I got to Mauritania, it was a whole different experience of Islam.  The day off in Kenya is Saturday afternoon and Sunday.  The day off in, in Mauritania was Friday.  That's when everything is closed.  And everything is quiet until after the men go to the mosque.  So, and by law, other than the Roman cathedral, which had been there since the time it was French West Africa, there could be no proselytizing of Christians, of Christianity.  So it was a whole different world.  But, having said all that, my--as I got to know people in Mauritania, and this was where the press is so wrong.  People outwardly are very orthodox, but, you know, in a social setting, they drink liquor, they party, they dance, they do everything, you know, literally.  And, at least the elite--the ruling elite and the bureaucrats.  The, even our workers, drivers, they drank beer.  So--
Speaker 2: And that's forbidden in Islam.
Speaker 1: Right, exactly, exactly.  And, and the, the only place you could buy alcohol in Mauritania, where we had a commissary, the U.S. government had a commissary  to serve the [U.S.] Embassy, Peace Corps staff, and the U.S. aid staff.  And I could go there and buy, you know, a fifth of Johnnie Walker [whiskey] for whatever it costs, let's say ten dollars, twelve dollars.  But on the black market in Mauritania--this was '85 [1985], '86 [1986], it was $100 a fifth.  So I'll never forget, as long as I don't have dementia, I had a party one night.  And it was a number of government officials.  And I had a bartender.  But then at a certain point I let the bartender go because the Mauritanians--in African society period, they feel they can't party in front of their wives or women.  So they take their wives home and come back, and then the real party begins.  And they sit all night and drink and dance, you know.  And, and they say it's, it's disrespectful to party in front of their wives.  And so, I let--
Speaker 2: Do they bring other women over?
Speaker 1: No, no.  See, this is, it's all very different.  The third world sense of, of, of touch and everything is different.  Men all over Africa dance with each other, as they do in the Middle East, married or not.  I remember one Christmas Eve when I was in Mauritania, I went to a, a public party in Dakar [Senegal] with a businessman and his wife from Mauritania, but he also had part of a business in Dakar.  And I was with both of them.  And he would ask me to dance just he asked his wife to dance.  Africans don't have--Africans walk down the street holding hands, have no sexual connotation.  And if they thought you were giving it a sexual connotation, they'd want to fight you.  Now, is there homosexuality?  Yes.  But it's very undercover.  So this is where a lot of Westerners--I remember when I was in Zimbabwe and people would say to me, it wasn't until I went to the U.S. to school, that I found out that I'm supposed to be gay if I walk down the street holding my buddy's hand.  It happens routinely.  And so men dance together in the presence of their wives because socially, you cannot ask another woman to dance whose not your wife or she's thought to be a whore, to put it bluntly.  Very rigid social lives.  So they take their wives home and come back and dance with each other and drink all night.  The point I'm getting at is, the next morning, I noticed some of my bottles of liquor were missing.  And this was in Mauritania.  And one of my Mauritanian buddies told me about one or two of the government bureaucrats that were there--they wear these long flowing robes, that were sticking fifths in their, in those robes cause, you know, on the black market, that fifth was costing a hundred dollars.  So that's, even in a--
Speaker 2: That's another violation of Islam.
Speaker 1: Right, even in my rigidly Orthodox, Islamic only Mauritania.  That's my experience of Islam, you know.  And any Muslim will tell you this, who knows, whose lived there, you know, that they're just real human people.  Women in Mauritania, there's prostitution.  You go out on the main street at night, Islamic women walking up and down the street, late at night selling themselves.
Speaker 2: In violation of the (unclear)--.
Speaker 1: Exactly.  So people here, you know, who appropriate Islam are more orthodox than any Muslim I've ever met.  The best fun I've had was living in an Islamic republic.  They loved to party.  I mean we'd go take tents--they're very desert-like, and they love to, they'd have big mansions, but still prefer to have a tent out in the desert, just like I saw in Kuwait the other day.  It's true.  It's that desert mentality. And we'd take a, we'd erect a tent by the beach and go out there, and you know, just party, fish, lay around, drink tea and eat.  It's a very laid-back, nomadic environment.  I don't know what else to say.
Speaker 2: Okay, well--.
Speaker 1: But they're also very status conscious, you know.  And, and people, even in African society, it's a hierarchical society.  And, you know, if you're born into the clan that, you know, it's--that is the ruling clan, you don't party with the clan that, that's supposed to be a fisherman or a janitor.  In Peace Corps, we had to learn that because we would invite our drivers, you know, to our parties, and government officials sent word, well, next time you do that, I'm not coming cause they're very status conscious in ways that--and you have to understand that.
Speaker 2: Now, were there any other big surprises--
Speaker 1: Not status in the, in a snobbish way, but I'm born into this clan and many of us would wear their robes.  But the material and the design of the robe--robe reflects your clan.  And not everybody can wear certain material.  The highest material in, the high status material in Mauritania was called homene (ph.). And it has like the crescent on it.  I had some, some clothes made out of it, but not everybody could wear that; only if you were from that elite clan.
Speaker 2: So you could really get in trouble?
Speaker 1: Oh, yeah, you could get--there is no question.  Nobody would defy it, okay.  And you don't pick up all those subtleties.  And it's true of black Africa too, especially a place like Nigeria.  I, I have a cap here.  It's called a fela (ph.), right on that chair, that one of my Nigerian members gave me.  And I told her to write me something about it.  And she did, which I have.  And it's only someone of high status would wear that cap and Yoruba society.
Speaker 2: Okay, now were there--
Speaker 1: We just put them on, don't know.
Story_ID: 14433
Speaker 1: Now, were there any other big surprises about Africa or did, you know, were you--?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Yeah, there were some others.  I was a rector in Washington [D.C.] at the time I was appointed administrator to the United States Peace Corps.  And one of my parishioners worked for the CIA [Central Intelligence Agency].  And he said, "When you get to post," meaning in Kenya, "I guarantee you that somebody at post, black, is gonna be a CIA agent."  And he wasn't lying.  So we do everything.  So the point, one of the points I'm making is there is as much suspicion about black Americans working in certain African countries as there are white ones, 'cause they say, people used to say, how do I know you're not a CIA Agent?  Okay.  Another learning was in '86 [1986], United Nations, every ten years has a, a worldwide conference of women.  And in 1985, they had the U.N. [United Nations] Decade of Women's Conference in Nairobi [Kenya], and I was there.  The late Ethel Payne was one of my house guests.  There was a lot of tension between African American women, and these are women from all over the world, and some of the African women.  One of the things that the African women said, and it's true, black Americans come to Africa and think they've got all the answers for Africans.  And there's an arrogance, they say, about black Americans.  Well, why don't you do X?  Or why don't you do Y?  And they, they define the African reality based on the African American historical and social experience and don't think Africans can think for themselves.  Now, this is an American trait.  The Episcopal church was the independent entity in the Anglican Communion to ordain women as priests in the late '70s [1970s].  White women priests would go to England and, and say, well, why, why aren't you agitating?  And, and the white women priests, the white women in England would say, stop telling us what to do, you know.  We know how to handle our situation here.  There's a certain arrogance on Americans' part, regardless of race.  We know what's best for the rest of the world.  We can tell you how to be free.  And black Americans suffer from it as much as white Americans.  That was one of the things I wanted--and so you have to be more humble.  Now, when I left Mauritania, the U.S. ambassador wrote me a letter of reference.  And I still have a copy of it.  And he said he had never met any American who had integrated so well in, in Mauritanian society.  When I left my post, many Mauritanians gave parties for me.  That didn't happen for any other American at post over there.  But that's how I had endeared myself.  I mean I just was me, but for some reason, you know, I gained the trust and respect of a lot of people.  So that's a learning.
Story_ID: 14434
Speaker 1: This past summer, August of 19--I mean 2002, I traveled to Papua New Guinea.  And enlarged my definition of what it means to be a part of the African diaspora.  People in Papua New Guinea have been there 40,000 years.  They were--I met an American anthropologist who lives there--I bought some of her writings and other stuff.  They were in the first wave of people who left Africa, humans, at one point, seven million years ago, came down through Southeast Asia, came across the islands of Indonesia, 60,000 years ago, when what is now the island of New Guinea was still attached to Australia.  So their ancestors are the Aboriginal people of Australia.  Many of them didn't see anybody white until forty years ago.  They live a lifestyle totally unlike you or I could ever live.  But the point I want to make is, I went to a cultural affair there, where the, the various tribes come together and dance for competition.  And one of the vendors put his hand next to mine, and he said, "Same skin."  That's all he could say.  There was a black American in our group from [Washington] D.C., whom I happened to know, but didn't know he was gonna be in this group.  I hadn't seen him in seventeen years.  He kept using terms like, "I'm African American," and the New Guinean would say, "Well, what are you?  African or American?"
Story_ID: 14435
Speaker 1: You were talking about [Papua] New Guinea and--
Speaker 2: Oh, New Guinea there enlarged my--both enlarged my understanding of what the [African] diaspora means and also further confused me as to what it means.  These are people who lived basically isolated lives.  One fourth of the world's languages are spoken--there are 800 tribes in New Guinea.  Allegedly, there are about 4,000 different languages in the world.  So that means a fifth of them are spoken in, in New Guinea.  But people who live lifestyles so different that it's unimaginable.  We visited various tribes.  And I can't tell you, there's one tribe that's representative of all the others.  They're very different.  And the ones in the highlands are still very warlike.  We had to be flown by helicopter to various places because there had been an election, and supposedly, there was election fraud and so tribes were fighting each other and the roads were not safe.  But it continues to enlarge the idea of what, what is the diaspora.
Story_ID: 14436
Speaker 1: Can you tell us how you came to become the Rector of St. Edmund's [Epsicopal Church, Chicago, Illinois]?
Speaker 2: Sure.  When I came back from, you know, the Peace Corps has a term limit for everyone--from volunteers who are paid and so volunteer is a misnomer even for them, from the administrators, the chief administrators are political appointments.  So after my term with the Peace Corps ended, I came back to the United States and was an interim rector at a church in [Washington] D.C.  The bishop appointed me to a church that was without a rector while they were searching.  And I also taught full time at Howard University [Washington, D.C.] in the political science department, while I was discerning happens next, in other words, looking for a job.  And I thought I would stay on the East Coast, and I thought that I would be involved in some kind of international work still.  There were two internationally-related positions that I was vying for.  And I didn't get either.  The church that I was--and in retrospect, I'm glad I didn't because both of those jobs were eventually--what's the word I'm looking for?  Abolished. (laughs)  One agency folded, that if I had gone there, I'd be without a job.  So, that worked out fine, in retrospect.  But I was an interim rector at this very middle-class church [St Timothy's Church, Washington, D.C.].  And they wanted me to be their rector, and I just didn't feel it.  I didn't feel it was the match.  I didn't know what was out there, but I knew that wasn't it.  And teaching at Howard was paying me a lot less that I had made as an administrator in the U.S. Peace Corps.  So, still not knowing what lay there, I said no to that church.  And in September of 1988, I flew out to Cincinnati [Ohio] for the consecration of the Bishop of Southern Ohio who was a black person, whom I know.
Speaker 1: Is it Thomas?
Speaker 2: Herbert Thomas.  And while I was there, a member of St. Edmund's was there.  And the person said to me, "We're looking for a rector.  And you should apply."  Well, I said, okay.  And I didn't think any more about it because, one, I had said I was never going back to the Midwest except when they brought me in a coffin to Fern Crest Cemetery in Springfield, Ohio, that I basically was a, a Boston [Massachusetts] to D.C. kind of person, just liked the ethos, the environment, the cosmopolitan nature of the place, the area.  And so I ignored that, and then in November, the individual rang me, and said, "Well, your name has been given to the search committee, and you'll probably get a call.  And I hope you come for the interview."  And I did.  And so I came out here in January.  And I had thought of St. Edmund's as this glorious place.  And then I got here, and I found a place that had deteriorated in every sense of the word and in a neighborhood, unlike anything I had--even Harlem [New York] is very well populated, you know.  You don't see very much vacant land.  So I'd never seen anything like this.  But I said to myself, I think this is where the Lord is calling me.  Everything needs to be done here.  And I remember asking the search committee, "What are you looking for?"  And one of the women said, "We're looking for somebody to love us and us to love Him."  And that, for some reason, hit me in a special way.
Speaker 1: Now, that's an interesting thing to say.
Speaker 2: Right.  And so eventually I was called and they said that I had been elected rector.  Would I accept?  And I accepted, and I came here June 1st, 1989 and we pretty much transformed the place.
Speaker 1: Now, this community known as West Washington Park [Chicago, Illinois], I guess?
Speaker 2: Yes, right.
Story_ID: 14437
Speaker 1: And has, you know, experienced a lot of problems.  Right across the street is a--well, it used to be a housing project.
Speaker 2: Well, in 19--let me say this, from the mid-1920s to the early '60s [1960s], this [Washington Park, Chicago, Illinois] was the black middle-class area of the city.  St. Edmund's [Episcopal] Church [Chicago, Illinois] was founded in 1905 as a white congregation.  And they built their first building, and they were founded on State Street at about Wabash [Avenue].  But they built their first building in 1906, which still stands today in the 5800 Block of South Indiana Avenue.  It's an African Orthodox Church now.  It grew out of the Garvey Movement.  In 1928, the Bishop sent the first black clergymen there, and said I send you--it was an Irish and a Greek neighborhood.  And the Bishop sent the first clergyman there, and said I send you to a building with no people.  Forty-two years later in 1970, he retired as the Rector of St. Edmund's Church.  They bought this building, which was a former Greek Orthodox Church, built in 1927.  They bought this building in 1948 because they had outgrown that building.  When he retired in 1970, this was the largest parish in the entire Episcopal diocese, bar none, with over 2,000 active communicants.  In 1970, there were 90,000 within a half--living within a half mile radius of this church.  In 1990, there were 19,000.  So the neighborhood lost 70,000 people over a twenty-year period.  This was known as a very bourgeois congregation, with many of the movers and shakers of Chicago--
Speaker 1: Black community.
Speaker 2: --black community attended.
Speaker 1: Newspaper columnists, TV figures, doctors.
Speaker 2: If you've read Lawrence Otis Graham's book, 'Our Kind of People', he mentioned St. Edmund's often.  And, and I'm particularly impressed; I look at the vestry, the board of directors in the 1920s.  And everybody on there was a doctor or a lawyer.  So that's the kind of place it was.  But by 1989, the neighborhood had deteriorated.  The members had moved out of the neighborhood or died.  This building was in shambles.  And so we redefined our--and some of the other congregations that were around here had moved to other neighborhoods.  The public housing was occupied at the time.  Part of what brought down the neighborhood, beginning the late '60s [1960s], there was an overly concentration of new construction of public housing in the neighborhood.  At some point, they built the el [elevated train] that runs through the neighborhood, that disrupted.  And anytime you build an el you see housing start to deteriorate on each side of it.  At some point in the '50s [1950s], they built [Interstate Highway] 90/94.  So all those things.  When I came here, there was an entranceway to the [Chicago] Skyway, pay road to Gary [Indiana], right at 63rd [Street] and Michigan [Avenue].  There was an exit ramp at 63rd and Indiana.  All that disrupted the neighborhood.  And with the overly concentration of public housing and with more neighborhoods opening up to blacks, middle-class people moved.  We reoriented ourselves, redefined our mission and decided in addition to re-establishing a vibrant ministry, we would have outreach efforts of three different components, housing, renew the housing stock.  This church had had a school from 1948 'til 1988, of which to this day, many leaders in Chicago's African American community graduated from it--the parochial school.  We re-established our educational mission.  And we would address the issue of neighborhood security.  So in 1990, the vestry, the board of directors formed a separate legal entity to revitalize the housing stock, which we call St. Edmund's Redevelopment Corporation.  To date, we have built or rehabbed $43 million in housing since our first effort in 1992.  We own fourteen buildings, 455 units of housing.  Our biggest effort is in the highrise at 63rd and Michigan [Avenue], which was, with acquisition and rehab, was $18.5 million.  Before we acquired that twenty-three storey, twenty-four storey, 230-unit building, the gangs ran it, anarchy reigned there.  We've completely turned it around.  In March of 2003, after two--ten years of negotiating with various administrations of the Chicago Housing Authority, we would purchase the public housing across the street that's now abandoned.  It's not abandoned; the residents have been relocated, and turn that into a mixed-income development.  Those will be townhouses that any of us would be proud to live in.  It'll be a nine million dollar job, they'll be Internet wired.  It'll be amazing, what you're gonna see over there after fourteen months, peaked roofs, balconies, wrought-iron fences, play areas, DSL, security cameras, operated by DSL, monitored from our highrise at 63rd and Michigan.  We will build thirty-three rental townhouses on some vacant land, and we're acquiring fifty lots to build for sale homes.  So that's our housing effort.  We re-established the school [St. Edmund's Academy, Chicago, Illinois].  Now, there're 340 kids in grades K [kindergarten] through 6th.  It's a charter school.  We, we opened as a private school that was tuition driven on a sliding-fee scale.  We closed that and were fortunate enough to get a charter school, which allowed us to significantly up the enrollment and do away with tuition.  And the security piece is addressed, we formed a neighborhood civic association, West Washington Park Residents Association.  It's had a number of names since its founding.  When we first started, we were called Michigan-Indiana Avenue Block Club, and then they realized that residents live in about fourteen different blocks.  So a couple of years ago, they changed the name to West Washington Park Residents' Block Club, and then now there are some other clubs that have started in the neighborhood.  But we were it for a while.  The church--we've spent over two million dollars renovating this building that I've had to raise, we still have a metropolitan congregation.  And we're attracting new members, most of whom are very highly professional people.  And it's a daily struggle, but it's a, it's a good one.
Story_ID: 14438
Speaker 1: I know that your sermons are put on the Internet every week, right?
Speaker 2: No, they're--some, there is an Episcopalian who has a website, and I have occasionally sent him sermons.  And those are.  We print our sermons here [St. Edmund's Episcopal Church, Chicago, Illinois] every week.  And we, we're gonna have a website soon, but we just started e-mailing our sermons this year to anybody who wishes to get them by e-mail.  But, yes, there are some of them on a website.  I was amazed to find them myself.  Actually, I don't know how they got there because they're on one website that I know about.  And they've been abstracted and put on another website.  How that happened, I don't know.
Speaker 1: I'm getting ahead of myself.  But before I ask you about your sermons, I wanted to ask you about, I guess the changes in the church.  There have been quite a few changes in terms of the appearance of the church, the two million dollars worth renovations we were talking about, as well as the aesthetic look of the church.  And I know that there's--here's a church that has a very traditional Anglican-looking vestments and so forth at one time.  And they're, they're African vestments in the church.  And there's a new series of stained glass windows depicting African heroes around the church, both of the church and secular heroes as well.  Can you talk about that and how important that is, has been to this church?
Speaker 2: Well, it was a very stayed, traditional place when I came.  One of the things I did was implement an annual, strategic planning retreat with the leaders.  And we would talk about all kinds of issues.  We'd use an outside facilitator to look at our strengths, our weaknesses, our opportunities, the threats, both externally and internally.  And the transformation you see represents trying to turn what might be threats to opportunities by redefining ourselves in some ways.
Speaker 1: Okay, and--now, can you tell me a story about the vestments?  I know not everybody was in love with that when it happened, but people--.
Speaker 2: Well, I think that's part of teaching.  I remember once when I was a rector in Washington [D.C.], and I happened to see John Walker, who was the bishop.  And he said, "How are things going?"  And I said, "Well, I have some people mad at me right now."  And he said, "Well, I'm glad to hear that.  He said that means you're doing your job."  He said, "We have too many priests who put their finger up in the wind, see which way it's blowing, and that dictates the decision they made.  If you aren't making people mad every now and then, then I don't think you're doing your job."  So, yes, there have been people who were mad, but at the same time, there have been people who paid for all those things (laughs), other people have paid for them.  And then so it's a part of growing.  And I think that--I remember in the '70s [1970s], when I was a rector in Boston [Massachusetts], I had hired this individual to our youth director.  And he had had a prison record.  And a lot of the, a number of the adults got very upset.  Why are you hiring this ex-con to work with the kids?  And I said, "Well, that's our role."  You know, I'm not gonna hire any ex-con, just as I wouldn't hire anybody, but I believe in this person.  Well, to make a long story very short, just when I was about to give up on this person for, thinking that he wasn't growing, he gave me this plaque, and he said, a friend is somebody who knows where you've been, knows what you can become and gently encourages you to grow.  And that's part of my philosophy about ministry.  I know where people, I have some idea what people can become, and I understand where they've been, why they are what they are.  And I do things to help them grow, gently, and sometimes not so gently.  But without that, you don't see any progress, at least in terms of how I might define it, and some other people.
Speaker 1: Now, the other physical thing I want to talk about is the stained glass windows.  Now, how did that come about 'cause they're truly remarkable.  I don't know if another church matches it.
Speaker 2: Well, interestingly enough, I made the decision about--first, everybody knew we needed new stained-glass windows.  The old ones were cracked and ugly, but not necessarily everybody visualized what I had visualized would go into the new ones.  So I did some research, and, and I had to make some hard decisions as to whom I might like to go in those windows.  And one Sunday morning, I announced we had thirty-three stained-glass windows, and what it would cost to buy one and who would go in them.  And I raised the money in one Sunday morning, I mean literally.  By the time the 8:00 [A.M.] service had finished, most of the windows were gone.  Some people at 10:30 [A.M.] were upset, they didn't have as much opportunity to buy a window.
Speaker 1: How much did the windows costs?
Speaker 2: They were a couple thousand [dollars] each.  And then they drew lottery names to see who they would get, you know.  And people were excited, but they still trusted me.  They didn't know what they were gonna look like.  And here's where, you know--I remember one of the now-deceased members said to me about the man who built this church from nothing to 2,000 members, she said, we learned to trust him.  We didn't always what he meant when he wanted to found a Federal Credit Union or a school, but we said, well, we'll trust him.  And literally, that's what people did.  And I oversaw the design of the windows, and when they were put in, everybody was just in awe.  But they had no idea.
Speaker 1: Now, these windows--can you name some of the people that the windows depict?
Speaker 2: Well, I wanted to--here again, I believe in inclusivity so I wanted persons of African, West Indian, because we have Caribbean members and Afro-American.  I wanted both secular and religious who made some significant contribution to history in general or to the struggle for justice in society.  On the secular side, we have Crispus Attucks, the first person to be felled by a bullet in the Revolutionary War.  We have Prince Hall.  We have Thurgood Marshall.  We have Rosa Parks, Patricia Roberts Harris, who grew up in this church, Marcus Garvey.  On the African side we have some of the early church fathers, like St. Cyprian [of Carthage], St. Augustine of Hippo.  We have an Archbishop [of Uganda], Janani Luwum who was martyred by Idi Amin, his body literally was cut up in parts because he spoke out against Amin's regime.  We have St. Monica, who was the mother of St. Augustine of Hippo.  We have Bishop Barbara [Clementine] Harris who was the first woman Bishop in the Episcopal church, also black.  [Dr.] Martin Luther King [Jr.], Absalom Jones.  On the Caribbean side, I've mentioned Marcus Garvey.  But we also have James--well, James Theodore Holly was the Bishop of Haiti, but I'm trying think other than Marcus Garvey, who from the Caribbean is up there.  I think there's at least one more.  I can't of--.
Speaker 1: (unclear)
Speaker 2: No, he's not there.
Speaker 1: Well, it's impressive.  It's, I just saying it's impressive stuff in there.
Speaker 2: And I had the artists of the stained glass company draw renderings of what all the windows would look like.  And I had the donors look at them in advance.  And then when there was--in fact, they were installed in May of '96 [1996] just before the Archbishop of Canterbury came here.  People were in awe.
Speaker 1: And that's powerful stuff, and when the congregation was involved in all that.  The congregation, you say, is diverse too, which is not typical of every Chicago church, you know, to have this kind of diversity.
Speaker 2: Well, one other thing.  Prior to those stained glass windows, the, the area behind the altar is called apse.  There was nothing there.  This was a Greek Orthodox church.  So when they bought it in 1948, there were icons everywhere, most of which had been painted over.  We commissioned an artist to paint on canvas, three scenes from the Bible reflecting persons of African descent.  And I formed a committee of some of our art devotees, but also of some of the most conservative people in the church.  And they interviewed artists.  I mean they spent over a year interviewing artists.  And, and then recommended to me--they studied the Bible for, to find scenes depicting, dealing with persons of African descent and made three recommendations to me.  And, and those were painted on canvas behind the altar, costing $7,000.  And they didn't want any other donors.  They didn't want to make--me to make a public appeal because they personally wanted to give those so they could, their names could go on it.  And then they paid for it.
Story_ID: 14439
Speaker 1: What's been the most satisfying thing about being here at St. Edmund's [Episcopal Church, Chicago, Illinois]?
Speaker 2: I think the most satisfying thing, one of the things I've read, is for, to see any real change, you have to have a long-term ministry.  Now, I don't know what long-term means.  I'm still trying to define that, but to see the transformation of people's attitudes, to see the transformation--and when I say attitudes, you know, church was more like a social thing to come to, and a very staid, Anglo forum, but people really have a sense of mission and ministry now.  And that's been the most amazing thing.
Speaker 1: What's the most challenging aspect of this?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) To raise all this money to keep all this afloat in every instance.  There're innumerable obstacles that one has to deal with, especially on the housing side, to get things done.
Speaker 1: In terms of the housing, is there a sense that low-income people will be able to occupy the housing that you--?
Speaker 2: Well, first of all, we're trying to create a mixed-income community [St. Edmund's Village, Chicago, Illinois].  This is what this neighborhood [Washington Park, Chicago, Illinois] used to be.  It became one of the poorest communities, as middle-class and working-class people left.  And there was an over-concentration of poor people.  So we're, we, we're trying to bring back working-class people.  And now this new project, working class and middle class, and also fourteen of the fifty-six units will be for public housing eligible people.  So we're trying to bring back another kind of balance because you can't have a viable community unless you have real stakeholders.  And that's why we also want to build for sale housing.
Story_ID: 14440
Speaker 1: You came through school at a time of social change and cultural change when black people started to look at themselves in different cultural ways and to separate that part that was black from the institutions that--black people formed political associations in almost every occupation, they separated themselves.  They started like looking at the world in terms of what's black culture and what's white culture.  How do you think that, I guess, that process affects, how we look at the black church or how you look at the black church?
Speaker 2: Well, excuse me, I would say they didn't separate themselves because they wished to be separatists.  They were separated, and they accepted that reality and built lives around that reality.  I was a trustee for nine years of a historical black college.  And the president would often say, people say "Well, why do you have all black students."  And she said, "Anybody's welcome to come here. White students choose not to come."  And so I think the dominant mode initially was an assimilationist mode.  And when people still did all the right things, got education, etcetera, and still found themselves marginalized, then they separated because they had to and built churches and cultural institutions and educational institutions and took great pride in them.  And this gave them a chance to, to learn leadership skills and, and lots of things, and develop.  And I was very supportive of that and still am.  And I think that today, you know, you cannot say what is stereotypically African American.  We run the gamut.  From those who still are very much a part of separated institutions, that were separated historically for the reasons I mentioned, to those who have one foot in, in other worlds and, and still embrace this world.  Our growth, as a congregation, is primarily among young, professional African Americans who all week live in a white world, Ph.D.s from MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts] and Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts], consulting, to--you know, 'Fortune' 100 firms, but come here to the ghetto every Sunday because there's some nurturing and reaffirmation they find here to help them deal with Monday through Friday.  So I think that--and yet, not in big numbers, because people are scared of the ghetto still or not sure how they will be welcomed, you know, we have white people who come here and join.  I just buried a woman from Winnetka [Illinois] because she said the white churches she experienced were dead and dull.  And here's a church trying to have a ministry.  And so I think we're redefining ourselves.  We have to be, be true to that cultural heritage, but we also say, we, we welcome the world.  And in welcoming the world, we try to be sensitive that people, in terms of their needs, run the gamut.  There are African American members of this historically black congregation who are very Eurocentric oriented, more so than some white members.  And there are African American members who are very Afrocentric.  But the bottom line is, people want to be a part of a community where they feel they're being fed across the board, trying to find meaning in life, you know.  What's, where am I in relation to the cosmos?  Where's my support system when I'm hurting?  That takes precedence over everything else.
Story_ID: 14441
Speaker 1: What is your philosophy of religion?
Speaker 2: Okay, my--I'm not sure what you mean, but I would say my philosophy has evolved over the years.  And that, you know, growing up, my philosophy was probably very basic, Protestant, Baptist, you know.  I need to get saved, and I've found Jesus as my lord and savior.  And I serve him, and I celebrate that every week.  And I didn't think much more deeply than that.  Then there came a period in college where, if I'm gonna be a part of the institutional church, I have to see some social mission, some social transformation mission.  And, but at the same time, being true to empowering black people.  As I've lived in other places in the world, as I've traveled extensively throughout the world, I have--my, my feeling about religion is this:  There, there are three models, philosophically.  One is called, the exclusivist model.  And that means, if you don't accept my understanding of religion, then, you're not saved.  All of the monotheistic, all three of the major monotheistic religions are officially exclusivist religions.  Christianity, very broadly, unless you accept Jesus Christ as your savior, you're not saved.  Judaism is the same.  Islam clearly, there's only one God and he's Allah, okay.  Then there's what's called the inclusivist view.  And the inclusivists view says, I can see some good in your religion and perhaps some manifestation of ultimate reality, God is revealed, but I have the best answer, you know.  You're not completely wrong, but I am--I have the best answer.  And some time in the '60s [1960s], the Roman Catholic Church wrote this great treatise, which the bottom line, just is what they said, we could see God revealed in other religions of the world, as they became more of a missionary church, but we've got the best answer.  That's the inclusivist.  Now, the third one is what you call pluralism.  And pluralism says that there are many incarnations of the divine.  I don't have the only way, the truth.  My philosophy at this point in life is one more of a pluralist, that, you know, this is--the route culturally that I have been exposed to and, you know, I accept Christianity and as it--and the more liberal version of that as embraced by the Episcopal church, not fundamentalist version like some of the other churches.  But I recognize that there're, that there are many incarnations of the divine.  They all have their drawbacks and shortcomings, but it--so I guess that leads me to the other piece, is that I learned to live with ambiguity and not be threatened by--
Speaker 1: Okay, I mean that, that's--yeah, it could really be confusing, you know, being an Anglican setting, African American, African Caribbean congregation with all the various expectations and directions--
Speaker 2: Well, let me--I'll take it further than that in terms of the--I was in Cuba, and someone, and, and one of the things we looked at is Santeria, Afro-Cuban religion, which has some derivatives from Europe, of church traditionalism.  And at the airport, one of our  group people who was a dye-in the--a dye-in-the-wool Baptist, but has become more of a pluralist in, since he's been hanging out with me, said to me, "Can you honestly say"--he said, "I can't say this back at my Baptist church in Chicago [Illinois], but can you honestly say that Christianity's the only way?"  And I said, "No, I can't."  And I can say that, and I did at my Easter sermon last year.  And a lot of younger people came up and really said they resonated with that sermon.  So I'm not just talking about cultural differences between African Americans, Africans, West Indians, whites.  I'm talking about theologically, you know, blacks claim to be Pan-Africanist, but in many ways, they're still very exclusivist.  Most blacks could not say they see any manifestation of the divine through Afro-Cuban religions, Santeria, through Candomble, the Afro-Brazilian religions, and other religions, and yet at the same time, they're the last red, black and green flag wavers.  So they're much more acculturated than most want to realize.  And that's some thinking I'm doing about some writing I want to do, you know.  Truly, how cosmopolitan are we?  How, you know--
Speaker 1: Yeah, I hear what you're saying.  There's also, I guess, I guess those who would criticize, you know, why we have religion in the first place and, you know--but I, and I don't--
Speaker 2: And there are those--I mean we officially have people who are black Buddhists.  Buddhists--I just came from Thailand, studying Buddhism, and, you know, Buddhists don't believe in a, in a creator god, but yet one of the articles I read is true.  They still come together for devotional purposes to concentrate on the teachings of Buddha.  And so the devotional aspect is still very important and the chanting and the holding onto the beads and whatever, because even when people say they don't need religion, they, they put other rituals in their lives, and try to find meaning in some devotional way, around some ideal.  And some theologians define religion as what is your ultimate reality, search for your ultimate reality.  So some people might not name it God, but when you look, they have some very devotional and ritualistic and communal aspect to their lives to reaffirm their view of ultimate reality.
Speaker 1: So you're saying in, I guess if I get this right, that's it's the communal aspects--
Speaker 2: Communal, it's devotional, you know, you know, the worship of an ideal and of values that, you don't do that by yourself.  You come together in a community, you know, whether if it's--even if it's Afrocentricity, you gather at the Northeast Center on Oakland with other folk, and, you know, and worship the ideal in a devotional way and go through a ritual to do that.
Speaker 1: You're absolutely right.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Sir, what are your hopes and aspirations for the African American community--.
Speaker 2: And people who don't do that find life vacuous.  So as much as they try to escape traditional paradigms, they find another paradigm that's just like the one they left, but call it something else.
Story_ID: 14442
Speaker 1: What are your hopes and concerns for the African American community?
Speaker 2: Hopes and concerns for the African American community.  My hopes are that we will continue to, to, both communally and individually, explore realizing our potential, you know--and that we don't allow ourselves to be rigidly defined by the group that, you know--but yet, the--because the social reality is there, politically, there has to be some group consciousness to have some gains.  But we don't allow the group to define, totally define us as individuals; that there's the individual side.  And that that should be respected.
Story_ID: 14443
Speaker 1: Do you have any regrets about anything you've--?
Speaker 2: Well, some time ago I preached a sermon that I don't think is on the web, called 'Without a Song'.  And I said, in essence, everybody has to embrace some song that describes who they feel they are.  And the song that I embraced was 'My Way' and, a lot of people--
Speaker 1: Frank Sinatra?
Speaker 2: Right, and a lot of people said, "That's sure you," you know.  And that's not to say there aren't regrets, I've had a few, but then they're too few to mention.  And I sincerely believe that.  There are some, but too few to mention because even the bad experiences have been occasions for growth.
Story_ID: 14444
Speaker 1: I know you have delivered sermons about the changes in the church, and there's been struggles with fundamentalists around like, who can be a priest and who can't.  You know, do gays and lesbians belong in the church?  You know, as there used to be a discussion about what race can belong in the church.  What are some of your thoughts on that?
Speaker 2: Well, our--one of the things that we've talked about in St. Edmund's [Episcopal Church, Chicago, Illinois], if you were to read our value statement, it says, we, we put--our facilitator has pushed us hard on these issues.  You know, if you want to grow, you've got to enlarge your paradigm of who's in and who's out.  And we say, we embrace the diversity that is the world.  Several years ago, the president of one of our--at the time, he was the president.  He's not now, but one of our theological seminaries in Boston [Massachusetts]--I don't mean Boston, Chicago, hosted a luncheon for black clergy.  Some members of the Chicago black and gay and lesbian organization, I forget the title, wanted to have an opportunity to have dialogue with the black church.  And so he called together some clergy.  And only two clergy showed up, myself and his minister, who was a minister in the United Church of Christ, which is a very local denomination.  And the other clergy used as their excuse that their board of directors would never vote to allow such a gathering in their church.  Well, I said--and so did that minister, "Well I don't have to ask anybody's vote.  I can just say it can happen."  And so we jointly decided to sponsor the event here at St. Edmund's and the parish hall was full.  And it was a very moving event.  Now, a lot of our parishioners didn't come.  Some did.  But a whole lot didn't, but the point I'm getting at is, when we had our next strategic planning retreat, and our facilitators said, give examples of how you're moving closer to diversity, because for us, diversity meant also being the tension--easing the tensions between West Indians and African Americans.  Some people spoke up and said, "Well, we hosted the, the black gay and lesbian black church dialogue, you know, let them take ownership."  One of our members said, "Well, they are in, but they're not out at St. Edmund's."  Well, today, there are people who are out.  That would not have happened when I first came.  It wouldn't have happened five years ago.  And one of those persons who is out, lives with their partner, is a member of the board of trustees, the vestry, elected overwhelmingly.  And we voted in December to recommend that person for ordination to priesthood.  Now, is everybody accepting?  No.  But a lot of people are.  But that's part of helping people grow.  People routinely come here now and stand up, this is--"I'm Jay, and this is my partner, George."  Now, does that make some people uncomfortable?  Yes.  Does it make others?  No.  I preached a sermon, which is on the web, on human sexuality.  And the day I preached it, I got a standing ovation at both services.  More people clapped about that sermon than any I've preached here.
Speaker 1: It's a subject that's sensitive in the black church, and you don't really--people don't talk about it much (unclear)--.
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) People don't talk about it.  Well, a lot of it is for theological reasons, you know.  And that's what I addressed in that sermon on the church and human sexuality.
Speaker 1: And you said some interesting things about scripture in there--
Speaker 2: Right.  How we arbitrarily pick, you know, the particular scriptures they use, they ignore all the other prohibitions, you know, like if your child is bad, you don't go kill it, you know.  And you don't not have sex with your wife or a female when she's menstruating, you know.  All those are--that same scripture said, women be silent.  The scripture said, slaves be obedient to your master.  Do we embrace that?  No.  So we pick and choose.  So don't blame it on scripture, 'cause even the most liberal person still picks and chooses what scriptures they'll embrace and what they don't.  So don't hide behind the Bible.
Speaker 1: Okay, now--
Speaker 2: And like I, that, that sermon I quoted Jeremiah Wright at the end, you know, this minister who was visiting him.  And Jeremiah Wright said, you know, they were gonna have some celebration around gays and lesbians.  And, and the man said, "Well, I'll be praying for you."  This minister said "I'll be praying for you at 8:00."  And Jeremiah Wright said, "Why aren't you gonna pray for me at 11:00?"  And he said, "'Cause you know how I feel about gays and lesbians."  And Jeremiah Wright said, "Yeah, but you're a married man, and you don't mind sleeping around with other women who aren't your wife.  The Bible clearly says, 'Thou shalt not commit adultery'."  He said, "And you don't see nothing wrong with that."
Speaker 1: There's a lot of contradictions in this.
Speaker 2: Exactly.
Speaker 1: So sir, at this point, what would see as your legacy?
Speaker 2: Let me say one more thing about that.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: The end of that session, a couple--one person came up to me and said,  "My grandmother is a member of this church.  And I really appreciate how you've ministered to her."  He belonged to that organization.  And another person came up to me and said, "Oh, I grew up here.  But I'd never come back."  And, and, but there're any number of people in all of our churches who have sons and daughters, brothers and sisters who are gay or lesbian, and, and the church doesn't minister to them in the way they should because the daughters or sons don't feel like they can come out.  And the, the parents don't feel like they can talk about it (laughs).  We've had people living with AIDS and I--fortunately, people have brought those family members to church, some of our most prominent families, a couple of them.  And I was so happy they did that, helped them up to the rail, 'cause all that's the teaching.  And that's what I said, if there's no struggle, you're not growing.  They could keep their son home.  They brought him here and helped him up to the rail.
Story_ID: 14445
Speaker 1: What would you consider as your legacy?
Speaker 2: What would I consider as my legacy?  Well, I'll tell you a little funny side, then I'll answer that.  All of our buildings, if you drive up and down the street, that we've rehabbed or constructed, have the name, St. Edmund's [Episcopal Church, Chicago, Illinois] on them, and then the name of the specific project, like St. Edmund's Meadows.  Well, that's gonna be across the street.  St. Edmund's Plaza, St. Edmund's Commons, St. Edmund's Village.  And you know, in black churches, the pastor is quick to name a building after them.  I say, "I don't want you to name any of these buildings after me because if you don't take care of them and they fall apart, I don't want my name on it."  So my legacy will not have my name on anything around here, (laugher) okay.  So it's not to get my name printed anywhere.  My legacy will be to hopefully let people see that they can become more than they ever thought they could become and feel good about that.
Speaker 1: Okay, and this slightly different.  Sir, how would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: How would I like to be remembered?  I would like to be remembered in some very paradoxical ways, you know; somebody who was a leader who pushed hard who sometimes was hard to along with, and other times was very loving, who was very intelligent, who was very goal-directed, who can be arrogant, and, you know, and interestingly enough, in Myers-Briggs [personality assessment test], they say self-assurance is often interpreted as arrogance, so--by other people.  A complex person, not somebody easily defined.
