Story_ID: 651583
Speaker 1: I'm Tony Poole, Anthony Poole, and I'm the interviewer today, for today's HistoryMakers interview with you.  Behind me is Matthew Hickey, he is the videographer and to my left is Thomas Jefferson, he is another interviewer and he's observing. And to begin this we do basically what's called slating up, or slating, so some basic questions I start out with are, can you give, can you give me your complete name and spell it and your date of birth?
Speaker 2: Sheila G. Talton [HistoryMaker Sheila Talton], I was born October 12th, 1952.
Speaker 1: Thank you, and where were you born?
Speaker 2: Cleveland, Ohio.
Speaker 1: Okay, thank you.  Today's date is?
Speaker 2: August 22nd, I believe we're in 2013.
Speaker 1: I think it's August 23rd.
Speaker 2: Twenty-third?
Speaker 1: Twenty-third, 2013.
Speaker 2: Ah, okay.
Speaker 1: I should probably have told you ahead of time 'cause we all kind of forget those things. And the location for today's interview is, where are we located?
Speaker 2: Chicago, Illinois.
Speaker 1: At The HistoryMakers, 1900 South Michigan [Avenue].
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Thank you, and your occupation is?
Speaker 2: I'm the CEO of Gray Matter Analytics, which is a technology firm.  We have headquarters here in Chicago and in San Jose, California.
Story_ID: 651584
Speaker 1: In order to get started, we usually have some basic warm up questions, I'm just going to ask you a few questions.  First, what is your favorite color?
Speaker 2: Red.
Speaker 1: Thank you, and what is your favorite food?
Speaker 2: All vegetables, actually.
Speaker 1: Your favorite vacation resort area or location?
Speaker 2: Vail, Colorado.
Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Fall.
Speaker 1: Finally, do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: Not really, no.
Story_ID: 651585
Speaker 1: Going forward, we next start talking about your family and family history; and first of all, what was your mother's name and where was she born?
Speaker 2: My mother's name was Mildred McWhorter [Mildred McWhorter Russell] and she was born in Elberton, Georgia.
Speaker 1: And growing up there in E-, can you spell (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Elberton, E-B--E-B-E-R-T-O-N [sic.].
Speaker 1: Thank you. And Elberton, Georgia, could you tell us, did she ever talk very much about Elberton?
Speaker 2: She really didn't, no, she really didn't talk a lot about it at all.  She was born there and she had a sister who died very young of, believe it or not, tonsillitis because she got infections in her tonsils and burst and there was no penicillin at the time.
Speaker 1: And do you know what, what year she was born?
Speaker 2: Oh--
Speaker 1: Just even about what, what year.
Speaker 2: About 1925, '23 [1923].
Speaker 1: Okay, thank you.  Did she ever talk very much, I'm sorry, is she still alive?
Speaker 2: No she's not.
Speaker 1: Did she ever talk very much about Elberton itself, growing up there?
Speaker 2: She talked a lot about the South and how much she disliked it, that's my memory.  When we, when I was young and we were in Cleveland [Ohio], and I had never been south, and whenever I would ask about it, she would always say to me, "You don't want to go," which tells me that her experiences were not pleasant being an African American young woman, young girl.
Speaker 1: Did any of her relatives, cousins or whomever, ever tell you more about what, what the life, like, or life was like in Elberton?  Did anybody ever--
Speaker 2: My uncle used to talk about it a little bit but it was nothing any different, I don't feel, or anything that I remember that was different than most people's stories of their era, or time, in growing up, African American, in the South.
Speaker 1: So let's kind of just go a little bit further with that.  So what, if anything, did he say?  Did he give you any, any stories?
Speaker 2: Oh, he would talk about how, you know, they would do odd and ends jobs as a young, young boy to earn money.  That my grandfather [Alex McWhorter] basically was a sharecropper in Elberton and, you know, that it was very difficult times. And my grandfather married my grandmother [Vesta McWhorter] and my grandmother had my mother and my aunt, whom I never met, and my grandfather brought to this marriage three sons and that was the uncle that I was referring to, my Uncle Jimmy [Jimmy McWhorter (ph.)].
Speaker 1: Okay, thank you.  So, yeah, that's in the South and basically, I think, the age you mentioned, that you're talking about the Depression [Great Depression] too?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: I could understand why you say they probably had some very difficult times.
Speaker 2: Right.
Story_ID: 651586
Speaker 1: So, on your--your father, what was your, what--is, is your father is still alive?
Speaker 2: No he's not.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, thank you.  What, what is your father's full name?
Speaker 2: Levard Lee Russell [Levard Russell, Jr.] and he was born in Apollo, Pennsylvania.
Speaker 1: Apolla, A-P-O-L-L-A?
Speaker 2: L-O.
Speaker 1: Oh.
Speaker 2: L-L-O.
Speaker 1: Okay, Apollo--
Speaker 2: Um-hm, um-hm.
Speaker 1: Apollo, Pennsylvania.  Where, just out of curiosity, where is Apollo?
Speaker 2: Just outside of Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania].
Speaker 1: Okay, thank you.  Oh, and I should have asked about your mother [Mildred McWhorter Russell] growing up in Elberton [Georgia], too.  Do you know where that is, it's just that--
Speaker 2: I've never been there (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay, thank you, but Apollo is outside of Pittsburgh, you said?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay, and so, do you know about when your father was born or what year?
Speaker 2: Probably would have been more like 1919 or 1920.
Speaker 1: Okay. And did he talk very much about growing up in, as some people say, Western Pennsylvania area, Western PA?
Speaker 2: He did.  He talked about growing up in a small town.  He talked about how, my grandmother [Delia Frye Pearson] and grandfather [Levard Russell, Sr.] and his sisters and brothers, he talked about the difficult times.  They, too, ended up divorced and my grandmother married a gentleman by the name of Pearson, last name was Pearson, and my grandfather remarried a woman and migrated to Youngstown, Ohio; and I don't know her maiden name, but first name was Ethel [Ethel Russell (ph.)].
Story_ID: 651587
Speaker 1: Actually I'll back, I'll back up a bit, I should have done this--your mom [Mildred McWhorter Russell], your mother.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: What was she like as a person?
Speaker 2: My mother had a really great sense of humor.  She looked at, she looked at life mostly as fun.  I mean, she just, she didn't take much too ser- much of life too seriously.  Towards the end of her life, she really changed a lot, she became somewhat introverted, didn't leave home much.  We were very different.  Her and my father [Levard Russell, Jr.] were very different also.  My father was a pretty serious person and, I mean, he liked to have fun but fun was my mother's priority (laughter).  My father was, he had fun when he felt that he had taken care of those things that were important to him.
Speaker 1: So what was, what did your, your mother, how far did she go into her education in school? College?
Speaker 2: No, she went to tenth grade.
Speaker 1: Tenth grade, and in the home, what was her, what did she do?  Was she a teacher, a homemaker--?
Speaker 2: She was a homemaker part of the time and then when her and my father divorced, she became a domestic help.
Story_ID: 651588
Speaker 1: What did your, what was your father [Levard Russell, Jr.]?  What, what did, what was his occupation?
Speaker 2: He worked construction; and then towards the end of his life, where he retired, was from Sherwin-Williams [Sherwin-Williams Company] in Cleveland, Ohio, and he was basically responsible for, and I don't remember what they actually called it, but coming up with different colors of chemicals of the paint.
Speaker 1: Mix, some sort of mixing--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --paints and things like that?
Speaker 2: Um-hm, but early on he was, I remember he used to tell me about the Ohio Turnpike [James W. Shocknessy Ohio Turnpike] and the Pennsylvania Turnpike, that he helped build it.
Speaker 1: Excellent.  Do you have any stories about growing up with your dad and what he was like?  I know your mom was fun loving and everything but specific stories about maybe your dad.
Speaker 2: Yeah, there's one about my father that I will always remember.  When I was a little girl, I'd say five, until I was probably nine or ten, and even as a teenager, he would tell me to dress up 'cause he was going to take me out for a meal and dressing up meant white gloves, a hat, a purse and he would take me out and he would tell me, "Now you should take your gloves off, one finger at a time and when you have them off, you lay them aside, on top of one another."  He spent a lot of time teaching me etiquette and class and that was something that he really valued and that's, that's a story that I remember a lot about my father.
Speaker 1: Was he college educated?
Speaker 2: He had some college, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, where do you think he got that etiquette training from or thoughts about that?  Where do you think that came from?
Speaker 2: I think he observed and he looked at himself that way that, you know, he was a refined man, although when he was--in his time, I remember him telling me the story when he was drafted and he said he didn't want to go to the [U.S.] Army, he wanted to go to the Air Force [U.S. Army Air Force; U.S. Air Force] and he said they told him they didn't take coloreds in the Air Force.  And another story my father used to always tell me to never let anyone define my future, my reality 'cause it is whatever it is that I want it to be.  My mother [Mildred McWhorter Russell] was much more, the South, I think, had marked her more.  She didn't believe that.  She felt that you could find yourself in a lot of trouble in trying to excel and change the system, where my father was just the opposite.
Story_ID: 651589
Speaker 1: Did your father [Levard Russell, Sr.] have siblings?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes, and my aunt Margaret [Margaret Pearson Jefferson] is still alive and so is my uncle Duke [ph.].  So my [paternal] grandparents [Delia Frye Pearson and Levard Russell, Sr.] both got remarried and when my grandmother remarried Mr. Pearson, they had two daughters and a son [Frank Pearson] and one of them is my aunt Margaret, who's still alive.  I'm actually planning on bringing her to Chicago [Illinois] in the next few weeks because she's never visited me here.  And then when my grandfather got remarried, Ethel [Ethel Russell (ph.)] had a son, Jack [ph.], and then together they had my aunt Marg--my aunt Sally [ph.], who is still alive also. And my uncle Duke, who lives in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania.
Speaker 1: And your aunt Margaret, where is she living now?
Speaker 2: Cleveland, Ohio.
Story_ID: 651590
Speaker 1: Just going back a little bit, now looking at your life.  You were born in Cleveland [Ohio]; and eventually in, you get to Rockford, Illinois, we'll get there somewhat later.  Oh by the way, I missed this, but when would, about what age--do you remember when your parents [Mildred McWhorter Russell and Levard Russell, Jr.] were divorced?
Speaker 2: I was nine.
Speaker 1: And you were in Cleveland or Rockford at that time?
Speaker 2: I was in Cleveland but then shortly thereafter is when my mom made the decision to move to Rockford.
Story_ID: 651591
Speaker 1: So let's throw a question out at you, what's your earliest childhood memory?
Speaker 2: The earliest childhood memory was my brother, it was, we were in Chattanooga, Tennessee because my grandmother [Vesta McWhorter] had moved there and, on my mom's side, and I remember my mother [Mildred McWhorter Russell] putting a coat on my brother, who was a baby, and the zipper, and I remember she accidentally caught his skin in the zipper and he cried.  That's the earliest childhood memory that I remember.
Speaker 1: And you were how old about, was this?
Speaker 2: I must--three, because I'm three years older than my brother.
Speaker 1: That takes us back here, absolutely, and your brother's name, again?
Speaker 2: Ronnie Russell, Ronald Russell.
Speaker 1: There were, there were just the two of you?
Speaker 2: Two of us, but I had a half-sister [Diana Russell].  When my father [Levard Russell, Jr.] remarried, he and my stepmother [Tolula Russell] had a daughter who is now deceased--she died from breast cancer.
Story_ID: 651592
Speaker 1: So you were born in Cleveland [Ohio], and do you remember which elementary school you went to?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.  I went to--oh, you know what?  I got to step out.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Hold it.  When my parents first divorced, we were in Cleveland.  My mother [Mildred McWhorter Russell] then moved to Louisville, Kentucky and I think she must have stayed there 'cause I went, that's what reminded me.  I went to first, second and third grade in Louisville, Kentucky and I went to first grade and second grade and third grade at Perry Elementary School [William H. Perry, Sr. Elementary School; Roosevelt-Perry Elementary School] in Louisville, Kentucky.  And then my mother decided to move to Rockford [Illinois].  She didn't know anybody there.  I don't even know how she decided that.
Speaker 1: Well let's, let's stay with Louisville for just a few minutes.  What was that, the name of that school in--
Speaker 2: Perry Elementary (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Perry Elementary.  Was it a mixed--
Speaker 2: No, it was all black.
Speaker 1: All black.
Speaker 2: And the other childhood memory I have of that, one Easter, and I don't know which Easter it was, whether it was in first, second or third grade, I wanted an Easter dress and I asked my mom, well could we go downtown to buy a dress and she says, "We can't shop downtown so we have to go somewhere else."  So we couldn't shop downtown in Louisville.
Speaker 1: How did that feel at that age?  Did you have any thoughts about that?
Speaker 2: Oh, absolutely, absolutely.  When you, when I talked to you about who I am and that journey, that had a huge impact on me because, if you recall, I shared with you that my father [Levard Russell, Jr.] was always whispering in my ear that I'm capable, I can be and do whatever it is I want and for me to feel like I had barriers because of the color of my skin, absolutely had an impact on me.
Speaker 1: Can you give me some specifics on how it felt when that happened?  You can't go shopping downtown with your mom and--
Speaker 2: Well I, I kind of felt like, who said so? (Laughter) But, you know, I was, I don't know, between six and eight years old so, but I'm thinking to myself, well, who says so?
Speaker 1: All right, okay.  Did you ever say anything at that time to your mom any, anything?
Speaker 2: I don't think I remember.  I don't remember if I did or not.
Story_ID: 651593
Speaker 1: So you're at Perry Elementary [William H. Perry, Sr. Elementary School; Roosevelt-Perry Elementary School, Louisville, Kentucky], it's all black, what was that school like?  What was?
Speaker 2: I really liked--my first grade teacher was Ms. Pollard [ph.] and she was considered to be a very strict teacher but I really liked her, some days. And then my mother [Mildred McWhorter Russell] didn't like her, I remember that.  And then I went to second grade and I had Ms. Hewlett [ph.] and I really liked Ms. Hewlett and then Ms. Pollard changed from teaching first grade to third grade so I had Ms. Pollard again (laughter).
Speaker 1: And what was it about Ms., Ms. Pollard and Ms. Hewlett that you really liked about them?  What was--
Speaker 2: Positive role models and images and, you know, as I reflect, and I didn't go to all black schools any more after, you know, just those three years, but as I reflect on it, I really feel that at that impressionable age, it's really important for young children to feel valued and to feel empowered and that they're worthy and to have their dreams, you know, reinforced and even encouraged.  So, I think that there's been a lot lost now that I reflect on that by the integration of schools and education.
Speaker 1: And when you're at Perry Elementary, did you have a lot of good friends that you remember?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I mean, like most six, seven or eight year olds, you know, we played in the playground and, yeah.
Speaker 1: And did you have any sports, music, things that you liked to do back in those days when you were little?
Speaker 2: Piano.  My mother was a wonderful piano player so I took up piano, my mother wanted me to.  I never became any good at it (laughter) but I did play piano during those years.
Speaker 1: And did you take formal lessons?
Speaker 2: Yes I did.  I sure did.
Speaker 1: And how many, how many, once a week, twice a week, how did you, how was that--
Speaker 2: I think it was once a week, but it could have been ten times a week, and I still wouldn't have been any good at it (laughter).
Speaker 1: Did you, did you like going?  Did you like piano?
Speaker 2: I love music.  I love music but I often say to my friends that have musical and artistic talents, that's one gift that I didn't get--
Speaker 1: Right, right.
Speaker 2: --but I appreciate it and enjoy it.
Speaker 1: In school, were there particular subjects that you enjoyed more than others, but back, when you're in elementary, at Perry?
Speaker 2: Yeah, you know, but I think reading, you know, and, that was with the years what, you know, you learn to read and write and you write cursor and so I think reading.  I think I enjoyed reading.
Speaker 1: Do you remember any stories or books that you--
Speaker 2: I do but I'm not sure I read this book in, at that age, but one of my favorite books, I remember reading, was a book about, called, 'Black Beauty' [Anna Sewell], it was about a horse.
Speaker 1: I remember that too.
Speaker 2: Yeah, but I don't--I think it was later and--I think I was maybe fifth or sixth grade [at Franklin School, Rockford, Illinois] when, when I read that but I enjoyed that book.
Story_ID: 651594
Speaker 1: You're in, in Louisville [Kentucky] and your mom [Mildred McWhorter Russell] and dad [Levard Russell, Jr.] are still together?
Speaker 2: They're separated.
Speaker 1: They're separated.
Speaker 2: They're not divorced but they're sep- my dad would come down to Louisville and visit us, but they're separated.
Speaker 1: Yeah, because you said your mom took you down from Cleveland [Ohio] to Louisville--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --okay.  Why Louisville?
Speaker 2: I don't know.  I don't know at all.
Speaker 1: Do you remember any cousins or--
Speaker 2: No relatives there.  All of my relatives were in Chattanooga, Tennessee, Georgia, Pennsyl- oh, on my mother's side, Chattanooga and Georgia and then after she migrated to Cleveland, her brothers came to Cleveland.
Speaker 1: And so what did your, what was your mom doing, workwise or home wise, while you're at Louisville, what, what was she doing?
Speaker 2: She was doing domestic work, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, and who else, in terms of siblings, were there?  Was your brother [Ronald Russell] (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) My brother and I were there together.
Speaker 1: He was, younger?
Speaker 2: Um-hm, yes, three years younger.
Speaker 1: Okay, two years younger.  The neighborhood that you grew up in, in Louisville, what was that like and let's just say, you know, well let's just say, what was that like?
Speaker 2: It was all black, poor, a lot of kids, you know, a lot of people sharing and helping one another.
Speaker 1: Do you remember, maybe, which part of town, or can't you--
Speaker 2: I remember the name of the street was Walnut Street, was the last place we lived.
Speaker 1: And in terms of the house or, what was it--
Speaker 2: It was an apartment.
Speaker 1: An apartment, thank you.  In terms of the apartment and your brother and your mom being there, what was that, what was your home life, family life like on a, on a day to day basis?
Speaker 2: We would come home from school, play outside, my mom would make us dinner. And I don't remember us watching much television, it was more playing, more kids outside and playgrounds playing.  There wasn't a lot of TV watching.
Speaker 1: And so in terms of your brother and you, how was that interaction?  How were things there back in those days?
Speaker 2: Oh, we (laughter), we were, he, well I was the oldest so he always wanted to emulate what I did and obviously I didn't want him to emulate what I did, so we had the normal sibil- sibling rivalry.
Speaker 1: But you, did you, for the most part, get along pretty well?
Speaker 2: For the most part, yes we did.
Speaker 1: That's good.  Did you have a lot of friends down there in your neighborhood that you got together with?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I do recall.  I don't, I can't think of one name, not at all.
Speaker 1: And your, your mom, was she, I'll use the word, disciplinarian or how, did she--
Speaker 2: Not so much, my father was, not my mother, not so much.
Speaker 1: Did you, did you have specific chores around the house?
Speaker 2: Uh-uh, no, not, when I would be with my dad, yes, but not with my mother, no.  My mother didn't, structure, discipline--even, when I say discipline, I mean, even self discipline.  My mother really didn't like structure.  She really didn't like doing the same thing all the time.  She really liked variety so, and that was probably one of the differences of her and my father is, they ended up--I mean, as I got to be a young woman, I could clearly see why they didn't remain married because they were quite different.
Speaker 1: And the way you describe it, she's, she's a fun loving person--
Speaker 2: Very pretty woman.
Story_ID: 651595
Speaker 1: Did you, did you go to church back in Louisville [Kentucky] (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, she--and you know it's funny, when she was in Elberton [Georgia], now that you ask me about things, she did talk about playing the piano in church. But she wasn't a churchgoer.  In fact, in all of the years growing up, I can't recall ever going to church with my mother.
Speaker 1: Did she encourage, in Louisville, what else did you do besides go to, you know, school and home?  Were there local community activities that you might have gone out to?
Speaker 2: No, no, we just played in the neighborhood and, you know, in the ballpark and, you know, out front of the house and we had, we had--oh I do remember we had a dog.  Oh, I can't remember the dog's name, but we had a dog.
Speaker 1: And did you, you're here at home, the three of you, and, it sounds like you're within the community, you never were supportive in anything but, did you guys have games that you played together?
Speaker 2: Absolutely, hopscotch.
Speaker 1: Hopscotch?
Speaker 2: (Laughter)  Hopscotch, jump rope, hide and seek, tag, yeah.
Story_ID: 651596
Speaker 1: Terms of sort of family rituals, gatherings, were there any things that you remember that stand out like every Sunday dinner or something like that, anything?
Speaker 2: Not with my mom [Mildred McWhorton Russell], with my father [Levard Russell, Jr.].  When we would visit my dad, there were--my father loved to cook and when, and when they were together, I remember this.  We had to eat at the table, all together, and we had to have proper etiquette at the table and that was a pet peeve with my father, every day.  Every day you ate all together and at Christmastime, my father always had lots of food and guests over during the holidays and even when we would visit him, once they were divorced, 'cause we would spend Christmas with him most of the time, it was always a house full of relatives and food.
Story_ID: 651597
Speaker 1: I'd like to go back a little bit if we could, 'cause we were talking about Louisville [Kentucky], but let's, let's go back when you're a little bit younger in Cleveland [Ohio]; and you're relatively, pretty young then but from what you described you, you definitely had a relationship with your dad [Levard Russell, Jr.], with the white gloves and other such things.  What do you remember about growing up in Cleveland?
Speaker 2: Oh, lots of relatives, my father's brothers, cousins, a lot of activity, always.
Speaker 1: And do you remember the neighborhood back then?
Speaker 2: Yes, Hough, it's an area in Cleveland called Hough, which has been revitalized lately.
Speaker 1: Is that on the east side or west side?
Speaker 2: On the east side, on the east side, yes.
Speaker 1: A lot of black families tend to be on the east side--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --of Cleveland and there's East Cleveland [Ohio], if I understand that.
Speaker 2: Yeah, we lived in East Cleveland at one time, too.
Speaker 1: Okay, Huff, thank you.  H-U-F-F?
Speaker 2: No, it's H-O-U-G-H.
Speaker 1: Thank you, thank you for that clarification.  So you had, and you remember the house you grew up in or apartment or--
Speaker 2: Um-hm, I do.
Speaker 1: What was--
Speaker 2: It was a two flat.
Speaker 1: And who exactly was in the two flat?  Who was there?
Speaker 2: My mom [Mildred McWhorter Russell], my dad and me and my brother [Ronald Russell].
Speaker 1: And did you have friends, I think we talked about that, at least some friends even back then that maybe you don't remember?
Speaker 2: You know, I don't remember any friends.  I mean, I'm sure, I'm a very gregarious person so (laughter) I'm sure there were people around.
Speaker 1: And you probably played the normal kids' games and things like that outside.
Speaker 2: Yup.
Speaker 1: So in terms of the home, the home setting and environment there, here you have your mom, who's a little less structured, and your dad, more structured.  How, how did that work?  How did that play out?
Speaker 2: Well, for them not so well.  My father, he was a very structured guy and very all about business and my mother thought it was all unnecessary.  So it ended up playing out that they didn't remain married.  In some cases, I guess, that could be a compliment among people but my mother was a very headstrong person, too, as well, as well as my father.  So, she probably viewed that as him trying to manage her and give her structure and that wouldn't go well with my mother (laughter).
Speaker 1: But in terms of some specifics that you remember where, let's say, maybe they, they, they disagreed on some things.  Can you give me a couple--story or two that you remember?  Anything?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, making up the bed in the mornings when you get up.  My mother would make up my brother's bed and my bed.  My father insisted that she not do that and that we make up our own bed and they disagreed and my father ended up winning out except for with, what was funny, when they divorced, I continued to make up my bed, but my brother stopped (laughter) and my mother continued to- then she went back to making up his bed.
Speaker 1: And, once again, did you have any chores besides this making up of beds?  Did you--
Speaker 2: Well, not, my mother didn't.  You know, again, when I was with my dad, I had to clean up the kitchen, you know, I had to help clean up the house but, and even when I would visit him, you know, once they were divorced, I specifically had chores that I had to do when I was there.
Speaker 1: And I'll be as delicate as I can, they disagreed but was there any kind of arguments that you remember--
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, oh yeah, oh absolutely.  Yeah, they would argue a lot and actually I was sad that they split because I was very close to my father but I didn't like it when they argued.
Speaker 1: That got you a little bit upset?
Speaker 2: Yup.
Speaker 1: Okay.  How did you, how did you handle that?  You're--it's a young age but do you remember--
Speaker 2: Well my father would usually tell my brother and I to go to our room and then--
Speaker 1: Just go--
Speaker 2: Yep.
Speaker 1: --maybe, you'd hear them and, in the other room?
Speaker 2: Right, exactly.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Exactly.
Story_ID: 651598
Speaker 1: So in Cleveland [Ohio], that area that, Hough [Cleveland, Ohio], was that predominantly black?
Speaker 2: It was and it was an area that was kind of like where the middle class blacks lived and my father [Levard Russell, Jr.] was quite proud to have been able to take us there in a two flat and I think he ended up buying a house.  I think we were in the two flat just a short period of time and he ended up buying--'cause he used to talk about that.  And then, in the '60s [1960s] and '70s [1970s] and '80s [1980s], the area just really went to horrible status. But now, you go back there and it's being gentrified and, in fact, Cleveland Clinic [Cleveland, Ohio] is partly in that area now.
Speaker 1: What's your, what were your overall impressions growing up in Hough with your family in the neighborhood? Good, positive, overall?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Overall, whenever I was with my father, I felt good and I, it's--we were very, very close and, and maybe it is because of structure.  You know most young kids like structure and I always felt safe and I always felt, you know, like I knew everything's going to be all right when my dad was around.
Story_ID: 651599
Speaker 1: And then you move to--then it was back to Louisville [Kentucky] for kindergarten, first, second, third grades?
Speaker 2: Didn't go to kindergarten.  First, second and third grade [William H. Perry, Sr. Elementary School; Roosevelt-Perry Elementary School, Louisville, Kentucky] (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) First, second and third grade, so that puts you about 1962 or so, '63 [1963]?
Speaker 2: No, 'cause I actually brought a picture of me in the fifth grade there [Franklin School, Rockford, Illinois] that is '62 [1962], '63 [1963] in Rockford [Illinois].  So that, so I was born in '52 [1952], so first grade would have been '58 [1958].
Speaker 1: Fifty-eight [1958], okay, a little bit earlier.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So you end up, you're down in Louisville, come back, and help me with the chronology, back to Cleveland [Ohio] or was it to Rockford?
Speaker 2: Back to Rockford.
Speaker 1: Thank you, to Rockford.
Speaker 2: Yes, to Rockford.
Speaker 1: Thank you, and what, what was it about Rockford?  Why, why Rockford?
Speaker 2: I don't know why my mother [Mildred McWhorter Russell] went there.  I think, I think she was trying to get farther away from my father [Levard Russell, Jr.] and I think she felt that he wouldn't be readily able to come.
Speaker 1: And so they're, you moved to Rockford, they're separated but not yet--
Speaker 2: When we moved to Rockford, they're separated, yes.
Speaker 1: Separated, and while you were in Louisville, did you visit your dad once a--occasionally?
Speaker 2: He came to visit us all the time (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) He came to visit you, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: How many times did he, each--say, once or twice a year?
Speaker 2: Oh no, no.  He was there probably once a month.
Speaker 1: Okay, thank you, and you enjoyed every time he--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.  How, how did that work out when he, when he would come down, he would--
Speaker 2: He'd come and pick me and my brother [Ronald Russell] up and take us to, you know, amusement parks or carnivals and stuff like that and, you know.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you would have a couple of days with him and--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Story_ID: 651600
Speaker 1: And then, so you move up to Rockford [Illinois] when you're going to the fourth grade, I guess (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Um-hm.
Speaker 1: So, '62 [1962], sixty--
Speaker 2: It's supposed to be '61 [1961] because, like I said, I looked at that picture and it says '62 [1962], '63 [1963] school year.
Speaker 1: We're close in age and I'm thinking I was born in '54 [1954], it's right, fourth grade is when I went, so I'm trying to--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: In terms of the neighborhood in Rockford, what--where did you, do you remember what specific part of Rockford that was in?
Speaker 2: Um-hm, it was a street called Elm Street and somehow my, the first night we were there, we stayed in a black hotel, well probably maybe like a couple of weeks, and my mother [Mildred McWhorter Russell] met someone that took in people, you know, rented part of their house and so we, her name was Rose [ph.], and we moved in with her and her two kids and lived with them a couple of years, until my mom got her own apartment and then we moved, after she got her own apartment, that only lasted about two years, and then we moved in with another lady who had a son, her name was Annie Mae Walker [ph.], and we lived with Annie Mae and her son, Shane [ph.], for like about seven or eight years, a long time.
Speaker 1: Let's, let's take to a couple of years at a, at a time.  So you moved in with Rose, first, maybe for two years or so?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Well, what was that house like or that setting?
Speaker 2: It was a two story house. And on Elm Street it was predominantly black people and a lot of kids, you know, a lot of people sitting on the porch, a lot of people helping one another, again, and it was, you know, your typical black neighborhood.
Speaker 1: Okay, and was Rose sort of the landowner, the--
Speaker 2: She was the, she owned--in fact, I think Rose owned that whole house.  It was, we lived upstairs with her and I think she rented out the downstairs and then upstairs she, it was like a three bedroom place so she rented out--she lived alone.  She rented out two rooms of it to my mom, so my brother [Ronald Russell] and I shared a room.
Story_ID: 651601
Speaker 1: The neighborhood, did you--well let's go to schools again.  So you're in fourth grade, do you remember the name of the elementary school you went to?
Speaker 2: Franklin [Franklin School, Rockford, Illinois].
Speaker 1: Franklin, thank you.  And how was that in terms of the demographics? Predominantly black?
Speaker 2: Predominantly white.
Speaker 1: Predominantly white, okay.  And about how many black students you think, maybe just even your class?
Speaker 2: Maybe three or four.
Speaker 1: Out of maybe how many students or how many classrooms for fourth grade?
Speaker 2: So if there were twenty kids in the class, there were, maybe be three of us.
Speaker 1: That's it (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) There would be--yeah.
Speaker 1: There was just one class of fourth graders?
Speaker 2: Oh I don't remember how many different classes of fourth grade.
Speaker 1: Okay, three, three out of twenty students or thereabouts, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Do you remember the name of the teacher?
Speaker 2: I don't, I don't remember the name of my fourth grade teacher.  I remember the name of my fifth grade teacher, which is the picture I brought, Mr. McKay [ph.], and my sixth grade teacher was Ms. Muzzy [ph.], and I remember that because that was the year when John Kennedy [President John Fitzgerald Kennedy] was shot and I remember Ms. Muzzy was crying when, when that happened.  I was in the sixth grade.
Speaker 1: And, any other recollections of that particular day?
Speaker 2: Oh, absolutely.  I, that day, I was home sick, I wasn't even in school and I was watching TV and that's when they said that the president had been shot.  And the next day I went to school and that's when Ms. Muzzy talked to us about it and she was crying about the president being shot.
Speaker 1: Yeah, that was a very sad day.  I think most young people of our generation remember exactly, exactly--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --what they were doing that particular day.  So in fourth, fifth and sixth grade, any particular subjects or classes that you really enjoyed?
Speaker 2: Loved biology, loved English and loved history.
Speaker 1: At about that time, well how did you like your teachers overall?
Speaker 2: I liked Mr. McKay, Ms. Muzzy was okay, too.  She was okay.  I don't remember my fourth grade teacher at all.
Speaker 1: Right.  About that time, you got a couple of subjects that you really like, did you start having any aspirations or inspirations in life to become something? Lawyer, doctor, scientist?
Speaker 2: At that time, I think I wanted to be a model and don't ask me why.  I think that might have been my mother's [Mildred McWhorter Russell] influence.
Speaker 1: You wanted to be a mom?
Speaker 2: A model, a model.
Speaker 1: A model, thank you.  I'm getting older so my hearing is not (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, so I think that was more my mother's influence.  And during those years I was not the happiest because when my mother moved to Rockford [Illinois], she choose not to tell my father [Levard Russell, Jr.] where we were going so I had a long span that I didn't see my dad but I, I don't recall of--and I will say my experience at Franklin wasn't good, meaning that I really sensed discrimination there.  I became--I remember in the fourth grade, I became a Brownie but I didn't have many friends because it was a predominantly white school; and I wasn't really happy at Franklin.
Story_ID: 651602
Speaker 1: Let me check a date too, I think you said your mom [Mildred McWhorter Russell] and dad [Levard Russell, Jr.] got divorced when you were about--
Speaker 2: They separated when I was nine--
Speaker 1: And then about a year later--
Speaker 2: No, they separated, no they separated before that--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --because they were separated when we were in Louisville [Kentucky].  So they must have separated when I was about seven 'cause he was there with us for a while and then it was nine when I went, when I got to Rockford [Illinois].
Speaker 1: Right, and that's about the time they got divorced?
Speaker 2: It happened some time during that time.  I didn't know.
Speaker 1: So you really didn't know they, they were just separated, you didn't know?
Speaker 2: In, in Louisville--
Speaker 1: In Louisville.
Speaker 2: --but I did not know when the actual divorce happened. And I think my dad got the divorce because he didn't know where my mother was.  I mean, for like seven years, she had no contact with him and told us to not have contact with him.
Speaker 1: So were you still seeing your, your dad kind of, well I'm sorry, he didn't know where you were?
Speaker 2: I didn't see him at all.
Speaker 1: How did that, how did that make you feel?
Speaker 2: Oh I felt horrible about it and I felt angry at my mother about doing that and just cutting us off.  Really, it was all of our family in Cleveland [Ohio] because, even her brothers and her own mother [Vesta McWhorter] because she, and I really think it was her wanting to get back at my father.  I really believe that because later in life, when he became ill, it was very clear to me she still loved him and they, they met, my uncle, my, my father's brother, my Uncle Frank [Frank Pearson] came to Cleveland and my mother was a cocktail waitress at a nightclub called The Kinsmen [Kinsman Creole Club, Cleveland, Ohio] and she and my Uncle Frank became very good friends and my father was still living in Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania], I believe, and he came to visit my uncle and met my mother and they got together.
Speaker 1: That's the, that's where that story began.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: If I may ask, your mother, obviously, wanted to get as far away from your father as possible.  Was it such a difficult marriage for her that he--she would want to do that?  Obviously, I should say the answer is, yes, but what do you think was going on there?
Speaker 2: I think she didn't want my father trying to control her life.  I think it was painful for her that they had split up, that's what I think.
Speaker 1: Okay, I understand.
Story_ID: 651603
Speaker 1: So, you're in the latter part of elementary school [Franklin School, Rockford, Illinois], thinking about maybe being a model.  Really, so tell me more about, tell me more about Rockford [Illinois].  And what it was like.
Speaker 2: You know it's funny we're having this conversation.  Two weeks ago, exactly today on Friday, my mother's [Mildred McWhorter Russell] best friend called me up and came to see me here in Chicago [Illinois] and she's known me since I was fourteen years old and we talked a lot about Rockford and the people.  She remembered when we used to live with Ms. Annie Mae Walker [ph.].  She remembered me in middle school and in high school [Rockford West High School, Rockford, Illinois]. And Rockford--and what amazes me, she tells me, so many of my contemporaries that I went to school with are all dead.  I mean, she was just listing and, and we were talking about that and it was a place where not many people saw role models of African Americans being educated, owning businesses, being senior executives in a company.  So, it was a place that really I don't think a lot of people had a lot of hope.
Speaker 1: So, in terms of the mix between white folks and black folks in the community, Rockford overall, was it a very difficult town, place to be in?
Speaker 2: Oh, I, yeah, yeah, very difficult, and it's still that way today.  I drove her, Saturday, two weeks ago, I drove her out there to--'cause her children's, a couple of her children still live there and she says it's still a very difficult place for African Americans.
Speaker 1: Was there a sense almost that you're in the North but you're almost--
Speaker 2: Exactly, exactly, exactly, that, but you could have been in the South.  That's exactly right.
Speaker 1: And can you give me some other examples, you know, that look at, say, the adults that were in Rockford that are black, African American adults.  What kind of problems you think they had to deal with back then as African Americans in what you think of is a northern city?
Speaker 2: Work.  I mean so many of the people that I lived in the neighborhoods with, they either did domestic work, there was, Ms. Floyd [ph.] and I were talking about it.  There was a Green Giant [Green Giant Company] factory in Belvidere, Illinois so there, a lot of them worked there and then there was an Admiral's TV factory in Harvard [Illinois] and many people worked there. And then many people were on welfare, including, for a period of time, from, from the time that I was probably fourteen, until I left home.
Speaker 1: Until you went to college [Northern Illinois University, DeKalb, Illinois]?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: That, who was--
Speaker 2: My mother was on welfare.
Speaker 1: Oh my goodness.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay, thank you for telling that.  Did you ever, at that time, did you, did you know that you were on welfare?
Speaker 2: Oh absolutely (laughter).  I don't know about in Chicago but probably so.  They used to have those--I laugh about it with some of my friends, those, the cheese and the powdered milk and the canned meat and all of the, the food that they would give out that, I think that started in the '70s [1970s] or something? I don't know, it's part of the, the welfare program that the federal government was giving out food.
Story_ID: 651604
Speaker 1: And, I guess that question then leads to, so how, how did it make you feel then to sort of know--you were old enough to kind of know these things, to know that things were a little bit challenging.  How did it make you feel?
Speaker 2: Well, like I never wanted to live like that. Because early in my life I had my father [Levard Russell, Jr.] who had shown me and told me very different things and I wanted nothing to do with living like that.  And at the time, I didn't know how that would manifest itself, meaning that I had a, a period, from the time I was about fourteen, I became quite militant and, and with my mother [Mildred McWhorter Russell] the reas- how I got back with my father was that I told her I was going to run away unless she found him and she didn't listen to me so I did. And I had a friend and we ran away for a few days and next thing I know, when I went back home, she had called her brother [Jimmy McWhorter (ph.)] in Cleveland [Ohio]; and he and my dad were still very good friends, and he called my dad and my dad came.
Story_ID: 651605
Speaker 1: But by that time, I also had gotten pretty enamored with a lot of the Black Power movement.
Speaker 2: Now this is about what time?  You're in high school [Rockford West High School, Rockford, Illinois]?
Speaker 1: I'm in high school, yeah, and I'm, I've got a big Afro and I'm going to the Black Panther Saturday morning meetings and when my father [Levard Russell, Jr.] sees me, he's like, "What's up with your hair?" And then that was a period that he and I didn't see eye to eye because he used to say to me, when he was my age or older, there was a reason to be militant.  "Now you can get a college education, better, you can do this and you can do that, I don't quite understand why you're, you know, intent on being a part of this Black Panther thing," and so that was tough years for us, during my high school time.  And when I would go to Cleveland [Ohio] to visit, you know, I often would go to the neighborhoods where the Black Muslims [National of Islam] were (laughter) in restaurants and stuff in Cleveland because I felt that, I didn't like what was going on in this country and I wasn't about to pretend that I did.  So I always believed if you're not part of the solution, you're part of the problem.
Speaker 2: Well let's, let's go back a little bit because I asked you a question a few minutes back about your earliest childhood memory, but let's go to maybe your earliest memory of being a, sort of a rebel.  Can you take us back to, not a specific date or time but some instance where you kind of, kind of knew you had that rebellious streak toward civil rights or whatever?
Speaker 1: You know, you reminded me of something what happened in Louisville [Kentucky], when I couldn't get an Easter dress and, and even to this day, I'm pretty forward out there when, when I need to be.  I just feel like change doesn't happen without people behind it and there's different ways that you can make change but to do nothing, you're part of the problem.  So, I remember I was dating a guy, Charles Hawkins, and he was in the Black Panthers and he was originally from Chicago [Illinois] and he moved to Rockford [Illinois] from Chicago and started the Black Panther chapter out there (laughter).
Speaker 2: And this is about what, what year?  Were you fifteen, sixteen?
Speaker 1: Yeah, I was about fifteen, yeah, yeah.
Speaker 2: I have to ask because I, I didn't sense that Rockford was a hot bed of militancy for the Black Panther Party or anything else.
Speaker 1: But that's what happened, Charles Hawkins.
Speaker 2: Charles Hawkins.  And so, you dated Charles and how quickly did you become enamored of the Black--
Speaker 1: Oh very quickly, very quickly and I loved reading about the Red Book ['Quotations from Chairman Mao Tse-tung,' Mao Zedong] and we would cook breakfast with kids and we would talk about revolution.  I absolutely, very quickly, very quickly, and my father hated every minute of it and my mother [Mildred McWhorter Russell] she did too but--
Speaker 2: And you started growing an Afro, or you already had your Afro then?
Speaker 1: Yup, yup, yup, big earrings, I, when I saw the movie last week, 'The Butler' and I saw the girlfriend that the son brought home, I thought, oh, that kind of, could have been me (laughter).
Speaker 2: And he started the chapter for the Black Panther Party in Rockford.  What did that look like?  What kind of operation was that?  Was that through the high school or was there an actual office or something?
Speaker 1: Oh, no, they had an office.  I can't remember where the office was but there was an office and we would meet there regularly, especially on Saturday mornings 'cause that's when we would study the Red Book and do breakfast and probably two, three times during the week too.  And I remember when Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] was assassinated.  We all got arrested because we started marching in front of the high school, and.
Speaker 2: And you were, you were marching (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Refusing to go back to school.
Story_ID: 651606
Speaker 1: This is 1967, '68 [1968], United States is, there's a lot of things going on, we're in the middle, of course, the Vietnam War, the Nation of Islam and Malcolm X, 1965, '68 [1968], Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.]  gets assassinated, Bobby Kennedy's [Robert F. Kennedy] shot down, you talked about the Red Book ['Quotations from Chairman Mao Tse-tung,' Mao Zedong] too.  I, I, but, tell me more about the Black Panther Party in Rockford [Illinois].
Speaker 2: I, you know, I don't think it was any different than anywhere else.  I mean, I never got involved in any violence other than, you know, when we would march and go to city hall [Rockford City Hall, Rockford, Illinois] and demand certain things that we felt were unfair for black people and jobs and stuff like that, but we would talk about there being a revolution in the country and we would often debate whether it's peaceful or will it have to be violent.  So--
Speaker 1: And you talked about the, the Red Book.  What was that, more specifically, you said--
Speaker 2: That was the study, the Chinese Red Book of, of--
Speaker 1: Mao Tse-tung [Mae Zedong].
Speaker 2: Mao Tse-tung, right, about the revolution in China and how to create and start a revolution.
Speaker 1: Did your mom [Mildred McWhorter Russell] ever see you reading this little Red Book?
Speaker 2: Yup, she did.
Speaker 1: And, what did she say?
Speaker 2: She would say to me, "Why are you bothering with this Red Book thing and you should be going--," and I, by the way, that was also a time, lucky for me that I had the intellect I did, because I didn't go to class much (laughter).  I would go to take tests, but I didn't go to class much.  I remember I had a geography teacher at the high school [Rockford West High School, Rockford, Illinois], I can't remember her name, but she stopped me one day and she says to me, "Why don't you come to my class?  Have I done something to offend you?  I really like you and I really wish you would come to class more than just for the test." And I said to her, I wish I could think of her name, I said to her, "Well your class is an eight o'clock class and none of my friends have class 'til nine so I don't come to your class" (laughter).
Speaker 1: Good answer, right, that's fair.
Speaker 2: It was true.  So--
Speaker 1: But did you ultimately go that direction, geography or political science in high school?
Speaker 2: No, so when I graduated from high school--
Speaker 1: Well, this, we're still--
Speaker 2: Okay.  No, in high school I, you know, I took the normal, I never took languages but I took classes to get through high school.  I wasn't, I wasn't very focused in high school as I just said.  I, I was more focused on change, how we're going to change this country and I didn't want to be--I didn't want to, I didn't want to be anything like my mother.  I didn't want to be like the people whom I'd grown up with.  I felt that there was much more that I wanted out of life.  I didn't know how, but I felt there was much more that I wanted out of life.
Speaker 1: Did you feel somewhat, I'll use the term, stifled in Rockford [Illinois]?
Speaker 2: Absolutely, absolutely.
Speaker 1: And beyond the Black Panthers, what other things were you doing in high school, (unclear) extracurricular or social or church or anything?
Speaker 2: Oh, I was drinking wine and smoking pot (laughter).
Speaker 1: And--
Speaker 2: Oh, or it could have been vodka or something.
Speaker 1: But you had a good, you're having a social life.
Speaker 2: Well, yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: And, so were you making, making a lot of, did you have a, other friends that you were hanging out with?
Speaker 2: Lots of friends with Afros and tams and (laughter)--
Speaker 1: And where did you, where did you, for that social life, where did you go?
Speaker 2: You know we used to hang in parks when the weather was nice, one of those houses, we would have parties at each other's houses, that was pretty much--oh, there was a rec center [Washington Park Community Center, Rockford, Illinois].  We used to go to a rec center too.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I'm trying to think of the name of the rec center but there, in fact the guy who ran it, his name was Deacon Davis [McKinley Davis, Jr.].  That's what we used to call him.  He ran a rec center, so we would go there.
Story_ID: 651607
Speaker 1: In high school [Rockford West High School, Rockford, Illinois] did you start thinking about college?
Speaker 2: No, my father [Levard Russell, Jr.] started thinking about it for me (laughter).
Speaker 1: And what did he think about or say to you to get you going to college?
Speaker 2: Kind of gave me an ultimatum that I didn't have a choice--that I needed to go to college. And I said, "What for, what am I going to do when I get out?" And he says, "Well, you'll have a lot of options."  I said, "No I won't.  Look at, look at this country, I won't have any options."  So, he convinced me to go to college and I went down to Northern Illinois University [DeKalb, Illinois] and I continued to be a Black Panther [Black Panther Party], I continued to party a lot, I didn't go to class, I protested a lot, I'll tell you a funny, funny story.  One of my dearest friends right now, and who used to also run a PR [public relations] firm that I hired to do work for me, we were sitting in the University Club [University Club of Chicago], about twenty years ago, here in Chicago [Illinois], and she says to me--Rita [ph.] is from Chicago, white, red hair--we're sitting in the University Club and she says to me, "So, where are you from originally?"  And I told her.  She says, "Well where'd you go to college?"  I said, "Northern Illinois University."  I said, "But twice."  She says, "What do you mean, twice?"  I said, "Well the first time I didn't--nobody told me I should go to class, I spent more time partying, protesting."  She said, "What were you protesting?"  I said, "Oh, I was part of the Black Panther and Black Power movement."  She goes, "What years were that?"  I told her the years.  She goes, "Were you on the lagoon that night at NIU when there was a group of anti-war protesting and then the Black pow--." I said, "Yeah."  She goes, "Well I was on the other side." (Laughter) So we love to tell people that story, today even. But so that's, was my college life, my first time college life when I went down to Northern.  I just continued what I was doing in high school.
Story_ID: 651608
Speaker 1: Oh I meant to ask, back, back in, in Rockford [Illinois] when you were a member of the Black Panther Party or, you know, part of that.  What--were there any problems with the Rockford police [Rockford Police Department]?  Was there any time--
Speaker 2: Most--yes, but not where I was involved.  I mean, mostly the guys, you know, because we weren't together all the time and Charles Hawkins, actually, he was quite confrontational with the police, if I remember, but I never had any--other than when we refused to go back into the school [Rockford West High School, Rockford, Illinois] when Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] was shot and then they started taking us into, downtown, to the city hall [Rockford City Hall, Rockford, Illinois].
Speaker 1: And, historically, I meant to kind of go a little bit further with some names I was tossing out, Huey Newton [Huey P. Newton], Bobby Seale, [HistoryMaker] Angela Davis.  Did you ever, ever have the opportunity to meet anyone?
Speaker 2: No, I didn't.  I wish I had but I didn't.
Speaker 1: Okay, but those are some key players (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Absolutely, including, locally here, [HistoryMaker] Bobby Rush.
Speaker 1: Bobby Rush, too, yeah, and do you, did you ever go to Chicago [Illinois] for--
Speaker 2: I did, I did.
Speaker 1: Back when you're in high school or a little--
Speaker 2: In high school and in college [Northern Illinois University, DeKalb, Illinois] too, but in high school, yup, I came over here with Charles, um-hm.
Speaker 1: All right, and I forget the year and, here in Chicago there was a raid on a Black Panther Party member--
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: --Mark Allen [sic. Mark Clark], I think, and--
Speaker 2: And Bobby Rush was involved in that too, yeah.
Speaker 1: --Bobby, yeah, 'cause I think in, do you remember the year that was--
Speaker 2: I don't.
Speaker 1: --sixty-five [1965], '66 [1966], '67 [sic. 1969], somewhere, and, yeah, that was a very troubled time across the country, frankly.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: But did you--when you went to Chicago, did you ever get involved with the Black Panther Party there?
Speaker 2: We'd go to social functions, kind of things.
Speaker 1: Okay.  How about the Democratic National Convention, 1968 [1968 Democratic National Convention, Chicago, Illinois], all that?
Speaker 2: No, I wasn't over here then.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Read about it, saw it.
Story_ID: 651609
Speaker 1: So you're, you're at, at Northern Illinois [Northern Illinois University] in, I think that's in DeKalb--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --Illinois.  What was the racial mixture back then?
Speaker 2: It was predominantly a white school and there was, you know, a handful of African Americans but it was predominantly white.
Speaker 1: And why Northern, Northern Illinois?
Speaker 2: Because I didn't want to go far from home and my father [Levard Russell, Jr.], he would have preferred me to go somewhere in Ohio and I wasn't having that at all 'cause I didn't want him to be able to show up that easily (laughter) so I decided, okay, I'll go to Northern.  So I went to Northern.
Speaker 1: Did you even, did anybody ever talk to you about historically black college [HBCU] and say maybe you should, "Sheila [HistoryMaker Sheila Talton], maybe you should go down south."
Speaker 2: You know it's funny.  My father wasn't a big fan of historically black colleges and I think, as I reflect of him talking to me, I think it's because he used to say to me, "If you're going to learn how to have success in a world that is predominantly white, you need to be able to know how to assimilate and manage that world."  So he never, ever talked to me about a historically black college.
Story_ID: 651610
Speaker 1: At Northern [Northern Illinois University, DeKalb, Illinois], you, of course, took the regular classes, I'm sure, you know, the prerequisites, freshman year; sophomore year, what are you, what are you taking?  What kind of classes your sophomore, junior years were you taking?
Speaker 2: Oh, I got kicked out before junior year (laughter).  I didn't go back junior year.  I was taking, let's see, what was I taking in sophomore year?  Oh, English, sociology, psychology, college algebra, I remember too.
Speaker 1: Were you thinking about a particular degree at that point?
Speaker 2: (Shakes head) I was there because my father [Levard Russell, Jr.] made me be there.
Speaker 1: And, I think, you kind of alluded this before.  Were you going to classes or--
Speaker 2: Sometimes, sometimes.
Speaker 1: How were, if--you don't have to say this if you don't want to, but how were your grades, though?
Speaker 2: Oh, my grades were horrible.  That's why I was on academic probation and I got asked to leave 'cause my grades were horrible (laughter).
Speaker 1: So you were a sophomore and, what happened besides the fact that your grades were--how do you, how did you get the notice that you're on probation and then you get this notice that you're--
Speaker 2: I got called into the dean's office and, you know, forewarned, that I needed to make a correction by the next semester and I really didn't care and I didn't.  So, then I got called into the dean's office and said that I was no longer eligible to stay at Northern.  So then I went back to Rockford [Illinois].
Speaker 1: Were you hurt, stunned, when you, when you get the message from the dean's office?
Speaker 2: Oh, I knew that--I mean, I clearly knew (laughter) that's what I was doing.  I mean, no, I clearly knew that, that wasn't going to be a long life.  My father was very upset with me.
Speaker 1: And what kind of conversation took place when you got home with your mom [Mildred McWhorter Russell] there, you talked to your dad but what, what happened there?
Speaker 2: Well my mother, she really couldn't quite understand why he wanted to make me go to college anyway.  She kind of was on the page of, you know Sheila [HistoryMaker Sheila Talton] will meet somebody, she'll get married, why--she doesn't need to do that college thing.  My father was very disappointed and when I saw his disappointment that kind of got to me because he--my father was a very strong man.  I saw a soft side of him when I had failed in college.
Speaker 1: Was there anything in particular that he said in terms of, I mean, what did he say to you?
Speaker 2: He said to me, "You didn't fail college."  He said to me, "You decided that you wanted to fail at college." And he said to me that he was very disappointed because someone with my capability should have pretty much anything I want in the world and because I wasn't willing to go the--as he said, "What you like to call, Sheila, the white man's way, then you're not going to probably achieve those things that you are really capable of achieving."
Speaker 1: And what was your reaction to his, his message to you?
Speaker 2: I just listened.  I didn't say anything, I just listened.
Story_ID: 651611
Speaker 1: And so you, this is probably 19--I'm just going to project, '74 [1974] somewhere, thereabouts?
Speaker 2: About '72 [1972].
Speaker 1: Seventy-two [1972], '72 [1972], 1972.  Now that you're dis-enrolled at Northern Illinois [Northern Illinois University, DeKalb, Illinois], what do you do?
Speaker 2: I go find myself a job as a secretary.
Speaker 1: What company?
Speaker 2: The first company I went to work for was a company called Sundstrand [Sundstrand Corporation; UTC Aerospace Systems] out in Rockford [Illinois].  And I remember during the interview the man asking me if I was on birth control pill and how would I know--how would he know that I wouldn't get married and get pregnant and quit the job.  As being as militant as I was, you can imagine that didn't sit very well with me, but I needed a job.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: So I worked there for probably about two years as a secretary, clerk, and then I worked at another place, it was a printing manufacturer in the office there as a clerk also and, you know, in both of those jobs, I, as you can imagine, always felt alone because that was during the time that many companies thought, okay, we got to hire some people of color, African Americans, give them clerk jobs, you know, whatever; and, you know, most of the time you didn't have friends there and people didn't know how to socialize or interact with you.
Story_ID: 651612
Speaker 1: Then in, let's see, 1975, 1975, I met my husband--maybe '74 [1974]. And we were married and he was a machinist at a factory in Belvidere, Illinois and I was still working at the printing place, and then I became pregnant and I had my daughter.  And when I had my daughter, life changed for me.  I did not go back to work at the printing place, I went to work at a place called Allis-Chalmers [Allis-Chalmers Manufacturing Company], they manufactured forklifts and I was a clerk there. And my daughter was young, a baby, and there was a salesman there, first name Greg [ph.], I cannot think of his last name, white guy, and I had been working there for about, say maybe a year or so, and he says to me one day, he says, "Why are you working here?"  And me being as militant as I am, I'm thinking, and why are you asking me that?  And he said, "You're capable of so much more, why is it that you're a clerk here at this showroom?"  And I said, "Well, I have to work, my husband works, we have a daughter." And he says, "Well, why didn't you go to college?"  I said, "Oh, I did."  I said, "That didn't work so well."  He says, "What do you mean?"  And I said, "Oh, I partied a lot, I was on academic probation."  He says, "Why don't you go back?"  I said, "Well they're not going to take me back."  He says, "They would take you back." And I said, "What do you mean they would take me back?"  He says, "Well, if you would go to a junior college and you take calculus and quantitative analysis, some really tough classes and ace those, they'd take you back at Northern [Northern Illinois University, DeKalb, Illinois]."  And I said, (makes sound), I said, "Well, you know, I've never been really good at math."  He says, "Well, I'll tutor you."  So I took his advice.  I went and enrolled in classes at Rock Valley junior college [Rock Valley College, Rockford, Illinois] and he kept his word.  I would go to his house, his wife and he, and he would tutor me.  I ended up taking about, I don't know, twelve hours there and then I reapplied back at Northern.  I had a young child at this time.  They accepted me back.  I quit that job.  I got a loan and a scholarship, a grant from Sundstrand [Sundstrand Corporation; UTC Aerospace Systems], it was one of them where I had worked as a secretary, and I was on the dean's list every semester.
Speaker 2: Can we hold that for a minute 'cause you're, you're going to where I'm going to be in a few minutes, but let's back up just a hair.  You ended up getting married in 1970--
Speaker 1: I think we got married, my daughter was born in '77 [1977], so we must have got married maybe in '74 [1974], '75 [1975].
Speaker 2: Okay, and your husband's name?
Speaker 1: Henry [Henry Talton].
Speaker 2: Henry, thank you, and your daughter's name?
Speaker 1: Shannel [Shannel Talton].
Speaker 2: Shannel, thank you.  These are important details, I want to make sure I get them.
Speaker 1: Ex-husband.
Speaker 2: Ex-husband, okay, no, I can deal with then-husband, later on, ex-husband.  And this salesman, I'm sorry, what was his name?
Speaker 1: Greg was his first name.  I wish I, I actually wish I could find him, but Greg was his first name.
Speaker 2: All right, and he just, so he took you under, under his wing (unclear)?
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: He's white?
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Story_ID: 651613
Speaker 1: And so you (background noise) end up going to junior college [Rock Valley College, Rockford, Illinois] for a period of time, come, come out and, onto Northern, back to Northern.  Were you from the--this is maybe stating the obvious, but were you from the beginning, you know, much more focused?
Speaker 2: Oh, (laughter) oh, it was night and day, night and day.  My father [Levard Russell, Jr.], he was still alive then.  It was night and day (laughter).
Speaker 1: And how did that, how did that look to you if someone from the outside looked at you before and that, and that first week, day, whatever it was when you could go back?  What did that look like?
Speaker 2: At Northern?
Speaker 1: At Northern.
Speaker 2: While I was at class, I was planning my study time, I was joining study groups, I was, it was all about getting out of there and getting out there, getting out of there with honors.
Speaker 1: And did you have a particular career in mind?
Speaker 2: Absolutely, yup, I did.  I went there--I was a business major and at the time, again, I reflected on being a woman and being a black woman, the hottest fields there was, was technology. And I thought, if I learn that, and I'm good at it, they'll never get rid of me because they need people, good people.  So, I only interviewed with three companies because I knew I was going to go to technology and I had a job offer from two.  So I was very, very focused.  I made the dean's list, I took the toughest professors and I actually had one of the--in fact I brought a picture.  I was honored--well I'll tell you this story.  I was in New York [New York] about three years ago on business and my cellphone rang and somebody says, "Is this [HistoryMaker] Sheila Talton?" And I said, "Yes it is." And they said, "Hi, my name is, I'm from Northern Illinois University [DeKalb, Illinois]."  I said, "Oh."  They said, "You've been chosen as alumni of the Year for the business school [Northern Illinois University College of Business, Rockford, Illinois]."  I said, "What?"  I said, "Do you know who you're talking to?" (Laughter) I said, "Do you know my history?"  They said, "Yeah, we know your history."  So when I went to accept the award I had a professor whose name was Dr. Kieselbach [ph.], he was the toughest.  He gave no A's.  I took Dr. Kieselbach's marketing, 300 level class and his 400 level class and I aced them.  After I left Northern, Dr. Kieselbach and I became friends.  He since has died but his daughter gave me the award which was very touching and she said her, her--
Speaker 1: Very touching.
Speaker 2: --yeah.
Speaker 1: Very good, very good.
Speaker 2: But--
Speaker 1: So, I'm just curious.  There's a movie, 'The Graduate' with Dustin Hoffman where someone whispers in his ear, the word, plastics.  How did you know technology was going to take off?
Speaker 2: You know, I will tell you, and I don't know what it is, even today and all through my career in technology, I just have a gift of knowing when there's a movement in business and in technology.  It's like the company I'm running now [Gray Matter Analytics].  I mean, it's amazing, I mean what's happening in this company that I'm running and it's the right place.  So I just, I have a gift of watching business needs and gaps and how certain types of technology can fill it and I knew that that was a place that if I learned well and I was good at it and because of the demand for skills, that I'd always have a job and I'd always have a good job.
Speaker 1: Were other students you came out with, the business administration degree, were other students, anyone else thinking along these lines? Anybody else you knew?
Speaker 2: I was, you know, at the time at Northern in business school, I was usually the only African American and a handful of women in business, in the business school at Northern.  And, no, you know, in fact, at Northern, I had a double major because I went to Dr. Kieselbach, I said--back to being focused--I said, "Well, I've got all these other hours of stuff, what should I be taking?"  I said, "I don't want to just fluff it off."  And he said, "Sheila, one of the biggest complaints we hear from businesses when they hire business majors is a lot of them can't write effectively and speak."  So I went over to the communication school at Northern [Northern Illinois University Department of Communication, DeKalb, Illinois] and got a double major in speech communications.  And some of the classes I took was over by where the teachers college [Northern Illinois University College of Education, DeKalb, Illinois] was and most of the African Americans at Northern, at the time, were either in the psychology majors or over on the other side of the campus.  So whenever they would see me, and they knew I was over at the business school, they would say, "Wow, you must be over there by yourself."  And I said, "Yeah, I am pretty much" (laughter).
Story_ID: 651614
Speaker 1: So do you think maybe, you know, some of this may have come from being rebellious and, and maybe some of the discipline from your dad [Levard Russell, Jr.]?  Where did this come from, the self direction?  Where do you think that came from?
Speaker 2: I think it came from becoming a mother, having someone that now you're responsible for and their life.  I think many times when kids grow up, the messages that your parents have given you, they start to settle in on you in your early twenties, mid-twenties, where sometimes in your teenage years and, you know, you think, they don't know what they're talking about and I think this guy, Greg [ph.], I mean, you know, I got my first job out of college and traveling and I was a business woman. And my mother [Mildred McWhorter Russell], at the time, she's like, "I don't know why you do all this?  You have a husband [Talton's ex-husband, Henry Talton], you have a daughter [Shannel Talton], why do, why do you need to do this?"  But my father on the other hand, he was quite proud, quite proud; and I would always, whenever I had a difficult business situation, I would always talk to him about it.
Story_ID: 651615
Speaker 1: Sheila [HistoryMaker Sheila Talton], I was going to, sit back a bit and you're finished at Northern [Northern Illinois University, DeKalb, Illinois] but in terms of that time period, you know, opportunities for African Americans, this is still late '70s [1970s] for the most part, it's--you know, opportunities for African Americans in business and in the work environment were relatively narrow and also for women.  There's some career paths that were open but it's a, it was a pretty challenging time.  So, did you, did you, did you see those barriers there or how did you see it (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No I didn't.  I mean, I, I knew that there was no such thing as I was going to be equal.  In fact I'll tell you a funny story.  One of my dearest friends had a big birthday four weeks ago in Washington, D.C. and we laugh about, my first job was at NCR [NCR Corporation].  Her first job was at NCR.  NCR hired me--now during this time, when I graduated from Northern, the technology companies could not find enough math majors and computer science majors to hire so they started hiring business majors and then they would ship us off for a year and teach us how to program.  So, Mary Ann [ph.] is her name, when she got hired at NCR, and I was at NCR, we didn't know each other at the time, they really didn't know what to do with us.  So, they put me in sales and gave me central and southern Illinois.  Now, you can probably imagine me going, showing up at a hospital and/or school districts, selling computer, software and hardware, in those little towns.  I remember one day I went through a McDonald's to get a cup of coffee and I was in Freeport [Illinois] or Ottawa, Illinois, and when I drive to the drive through, the woman says to me, she says, "You're not from around here, are you?"  And I started laughing.  I said, "What gave it away?"
Speaker 1: And you hadn't even said anything.
Speaker 2: I haven't even said anything but, no, you're right.  I mean, the opportunities were there for technology people.  I mean, I interviewed with IBM [International Business Machines Corporation], NCR and Burroughs [Burroughs Corporation; Unisys Corporation] and I had three job offers and I could have gotten one from IBM, but I was married and the first thing they said to me was, "You're not going to be able to stay here, we'll ship you somewhere else."  So, I just decided, my husband [Talton's ex-husband, Henry Talton] had a job, it was best for me to stay around Chicago [Illinois] area, so.
Speaker 1: Right.  Just, just so I kind of put this out there, for some folks that may not know about central Illinois and southern Illinois, there's, even now, some vestiges of, you know, almost southern--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --racism as I understand it.  So, did you ever in those times when you had to travel downstate, see anything, any overt racism or problems, anything?
Speaker 2: You know I didn't.  In fact, I remember in Ottawa, I got so close to the superintendent of schools down there I started going to his house with he and his wife for dinner sometimes when I would be down there.  I didn't, I mean, I clearly knew that, I think a lot of it was they'd never seen anybody like me so--but no, I mean, you feel that people are looking at you, right, and wondering who you are but my father [Levard Russell, Jr.] used to say to me, speaking of my father, my father used to say to me, "Sheila, you always want people to know who you are when you enter a room, and you should carry yourself that way." So, you know--
Speaker 1: So you really didn't see anything (clears throat) that, you know, that difficult?
Speaker 2: Right.
Story_ID: 651616
Speaker 1: You went into NCR [NCR Corporation] in sales?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: What type of products did you sell?
Speaker 2: So that story is, NCR would ship us off for a year to Dayton, Ohio, and I have a funny story about that, I just relived that eight months ago, but anyway, and they would teach you programming and I didn't want to stay a year 'cause I felt that I had learned programming.  So, I kept asking to be taken out of the program early and they kept saying no.  So we would go to Dayton, we would stay like four weeks, come back for three, four weeks, go back, back and forth.  So, excuse me, I was in the group that they called, CIMEG, Commercial, Industrial, Medical, Education Group and I was assigned to be in the medical and education group.  So, there was a hospital, Libertyville Hospital [sic. Advocate Condell Medical Center, Libertyville Illinois], if I recall was the name of it, and I had started to go out--because part of our training also was to, when we would not be in Dayton, was to actually work in a hospital or a school district and understanding the, that time it wasn't software as much as it was general ledger systems, that--the GL [general ledger], the accounts payable, accounts receivable in the hospital and then in the education environment, it was, you know, grade reporting, payroll, those kinds of things.  So I had been working in a hospital as part of my training and I actually sold the hospital a new computer.  So once I sold it, I went to my boss and I said, "So now will you let me be out of that program?" (Laughter) So they did.  And so, during those years, many hospitals and school systems still had those big ledger machines and NCR and Burroughs [Burroughs Corporation; Unisys Corporation] were the makers of many of those machines but now they had come out with computer systems. Computer systems that, you know, probably would, if you go from that wall to this corner, you'd spend about close to a million dollars for a computer that large which had no more power, or a lot less power than your iPhone during those years but it was kind of now getting to a point where hospitals were starting to think about maybe running their own computer systems, mainly for general ledger, accounts payables, receivables and so that's what I sold.  I sold the hardware and the software.  NCR was also the maker of the software and the hardware.  During those years also, that was when hardware and software was bundled but it was starting to take shape that the United States government had filed a lawsuit against IBM [International Business Machines Corporation] about embedding a lot of its software into the hardware and making it very difficult for competition and that's when IBM unbundled software and you really created the software industry during that time.  Once again, when I saw that happening, I thought, humph, the real money's in the software, it's not in this hardware.  So I answered an ad in The Wall Street Journal for a startup software company based out of Boston [Massachusetts] and so I left hardware because I saw where it was going.
Speaker 1: Saw an opportunity?
Speaker 2: Saw an opportunity and went to work for a company called Data Group [Data Group Systems], they were venture funded and out of Boston and I remember when I resigned from NCR, my boss said to me, "I can't believe you're leaving.  You've made the century point club every year, you've been in the top 5 percent performers, why are you leaving?"  And I said to him, "When I go to Dayton, Ohio, the corporate headquarters, and I go up on that top floor, there's nobody there that looks like me."  So, that's what I told him.  So, I went to the startup software company.
Story_ID: 651617
Speaker 1: Could I ask a question?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: At NCR [NCR Corporation], which was one of the largest companies in that industry, one of the, it was probably Fortune 500 company or, it's a pretty big company, you--it sounds like things, it sounds like you did very well there?
Speaker 2: Did very well there.
Speaker 1: Yeah, was the--was it challenging in terms of the learning curve?
Speaker 2: Unh-uh, no.  I'll, I'll tell you a funny story that just recently happened.  I haven't written a line of code of software in a long time.  I haven't looked at database table layouts in a long time.  I'm currently running a startup called Gray Matter Analytics and when I decided to do this, I made a few phone calls, said this is what I'm doing, I immediately had a friend call me up and said, "Hey, we've got an opportunity for you.  A client would love to see if you would be willing to engage and help them out, big insurance company."  I'm like, oh boy, (makes sound).  I haven't even hired staff yet.  I did that project myself just recently.  I now have people hired, but I was joking with my lead data architect today, I said to him--'cause he's pricing out the second phase of this engagement--and I said to him, "I never want to do data mapping again in my life," (laughter) and he said to me, "Well, I'm quite impressed that you were able to do what you did."  So I, I think, I think sometimes, you know, we have an aptitude for certain things and my daughter [Shannel Talton] says to me, "You made me be a computer science major." And I said, "No, you had choices.  You choose not to do--why you went to Emory [Emory University, Atlanta, Georgia] and so I just said, 'I'm not spending thirty five thousand dollars for a journalist degree.'" And she says, "But you love technology, I don't."  I said, "Well, that's true, I love technology," so.
Speaker 1: Back to NCR, though, and you get this sales training group that you're probably part of--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: How many other men and women, if you--
Speaker 2: Not many women.  I think, I brought a picture of me at that, at our graduating class.  I was the only African American and I'm thinking maybe there might have been ten women out of a class of about seventy-five.
Speaker 1: And what kind of subjects did you need to get through?  Obviously, sales but, but the technical work, what did you do (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, we were writing COBOL [Common Business Oriented Language].  We were learning COBOL.  We were writing programs.  We wrote, and during those times you had punch cards, and tapes, so, but, no, we were writing software.
Speaker 1: So let me make sure I understand this.  You're a business major, did you have any software classes--
Speaker 2: Yes--
Speaker 1: --at Northern [Northern Illinois University, DeKalb, Illinois]?
Speaker 2: --at Northern--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --to be a business major, you had to take twelve hours, either nine or twelve hours of computer science.  So I had written COBOL at Northern and did punch cards at Northern and wrote FORTRAN [Formula Translation] at Northern.  I had never written, I wrote a little COBOL but learned FORTRAN at Northern.
Speaker 1: Not to get technical, but for folks who are nontechnical, COBOL, FORTRAN, these are different types of software--
Speaker 2: Those are languages that you use to write software.
Speaker 1: Right.  Did you have a sense that you, had a natural aptitude towards that?  Did it--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --fit for you?
Speaker 2: Um-hm, and the biggest part of my aptitude, again--even though I do know how to lay out tables in a software database--but my biggest aptitude is being able to see new technologies and where they apply to business and the next wave of, of technology. More business to business, what we call in the industry, B to B, I'm not a B to C person so I, I would never work at Apple [Apple Inc.] because that's (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) B to C being business to consumer?
Speaker 2: Business to consumer, right--that's not my forte.
Story_ID: 651618
Speaker 1: And on the sales side, how did you, how did you think you were as a salesperson?
Speaker 2: Very good, very good.
Speaker 1: And how did that, how did that show up, not necessarily awards but, you know, give me a story where you sold something and you're, you felt pretty good about it.
Speaker 2: Oh god, I have a lot of those.
Speaker 1: Give me one or two.
Speaker 2: Well, first one was when I was supposed to still be in the class at NCR [NCR Corporation] and I sold Libertyville hospital [Advocate Condell Medical Center, Libertyville Illinois] a computer.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: And when I was at the startup software company [Data Group Systems], this company, in the industry we have terms called, alpha, beta, meaning the phase of where the technology is and in the software industry, it's not unusual to sell product that you don't have. And I felt quite good at the startup company.  We had this software product that was running on, at that time, Datapoint [Datapoint Corporation] equipment, which is no longer around, and most of our clients wanted the product on an IBM 360 [IBM System/360] architecture, which was like the IBM 36 [IBM System/36], 38 [IBM System/38], and, or DEC, Digital Equipment [Digital Equipment Corporation], and we had not ported the software over to that.  So I probably sold about six customers new software to be yet ported over to the IBM, into the DEC platform and I felt pretty good about that and even right now, like I said to you, I, you know, I--my, Gray Matter's [Grey Matter Analytics] doing quite well.
Speaker 1: Very good.  Well we're going to get to that.
Story_ID: 651619
Speaker 1: So, you moved to Data Group [Data Group Systems] out of, in Boston [Massachusetts].  Did you move to Boston?
Speaker 2: No, they wanted specifically for someone to open up the Midwest for them.  So at the time when I was at NCR [NCR Corporation] I was still in Rockford [Illinois] but spending a lot of time in Chicago [Illinois], at the Chicago office in Mundelein [Illinois] and in Park Ridge [Illinois] and I knew that I was leaving Rockford and so I waiting for my opportunity, which, when I joined Data Group, that was the perfect opportunity because they wanted me--I had about fifteen states I was responsible for and I had to hire people to work for me--which I had never done any of that before. But that's why I went to a startup because in a big company like NCR, you know, you stay at this level for three years and then you get promoted to this level after five years and I didn't want any of that.  So, going to the startup, I got to see a lot, do a lot that I normally would not have done inside of a big company so that's when I made the move to Chicago.
Speaker 1: Let me get a better picture about your application to Data Group.  They apparently thought you had a great resume, obviously.  Did you fly to Boston to meet with them?
Speaker 2: Yes, I did.  I flew to Boston.  First they came to Chicago and met me here and then I flew to Boston.  I had never been to Boston before and when I was at NCR, I was flying quite a bit for, 'cause every time I made the century point club, we would get a trip and, you know, so that was the beginnings of my kind of starting to see the United States.  So, yes, I flew to Boston and that was pretty awesome.
Speaker 1: Did, did you get any kind of, I'll call it, a reaction when you walked in the door that, I don't know if they knew ahead of time that you're African American, either in Chicago or Boston?
Speaker 2: I don't think he knew it when he came to Chicago.  I can't--Harry [ph.] was his first name, I can't remember his last name.  I don't think he knew it when he came to Chicago, but he flew me to Boston and I met with the CEO when I got there and the rest of the management team.
Speaker 1: Right, and what kind of products did Data Group--
Speaker 2: All software.  So now I wasn't selling any hardware, it was all software and it was software for field service dispatch.  So think of Sears [Sears, Roebuck and Co.], dispatching appliance repair people.  This software would do the dispatch, keep track of the field service people, keep track of the parts in their trucks, so it was all field service, and also we sold that product to Pepsi [PepsiCo], American Hospital Supply [American Hospital Supply Corporation] was one of my first sales here, as well as Baxter [Healthcare Corporation; Baxter International, Deerfield, Illinois] because they had people that was repairing pumps and things like that in hospitals.  So it was all software.
Speaker 1: You had to open up an office and hire people.  What was that like and--
Speaker 2: It was exciting, very exciting.  You know, hiring people to work for me to help me sell software in fifteen states and it was, it was really a blast.  I really, and I learned so much about business during that time 'cause I had to do everything that I would have never done at NCR.
Speaker 1: What was your title at Data Ma- Data Group?  What were you, what were you?
Speaker 2: I think it was director of Midwest sales, I believe it was, yeah.
Speaker 1: It sounds impressive.
Story_ID: 651620
Speaker 1: How long were you with Data Group [Data Group Systems]?
Speaker 2: Only about three years because one day my phone rang and Data Group had been funded by a venture firm called Norwest [Norwest Venture Partners] out of Minneapolis [Minnesota]. And I got a phone call from one of the partners at Norwest asking me to come up to Minneapolis, and I go up there and they tell me that they've made a decision to take the company in a different direction and that the president and the vice president and all had been let go, but they would really like to see me stay on as they kind of relaunch the company with new leadership and assuring me that I had a job and that things would be great.  Now, in startups, much of the reason why you join them is because your expectation that the company is either going to go public or it's going to be sold and your stock will be worth something.  When I got back to Chicago [Illinois], I thought about it and I thought about how hard I had been working and I thought, you know, I think given that the company is going through this change, probably time for me to make a change to a little larger company, a little more stability, not as large as NCR [NCR Corporation] but larger.  So, I believe a search guy called me while I was having those thoughts, so the kind of two came together and talked to me about a company in Princeton, New Jersey by the name of Applied Data Research and I thought, hm, haven't heard of them before and I started doing a little research and it was systems software. And I got to thinking about that and I thought, okay, I've done hardware, application software, system software would be a good thing. And system software is the operating system, and they wrote system software for large mainframes and in particular only IBM [International Business Machines Corporation] mainframes at that time.  And so, they wrote, what's called source library management so in the CPU [central processing unit] it manages all of the applications' source code and they sold that product. And then they sold the very first beginnings of relation on databases in fourth generation languages. And what that means is, before relational databases, which are flat tables, which I was joking about doing data mapping, looking at tables, all the software to manage all the data in a computer had, what's called pointers, and that makes the machine--the software run much more efficiently but you can't manipulate the data very much because it's all got to be chained together and you gotta kind of know where--in order to manipulate the data.  So the early years of relational databases was flat file tables and then you have what's called the data dictionary that basically kept track of the location of all the data so you can manipulate the data much, much more readily and easier.  So I joined Applied Data Research in sales in Chicago and at the time, I was only Chicago based.  All my accounts were Chicago, really enjoyed the company a lot.  I had clients like Kemper [Kemper Corporation] and McDonald's Corporation here and, oh wow, Stone Container [Stone Container Corporation; Smurfit Stone Container Corporation], a lot of big customers were my customers.  I learned a lot about system software which was great because I didn't know a lot about it and especially the database piece and the fourth generation languages. And it was a small enough company that you didn't--you weren't bogged down with a lot of bureaucracy.
Story_ID: 651621
Speaker 1: So I really enjoyed it, except for I didn't like my boss [at Applied Data Research].  We didn't get along at all; and this is one of the few companies that I worked in that they had a black man who was his boss.
Speaker 2: And this is about 1987--
Speaker 1: This must be about 1985-ish.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Eighty-five [1985], '86 [1986].
Speaker 2: Okay.  So here you have your boss here and then he has a--well, what was--question: what was your title, what was his title and above him, what--
Speaker 1: So I was senior account manager, I think was my title there, and the guy that I didn't get along with was the district sales manager for Chicago [Illinois] and Mike Fields was the head of sales for all of the U.S. at the time.
Speaker 2: And he's African American, Mike Fields?
Speaker 1: Um-hm, and he was in Boston [Massachusetts], yup.
Speaker 2: And so what was the tension between you and your district sales manager (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I actually believe the tension there was race and he, he, this guy drank a lot, and I remember we used to have sales meetings in the office and then after the meetings he would open up a bottle of wine or whatever, right, and I would always leave, most of the time.  And once when I was leaving he said, well, you know, "Sheila [HistoryMaker Sheila Talton] won't be sticking around long because she's a little too uppity to hang with us."
Speaker 2: Was that in front of you or did you hear that?
Speaker 1: Oh, no, he said it right there in front of me, right, he said that right there in front of me. And I still left and, you know, he started wanting to maneuver accounts and take accounts from me and, you know, try to make me feel like he was doing me favors and I forgot what he did that made me send Mike Fields a letter. And Mike came to Chicago and talked to me one on one and said, "Sheila, I would really appreciate it if you would just give me time and we'll get things kind of rectified," so I said, "Okay."  Probably six months later they fired him.  Jeff Beck [ph.] was his name.
Story_ID: 651622
Speaker 1: I ended up leaving [Applied Data Research] though, anyway--not because of him then--because one day I was driving, and--the time when you had those big cellphones, one of my colleagues from Montreal, Canada called me, who I had become very good friends with, and he says, "Have you checked out what's going on with our stock?"  And I said, "No."  He says, "Something's happening, Sheila [HistoryMaker Sheila Talton], the stock is going up."  So I get to the office out in Rosemont [Illinois], was where our offices were, and Ameritech [Ameritech Corporation; AT&T Teleholdings, Inc.] had acquired the company and I'm thinking to myself, oh, shit, I don't want to work for a telephone company. And I was not happy about that.  Anyway, Ameritech acquired us and I had met a guy here in Chicago [Illinois] on a boat.  He had bought a big sailboat, he had worked for the Kennedys, and actually through him is how I got to know Chris Kennedy [Christopher G. Kennedy], but I met Jay Doherty and we'd go out on this boat and one of these boat trips, there was a guy there from Morrison and Knudsen [sic. Morrison-Knudsen Company, Inc.] by the name of--I can't think of his name. But anyway he says to me, "Have you ever thought about being an entrepreneur?"  I said, "Yeah, I thought about it a lot," I said, "in particular since the breakup of AT&T [AT&T Inc.] and Ameritech just acquired my company, there's going to be a huge void for the design of networks, both local area and wide area networks because AT&T no longer exists, the regional Bells will not be able to offer that nationally because now they're regionalized." And I said, "That's an opportunity."  So he says, "Do you think you could start a company doing something like that?"  I said, "Absolutely."  So he said, "Well, what would you need?"  I said, "Money."  I said, "I don't have any money."
Speaker 2: Right, capital.
Speaker 1: So he had been doing work with a Canadian telephone company up in Saskatchewan telephone [Saskatchewan Telecommunications Holding Corporation], Saskatchewan, Canada, and he invited those guys from SaskTel to come down here and meet me in Chicago and I told them about my idea and they said, "Well, do you have a business plan?" and I said, "Nope, I don't."  They said, "Well, could you write one?"  And I said, "Yeah, I could write one."  So I wrote a business plan and they invited me to Saskatchewan, Canada and I went there, I presented my business plan, convinced them to give me a million dollars to start a company and located the company at 224 South Michigan Avenue.  We designed local and wide area networks, we did all of the communications design for the international terminal at O'Hare [Chicago O'Hare International Airport, Chicago, Illinois], the Harold Washington Library [Chicago, Illinois].  In fact, Jim Compton [HistoryMaker James W. Compton] was head of the library.  I tease him about it now.  My first million dollar contract came from Jim Compton to design all the communications and video in the Harold Washington Library.
Speaker 2: And what was the name of the company, the startup?
Speaker 1: Unisource Network Services, and I ran that company for about eleven years.
Story_ID: 651623
Speaker 1: So, Sheila [HistoryMaker Sheila Talton], let me, let me back up just a little bit in a couple of different areas.  ADR [Applied Data Research], out of Princeton, New Jersey, major company, major player, you, you're learning relational data- databases, systems programming, I'm sure they gave you a great deal of material to learn those areas or not, but, but then, did you, did they give you like a massive book or handbooks to read and learn and all that stuff?
Speaker 2: Well now that was all software, so it was all on the computer and I spent a lot of time with the developers, understanding the architecture of the software, how it was designed, 'cause I like it (laughter).
Speaker 1: So what does that look like?  When you, when you sit down with a developer, they're the, are they the programmers?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: When you sit down with them and look at, look at code, what are you looking, at that time, what are you looking at (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) You're looking, you're looking at how the software tables are laid out, how the data dictionary accesses the database, how the data dictionary does calls to the database, retrieves the data, builds new tables to present on your computer screen when you do a query.  I talk to the programmers about the logic that they write into the software. And then I think about what are the various different business applications that this software could be used in and that's the place where I've done real well.
Speaker 1: In those areas--these are very technical areas--could you see flaws in a program?  Could you see something and say, something doesn't, the logic of it, did you ever--did that come into play?
Speaker 2: No, where I would see flaws is where there might be gaps in how the software is applied to the business problem--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --but not in the logic of the software itself.
Speaker 1: Okay, so the ultimate application, say, was for a hospital system--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --or Sears [Sears, Roebuck and Co.] or something like that--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: You've got these, I'm prefacing technology experts but you might say, this is not leading in the direction--
Speaker 2: I'll tell you a funny story.  Kemper insurance [Kemper Corporation] was my toughest client at ADR and they, and we had sold them to buy this relational database, as what we call in the industry as transactional database, meaning, you can run payroll against it and it's going to be just as fast as a pointer database. It wasn't, and Kemper had major problems with our database and they would beat me up, daily, about it.  So I went down to Dallas, Texas where our developers were and most of the time we joke in the industry, really good developers are the guys, and some women, that, you know, you slip a pizza at the--under the bottom of the door and they just don't come out.  So, I, I went down to Dallas and I met one of the top programmers who was very instrumental in designing the database. And I convinced him to come to Chicago [Illinois] to spend a couple of weeks with Kemper to just really analyze how they were using it and try to figure out how we could get the performance up on the database.  So I went to the senior execs [executives] at Kemper and I said to them, I said, "Now look, the guy that I'm bringing in here, don't ask him any questions, don't be horrified that he smokes Camel cigarettes down to the"--
Speaker 1: To the nub.
Speaker 2: --"to the nub and he's not very communicative but trust me, he'll get it fixed" (laughter).  So, and I used to like hanging out with those guys just thinking about how they think about, how they wro- write software.
Speaker 1: It sounds like it helped that you developed relationships with folks at different levels, including the ground troops to a certain extent.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: That's good.
Story_ID: 651624
Speaker 1: Okay, so at this time, you were--I'm going to go into family a little bit.  You got married about 1975 or so (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Seventy-five [1975] or so, um-hm.
Speaker 1: Right, your husband [Henry Talton] was out there working in the Rockford [Illinois] area?
Speaker 2: Um-hm, um-hm.
Speaker 1: You had one daughter [Shannel Talton].  What's going on with them?  What's going on with your marriage, if I can go there?
Speaker 2: Well, my grandmother, Ethel [Talton's paternal step-grandmother, Ethel Russell (ph.)], Ethel, in Youngstown [Ohio], I remember when I graduated from college [Northern Illinois University, DeKalb, Illinois] she said to my husband, she says, "Now it's your turn, you should go back to school," and I'm thinking, yes, tell him that, tell him that, tell him that.  And so I'm trying to convince my ex-husband to quit his job and go to school.  I'm earning enough money, I'm wanting him to step out and grow. I'm traveling, and have traveled, and starting to see the country and liking it. And he's a very simple guy, nice man, and we still are friends, but wanted nothing to do with any of that.  So when we moved to Chicago [Illinois], actually moved to Highland Park [Illinois], I continued to try to convince him to quit his job.  He wouldn't do it.  He actually commuted from Chicago to Rockford; and as you can imagine, that's not healthy for a marriage, and we grew apart.  And so we ended up divorcing when my daughter was six.  I stayed in Highland Park and he went back to Rockford.
Story_ID: 651625
Speaker 1: My daughter [Shannel Talton] goes to elementary school, middle school and high school, I stay in Highland Pa- Highland Park [Illinois] until she graduates from high school.  So.
Speaker 2: Okay, and so she's six and attending Highland Park elementary school up there.  It's on the North Shore--
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: --of Chicago [Illinois], in terms of, just out of curiosity, demographics back then, back then?
Speaker 1: Well I picked it because it was predominantly Jewish and to this day, I still go to Rosh Hashanah and Yom Kippur (laughter).  Some of my dearest friends are still up in Highland Park.
Speaker 2: Okay, okay, very good, very good.  So--
Speaker 1: My daughter calls them her Jewish mothers.
Speaker 2: And what--did she later on finish at Highland Park High School [Highland Park, Illinois] or--
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Finished at Highland Park High School and then went on to Emory [Emory University, Atlanta, Georgia] and was a computer science major. Graduated from Emory, did an internship at Ernst and Young [Ernst and Young LLP], went to Ernst and Young and then she went to IBM [International Business Machines Corporation]; and then from IBM she went to Allstate [Allstate Corporation], and then to Accenture [Accenture PLC]; and now she's back at Ernst and Young.
Story_ID: 651626
Speaker 1: So, I'm not sure the exact year but you end up with this startup company, Unisource [Unisource Network Services]?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: And you got this million dollar investment.  Did you have--who was part of your team?
Speaker 2: Well the Canadians sent a watchdog, (laughter) a guy by the name of Doug Van Vliet [Douglas Van Vliet], he came, he wanted to leave Saskatchewan [Canada], he wanted to come to the big city so he moved to Chicago [Illinois].  And so he was kind of my sidekick and he was more of a technical guy and I was more the front face, salesperson in the company and I bought those guys out in four years.  The company was profitable and I ran the company until, when I wanted to grow more, and then I ended up taking in more capital.  I took $6 million in from a venture fund here in Chicago.  That didn't go so well. And I would say back in, back to SaskTel [Saskatchewan Telecommunications Holding Corporation], also, after the president who initially made the investment in me, he retired and they hired a new guy who, I think, felt, 'cause, A, I was a woman and probably a woman of color, that he really could run the company and just--I do what he tells me to do and that didn't go over very well.  So I ended up buying them out.  I had a really smart lawyer, a very good friend of mine from Highland Park [Illinois], and we ended up doing a reverse stock split when I got them down to a certain level of ownership and, I can't remember all the details, but Richie [ph.] figured out, because of Illinois law, when we did the reverse stock split, their ownership was so low that I was able to force them out so I did that.
Story_ID: 651627
Speaker 1: And then I ran the company. For another six years, we were profitable. But I wanted to grow because I had an office by that time in Washington, D.C. and we were doing a lot of federal government contracts, but I wanted to grow faster because that was during the time that services companies and technology were starting to go public and I thought we had a shot of doing a rollup if we could get enough capital to do some acquisitions and actually go public. And my mistake was that I picked the wrong venture firm.  I picked a small Chicago [Illinois] based fund that was only a $30 million fund, which means, after I got $6 million from them, they couldn't do any more. And an African American man who was one of the leaders in the fund and he was partnered with a couple of white guys in this fund and when the market tanked, or started to tank--
Speaker 2: Which was about 19--
Speaker 1: Ninety-eight [1998] was starting to tank. And we had some tension before that.  We had tension because we started to get offers to buy Unisource [Unisource Network Services] instead of us being the acquirer, which I was okay with because by that time, I only owned 30 percent of the company and they had become the majority shareholder, but what I wasn't okay with was trying, them trying to bully me into signing a five year employment contract with the acquirer, 'cause I wasn't going to do that. And that created a lot of tension because they couldn't sell the company because everybody who wanted to buy the company wanted me to commit for five years and I wasn't going to commit for five years.  So, it ended up that when the bubble burst, we had to stop the growth 'cause they were out of capital.  We were close to still selling the company and in one of the due diligence meetings, the buyer asked me a question about our continued growth and I was very honest with them.  One thing I am, I'm very, very transparent, and I said to them, I said, "Well, our cap- we're capital constrained and we're not going to be able to grow any longer and, by the way, if we don't start to grow, we'll probably have to lay off some people."  Well, the venture guys didn't like me saying that so they fired me.
Speaker 2: I hate to do this but at this moment, when you had the buyout, you assumed the position, I'm guessing, president, CEO, what, how was that--
Speaker 1: When, when we were being offered, offers were coming in to buy us?
Speaker 2: No, back a few years, you, you did a little bit of a buyout, I thought, of Unisource, and then you required $6 million more--
Speaker 1: Oh, yeah, yeah, yeah.  So when I, so when I, so I was the majority shareholder--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And so it was quite easy for me to buy the Canadians out.
Speaker 2: Right, right.
Speaker 1: And then I was pretty much, owned the company 100 percent, other than what I shared with employees.
Speaker 2: And how, how big was the company staff wise about that time?
Speaker 1: We were probably, at that time, up to maybe about fifty, sixty people.
Speaker 2: Oh, so it was not like ten or twenty, it was a sizable enough company.
Speaker 1: And when I left, we were about 120--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --or so.
Speaker 2: Okay, so the venture capitalists didn't like what they were hearing about the possible downsizing.  About, when was that? The bubble had--
Speaker 1: About '99 [1999].
Speaker 2: Okay, '99 [1999].  And so you're out of your own company.  Were there, was there some sort of a golden parachute part of that?
Speaker 1: No, it got really nasty after that.  I'm not sure how much I can talk about but I will--
Speaker 2: It's up to you whatever you want to talk about.
Speaker 1: Okay, so they decided, and I mean, I still was a 30 percent shareholder and they decided to try to block me out of coming to board meetings.  So, it ended up that I hired an attorney, I sued them, we settled.
Speaker 2: Okay, I understand, enough, enough said. I understand.
Story_ID: 651628
Speaker 1: So now you, this is 1999, 2000 thereabouts?
Speaker 2: Yup.
Speaker 1: You've, you've settled and what do you do next?
Speaker 2: Send out a bunch of letters and told a lot of people that after running Unisource [Unisource Network Services] for twelve years, I've decided that it was time for me to do something else. And some of those letters that I sent to people I got a couple of phone calls, one was from Ernst and Young [Ernst and Young LLP], another one was from EDS [Electronic Data Systems Corporation] and both asking me would I be willing to come and work in those companies.  So I went to Ernst and Young, interviewed with them, went to EDS, interviewed with them, and had an offer from both and I decided to become a director (unclear) partner at Ernst and Young and I ran the technology practice in the Midwest for them, had a wonderful, wonderful time with Ernst and Young.  I still have a great relationship with the firm, but after being there for about eighteen months, they sold the technology practice to Capgemini [Capgemini SE] and that was horrific (laughter).
Speaker 1: Well, let me ask a question.  I mean, Ernst and Young in the old days was an accounting firm, so what was the technology group?  What did it consist of (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) All, all of the accounting firms had developed a technol- so Arthur Andersen [Arthur Andersen LLP], remember they had a lot of strife about Andersen Consulting [Accenture PLC] wanting to split off from the audit side--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --Ernst and Young had a technology practice.  KPMG [KPMG LLP], they did spin out their technology practice, became BearingPoint.  PricewaterhouseCoopers, IBM [International Business Machines Corporation] bought their technology practice.  So all of them had technology consulting.
Speaker 1: Right, so in that, that world of technology consulting, what would you, what would you do as a, for instance, what exactly were you--
Speaker 2: I ran the practice.  So I had about two thousand professionals and, you know, all the big customers in the consumer products retail was pretty much my responsibility around the country, in fact. So we were matrix.  So the technology people who were housed in Chicago [Illinois] were under my domain and we supported all the verticals but then my vertical expertise, I was assigned to the consumer products retail practice.
Speaker 1: Okay, and vertical expertise in--
Speaker 2: Industry.
Speaker 1: --industry.  So whatever's in that particular industry up and down the chain of, of--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.  So we, we did a lot of Y2K consulting for Kraft [Kraft Foods Group, Inc.] and a lot of consulting for McDonald's Corporation, Best Buy [Best Buy Co., Inc.], Sara Lee [Sara Lee Corporation], I mean--
Speaker 1: You were, and you were the manager so you really, did you ever have the responsibilities of account management?
Speaker 2: Yeah, the way those firms work, I had three accounts that I was responsible for but that wasn't doing delivery work, it was basically at the executive levels.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: You know, meeting with CEOs, CFOs, you know.
Story_ID: 651629
Speaker 1: Did you ever have any situations where you, a situation where you were on the hot seat because something didn't, wasn't working right?
Speaker 2: Oh gosh, I've had many of those, absolutely, absolutely.
Speaker 1: But without naming maybe a particular company, can you give us an example or two?
Speaker 2: Oh gosh, yes, and I actually ran into him in the airport recently.  McDonald's [McDonalds Corporation] owned Boston Chicken [Boston Market Corporation].  We--they were headquartered in Denver, Colorado.  We had a PeopleSoft [PeopleSoft Inc.] implementation that was not going well and the individual who was the CIO at the time for this, for the Boston consulting, I felt was very, very unethical and I, more than once wanted to pull my team and I'd call my boss and I'd say, "I just think we should leave," and my boss said, "No, we can't do that, Sheila [HistoryMaker Sheila Talton], we've got to stay."  I said, "Well, he's not being fair with us.  Every time we conform and do, you know, the changes he wants to the software, there's more, there's more.  It just never stops."  So that one was really difficult and when I ran into him, he now is in another company out in the West Coast and he says to me--and I'm trying to think what was I--oh I think I was at Cisco [Cisco Systems, Inc.] when I ran into him. And he says to me, "Oh gosh, how wonderful to run into you.  You were one of the best supporters when we--and you know here's where I'm at now.  I would love for us to connect." And I'm thinking to myself, no way (laughter).
Speaker 1: That's not going to happen.
Speaker 2: Not going to happen.
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah.  So you, even at your level, you had to deal with some, you know, clean up matters?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, oh yeah.
Speaker 1: And how, how did you, how did you like that?
Speaker 2: I don't mind it.  I mean, I, I'm a, I'm a very transparent, very all about business and very about finding a win-win and I, I, if we've done something wrong, I want to fix it.  If you own part of the problem, you need to help me fix it.
Speaker 1: Say you're looking for the win-win but would you say you could also, if you had to put on a more combative hat, did you, you know--
Speaker 2: Oh, I could do that.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: I could definitely do that.  I mean not to where--I'll give you an example, Kaiser, Kaiser Permanente.  I'm out in California, my team is telling me that the new CIO at Kaiser Permanente is wanting to implement a total refresh of all the network, put in a whole new platform for servers and that Cisco is the chosen vendor. Great, and I'm asking where's the contract, where's the--oh, not signed yet but he's going to sign.  So I said, "Who is he?"  Well it turns out, he had been my customer before here in Chicago [Illinois] at Ameritech [Ameritech Corporation; AT&T Teleholdings, Inc.].  So I go to, over to Oakland, California to meet him and we, you know, talk about old times and he tells me what a mess they have at Kaiser and they need to make some substantial upgrades of the technology platform and I said, "Well, Cliff [Cliff Dodd], we're here to support you and do whatever we can and it's great to be able to work with you again," I said, "but we do need to get the contract signed."  Three weeks later, no contract.  I call him up and I said, "Cliff, I hate to inform you, but my whole team is leaving, we can't continue to work without a contract." So I pulled him.
Speaker 1: And what was his reaction?
Speaker 2: "Oh, you can't do that."  "Well, yes I can.  Thirty days, no contract, I'm pulling 'em.  I have demands for these resources and other clients that have a contract.  You get a contract signed, more than happy to come back."
Speaker 1: And did that contract ever come back?  Did you ever--?
Speaker 2: It did, about six months later.  He ended up getting fired (laughter), so, but, yeah, it did, they, yeah, it did come back.
Story_ID: 651630
Speaker 1: Well before we get to Capgemini [Capgemini SE], I was thinking about you saying how you had this rebellious nature in civil rights.  What, is it, what, if anything, have you been doing since college, you know, the community?  Anything going on on that side of the world?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.  I, I've, I'm on the board of the Chicago Urban League.  I go to church on the West Side of Chicago [Illinois], purposely I go to church on the West Side of Chicago because I feel that young people over there need to see people like me and the resources that I have, where I give, I need to be giving to those types of communities.  At my church we have an after school program and I got Cisco [Cisco Systems, Inc.] to rewire the whole campus so that we could have a robust network for the kids and computer system.  I, I'm having a computer lab named after me over there because they have a, a new structure called the Firehouse [Firehouse Community Arts Center] in Lawndale [North Lawndale, Chicago, Illinois] that it's an education program for kids to learn about technology, dance, cooking, different types of--and so the computer lab they told me that they were naming after me because I've given quite a bit of money to help get that facility. And when the president [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama] was running, I went to six cities knocking on doors, door to door, and was very active in trying to make sure that he was elected.
Speaker 1: Yeah, was that involved with fundraising activities or--
Speaker 2: Fundraising, getting the voters out, going to the projects in Charleston, South Carolina, down in Indianapolis [Indiana]--
Speaker 1: Oh, you were on the (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], right in the worse neighborhoods of Philly, yep.
Speaker 1: Yeah, very good, very good.  Now I was just wondering, we'll talk a little, about that further, in a little bit too.
Story_ID: 651631
Speaker 1: So you end up at Capgemini [Capgemini SE]. Or Capgemini happens to be part, you know, purchased by--
Speaker 2: They purchased RCN's [RCN Corporation] technology practice.
Speaker 1: Thank you, and you said, I think, that was horrendous or some term.
Speaker 2: Oh, it was horrible, horrible.
Speaker 1: What does, what did that look, why was it horrendous?
Speaker 2: Well, it was kind of like the, trying to merge royalty with the commoners is what I'd put it.  Cap Gemini is a very, kind of, nuts and bolts software technology company.  I mean, they get their hands dirty.  Partners at Ernst and Young [Ernst and Young LLP], they thought that they were the royalty and the two companies really never merged.  I mean, separate offices, the partners at E and Y, they didn't try to sell business together, the last partner meeting we had before the merger, I think we had about, I don't know, eighteen hundred partners at a big meeting in Atlanta [Georgia].  When I left, two thirds of those partners were gone.
Speaker 1: And when did you leave?  About was that?
Speaker 2: I left there in 2004.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: No, no, I left there, 2003. And they disseminated the--no, I left there in 2002 'cause I went there in '99 [1999], that's when I left Unisource [Unisource Network Services].  So they, they, I mean, the practice was just, I mean they, I spent all my time in Sears Tower [Willis Tower, Chicago, Illinois] laying people off.  I mean, our business shrunk, it was very, very tough times.
Speaker 1: Right.  So you were still overseeing several thous- I think it was two thousand?
Speaker 2: Well I was laying off a lot of, yeah, I still was but, I mean, god we were laying off so many people during that time.
Speaker 1: Right, besides trying to take care of the accounts, too?
Speaker 2: Right, right.  And then, one day I was in the Sears Tower and my phone rang and it was EDS [Electronic Data Systems Corporation] and I had an offer from them when I--and the president of the outsourcing practice says to me, "Well, how's it going for you over there at Capgemini?"  I started laughing, I said, "You know what is going on over here."
Speaker 1: They know, they know.
Speaker 2: So he said, "Well, Dick Brown and I, who was a CEO at EDS, we've got to go to COMDEX [Computer Dealers' Exhibition] in Vegas [Las Vegas, Nevada], would you consider meeting us out there, we've got a job we want to talk to you about?" And I said, "Sure."  So, ended up Dick didn't come but Doug Frederick came and I went out to Vegas and met with him and he said, "We think we've got the perfect job for you." And I said, "What is it?"  He says, "I don't know, we're still figuring it out."
Speaker 1: That's great.
Speaker 2: So I go to, down to Dallas [Texas] and go through a series of interviews and I ended up accepting a job and after I'm there for four weeks, Dick Brown calls us all together and says that we're not able to be competitive enough with IBM [International Business Machines Corporation] because IBM had bought PWC's [PricewaterhouseCoopers] front end consulting business and we didn't have one and that we needed to create one.
Speaker 1: You can continue.
Speaker 2: Okay. So, the next thing after that call, Dick had all the leadership on the phone, my phone rings, they said, "Sheila [HistoryMaker Sheila Talton], it's you, you're going to take different pieces of the business and create a consulting practice, globally, for EDS."  So I said, "Okay." So I ran a global team for about three months all over the world and taking bits and pieces of EDS's business and created about a $4 billion consulting practice. And Dick choose Paulett Eberhart to run that practice and then she choose me to run the front end practice globally.  So I had teams in Europe, probably in eight different countries in Europe, in China, in Mexico City [Mexico], so it was a pretty global team.
Speaker 1: How many employees total did you think, did you oversee, ballpark?
Speaker 2: Oh, maybe eleven hundred, so it wasn't that big of a team.
Speaker 1: And how many direct reports did you have underneath you?
Speaker 2: I had about eight direct reports.
Speaker 1: And I should have asked, what was your title at EDS?
Speaker 2: I was president of the business process innovation services group.
Story_ID: 651632
Speaker 1: In moving up the ranks, officer to officer, I just wonder, how did it feel?  Not the, necessarily the moving up but did you feel, feel comfortable being, oh the, the top dog?  Is that something that you always wanted, you could always see yourself being?
Speaker 2: My daddy [Levard Russell, Jr.] told me that (laughter). But I never felt, and I still to this day, I always feel grateful and humble. Because the neighborhoods where I grew up, I told you, Ms. Floyd [ph.] told me two weeks ago, most of my contemporaries are not here anymore. And there's so many different ways that my life could have taken given that I was very active in Black Panthers [Black Panther Party] and growing up in poor neighborhoods, you know, I could have had a lot of kids out of wedlock, I could have been on drugs, I could have been in trouble because of being involved with the Black Panthers so I--and when I go, you asked me about other activities in the community.  There's a couple of homeless shelters, one on the South Side [Chicago, Illinois], one on the West Side [Chicago, Illinois] that I frequent at least, probably, I try to go every two months but I go there--the one on the West Side I go to take food.  I usually will call them up and ask them to give me a grocery list and then at Christmastime, I go there and provide gifts for the mothers and it's a shelter for women and children. And I, when I go there, I say there for the grace of God, this could be me.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: So, I, I feel, when I was coming over here I thought about my father, I thought, hm, somebody wants to interview me about my life, I guess my dad probably would like that, you know. But I, I never take it for granted at all and I always believe that, as they say, "To much is given, much is expected," and I try--don't always do as much as I should do, but I try to focus on giving back.
Speaker 1: That's from Luke, Chapter 12 [Luke 12:48]?
Speaker 2: Yep.
Story_ID: 651633
Speaker 1: You just mentioned a saying, to he has much--to, "To, he who has much, much is expected" [Luke 12: 48]. And I know you mentioned earlier you really, when you were younger you weren't going to church on a regular basis but--
Speaker 2: I wasn't going with my mother [Mildred McWhorter Russell].
Speaker 1: Thank you, but you, you were going, okay.  So, do you think some of this is a little bit of from a spiritual standpoint, a little bit of--well spiritually,  what do you think is going on there?
Speaker 2: Well, I'm very spiritual and I, I believe in God and I'm a Christian. But I, I remember the guy, Greg [ph.], who told me, "What are you doing here?"  I mean, all along my life, and all along everyone's life that have been able to accomplish things in their life, somebody opened up a door for them and I'm a big believer of opening up doors and I'm a big believer in opening up doors for my people.  Now I open up doors for a lot of people and I'm very, very proud that the global teams that I have run--I was telling the guy yesterday at breakfast, a Chinese guy in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], about my time in China and that some of the nicest notes that I still get, people asking me when am I coming back to China.  I miss China so much.  So I, I really believe in my teams, in business, looking like the UN [United Nations], that's my goal but on the ground, in the communities, I do things in all communities but my number one priority is where I'm going to open up the door for people who otherwise wouldn't have anybody to open up the door for them and that's people who look like me.
Speaker 1: Right.  So, do you think you have a number of folks who would say, or maybe you could tell us some folks who say, "Sheila's [HistoryMaker Sheila Talton] been a great mentor for me," or, "Sheila's helped me get to that next level."  Are there some folks out there you could think of?  Not tooting your own horn but I'm just wondering.
Speaker 2: I said to a friend of mine now who has cancer--and I actually thought about it.  She's fifty-two and she used to say to me, "What would, if I said your eulogy, what would you want me to say?"  And I looked at her and I said, "What would you say, instead of me telling you what I--," she said, "I would say that you've opened up the door and helped a lot of people." And then she said, "I would say that whenever somebody's with you, they're going to eat well, drink well and laugh a lot." And I was actually reflecting on that because now she's, she possibly may pre-leave here before me and given her illness but, and I said to her, she turned it around and she says, "So what, what would you want them to say?"  And I said, "I'd want them to say that she helped somebody." And she said, "Oh, a lot of people will say that."
Speaker 1: Very good, very good, and we're going to get to that a little bit later on, too.
Story_ID: 651634
Speaker 1: In terms of your family, you're, you're living up in Highland Park [Illinois] your--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --daughter's [Shannel Talton] there.  You--off camera, you mentioned that you had remarried by now?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: When did you get married again?
Speaker 2: In 1997.
Speaker 1: Nineteen--and what was your husband's name at that--
Speaker 2: Larry Henderson.
Speaker 1: Larry Henderson.  And how did you, how did you meet Larry? What's going on?
Speaker 2: Met through a lawyer.  I, I'm involved in a lot of organizations and one is an organization called, well, YPO [Young Presidents' Organization] and WPO [Women Presidents' Organization]. And through YPO a bunch of us were out one night having dinner and the lawyer to one of the YPO guys that was with us said something to the effect, he says, "You know, Sheila [HistoryMaker Sheila Talton], I've got a client you should meet, you'll really like him."  And I said, "Oh, he probably will really like me," I jokingly said that.  Anyway, he proceeded to fix us up and when he first had lunch I wasn't that interested, actually 'cause I was dating someone else, but, I don't know, I wasn't that interested.  Buy anyway, he was persistent and he happened to be living in Atlanta [Georgia] at the time and my daughter had just gone to Atlanta and he knew that she was down there, and he called me once and he says, "How often do you come down to see your daughter at Emory [Emory University, Atlanta, Georgia]?" And I said, "Quite often." "Well, I'd love to take you to dinner sometime when you're down here." And I said, "Oh, okay, well I'll call you when I'm there." And I hung up the phone and I remembered thinking to myself, didn't I tell that brother I was dating somebody but (laughter). But anyway, I went down to Atlanta and he did take my daughter and I out for dinner and my daughter says to me, "Oh, mom, he seems like a very nice guy." I say, "Yeah, maybe I'll introduce him to some of my girlfriends that--," and my mom said, "Well what about--," I meant, my daughter says, "Well what about for you?"  I says, "I'm dating somebody." And she says "Well you need a new boyfriend," and I'm like (rolls eyes). So anyway, from that he came back to Chicago [Illinois] and when I'd go to Atlanta and so, then I broke up with my boyfriend and we started dating and he moved back to Chicago and we got married.  We actually got married within like thirteen months, which was way too fast.
Speaker 1: And what was he doing?  What was his occupation?
Speaker 2: He also, rare, I mean very rare to, there are not many people of, African Americans, who are in technology.  There's a few of us, but he also was in technology and he had started a software company down in Atlanta and it wasn't going very well and so he actually was having to shut it down 'cause it burned through a lot of cash and it wasn't, it wasn't taking off.  So, when he came back here, he went to work for a company out in St. Charles [Illinois] called Dukane [Dukane Corporation] and he was president of their education, software education group.  And then when he left there, he ended up doing a lot of consulting work for United Airlines.  So--
Speaker 1: Okay, right.  And, you kind of mentioned that was another future ex--
Speaker 2: Yep.
Speaker 1: --ex-husband? So how long did that marriage last?
Speaker 2: We were married for ten years.
Speaker 1: Ten.
Speaker 2: Yep.
Speaker 1: All right, all right, that's, that's fine.
Story_ID: 651635
Speaker 1: Okay, so you're, you're continuing on your corporate track; and you're at EDS [Electronic Data Systems Corporation]--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --consolidating a global operation.  How did that work out?
Speaker 2: Worked out great.  I really enjoyed working with Dick Brown, Doug Frederick, Paulett [Paulett Eberhart], I just had breakfast with Paulett three weeks ago, but EDS had one, a billion dollar Navy contract from the United States Navy, and Dick and the team that were involved in that really wanted that contract badly and I think because--the whole company, all the leadership team wanted it.  It all happened before I got there but somehow there was a lack of due diligence that was done and that contract started losing money, big time, and because of the size, it caused us to miss our earnings after Dick and our CFO had been on Wall Street [New York, New York] confirming guidance. So the board fired Dick and brought in a gentleman by the name of Michael Jordan [Michael H. Jordan] and basically gave him the direction to shut down all the consulting stuff, take it back to the core, package it up and sell it and hence EDS is part of HP [Hewlett-Packard Company] today.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So while I was at Harvard Business School [Boston, Massachusetts], I went to Harvard, 2002, I believe it was, two thousand- yeah, 2002, to the executive program and while I was there I met a gentleman from Cisco [Cisco Systems, Inc.]. And after Michael Jordan had come in and they had fired Dick I told them I wanted to come back to Chicago [Illinois], I would run the consumer products retail group for them but do it out of Chicago.  So I left Dallas [Texas], came back here. And I was also on a board at the time with--oh, he was a CEO at Motorola [Motorola, Inc.] at the time--Ed Zander [Edward Zander]. And Ed asked me to think about would I be interested in joining Motorola and at the same time I got a phone call from Cisco and I went out to California, went out to Schaumburg [Illinois]. The two were night and day. And Cisco was much more of a fast moving, you know, take no prisoners kind of attitude, where Motorola was kind of bureaucratic and a throwback to the '60s [1960s] kind of, felt to me, anyway.  So I took a job with Cisco.
Story_ID: 651636
Speaker 1: When I joined [Cisco Systems, Inc.] they asked me to run another global consulting practice, which I did not want to do; and I said--they said, "Well, we really need somebody to fix this and turn it around, and if you do that then we'll find something for you to do that you really want to do." And I said, "What I really want to do is I want to be back on the hardware side of the business."  I said, "I started my career in hardware, I want to go back to hardware." So, three and a half years later, after growing this practice and, you know, took it global, it wasn't global when I took it over, I went to John Chambers [John T. Chambers] and Gary Moore, who I worked for and, and, Wim [Wim Elfrink] and I said, "I don't want to do this anymore."  So, at that time, John Chambers had decided that he wanted to have more than just sales offices around the world.  He picked seven emerging countries that he really wanted to make big investments in and that was India, China, Saudi Arabia, Brazil, Mexico, Russia and Hungary. And he had dispatched a guy to India to build development centers or software development centers there. And then they asked me if I would be willing to go to China and I was ecstatic about that because I do have an adventure side to me (laughter).
Speaker 2: Right, absolutely.
Speaker 1: So I had been, I had been to China before. And I went over to China, start getting a lay of the land with the Chinese government, assessing what we needed to do as a team, going through my physicals and everything I needed to do to get my work visa in China. And as I'm on the ground I'm kind of looking at the business dynamics between my boss, the Chinese at Cisco and the Chinese and the friction and I decided that the best way for me to manage the friction and not be a pawn in it was to keep a foot in California.  So I ended up just getting myself a place at the Ritz Carlton and I never packed up and got an apartment.  I had looked for an apartment, I was about to get an apartment, so I would stay six, eight weeks at a time, go back to California, six, eight weeks at a time, go back to California. But while in China I lectured at their equivalent of MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts], it's called Peking University [Beijing, China].  I traveled around the country and met with Chinese government to decide where could Cisco invest, basically we were investing a billion dollars there, and where was the win-win for the Chinese government and for Cisco.  We ended up building call centers in Dalian [China].  We built software development in Shanghai [China], expanded our Cisco academies where we would teach the Chinese technology and how to use technology. And it was an experience of a lifetime.  I thoroughly enjoyed it and miss so much being over there. Not--after I left Cisco, I had an opportunity to go back to Asia but at this point in my life, when you're in Asia working, you are very disconnected and I just didn't want to be disconnected like that anymore.  So when I came back after--
Speaker 2: Sorry, you have, you're on a flow there, I have to--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: One question is, what's happening, what's going on with your, your daughter [Shannel Talton]?  You know, what's going on with your--
Speaker 1: Well my daughter is an adult when I go--
Speaker 2: She's grown.
Speaker 1: Yeah, and she, I actually encouraged her to do something similar, so she ended up spending a year and a half in London [England], but yeah.
Speaker 2: Right, but, and so these seven centers, software development centers and call centers, is that part of that, some people describe, positive, negatively as globalization and--
Speaker 1: Definitely globalization.
Speaker 2: Globalization.
Speaker 1: Definitely globalization.
Speaker 2: And, you know, from a Cisco standpoint, what is that, what would that really mean in terms of manpower, people, people resources?
Speaker 1: Oh gosh, we probably deployed, hired, probably ten thousand people in China.
Speaker 2: From China, just China?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: And there were six other countries that--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --and so some other huge number of, of folks (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) People down in India and Mexico and Brazil and--
Speaker 2: And with China being, setting up the call center and the software development center, what did you do on a--what exactly did you do?  Did you have to fly over and you had a team of folks, and--
Speaker 1: Right, right. Planning, tracking the investments we were making, continually getting the consensus from the Chinese government and the people on the ground in China from Cisco and implementation, you know, executed.
Speaker 2: Right, and it sounds obviously like a great responsibility and the levels of officers at Cisco, where were you?  Here you have, say the--
Speaker 1: John Chambers [John T. Chambers] is CEO.
Speaker 2: President and CEO.
Speaker 1: Wim Elfrink and then me.
Speaker 2: So you were, what title's that, like senior vice president?
Speaker 1: No, that was a vice president.
Speaker 2: Vice president.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: Okay, but you were very close to the top?
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Story_ID: 651637
Speaker 1: Would you say Cisco [Cisco Systems, Inc.] was progressive in terms of bringing in African Americans; or it was just, what was?
Speaker 2: Nah, nah, they're not.  They--and women too, both, they struggled with that.  I took on an initiative that John Chambers [John T. Chambers] asked me to take on to try to fix that, but it's, it's been a difficult, difficult thing for them. And I think a lot of it is, Cisco has such a macho culture and it's a young company and there's still a lot of people that are there that have been there since the beginning, almost.  So it's very hard for new people to get part of the fabric but I got a very nice e-mail yesterday from a woman at Cisco saying to me that, how much I'm missed and the impact that I made there for women and people of color while I was there.
Speaker 1: But I'm not sure if it's based in Silicon Valley or just wherever in California but--
Speaker 2: It's in Silicon Valley.
Speaker 1: Silicon Valley, there's still, I think, a little bit of that bias towards, not just men necessarily but folks who came from certain business schools or Stanford [Stanford University, Stanford, California].  Is that, am I correct or what are your thoughts?
Speaker 2: It's not about the schools, it's mainly about the location. And there are not many African Americans in Silicon Valley or in Northern California, you know, Oakland [California], yes, but not many.  So when you come there as an outsider, unless you come there being brought there to a job, you kind of almost have to pick up and take yourself there.  One of the large, one of the largest venture firms, Andreessen Horowitz, just had a networking cocktail reception where they were inviting African Americans, Asians, to try to k- entrepreneurs, to try to get to know one another 'cause they're so spread out and they said that they're going to do this more regularly to try to--and try to encourage African Americans to move out there but that's kind of hard for us as a culture and it's definitely hard if you don't have something you're moving to, you know.
Speaker 1: Right, I think I saw something like that on TV where these entrepreneurs have to go out and make presentations--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --right in front of the venture capitalists and very rigorous, as it should be.
Speaker 2: And, you know, back to discrimination, you have discrimination among venture capitalists.  I mean, you could count how many African Americans and women get significant funding from venture capitalists, whether they be in Silicon Valley or anywhere in the country.
Speaker 1: Right, right. And venture capitalists want a certain stake and they're not going to, they're not like bank loans--
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: --so they want to make sure their investment is, there's a return on their investment.
Speaker 2: Yeah, but usually our people don't get the audience with them or the benefit of the doubt.  I mean, I've watched so many millions of dollars be invested in bad ideas, of white males, (laughter) and I sit there and think, really, they really invested in that?
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Here's one right here in Chicago [Illinois] called Groupon [Groupon, Inc.] (laughter) (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Right, yeah Groupon got major investment and didn't do so well very quickly from what I hear.
Speaker 2: That's right.
Story_ID: 651638
Speaker 1: So you, you started the busin- the software development operation and call center in China and then what happens after that [at Cisco Systems, Inc.]?
Speaker 2: Go back to California, I say, "Okay, guys, what's next?"  "Well, you did a great job down there, why don't you go down to South America?" I said, "Okay."  So, I head to Mexico and John Chambers [John T. Chambers] and I actually were in the presidential palace [National Palace, Mexico City, Mexico] together the day that the H1N1 flu broke out down there and, again, when we went into these countries in the emerging markets, you can't do much as a corporation without having the blessing of the government.  So, we always would start with what's the agenda of the government and in Mexico the agenda is public safety and security because of the drug cartels.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: And working down there was not fun at all, but we ended up building a center of excellence around public safety and security and what that means is we used technology that--the street cameras that you see around Chicago [Illinois], we use some tech- similar technology down in Mexico that also had sensitivity to sound and particular to gunshots. And the cameras would pan an area where they would see a gunshot, take numerous photos, send the photos to the police department over the network and then automatically dispatch police. And we built, in probably three major cities in Mexico, those types of systems.  I didn't, I felt rewarded of the work we did in Mexico, it just was so dangerous.  I mean, one day I was sitting having lunch and the equivalent of our homeland security was in a private plane coming back from a meeting where they were planning to try to beef up security against the cartel and the plane just explodes right there in the air.  We'd go meet with government officials and they have to empty out the restaurants, you know, and sweep 'em and so it wasn't a lot of fun.
Story_ID: 651639
Speaker 1: Brazil was fun. 'Cause after I left there then I went to Brazil.
Speaker 2: Ah.  So you, you--Mexico--Sao Paulo [Brazil] or Rio [Rio de Janeiro, Brazil], whe-?
Speaker 1: Sao Paulo, um-hm.
Speaker 2: Sao Paulo.  What kind of operation did you set up down in Sao Paulo?
Speaker 1: Well, we [Cisco Systems, Inc.] didn't finish it but we started. We started looking at energy.  As you probably know, Brazil is the capital of ethanol and also have perfected deep sea drilling because of all the oil they found in the sea offshore.  So, we started looking around, what could we do in building technologies that would enhance the energy industry? And one we came across, but we didn't end up building it, was most of the ethanol in Brazil is made from sugarcane and the big tractors and where they grow the sugarcane is long ways away from major cities and when those tractors would break down in the middle of the field, full of sugarcane, the communications to get someone out there to replace the tractor and get the sugarcane was not that good.  So, and that was important because after you cut the sugarcane, it loses its sugar content, it goes down very rapidly so you have to use more sugarcane to produce an equal level of ethanol if the content of the sugar has declined a lot.  So we started looking at what kinds of technology from a communications standpoint could we put on the tractors and build communications that would communicate with satellites and things like that, so.
Speaker 2: Did you enjoy this, did you enjoy the work more down there in Sao Paulo (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I did, and, and, and the other place where I worked down there that I just went back to last year, that I just absolutely love is Chile.  So I worked in Chile and we looked at trying to do some things in mining but we didn't do much in Chile.  Chile is a small country.  So, and we couldn't get the return on the investment, so we ended up not really doing anything in Chile.
Story_ID: 651640
Speaker 1: So you end up doing South America, Centr- South America, after that with Cisco [Cisco Systems, Inc.], what, where did they take you next?
Speaker 2: So I go back to California and I'm looking around and I'm thinking I'm done from the international stuff because I wanted to be done too. And Cisco starts to have some problems which, they're having problems right now.  In fact they just announced a four thousand people layoff.
Speaker 1: Oh, and I'm sorry, about what time was this timeframe when you're coming back to the United States?
Speaker 2: Two thousand and eleven [2011].
Speaker 1: Oh, okay, thank you.
Speaker 2: And I go to California and I'm looking around, what is there for me to do, what is there for me to do?  Oh, you could do this, you could do that and I'm thinking, nah, I don't want to do that.  I don't want to do any of those things and right about that time they offered an early retirement package. And I raised my hand and I said, "I'll take one of those."  Meanwhile, as I was looking around what I wanted to do inside of Cisco, I was also looking around what did I, wanted to do outside of Cisco. And I became very, very interested with data analytics and big data, taking me back to my database roots at Applied Data Research, ADR.  So I thought, I don't think I want to go back into a big technology company, I've never done private equity work and if I do private equity, maybe I can open up some funds, more for African Americans and women if I'm inside.  So I go to the East Coast, the West Coast, Midwest, start talking to a bunch of private equity firms.  I don't know how much you know about private equity firms but if you find many that have anybody that looked like me or you, I'd be shocked.  Now there are some that are African American owned but they tend not to be very large and not have a large capital base but I specifically wanted to go into private equity only to invest in big data and data analytics.
Speaker 1: And, and, but you say, big data and data analytics.  What is that, what does that mean?
Speaker 2: That means taking volumes and millions and millions and millions of data records and being able to manipulate them with algorithms to have insights into the data about future behaviors and do predictive modeling and to be able to use that to either improve how you operate your own company or to predict the behaviors of consumers or to manage risk if you're a large insurance company, like a Blue Cross [Blue Cross Blue Shield Association] plan or Aetna [Aetna, Inc.] plan.  So right now, it's kind of the latest craze, especially, well globally, but especially out in Silicon Valley.
Story_ID: 651641
Speaker 1: And when I went back out there I started looking around, who was investing in all the big data and then where the money was going, and it was pretty much going all in software; and I thought to myself, hm, that's probably not a good thing 'cause I think that there's an opportunity for the services piece, which is really more important because it's having the people that can read what the data's telling them.  I ended up landing at a private equity firm here [Sterling Partners] that had not done a lot in technology but they said that they wanted to, and quite frankly, I believe because of the discrimination in those firms, I didn't have a lot of options.  I mean, I wasn't getting firms, "Oh, yeah, Sheila [HistoryMaker Sheila Talton], come on in, come on in," but there was an African American principal at this firm and he wanted me to come into this firm.  So I did.  I joined the firm as, what they call an executive in residence, which means that, you're not making much money but you're looking to invest where you might end up running the new entity that they invested in.  So, I wrote an investment thesis, spent about eight months doing that and I was becoming very, very bored and then I probably brought them about four different deals.  They didn't like any of them.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And I went back out to California this past March and met with some old Cisco [Cisco Systems, Inc.] colleagues, met with some venture funds and told them all about this investment thesis I wrote and how I know that this is the sweet spot in big data, where there's a void.  Consistently, I got asked, "So why aren't you launching the company?"  I said, I don't know.  Came back to Chicago [Illinois], thought about that, went skiing out in Vail [Colorado] with a couple of friends, talked to them about my investment thesis and they said, "So why aren't you launching it?"  And I said, you know, I think I will.  So, I came back to Chicago and started Gray Matter Analytics and we're nine people now, office in Silicon Valley, office in Chicago, thinking about whether we need one on the East Coast because right now our biggest customer is out there on the East Coast.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: I sit on a couple of public company boards and still on the Northwestern Memorial Hospital [Chicago, Illinois] board, Chicago Urban League board and the Shakespeare Theatre [Chicago Shakespeare Theater, Chicago, Illinois] board, so I've got a full life.
Story_ID: 651642
Speaker 1: Sheila [HistoryMaker Sheila Talton], you were talking about at Cisco [Cisco Systems, Inc.] you, you did an investment thesis.
Speaker 2: That wasn't at Cisco--that was at--
Speaker 1: I'm sorry.
Speaker 2: --Sterling Partners.
Speaker 1: Sterling Partners, Sterling Partners, thank you, and about what time was that, 2011, 2012?
Speaker 2: Yeah, that was pretty much 2012.
Speaker 1: Sterling Partners, okay.  And maybe I should ask that, what kind of environment is that at one of those private--
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: --equity firms?  What's the life like?
Speaker 2: A whole lot of testosterone.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) So, how many women were there?
Speaker 2: Two.
Speaker 1: Two, how many--
Speaker 2: I mean that had real significant, that weren't the--
Speaker 1: Staff support (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right, exactly.
Speaker 1: Right, so there's two and how many, how many testosterone guys?
Speaker 2: Seventy.
Speaker 1: Oh, so it wasn't that small, right?  And, it's kind of a go, go, go atmosphere all the time?
Speaker 2: Um-hm, um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay, well describe that to me just a little bit, just, just--
Speaker 2: It's a go, go, go atmosphere and it's also one, they don't live in the real world.  They have so much money. You know, private planes, don't fly commercial, that's kind of a badge of honor.
Speaker 1: Yeah, so when someone says, let's go and hang out a little bit, what does that look like?
Speaker 2: Finest of the finest.  All the fine restaurants, all the fine wine.
Speaker 1: Yeah, and they, they might say, well let's go and hang out and get on the plane to Monaco or Paris [France] or something like that?
Speaker 2: I remember, I've flown private jets, I mean, 'cause at EDS [Electronic Data Systems Corporation] we had jets and one of my boards we'd fly private jet. But we were taking a trip down to Baltimore [Maryland] and I had booked a ticket, plane ticket somewhere, the secretary calls me up and she goes, "Oh Sheila, we've got two planes that are going, you can just hop on one of the planes," I said, okay.
Speaker 1: So it was some fun there?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.
Speaker 1: That's good, all right.
Speaker 2: But I, I look at that very differently.  I, I, I don't need an airplane and when I think about the amount of money it takes to buy one and keep one up versus the impact that would have in the community, I don't need a plane.
Speaker 1: I under- understand.
Story_ID: 651643
Speaker 1: Once again, that, that investment thesis, could you share us, share some thoughts on what that entailed (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, what I did was I wrote an investment thesis around taking a, what I would call a mature business like a call center, a claims processing center for insurance companies that, that are data rich, right.  I mean, tons of data in claims processing or a customer complaints coming into a call center. And buying a software product that would be an analytics tool that would allow you to mine all that data and from that data learn more about your customers and their behaviors and create different services that would be new products for your customers.  Now I wrote that investment thesis mainly for the benefit of Sterling [Sterling Partners] because they were so gun shy around technology that the mature business would be one that would continue to throw off cash and profitability even if the software business was not a hit.  Software has a very short life cycle.  You have to invest a lot of money these days in to keep a product viable.  The margins are phenomenal but, you know, your product could become obsolete overnight depending upon some new research of a new product and it could be obsolete overnight.  So, in building Gray Matter [Gray Matter Analytics] I'm using some of my investment thesis but not all.  The other piece of it was focused on two industries, healthcare and financial services because those are two industries that are data rich and can't operate without minding the data.
Speaker 1: Right, and on the, just, I know a little bit about this, just maybe, in order to run, to put that data, big data together, you have to have serious, but super computers or how does that work?
Speaker 2: Not anymore.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Back to the evolution of technology, you can do it all in a private cloud.  You don't need to have invested in a bunch of servers and compute platforms at all, not anymore.  In fact what we're doing is buying private cloud space from Amazon [Amazon.com, Inc.].
Speaker 1: And just a little bit of insight.  The cloud has been around, the idea of the cloud's been around about, how many years?  Five, six, seven years or so?
Speaker 2: Five.
Speaker 1: Yeah, five.  So it's, we're, we're at another generation of the cloud?
Speaker 2: Well actually we're not.  So when I was at NCR [NCR Corporation] and when I was selling those hospitals, my biggest competitor was something called a service bureau.  A service bureau at that time was a company that would basically own the compute platform, all the communications hardware and you would rent time, compute time, from a service bureau.  That's all cloud computing is.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It's come full circle.
Speaker 1: Fascinating.
Story_ID: 651644
Speaker 1: Gray Matter [Gray Matter Analytics].  You were telling us a li- telling us a little bit about it a few minutes ago. It's based out in Silicon, Silicon Valley?
Speaker 2: And here in Chicago [Illinois].
Speaker 1: And here.  How many people did you say you have so far?
Speaker 2: We have nine and hiring every week.
Speaker 1: That's good.  What's the five year plan or what's your, what's your plan?  What do you want to be--
Speaker 2: Probably won't be a five year plan.  We've, right now, written a plan out through 2015.  Twenty fifteen [2015] we expect to be about a $30 million company, roughly about 125 people in the company.  The biggest leverage and opportunity will be out in California for the business.  The reason why I said it won't be a five year plan, probably, because this is a very hot technology.  What normally happens in the lifecycle of technology is you have a lot of companies early in the, in the life cycle which is where we are now.  As the lifecycle matures, you start to get, weed some out that can't compete and then as the lifecycle matures to the next level, you get consolidation.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: So what will probably be happening pretty feverishly in the next two years will be a lot of acquisit- mergers and acquisitions.
Speaker 1: Right, and you just have to kind of get your company positioned where it's competitive and, well, successful?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: But, in the best of all worlds with Gray cloud, where would you, where would you be?  Would it be a national, global, I mean, everything now can be global but, so--
Speaker 2: Right, no we, because we're just focused on financial services and healthcare, we probably will just be national.  Healthcare in the United States is very different than anywhere else in the world.  Anywhere else in the world it's really government.  Because of the sensitivity of the data, both healthcare and financial services, we won't be doing anything offshore and I, I don't see me building an operation in China or, because I don't want to raise that kind of capital--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --to do that, and it would take a large capital raise.
Story_ID: 651645
Speaker 1: Well, I'm going to ask you a few, few legacy questions and I may drift back a little bit too; but one question I have is, so what, what values do you place the highest value on?  What, what values in life are important to you that you can part, say, onto your daughter [Shannel Talton] or--
Speaker 2: Honesty.
Speaker 1: Honesty.  Anything else?
Speaker 2: Trust in God, faith.  Sometimes you can't, people who are type A people, and I've been guilty of this, having control, thinking that you know where you're going, you don't. And I think most successful people, whatever their faith has been, many times have put a foot forward and really didn't have it all put together but have faith, that if they needed the tools somehow.  Somebody will hand them a wrench, a hammer, a screwdriver.
Speaker 1: Right, I'll say, the sense is that you've been on almost a linear track, life, let's say in the world of business, you know, marriage and (unclear)--but business, life has been a linear progression upward.  Have you had, along those lines about trusting in God, any setbacks that you say, I had to deal with that trust in God and made a breakthrough?
Speaker 2: Well when, when I left Unisource [Unisource Network Services], I mean, that was my baby, I started that company, that was a setback but I also have learned along life, sometimes when you don't know it's time to move, God will make you move.
Speaker 1: It's very insightful.
Story_ID: 651646
Speaker 1: In the African American community we have a lot of challenges.  In the world of, let's just say specifically business, what thoughts could you pass along to young people today to help them do better in life?
Speaker 2: So I believe that everything in life is cyclical.  When I left Northern Illinois University [DeKalb, Illinois], going to work for a big company, was a good thing.  Made a lot of money, saw a lot of the world.  When I look now, and it's unfortunate, but I do see some regression and I think the regression is happening mainly because of where we are in the economic cycle also. Meaning that a lot of the middle class jobs are gone and not, they're not coming back, and as a result of that, people who normally didn't feel threatened economically--meaning, whites do--and today what I would say to young people is get your education for sure, maybe go to a big company for a few years and get some training. But I think running your own business is the thing to do right now and not everybody's cut out for that.  So the flip side I would say is, or find an entrepreneur that you believe has the ability and be a part of his or her team.  Smaller companies you tend to, can deliver value and be appreciated much more than you can in larger companies and in larger companies if you don't have a sponsor, you're not going to have success because somebody's got to open up the doors for you inside of there and what I'm seeing now from young people and a lot of my contemporaries that are coming towards the end of their corporate careers, is a lot of scrapping going on inside of IBM [International Business Machines Corporation] and KPMG and General Motors [General Motors Company] and Ford [Ford Motor Company] and, you know, Abbott Labs [Abbott Laboratories] and CIGNA and AIG [American International Group, Inc.], all of them, because there's only so many jobs at the top or in the middle. And if you don't have a sponsor and you look like me or you, you're not going to get one of them.
Speaker 1: Right.  So you think there's a great responsibility to pull someone up when you have that opportunity?
Speaker 2: Absolutely, absolutely, and one of the challenges of even giving the, the counsel about becoming an entrepreneur and joining with an entrepreneur, we still have the challenge of capital.  We still have the challenge of capital.  One thing that really recently has made me proud is to watch Oprah [Oprah Winfrey] and Lee Daniels all figure out how to finance what they want to do and do it together; and I wish, so wish, that there were more of us doing that.
Speaker 1: Okay, thank you.
Story_ID: 651647
Speaker 1: Looking back at your life, here you are this little bit of a rebel in Rockford, Illinois. Could you, to that point, look forward, imagine where you are today?
Speaker 2: No.  There were times when I, many times, I remember once being in the South of France.  I had some people working in Saudi Arabia and in Dubai [United Arab Emirates] and one of the women that was working in Saudi Arabia, she had been treated so poorly and we were going to ship her back, move her out of Saudi, and she says to me, "Sheila [HistoryMaker Sheila Talton], I need you to come over here and meet with me and figure out how I'm going to get out." And I said to her, I said, "I'm not coming to Saudi."  I said, "You can meet me in Nice [France], in the South of France and we'll figure it out from there."  And I remember being in the South of France thinking to myself, boy, I never thought I'd be in the South of France. Or I can remember when I used to live in Highland Park [Illinois].  I lived two blocks from the lake [Lake Michigan] and I've been a longtime runner, jogger, long distance runner, and I can remember many a days' running in Highland Park thinking, I really live up here, huh?
Speaker 1: So you're very thankful for what you've achieved (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, gosh, yes.
Story_ID: 651648
Speaker 1: If there's a le- legacy you'd like to be remembered for down the way, what would that be?
Speaker 2: Willingness to take risk to help other people.  It's so easy for those of us who get comfortable and live in certain neighborhoods. You don't have to go to the West Side of Chicago [Illinois].  You don't have to go to the South Side [Chicago, Illinois] to a homeless shelter. And I believe that when you put yourself in those situations and environments, that keeps you humble.  It keeps you remembering, that could be me.
Speaker 1: Right, there but for the grace of God.
Story_ID: 651649
Speaker 1: Is there--you've been very successful and you've got a business today [Gray Matter Analytics].  Is there anything that you want to do in your--that you see yourself maybe wanting to do later, later on that you, that you say, oh, I know I--something else, passion?
Speaker 2: You know it's funny, I don't and I think about that.  I, because I'm now spending time in, half my time in California, I thought about maybe teaching at Stanford [Stanford University, Stanford, California] or something. And I think teaching somewhere might be good, mainly because I want African American kids to hear from someone that looks like them how they did it.  It may not be the way you can do it but it's more of hope, dream reinforcement. And it's not easy.  I mean, there are a lot of sacrifices you make along the way.  I mean, I could contend that both of my marriages, especially the first one, my ambition, you know.  My first husband [Henry Talton] was a wonderful man, or is a wonderful man, just we grew apart because I had ambitions.
Story_ID: 651650
Speaker 1: Maybe just one or two more questions.  If your father [Levard Russell, Jr.] was here--whom you've talked so dearly about--he was here, what would you say to him?
Speaker 2: Thank you.  Thank you for pushing me, thank you for teaching me poise and grace.  I remember my father told me when I worked at NCR [NCR Corporation] and I said, "Daddy, one of those computers that I'm selling, it costs, sometimes up to a million dollars." And my father said, "And remember, if you're asking somebody for a million dollars, you need to look like you're worthy of them giving you a million dollars."
Speaker 1: Very good, very good.  In closing, is there, is there anything else you'd like to add to this interview that maybe I didn't ask you about?
Speaker 2: You know, I would also say, my mom [Mildred McWhorter Russell], although she wasn't a driver, she did give me the ability to laugh at myself.  I mean, I get my sense of humor and I do love to laugh from her, and I think that's very healthy also because if you can laugh at yourself and laugh at life, you don't get depressed and bogged down and beaten by life. And I guess, you know, that's another thing I would leave with a lot of young people.  They--somehow I think, I think they look at people like me and my contemporaries who've had some level of success and they happen to have been our children, they don't really realize the struggles and the steps, the baby steps, not leaps and bounds, baby steps. And so many of them are not willing to have patience and be happy with baby steps.
Speaker 1: Okay, very good.  Anything else?
Speaker 2: No, I think that's it.
Speaker 1: Okay, well thank you very much.  It's been an honor to talk with you and to be interviewing you; and The HistoryMakers is very, very thankful that you came in today.
Speaker 2: It's my pleasure.
Story_ID: 651651
Speaker 1: That picture is of me and, and Al Gore in the center; and the gentleman on the left, I do not remember who he is, but the guy [Jay Doherty] who I told you that I was on the sailboat and met the people from Saskatchewan, Canada, he's a political consultant and this is a fundraiser he gave for Al Gore.
Speaker 2: And that's the current vice president, Joe Biden.  Joe came to Chicago [Illinois] to explore running for president, same political consultant sponsored that and Al Raby was actually there with me at the time.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: And that's my graduation from Northern Illinois University [DeKalb, Illinois].
Speaker 1: And that is a technology forum that I was one of the original founders and that's me, second row sitting down.
Speaker 2: And that is at Unisource systems [Unisource Network Services].  I was in one of the, I think it was the Chicago Sun-Times.  That picture was taken, it was actually in the Sun-Times.
Speaker 1: And that is my graduating class from NCR [NCR Corporation] in Dayton, Ohio.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: Yeah, and I brought some other, you can tell me if you want any of that.  I was on front covers of magazines and in Black Enterprise, I brought some of that.  I was the keynote speaker for the graduating class at Great Naval Academy [sic. ].
Speaker 2: Okay.  That was Great Lakes [Naval Station Great Lakes, Lake County, Illinois]?
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: Great Lakes?
Speaker 1: That's my living mate class at Harvard [Harvard Business School, Boston, Massachusetts].
Speaker 2: Oh, was that a good program?
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: Okay.  Top left, fifth grade in Rockford, Illinois [at Franklin School].
Speaker 2: Fifth grade class in Rockford, Illinois.
Speaker 1: Me sitting on the front steps with my dolly.  I think I was about two.
Speaker 2: And same, I was about two.
Speaker 1: That's me and my [maternal] grandmother [Vesta McWhorter] down in Chattanooga, Tennessee.
Speaker 2: That's one of my girlfriends at Rockford, at her wedding, and I was her maid of honor.
Speaker 1: That's me in the fourth grade in Rockford.
Speaker 2: That's two year old birthday party.
Speaker 1: That's me and my mother [Mildred McWhorter Russell].  I don't know where that picture was taken, it might have been Cleveland [Ohio].
Speaker 2: And that's me as a baby.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION
Speaker 2: Yeah, that's Diversity Journal and that's me at the far left in red.
Speaker 1: I'm inside here, right here.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  And which magazine is this we're looking at here?
Speaker 1: Oh that's, Chicago United's diversity, I forgot what they called it.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Let's just get a shot here.
Speaker 1: This is NIU business school [Northern Illinois University College of Business, DeKalb, Illinois]?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: Oh, that's my dad [Levard Russell, Jr.] and my mom.
