Story_ID: 369667
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe. I'm interviewer today for The HistoryMakers. Our videographer is Neculai Burghelea. Ma'am, could you please state your full name and spell it for us please?
Speaker 2: Dorothy Ann Terrell [HistoryMaker Dorothy Terrell], D-O-R-O-T-H-Y, A-N-N, T-E-R-R-E-L-L.
Speaker 1: And do you have any nicknames or?
Speaker 2: Not really.
Speaker 1: There must be one then (laughter).
Speaker 2: No, when I was, it depends on who knew me when. At one time people would say Dot, but for the most part it's Dorothy now.
Speaker 1: Okay. And what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: June 12th, 1945, and I was born in Fort Lauderdale, Florida.
Speaker 1: Okay. And what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: I'm president and chief executive officer of the Initiative for a Competitive Inner City [Roxbury, Massachusetts].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It's known as ICIC.
Speaker 1: And, I think you were the first African American woman to be the CEO of, well you were, you were the, well tell us what you were, (laughter) Sun Microsystems [Sun Microsystems, Inc.], I see that--
Speaker 2: Oh Sun, okay.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: I was in California when I joined Sun. Most people think that I worked in California because it's headquartered there, but I was actually working for a Digital Equipment Corporation [DEC] in California and was hired by Scott McNealy, who was the president, CEO, chairman of Sun Microsystems to start up an operation on the East Coast, so Scott asked me to come back to Boston [Massachusetts] to start up SunExpress, which was the after-marketing company for Sun, and I was the president of SunExpress.
Speaker 1: Okay. All right. Now, and what is today's date?
Speaker 2: Today is April 11, 19--no (laughter) April 11, 2007, gosh (laughter).
Speaker 1: And, where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: We're in Boston, Massachusetts.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Now before we (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Is that to establish sanity (laughter)?
Speaker 1: Yes. Yes, that's the reason why we do this, that's why we do it.
Speaker 2: I almost lost it there a minute (laughter).
Speaker 1: Yes, that's why we do it (laughter).
Story_ID: 369668
Speaker 1: Before we go into depth, there are five lightweight People magazine-ish type questions that management compels me to ask of everyone, and they only require a short answer.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: The first one is do you have a favorite food and what is it?
Speaker 2: I, my favorite food is pasta.
Speaker 1: Okay. Now, do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: Black.
Speaker 1: Favorite time of year?
Speaker 2: I like the change of seasons, so usually autumn.
Speaker 1: Okay. Do you have a favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Italy.
Speaker 1: Okay. And the last one is do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: Sometimes I say, while we can.
Story_ID: 369669
Speaker 1: I'm gonna ask about your family history. I'm gonna ask about your mother's side of the family and your father's [Charles Terrell, Sr.] side. But we'll start with your mother's side. Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: My mother's name is Pearlie, P-E-A-R-L-I-E [Pearlie Weeks Terrell]. Her maiden name is Weeks, W-E-E-K-S.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And her married name is Terrell, T-E-R-R-E-L-L.
Speaker 1: And what is her date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: My mother's birthday, my mother was born September 12th, 1919.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And she was born in Winter Garden, Florida.
Speaker 1: Winter Garden, Florida. Now what do you know about the ancestors on your mother's side? How far back can you trace them, first of all?
Speaker 2: I knew my grandmother very well on my mother's side, and I knew my grandfather [Joe Weeks] a bit. He was alive for a portion of the time, but my grandmother, I was very close with. I didn't know my mother's grandparents. I know their names, but I never met them nor the great-grandparents.
Speaker 1: Okay. Do they have stories that go, I guess they'd have stories that go back into the 19th century if your great-grandparents were born then. Did your grandmother talk about what it was like growing up in Florida? I guess she was raised in the 19th century and her parents were.
Speaker 2: My grandmother was born in 1900. At least, the birth certificate says April 1, 1900 (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Oh, okay, all right. Okay. All right.
Speaker 2: My brother tells the story that my grandmother was really born in, a year earlier, but when they took the census, it was in 1900, so they put down 1900, and she always stuck with that.
Speaker 1: So, she was born at the turn on the century.
Speaker 2: She was.
Speaker 1: Her parents may have only been, they may only date back to 1880 or so, I guess, I don't know. They don't have to go all the way back to the Civil War, I guess.
Speaker 2: I'm not so sure about that. My grandmother tells the story that her mother and father were part black and part Native American, and the same with their family, and I'm sure it had to with who was doing what during slavery, because they're, part of it was growing up on an Indian reservation, but I had never met them and my grandmother talked about them a lot.
Speaker 1: Okay. Well, what did she say? What did she say about them?
Speaker 2: Just, she was, she was named after her grandmother, and Jane, my grandmother's name was Janie Weeks [Jane Griffin Weeks]. Her maiden name was Griffin, and her father's name was Tillman [Tillman Griffin], and her mother's name was Luvenia [Luvenia Griffin]. There was a picture that my grandmother had at the house with Tillman and Griffin, with Tillman and Lavinia, rather, and she always kept that picture and I think my mother had the picture afterwards and now my brother has it, and it shows this thin, rather thin guy and heavier set woman, very stern looking, and my grandmother would say that they always looked stern, but it was pretty much a facade. And, she, because of the, probably more the Native American heritage, my grandmother had very long hair down her back. Her sister had even longer hair. I don't quite know what happened as time went on with the rest of us, but she, in the very early days, would have to move her hair to really sit down, and my grandmother never left Florida until she was, oh, I'm not sure, I know it was 1984 my grandmother, so that was, she was eighty-four years old when she left Florida to come to Boston [Massachusetts] for my wedding.
Speaker 1: So she, by that you mean she never left the state for any reason until then (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) She never left the states, no. She would always say my daughter's travelled a lot, and she'd say, "That baby has been everywhere and I'm still in Florida."
Story_ID: 369670
Speaker 1: Winter Haven is, that's--
Speaker 2: Winter Garden.
Speaker 1: Winter Garden.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Oh, Winter Garden, Florida. I'm getting it mixed up with the town where they play baseball (laughter) in spring training. Really, that's what a lot of Florida towns you hear of because of spring training.
Speaker 2: Um-hm, um-hm.
Speaker 1: Naturally you know, when you hear the name, you know where they are.
Speaker 2: All, Florida has changed so dramatically since I was there. A lot of the places that are now resort places have high rises and condos and big hotels. We're actually swampland in Boca Raton [Florida]. I remember going there with our, my very best friend growing up lived next door and she, her aunt lived in Boca and we went there. It was swampland and there were alligators there, and now my daughter [Dorian Brown] goes to college there, and it's the place to be, you might say. So, all of the names that you hear were names from the past, but there are lots of new names now in Florida that I'm really not as familiar with.
Speaker 1: Okay. Now, what did your [maternal] grandmother [Jane Griffin Weeks] say about growing up in Florida? Did she talk about what it was like when she was growing up in terms of the opportunities for black people in that part of Florida?
Speaker 2: The opportunities were being made for the women of being a gardener, generally for those who hadn't gone to school, but the, on the other side, and this is the same when my mother [Pearlie Weeks Terrell] grew up and the same when I grew up, you also had the professionals that were black, that, the doctor would have been black, or the insurance agent, or the person who ran the funeral home or whatever, but if you didn't the, any training or education, then there was always that because Florida was, I'm not sure about when my grandmother grew up, I do know when I was growing up, it was the place that people would go to during the winter, and so there were always positions for housekeeping and gardening.
Speaker 1: Okay. Well people that wintered in Florida from the North. Okay. Now, what did your mother have to say about growing up? Now did she grow up in--
Speaker 2: Winter Garden?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: I'm not quite sure when my mother left there, at the exact age, but they moved to more southern Florida. I was born in Fort Lauderdale [Florida], but we really lived in Hallandale [Hallandale Beach, Florida], which is between Miami [Florida] and Fort Lauderdale, and that's where my mother and father [Charles Terrell, Sr.] met, and that's where we all grew up, where you had my mother and father's house here and my grandmother and grandfather's [Joe Weeks] house here and my godparents' house here; so you had sort of like right next to each other.
Speaker 1: Yeah, like little villages of relatives.
Speaker 2: Oh, it was definitely a village, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay. So, did, now, did your mother get a chance to finish school in Florida (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) My mother finished high school.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: She went to Dillard High School in Fort Lauderdale, as a matter of fact.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right. So, did she have to catch a bus there, or--
Speaker 2: She and, she would, she got a ride there to go to school. She didn't live in Fort Lauderdale, but she went to school in Fort Lauderdale. Pretty much the same as I did.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: She went to high school, she went to elementary school in, around Hallandale.
Speaker 1: Now, what did your mother's family do for a living primarily?
Speaker 2: My grandfather was a gardener and my grandmother was, she worked as a maid in the beginning and then she was a homemaker.
Story_ID: 369671
Speaker 1: Let me get your father's side of the family. Can you give us your father's full name and spell it for u?
Speaker 2: My father's name is Charles, C-H-A-R-L-E-S, Walter, W-A-L-T-E-R, Terrell, Sr. [Charles Terrell, Sr.].
Speaker 1: Okay. And what is his date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: My father was born in Aucilla, A-U-C-I-L-L-A, Florida, and he was born Ap-, just left me, my father was born in 1919, 1918. My mother [Pearlie Weeks Terrell] was born in 1919. My father was born in 1918, and he was born--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: April (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) In Aucilla?
Speaker 2: April.
Speaker 1: April, okay. In April.
Speaker 2: April 5th, in Aucilla, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay. Now, what do you know about the ancestors on your father's side?
Speaker 2: Not much. I knew my grandfather briefly. His name was Monroe [Monroe Terrell], M-O-N-R-O-E, and my father's mother's name was Shelly [Shelly Terrell], S-H-E-L-L-E--S-H-E-L-L-Y, but I never met her. She had died quite some time, my mother had never met my father's mother, but my grandfather for a period lived in the house behind us.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And, what I remember of my grandfather is being, and my mother would tell me, that on wash day, because there weren't any washing machines they would wash in tubs with bricks and fire under it, where you boiled the clothes and hung them on a line, and I was probably pretty young, but my mother always tells the story. On wash day, my grandfather would take me away because I had a tendency for throwing sand. I know it's (laughter). So, he'd say (laughter) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) You'd throw sand in the pot?
Speaker 2: I don't know. I can't remember the age, but my mother used to love to tell the story that my grandfather would take me away every washday and say, "Come on, honey. Let me take you away and save your life." So, my grandfather was a minister and by the time I knew him, he didn't have a church anymore, but I remember him from that, and I remember the house behind our house where he lived.
Speaker 1: Okay. All right. Do you know what denomination he was?
Speaker 2: A.M.E. [African Methodist Episcopal].
Speaker 1: Okay, all right. So, now, did your grandfather have any stories of growing up? I mean, did he talk about what life was like when he grew up?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Did, any, are there any stories from that side of the family about--
Speaker 2: My father's side of the family came from more northern Florida. Aucilla is a bit lower than Tallahassee [Florida], but it's heading in that direction. And, I don't remember, I remember going with my father. We would, we'd take a trip to, occasionally to Aucilla, and my memory of Aucilla was just dirt roads once you got off the highway. It was a rather long trip. It was during segregation, so it wasn't like you could go into a hotel or anything and stop along the way for anything like that. You would stop at friends' homes and stay there and then you would move on. I remember getting there, I remember dirt roads, I remember lots of family running around, I remember biscuits, I remember food, but I don't remember a lot of the stories, but my brother [Levon Terrell] who was younger than I am would go with my father more when he was, I guess, it was easier to travel and as you can see I'm dark, and most of my family that I know of is, but my brother says that when he would go with my father, he's had extremely light skin but I don't remember that part of the family. My father had a sister [Callie Terrell] that he talked about a bit, but I never met her. She was not alive and I don't remember how many brothers he had but he had a number of brothers and I do remember two, so there were a number of brothers in the family.
Story_ID: 369672
Speaker 1: Describe your parents' [Pearlie Weeks Terrell and Charles Terrell, Sr.] personalities and tell us who do you think you take after the most.
Speaker 2: My mother was this, sort of the stoic one. For a very long time, I thought my mother was weak because she pretty much did what I thought was what my father wanted done, and my father was the easy-going one in the family and I could go to my father and my father would, it would be fine, you know, but check with Pearl, and my mother was the one to say no. In the back of my mind, I pretty much knew she was doing what my father wanted, or thinking that she was doing what my father wanted and thinking why can't she just do what she thinks should be done. Why can't, she wants me to go to, let me go, but it was always my mother's role to say no. I grew up later to understand my mother was the strong one of the family and the role she played was not an easy role at all, and she was the one, she was the disciplinarian. She was the one that pretty much said no. She was definitely, my family was very much into Christianity. We went to church. They were very strict. I didn't date growing up until I was in high school [Dillard High School, Fort Lauderdale, Florida]. They were bound and determined that their kids were going to go to school, college, and for whatever it took, they didn't have a lot of money. What money they had, they would make sure we had nice clothes. It was segregated during that time and we lived on 11th Street, 211 Northwest 11th Street in Hallandale [Hallandale Beach, Florida], and our house faced this, it wasn't a very big highway, but it was the highway and, again, my parents, my mother's best friend lived here and her aunt and daughter, who is my best friend, my parents, my [maternal] grandparents [Jane Griffin Weeks and Joe Weeks], and so behind us was Hallandale, and across the street, if you cross the street, was Hollywood, Florida, and Hollywood was where whites lived and Hallandale, where we were, what we knew of Hallandale, was where the blacks lived and as children we didn't cross that street by ourselves, and so the whites were over there and we were, it's a strange story in a sense with that line in the middle of the street separated the towns and it was a whole different, different world.
Speaker 1: Okay. But in terms of your mother's personality, do you think you take after your mother more or your father?
Speaker 2: Probably my mother.
Speaker 1: Okay. So you're quietly controlling everything (laughter). I see.
Speaker 2: I'm most like my mother.
Story_ID: 369673
Speaker 1: What was your father [Charles Terrell, Sr.] like? You said he was easy going and kind of--
Speaker 2: My father, my father was a gardener early and later became a law enforcement, he was probably the first, I think, deputy sheriff in Broward County [Florida], and, but my father was, he didn't let very much bother him from the perspective, and so therefore I'm sure he let a lot bother him, but the way he dealt with it was to just, in a way, do his thing. My father was a deacon in the Wards Chapel A.M.E. church [Greater Ward Chapel African Methodist Episcopal Church, Hallandale Beach, Florida]. He was very high up in the A.M.E. [African Methodist Episcopal] church.
Speaker 1: What was the name of the church?
Speaker 2: Wards Chapel.
Speaker 1: Wards Chapel, okay.
Speaker 2: My father graduated from high school, but has an honorary degree from Edward Waters [Edward Waters College, Jacksonville, Florida], because Edward Waters was associated with the A.M.E. church and there would be conventions there and because of my father's status in the church he received the honorary degree. My father, for my father, appearances were important also. My father owned property in Hallandale [Hallandale Beach, Florida], and also in Dania [Dania Beach, Florida] and, as I said, was a deacon and when my father died, by the time he died, he no longer had any of that property except for the house, but it was mortgaged to the hilt. My brother [Charles Terrell, Jr.] tells the story of my mother [Pearlie Weeks Terrell] going to church and my mother was also very proud, and finding out, and writing a check and finding that the check had bounced and just went to pieces. Now, my father probably would have known that, but my father lived on the edge from that perspective. He was the one that I felt closest to growing up because we would go out, we'd go riding, he, my brother was dating a white girl and my mother was very opposed to that and to my mother, my father was very opposed to it, but I was friendly with this young woman. My brother was five years older than I was. My father, a couple of times, took me out to be with her and if my mother had known she would have not been a very happy camper at all, so my father had this, just very easy, in a sense, that's why I say easy-going, but because of the times there was no way to be easy-going, but my father made every end meet he possibly could, he meant that we would go to school and if he had to mortgage, hock, whatever, it was gonna happen, and that was just the way it was. None of us ever thought about not going to college. Somehow, my sister [Althea Terrell] was the only one at some point who felt that she could decide that she would, would stop college. Eventually she did.
Story_ID: 369674
Speaker 1: How many brothers and sisters do you have?
Speaker 2: I have one sister and two brothers biologically.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And, there's always more to the story. My family has always, if there was someone who needed to, needed something, my family was always, that's part of who we've always been. I always remember cousins that were, stayed with my [maternal] grandmother [Jane Griffin Weeks], but when people ask, I always say I have two sisters, and that I have three brothers, because my nephew was adopted by my parents [Pearlie Weeks Terrell and Charles Terrell, Sr.] and raised as my brother, because my brother was in twelfth grade and the girl was in twelfth grade and she didn't have family so my folks raised Kevin [Kevin Terrell], so he is the third brother, and when I went to A&M [Florida Agricultural and Mechanical University, Tallahassee, Florida], I met a student there and Genie [Eugenia Nicholas] came home with me because she was from Rhode Island and it was too far for her to travel. There wasn't a lot of money in the family, so she would come home with me and because she was from Rhode Island, she had to pay a lot of money, much more than if you were in state and so my parents became her legal guardian so that she wouldn't have to pay out of state fee, and so I tell people Genie is my sister because she really is like a sister. Any one of us would say Genie is a sister and we'd say that because she was so close to my mother and father, and when my father died she was listed as a daughter, and when my mother died she was listed as a daughter and when my brother died she was listed as a sister, so--I have two sisters and three brothers (laughter).
Speaker 1: Just so you don't get in trouble, give us the names of all of them (laughter), you know, so--
Speaker 2: Okay. Charles Walter Terrell, Jr [Charles Terrell, Jr.] is the oldest, Levon [Levon Terrell], L-E-V-O-N Terrell, Althea Elaine Terrell [Althea Terrell], then there's Eugenia Nicholas, and Kevin Keith Terrell.
Story_ID: 369675
Speaker 1: Is there a story about your parents [Pearlie Weeks Terrell and Charles Terrell, Sr.] met before we leave that? Do they have a courtship story?
Speaker 2: The story more is not so much the courtship as the fact that once they got married, they moved to Detroit [Michigan] for a while and I think it was more that, I don't even remember if my father had relatives there. I think it may have been work, no, there was a relative there and they were there only a very short period of time because my mother became homesick and missed her mother [Jane Griffin Weeks] and so they moved back to Hallandale [Hallandale Beach, Florida] as a result of that, so all of us were born in southern Florida.
Speaker 1: That's interesting. That's a story you don't hear a lot about, about black people going back down south after moving north.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Even when they encounter rough conditions in the North, they usually stay, you know, rather than going back, but they actually moved back?
Speaker 2: They moved back and it was, I, it might have been a year. It may not have been that long.
Speaker 1: Okay. So did they, how were conditions for them when you were little ones, I mean what's your perception of what it was like for them in those days? You know--
Speaker 2: If you were in Hallandale, you would consider my folks middle class, maybe even almost upper middle class in a sense. They had a house, they had jobs, they were respected members of the community. If you were across the street in Hollywood [Florida] looking across to, in Hallandale, looking over and you were looking at median income, you would say that my folks were lower class when it came to economic conditions, because when I was young, as I said, my mother was a maid and my father was a gardener. But, you wouldn't have known it. I mean we, we were never hungry, we always had clothes, but there was a difference when you left Hallandale to go out of Hallandale to Hollywood or whatever. As I said, we never crossed that street alone, and there was a different demeanor, in a sense, when you weren't in Hallandale. In Hallandale, everything was just fine.
Speaker 1: Okay. And so the community kind of, was there a name for the black community?
Speaker 2: Hallandale.
Speaker 1: Was Hallandale--?  That was the name for it, okay.
Story_ID: 369676
Speaker 1: What were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up?
Speaker 2: It wasn't terribly large so you could walk it. We walked to school. I remember lots of sounds of children. We had cousins around. In that little area behind us, because again the street and then behind us, was the rest of Hallandale [Hallandale Beach, Florida] were lots of cousins and family and friends, you know. Your school teachers were your Sunday school teachers. Everyone felt that they had a vested interest in your well-being and if you were caught doing something wrong, any adult felt like they could beat your behind and send you home and, of course, you would get another one. It was a community. People looked out for you. People had your best interest at heart for children. Adults looked after and looked out for children. They were known, you know. I don't know if there was anyone in Hallandale that didn't know who we were. And people prayed for you. It was a community. We knew, I talk about that line in the street and folks will say, "Oh, that must have been awful," and that wasn't awful. Hallandale wasn't awful at all. You know, I have a lot of pleasant memories of running around, running in the back yard of mango trees, climbing trees of sea grapes; I don't know if you know what sea grapes are but they're, it's a little round fruit that grows on trees certain times of the year, and you had orange trees. You had everything, (cough) excuse me, in the yard and, as kids we would play cowboys and Indians [Native Americans], we'd play Tarzan and swing from trees. I remember, and there were only two, I was the girl and (unclear), mostly guys, mostly boys, and we were playing cowboys and Indians and the boys had a set a trap that, at least the other side had set a trap and it was glass and in running, I ran and I fell in and I have a cut on my foot from that. But it was with no intentions of really hurting, I don't know what we were thinking. You know, like I don't know why I would think of throwing sand or anything else 'cause I knew I'd get a killing (laughter) so why would I do that, or why would there be that kind of trap? But it was.
Speaker 1: Well, youth, being kids (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And, but we all survived (laughter). So there were, so the sights and sounds of Hallandale were just of great memories of, just great times. A lot of church, lot of church.
Story_ID: 369677
Speaker 1: A.M.E. [African Methodist Episcopal] church is not known as the strictest of churches, but you said your parents are very strict on that.
Speaker 2: Uh-huh. My mother [Pearlie Weeks Terrell] grew up in the Baptist church. My grandmother [Jane Griffin Weeks] went to the Baptist church and my grandfather [Joe Weeks], when he went, went to the Baptist church and then he stopped going to church. But my grandmother continued. And, my father [Charles Terrell, Sr.] went to the A.M.E. church. He grew up in the A.M.E. church and so we went to the A.M.E. church and my mother went once we were born, went to the A.M.E. church. After we were gone and after my father died, my mother went back to the Baptist church. So, no, it's not the strictest of churches when I compare the A.M.E. church to the Baptist church in our town [Hallandale, Florida; Hallandale Beach, Florida], when a girl would get pregnant in the Baptist church, if she wasn't married, they would expel her from the church until after she had the baby. Then she could come back and join the church. I mean, what sense did a lot of that make, but I don't recall that with, I remember that with the Baptist church because I would talk to my grandmother about that, but we'd, that wasn't part of the A.M.E. church.
Speaker 1: Hm, okay.
Speaker 2: But, as I said, my folks were bound and determined that we were going to be right, do right, and go to school and so they were pretty strict from the perspective of the dating, the things like that. When it came to running around town or in the yard, those kinds of things, that wasn't the problem at all.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, did you have, did the church offer opportunities for youth to do things, you know, I mean to be on committees or clubs or sing in the choir or, you know, to speak, you know (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, yeah. There was the junior choir and I was president of the junior choir for a while. I was, I'm trying to remember the name of the, it was like a debating club that we had and that was also part of the church, Sunday school, of course, and young people's whatever. But there was also the part of church where you did have, I'm blanking on it, but it was more, it was even in addition to debating, it was speeches. You had to give speeches and that was a part of what you did in going to Wards Chapel A.M.E. church [Greater Ward Chapel African Methodist Episcopal Church, Hallandale Beach, Florida].
Speaker 1: Okay. It would be at Eastertime, or Christmastime (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh sure, those were plays, but there were also contests for speeches.
Speaker 1: Oratorical contests.
Speaker 2: Oratorical, yes, thank you. That's exactly it.
Speaker 1: Okay. Yeah, that's something you don't see a lot of anymore, but at least I don't, I don't know about a lot of it but there was a time when being able to speak, you know in front of people was cultivated and there was a way to do it--
Speaker 2: Right, exactly.
Speaker 1: So, okay.
Speaker 2: And so I, that was a big piece of what I was, I want to say encouraged, but it was like I knew I, that was what I was supposed to do.
Story_ID: 369678
Speaker 1: Now, where did you start school?
Speaker 2: Lanier Elementary School [Lanier-James Education Center]. That was in Hallandale [Hallandale Beach, Florida]. And I went to Lanier Junior High [Lanier Junior High School, Hallandale Beach, Florida], also.
Speaker 1: Now, did you have a favorite subject in elementary school?
Speaker 2: English.
Speaker 1: Okay. And was your favorite teacher an English teacher (laughter)?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But, not but, and my second grade teacher was also my third grade teacher, and so, like I said, it was a small town. I went to school, I went to high school in Dillard. Dillard High School in Fort Lauderdale [Florida], like my mother [Pearlie Weeks Terrell]. And my second grade teacher, who was also my third grade teacher, was a principal at that time, in, right, just past Fort Lauderdale, and so I rode to high school with her every day and she would drop me off and pick me up and take me home.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay. What was her name?
Speaker 2: Ora Mae Kennedy [ph.], it was Hollinger at the time, Ora Mae Hollinger [Ora Hollinger].
Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Now, were you a good student in school?
Speaker 2: I was.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I was a very good student in school.
Speaker 1: And, did you have sports in school, did you participate in sports throughout?
Speaker 2: There wasn't organized sports. During recess there might be basketball, but there weren't teams when I was growing up.
Speaker 1: Yeah, okay. Now, like English was your favorite subject. So, I take it you liked to read.
Speaker 2: I did.
Speaker 1: What was your favorite subject matter in terms of reading, or favorite books?
Speaker 2: Just whatever we had to read. As I said, I wasn't dating so (laughter) and I wasn't going out (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Well, we're talking about elementary school now, so you don't have to--
Speaker 2: Even in elementary school we were, okay, elementary school, I just liked school, because it was, I did well in school, I wanted to do well in school, I was pretty meticulous. My mother always tells the story of me doing homework and tearing up the pages, writing and tearing up the paper until it was very neat. I didn't want to pass on anything that was not right.
Speaker 1: So, this is just the way you are or were you influenced by somebody to be that way or--
Speaker 2: I think it was both. You know, the classes weren't that big and the teachers were very dedicated and they pushed us to excel and to do well and want to do well. So, I think it was a combination of both, of what I wanted to, how I wanted to be and also what was expected. Now, probably not everyone went to the same extremes but I did.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay. So early on you were somebody that could, you know, was meticulous about what they did and tried to do a good job?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Story_ID: 369679
Speaker 1: In high school you went to, Fort Lauderdale [Florida], this is the bigger, bigger high school in the area around there, I guess?
Speaker 2: It was not close. Lanier [Lanier Elementary School; Lanier-James Education Center, Hallandale Beach, Florida] only went to junior high and most of the kids in Hallandale [Hallandale Beach, Florida] would go to Dania [Dania Beach, Florida] to school, to Attucks high school [Attucks School; Attucks Middle School, Hollywood, Florida] and my folks [Pearlie Weeks Terrell and Charles Terrell, Sr.] wanted me to go to Dillard [Dillard High School, Fort Lauderdale, Florida], which was actually a better high school and so therefore we made arrangements with Ms. Hollinger [Ora Hollinger] to take me to school and bring me home. My mother, now I think about it, would go up and come back on the weekend, so she got a ride there but not a ride every, back and forth, its coming back to me now. She would stay with a friend, with a friend of my grandmother's [Jane Griffin Weeks] in Fort Lauderdale during the week to go to school and then come home on the weekends. I came back and forth.
Speaker 1: Okay. So your mother, she worked in Fort Lauderdale?
Speaker 2: My mother went to school in Fort Lauderdale (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Oh, she went to school, okay, so she was going to school in Fort--
Speaker 2: She went to Dillard also.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, okay. So your mother was, she was going to high school at the same time that you were?
Speaker 2: No, no, no. I'm saying, I had said that my mother went to Dillard earlier, and I'm just saying--
Speaker 1: Oh, earlier, yeah, oh this is a completely different time period--
Speaker 2: I was just, yeah, sorry about that.
Speaker 1: Okay, that got me, I'm easy to confuse.
Speaker 2: (Laughter) No, it's just flashes as I'm telling this. I'm just starting to think of some things that I guess have been in the recesses for a long time.
Speaker 1: Well tell us, tell us.
Speaker 2: No, that was, about my mother, I remembered when you started talking about high school about her being away from home during high school and the going back and forth, but I was thinking about that and remembering that she didn't come back and forth every day like I did. But Dillard--
Speaker 1: She's have been, your mother would have been in school in the '30s [1930s] I guess?
Speaker 2: She was born in 1919. So, high school--
Speaker 1: Yeah, in the mid-'30s [1930s], I guess, yeah. So, okay. So, did you have a favorite subject in high school? Was it still English?
Speaker 2: Yes, I was pretty good in all my subjects. I graduated salutatorian in high school. I was just thinking my older brother [Charles Terrell, Jr.] also went to Dillard and he graduated valedictorian. As I said, we were expected to do well (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) All right, okay.
Speaker 2: So, I did pretty well in all of those subjects.
Speaker 1: Okay. Now, what kind of facility did Dillard have? I know it was a segregated school in the South, pre-integration and all of that. Did you have, what were your facilities like?
Speaker 2: Dillard was, I just have to say not bad when you think about it. Dillard had a gym. You know, there was a basketball team, there was a football team. Classes were fine. So, the facilities weren't run down. Let me put it that way.
Speaker 1: Okay. Now you were popular in high school? You were real smart now, so but were you a popular girl in high school?
Speaker 2: I wouldn't say so. I was not a part of their scene, you might say. Again, I have to go back to the family piece. Plus, I was going back and forth so I didn't live in Fort Lauderdale like the rest of the kids and I wasn't there on weekends, so I knew the kids of course. It wasn't that big, but, no I wasn't one of the more popular ones.
Speaker 1: Did it keep you from being involved in clubs in school and that sort of thing, after school programs?
Speaker 2: Because Ms. Hollinger was a principal, she had to stay so I was, would wait for her to pick me up so I could be involved in, like biology club or anything like that.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Now you all had a prom, or did you?
Speaker 2: Yes, there was a prom.
Speaker 1: Okay. All right.
Speaker 2: No, I didn't go.
Speaker 1: You didn't go? Oh.
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Was it because your parents didn't let you date at that point or what?
Speaker 2: In eleventh grade I wasn't dating and in twelfth grade, my mother wanted me to be home at twelve o'clock. I lived in Hallandale, mind you. Now, it doesn't take very long now, to go from Hallandale to Fort Lauderdale because of highways, but it took a while then because of lights and there weren't highways, so she wanted me home by twelve o'clock and, of course, that's, the prom is still going at twelve o'clock and then there were after parties, so I decided that I'd rather not go than go through that.
Story_ID: 369680
Speaker 1: Did you have a favorite teacher in high school or a mentor during your high school years?
Speaker 2: No, not really.
Speaker 1: Okay. That's unusual. To think that you're a real bright student and you seem like that somebody would have--is there anybody that took a special interest in you when you were coming along, or anybody that you--
Speaker 2: Oh, when you say special teacher, it wasn't like Hallandale [Hallandale Beach, Florida] where I totally knew absolutely everybody and people felt they had a vested interest in me in the same way, but Dillard [Dillard High School, Fort Lauderdale, Florida] was a community also. It's rather foreign to me when I think about some of the schools now and the relationship with teachers and students and looking back at how I grew up, because even in high school, even there wasn't a Mrs. Hollinger [Ora Hollinger] necessarily in high school, I related well to all my teachers and vice versa, and I never felt like there wasn't one that wasn't willing to go the extra mile for me, or with me. So, but it's just not that one person that's really sticking out.
Speaker 1: Okay. All right. Now, when you were a senior, what did you, did you have any aspirations towards a certain vocation when you finished college or what were you (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I wanted to write. I took journalism in high school and I guess that must have made an impression because I wanted to be a journalist. So, that was what I went off to go to school to be, to do.
Speaker 1: Now, did you work on a school paper?
Speaker 2: At Dillard, are you talking about?
Speaker 1: Did they have--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay. What was the name of your paper?
Speaker 2: I know it was the Panthers (laughter). I remember that part.
Speaker 1: So, did you become the editor?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: But you worked, you wrote articles for the paper.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Were you familiar with the black press pretty much in those days? The Pittsburgh Courier [New Pittsburgh Courier], I don't know if there was a black paper in Florida or not, I don't know.
Speaker 2: I didn't see it.
Speaker 1: Norfolk Journal and Guide [New Journal and Guide] or any of those papers?
Speaker 2: No. I just took journalism in school and I liked writing and thought that was something to do. I also (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Did you know any black journalists?
Speaker 2: I also took shorthand, so that was helpful with the writing.
Speaker 1: Did you know any black journalists at all?
Speaker 2: No, no.
Speaker 1: Or of any?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: (Laughter) I don't know.
Speaker 1: Did you have an impression of what a journalist you know, from the movies or television or something as to what they would do?
Speaker 2: No, no.
Speaker 1: Okay. All right. But you wanted to be journalist?
Speaker 2: (Nods head).
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 369681
Speaker 1: Did popular culture have a big effect on you growing up? Music and television? Movies?
Speaker 2: We didn't have television for a long time, and then we had the black and white and so there was 'Ed Sullivan' ['The Ed Sullivan Show'] and what is the teenage dance--
Speaker 1: 'American Band'--
Speaker 2: 'American Bandstand,' I remember. So, that's about it. We didn't, there wasn't a lot of television watching.
Speaker 1: Okay. Pretty serious household, I guess, huh?
Speaker 2: We didn't have, even, we didn't as kids my mother [Pearlie Weeks Terrell] did all of the cooking and pretty much during the week she did whatever needed to be done around the house and we did, came home, did some playing, did homework, that kind of stuff. On the weekends we had chores, and that would be, you know, scrubbing the bathroom floor, those kinds of things, and all of us had to keep our room straight, but there just wasn't a lot of television. There were a bunch of us in that house so we could get into enough mischief without television. We played together, we'd to go next door to Viannas' [ph.], so there was enough to amuse us, I guess.
Story_ID: 369682
Speaker 1: My brother was valedictorian of his class [at Dillard High School, Fort Lauderdale, Florida]. He was (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) He's older than you by how--
Speaker 1: He was five years older than I was, smart, very smart from a book perspective, but when it came to more the common sense, you might say, he wanted to be something that he really wasn't. My brother graduated from college. He was a teacher but he wanted to be, sort of in the life, he wanted to be what my (unclear) would say, that's kind of a hoodlum. My mother [Pearlie Weeks Terrell] and my grandmother [Jane Griffin Weeks] prayed and stayed on their knees for Charles [Charles Terrell, Jr.]. My younger brother and I were talking, Kevin [Kevin Terrell], and Kevin's perspective is that the reason Charles couldn't make it as a hoodlum (laughter) was because my grandmother and my mother were praying so hard (laughter).
Speaker 2: And praying the rug out from under him, right (laughter)?
Speaker 1: Yeah. But he was a teacher and got into some trouble and ended up in jail for a short time, but my mother was always there, my grandmother was always there. He moved to, he was in Boston [Massachusetts] for a while, moved around for a while, went back to Florida, lived with my mother for a while, and was a martial artist. He could do what he wanted. He taught himself Spanish. He could read the Bible in Spanish. He has just had this thing that, and I don't quite know, and maybe it was just in growing up and the way he did, I don't know, but that's why I was saying the book smarts and the common sense sometimes don't always go together.
Speaker 2: Okay. Well, I mean, it seems like what his, I don't know, did you think that his issue wasn't so much common sense as how to apply his knowledge, I mean, because there are like, people that get involved in criminal activity are very, some of them are very smart, some are stupid, of course, but they don't have a sense of, the same sense of right or wrong.
Speaker 1: He understood right and wrong. That was not his issue.
Speaker 2: So, what kinds of activities was he involved in? I mean, were they con games or was he just, he just was trying to get in to (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) It was drugs for a while. Then he started cleaning himself up, but always wanted to, you know, dress a certain way, or he was just, I don't know, growing up Charles was my big brother. He was very protective of me. And, if I thought my folks were strict, then I had a big brother that was also as strict if I tried to think I was sneaking around (laughter) that wasn't going to work, and it wasn't until much later in life again that I had my big brother back in a sense. I, when I worked at the Job Corps center [Poland Spring Job Corps Center for Women, Poland, Maine] and he was in trouble with some of his finances, I wasn't making a lot of money but I had sent him some money for a car. I am one of the ones in my family who has been extremely blessed, and blessed by the positions that I've had, some of the things that I've done and being able to afford a nice lifestyle. And I'm also blessed by the family that I have in that none of them try to take advantage of it and even when I didn't have much, you know, Charles was, he would have taken the last penny, but he died of lung cancer. He had stopped smoking for a long, I think maybe about fifteen years, and, but we all got very close before he died, and, but my mother never, ever, ever gave up on her son. And neither did my grandmother.  And as I said, that's probably why he could be the great thief or the great con artist or the great drug addict or anything else. Because it's just, he had prayers going against him.
Story_ID: 369683
Speaker 1: As you were a senior in high school [Dillard High School, Fort Lauderdale, Florida] and you were aspiring to be a journalist and how did you manage to choose to go to Florida A&M [Florida Agricultural and Mechanical University, Tallahassee, Florida], it doesn't seem like it's that big a jump to go to school in Florida, but what was the decision?
Speaker 2: To go to Florida?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: I had, I had actually gotten a scholarship to the University of Miami [Coral Gables, Florida], and a partial to Florida A&M.
Speaker 1: Now, you graduated in what year?
Speaker 2: I graduated in '63 [1963].
Speaker 1: Sixty-three [1963], okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) From high school.
Speaker 1: So University of Miami must have been freshly integrated, I think.
Speaker 2: Yes, yeah.  And, I decided on A&M because I wanted to leave home, and maybe that's why I decided on journalism because that was, would take me around the world. I went to A&M because it was far enough away. I didn't apply to it. Now, I did apply. I was going to say I applied to Talladega [Talladega College, Talladega, Alabama]. I don't, I just, I decided to go to A&M. My brother [Charles Terrell, Jr.] had gone to A&M (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now how far is Tallahassee [Florida] from Hallandale [Hallandale Beach, Florida]?
Speaker 2: Hallandale is down here (gesture). Tallahassee is up (gesture).
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Up top. But it was far enough away, and I could be grown, you might say, and I wanted to be a journalist and I, A&M had a degree in journalism and when I got there, they no longer had a major in journalism. They had a minor. In order for me to minor in journalism I had to major in English. So, I majored in English and minored in journalism and somehow in all of this I have a minor in history also, and when I graduated, I graduated with honors.  I graduated in '66 [1966], so there we had trimesters and I finished in three years and by that time, I didn't want to teach, and I didn't want to write another word. I wasn't quite sure what I wanted to do.
Story_ID: 369684
Speaker 1: Before we get you on a career path, let's talk about Florida A&M [Florida Agricultural and Mechanical University, Tallahassee, Florida] for a minute. Now, who was president [George William Gore, Jr.] when you were there?
Speaker 2: I see his face--
Speaker 1: It's not that important to (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I can, yeah--
Speaker 1: But what was it like when you were there?  What was Florida A&M like?
Speaker 2: Florida A&M was, it was fun. It was away from Hallandale [Hallandale Beach, Florida]. It was away from my parents [Pearlie Weeks Terrell and Charles Terrell, Sr.]. I was, like I said, I was on my own, of sorts, but there were no co-ed dorms like there are now, so there was a freshman dorm for girls and there was a nine o'clock curfew, so nine o'clock, you know, the lights would flicker and you had to be in by then and there was no going out after that. But, it was Tallahassee [Florida] and there were people there from all over, which was very different than being in Hallandale. So, you had people from New York [New York] and from Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] and New Jersey and, of course, all over Florida and lots, but all black, because Florida A&M was all black, and probably predominantly now still, the last time I was there. And, it was pretty much self-contained. We didn't go into town that much, and all was quiet on the western front until the whole thing with the sit-ins and so this was during the time that I was there, because it was segregated when we went to school there, and this was during the time of the riots and sit-ins, and I could do those kinds of things because, again, there was no one saying that you can't do it.
Speaker 1: Now, would your parents have been in favor of you being involved in a sit-in or a march, had they known?
Speaker 2: There was, you know, I went to Florida A&M and left Florida A&M and went other places so that I could live my life, or live a life that I thought was pretty much mine. I could feel like I was grown and I think it was, in a sense, I'm not so unlike my brother [Charles Terrell, Jr.] who wanted to rebel, I guess, from the years of being of the strict life, you might say, being good, but unlike my brother I didn't do it in front of my parents, and I didn't, you know, for them, you know, the reports home were everything's fine, everything's good, so that, there were things about my life my folks never knew, and it was like my brother, he wanted them to know everything. I think that was, that's probably the difference. We're very similar in a lot of ways, the difference was in how we chose to, to flaunt it, you might say.
Story_ID: 369685
Speaker 1: So you were involved in the Civil Rights Movement in Tallahassee [Florida], and did you go other places?
Speaker 2: No, I didn't (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I mean, this was just right around Tallahassee?  I know, like sixty--'64 [1964], I guess, I know there were demonstrations in St. Augustine [Florida] and other places, and you were out, now, your campus is next to Florida State, right?  It's near, very close to Florida State University [Tallahassee, Florida], which is an all-white state school.
Speaker 2: Yes. We didn't know that, for all intent and purposes we didn't know that.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: I mean, we knew that, but that was--
Speaker 1: I just wondered if there was really any sense of that--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay. But in terms of Florida A&M [Florida Agricultural and Mechanical University, Tallahassee, Florida], who are the leaders of the Civil Rights Movement on the campus?
Speaker 2: [HistoryMaker] Bernard Kinsey, remember Bernard? Bernard was there when I was there. He and Shirley [HistoryMaker Shirley Kinsey] were there. I'll just say Bernard and his posse, in a sense.
Speaker 1: Okay. Was there an organization, was there a chapter of SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee] there or student (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Not really, and it wasn't even that long. You know, it seems like a flurry, it was, the sit-ins. There was, I didn't go to jail but several of, mostly the boys did, and I can't even remember how long, no.
Speaker 1: Okay. So, where did you all sit-in? Do you remember when you first went on one?
Speaker 2: It was downtown.
Speaker 1: What store did you sit in, or restaurant did you?
Speaker 2: It was a drugstore, fountain kind of thing.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: You know, the thing is I think it was more the times. Because once it was all over, we really had no interest in going into Tallahassee. There's nothing in Tallahassee. There still isn't anything in Tallahassee (laughter). It's not like a big city, it's not like downtown Boston [Massachusetts], or I won't even say New York [New York]; we won't even go there, or Miami [Florida] or anything else like that.  Tallahassee is everything we pretty much wanted to do that we could do on campus.
Speaker 1: So, did you kind of feel like you had to do something for the Civil Rights Movement (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It was just, yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay now, did you have, who were, did you have heroes in the Civil Rights Movement that you read about, that you--
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, sort of the, the usual, we knew about SNCC, we knew, we would, there was a student union building on campus that we would go to and there would be the latest news about what was pretty much going on. So, think, I'm, I was just thinking about why it wasn't so much more prolonged, and like I said, I think it was nothing there in Tallahassee.
Speaker 1: Well after, I guess, so, did your, did the students effectively desegregate downtown (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, yeah.
Story_ID: 369686
Speaker 1: I was just, just thinking in 1963, the fall that you started school [Florida Agricultural and Mechanical University, Tallahassee, Florida], John Kennedy [President John Fitzgerald Kennedy] was killed, and it was (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I was in the hospital in, at that time. I wasn't feeling that well and had, I think it was '64, [1964] wasn't it?
Speaker 1: I think he's killed '63 [1963], November '63 [1963].
Speaker 2: November. Yes, that's true because that was my first, not too long after I got there and I wasn't feeling so well but I decided that I was gonna go to, I was gonna cut class, that's what I was gonna do. I still wasn't feeling too well so I went to the clinic because there was a hospital on campus and like I said, but there was no use to go, and found out that I had a fever and I was sick and they kept me and I was in the hospital when they found out about the shooting of the president.
Speaker 1: I think before, the summer that you were on your way, they had the March on Washington.
Speaker 2: The summer before I was on my way there, I was in Hallandale [Hallandale Beach, Florida].
Speaker 1: Okay, yeah. But it wasn't just--okay. So was the March on Washington a big deal in Hallandale? I mean, did people talk about it there?
Speaker 2: They talked about it but I don't know anyone from Hallandale that went to Washington [D.C.].
Speaker 1: Okay, so it's kind of remote, would you say?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay. What was the reaction in '63 [1963] when the president was killed? Was there a big reaction on campus?
Speaker 2: It was an emotional reaction.
Speaker 1: Okay. All right.
Speaker 2: That was the talk, the president had gotten killed.
Speaker 1: Did they have a program or anything to commemorate (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I was in, I was in the hospital.
Story_ID: 369687
Speaker 1: Did you have a favorite teacher at Florida A&M [Florida Agricultural and Mechanical University, Tallahassee, Florida]?
Speaker 2: Not really.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I did well at Florida A&M (background noise).
Speaker 1: (TAPE INTERRUPTION)
Speaker 2: Okay. All right. We were in the middle of something and I, you know, but we were talking about (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I hope you remember (laughter).
Speaker 2: Okay. Well, I did want to ask you about the, oh, I was asking you about your favorite teacher.
Speaker 1: Oh, at A&M.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: I don't know. I did well there but I don't remember a favorite teacher. No.
Speaker 2: Okay. All right. Were you exposed at Florida A&M to black literature specifically? Did they talk about Richard Wright or Zora Neale Hurston, any, or Langston Hughes?
Speaker 1: They did.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: It wasn't an immersion in it or anything like that, but they were there and it was much more than when I was growing up in, in Hallandale [Hallandale Beach, Florida].
Speaker 2: Okay.  Now after--
Speaker 1: Since you mentioned, I remember my Spanish teacher, and it's not like, I mean I took Spanish in high school [Dillard High School, Fort Lauderdale, Florida] and college. It was Senora Bausman [ph.]. It just popped in. Dr. Mobley [Sybil C. Mobley] was a legend even then. I didn't, I wasn't in the business school, but I definitely remember her, because a number of the, a number of people I knew must have been in the business school.
Speaker 2: Any of the history teachers stand out?
Speaker 1: No.
Speaker 2: Okay, or the English teachers?
Speaker 1: Hm, nope.
Speaker 2: Okay, all right.
Speaker 1: Or the journalism teachers either (laughter).
Speaker 2: Okay, all right.  Now, did you pledge a sorority?
Speaker 1: Delta.
Speaker 2: Delta, okay.  Delta Sigma Theta [Delta Sigma Theta Sorority].
Speaker 1: That's right.
Speaker 2: All right. So, did you pledge early or did you wait until later on?
Speaker 1: I pledged, I guess it was my junior year for what would be considered--I said I went for semesters [sic. trimesters], but it would be considered about that--because you didn't pledge as a freshman in those days.  So, whenever I could pledge, I did.
Story_ID: 369688
Speaker 1: And I have to ask you about the Florida A&M [Florida Agricultural and Mechanical University, Tallahassee, Florida] band, I mean (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) The Marching 100.
Speaker 1: Yeah, the Marching 100.  That's one of the most famous bands in the world so, what was your impression of the band?
Speaker 2: Well, when I was there the football team and the band were both incredible. Now, it's just the band that's incredible and the band at that time, didn't have women in it. It was only the guys that were in the Marching 100.
Speaker 1: Now, were there not--
Speaker 2: Dr. Foster [HistoryMaker William Foster].
Speaker 1: Okay, yeah, Dr. Foster, right, right, and wasn't there a marching, a group of female students that marched or were drum majors or majorettes or something?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: None at all?
Speaker 2: Not that I remember.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right. So it was all male, it was all male (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) In the band? No. It was all men.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Okay. I know they performed at the Super Bowl in '66 [1966] [Super Bowl I], I believe, the first Super Bowl, they performed at [sic.].
Speaker 2: In '66 [1966]?
Speaker 1: I believe they did.  Yeah. I believe discussing it. Was Bob Hayes in school when you were there?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: All right.  The world's fastest human man.
Speaker 2: That's exactly right.
Speaker 1: Won the Olympics [1964 Summer Olympics, Tokyo, Japan] in '64 [1964], I guess, right.  Did you know him?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Any comments about him (laughter)?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Yeah, I mean Bob was, he was a lot of fun and he was fast, that's for sure, pretty down to earth, and, as I said, the football team was really something at that point, and that's because during those days the black athletes in the South could only go to the black schools [HBCUs], and so you had great talent that was going to schools at that time and now the really talented ones can go anywhere and generally opt to go to Nebraska or, in the cases like my husband's [Albert Brown] grandson to BC [Boston College, Chestnut Hill, Massachusetts] or the other schools but, you know, we were talking before, Eddie Robinson in Grambling [Grambling College; Grambling State University, Grambling, Louisiana] sent numerous young men to the pros, but a lot, at that time, they, in order to get to the pros, they had to go through the historically black colleges and they were, the football was incredible in those days.
Speaker 1: Yeah, now other than Bob Hayes, were there other stars that you remember--
Speaker 2: Probably, but I don't remember (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay. Well I asked if you, okay. Yeah, Bob, did you have a sense when you were at Florida A&M that Bob Hayes was the fastest human in the world (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Bob was special.  Bob was, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  I wondered what people, and that the band was considered one of the best in the country.
Speaker 2: Yes. Yes. Now we knew that for sure. We knew Bob was extremely fast and we knew the band was the best because we'd go to the football games and it would be the battle of the bands, and so you'd have the opposing team band come out and then you'd have A&M come out and, of course we would think there would be no contest.
Speaker 1: What band came closest?
Speaker 2: Southern [Southern University; Southern University and Agricultural and Mechanical College, Baton Rouge, Louisiana] had a good band (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Southern.
Speaker 2: Grambling had a good band, I mean--
Speaker 1: Southern thinks they're as good as Florida--
Speaker 2: No, they're not, it's a good band (laughter).
Speaker 1: But they do, they think they're as good as Florida A&M.
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Please.
Story_ID: 369689
Speaker 1: So when you graduated from Florida A&M [Florida Agricultural and Mechanical University, Tallahassee, Florida], now you graduated with honors.  You were, where were you at Florida A&M?  Were you a--
Speaker 2: I was White and Gold Honor Society. Is that what you--
Speaker 1: Yeah, just tell us, yeah, what the honors were.  I don't know exactly which, if you were valedictorian or salutatorian (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, I graduated with honors, but I was in the honor society. Genie [Eugenia Nicholas] was trying to tell me I was in a number of clubs which, of course, I don't remember because I like to think that it's my first time being away and, as I said, thinking I was grown and I smoked and first time having a drink, so it was like, all right (laughter), so I was more into trying to, trying to have a good time.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I obviously had the grades for, to graduate with honors, but also you had to have a certain grade average to pledge and, pledging Delta [Delta Sigma Theta Sorority]. I think that's it.
Speaker 1: Okay. I wonder if some of that is still true, you know, if people have to have a certain grade point average to pledge these days. I wonder.
Speaker 2: You can pledge after now, I don't know about A&M, but I know with a number of the schools, when my friends would tell me that their son or daughter pledged, it's like after their second semester, I mean into their second semester, so it's pretty quick. They get rushed during the first semester, so I don't know what the requirements are. It seems like it's a way of, I don't know, connecting.
Speaker 1: Okay. So, well, when you graduated from Florida A&M, now what did you do?  What were your options? You didn't want to, you said you didn't want to go into the classroom, right?
Speaker 2: I didn't want to teach. By having a major in English, that was an option. I didn't want to write. The degree in journalism, because it was like this isn't what it's all cracked up to be, and I wasn't quite sure what I wanted to do, but I thought I wanted to do was to get out of Florida and along came recruiters and one came from the Job Corps center in Maine, recruiting and I thought, hm, okay. That's out of Florida (laughter).
Story_ID: 369690
Speaker 1: So no teaching after, so, so what did you decide to do?
Speaker 2: I decided to travel.
Speaker 1: So you're going to Maine, oh yeah, we had you in Maine (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Went to Maine, right.
Speaker 1: Going to Maine for Job Corps.
Speaker 2: And it's pretty drastic but not as drastic because, remember Genie [Eugenia Nicholas], the (background noise), Genie, the person that I told you about that's my second sister?  She was originally from Rhode Island, so my folks [Pearlie Weeks Terrell and Charles Terrell, Sr.] had become her extended family and we kind of assumed the same, so Genie and I went together to Maine. So, but she was rather used to being up north. It was my first time leaving Florida so it was the first time I had ever seen the change of seasons, it was my first time seeing snow. I was in a meeting the first time it snowed. I disrupted the entire meeting, because I was like (gesture), I had never seen this stuff before. So, we were there, not too, too long. It was a Job Corps center. It was for girls, for young women, and they came from all over. They came from the major cities. It was almost like if you take the folks out of the major cities and give them some country air, because we were in Poland Spring [Poland Spring Job Corps Center for Women, Poland, Maine], then everything would be fine. It was a vocational training. We were counselors. We worked four days on, four days off. I really enjoyed working with the young women there. I wasn't as excited at all about working with some of the staff that was there, the administration. I learned a lot from those young women. I was supposed to be the wise one and helping them, but it was a two-way street, definitely. They would say, you know, "Come on college girl, let me just explain some things to you," and the town though, Poland Spring [sic. Poland, Maine], was very close to Portland [Maine]. So, of course, it snowed. It was the first time I learned to almost ski, because Poland Spring used to be a resort and so you had skiing and you had golf and all that, and so the ski lodge was still attached, but you'd go into town and Portland, for the most part, weren't used to seeing blacks and it wasn't like they were nasty or anything like that. We were just not part of the, the normal, everyday sight you might see and people would be stopped at a stoplight and I would go across the street and the light would turn green and they'd still be there because they were just staring, (laughter) not hatefully or anything, but staring. It's kind of like being an oddity, so it was my first experience with whites also because, again, I had grown up in Hallandale [Hallandale Beach, Florida] and gone to A&M [Florida Agricultural and Mechanical University, Tallahassee, Florida]. We were there a little over a year and then moved to Boston [Massachusetts], and we thought okay, so we were in Maine, now we're in Boston. We'll stay here for a while, work, maybe move to California or maybe move to somewhere else. In the meantime, I got married, Genie got married, I got divorced, Genie got divorced, and somehow the only time I left this area was to go to California when I lived out there and she never did.
Speaker 1: Now, was there a reason why you chose Boston? Was there a job waiting for you here or--
Speaker 2: No, no. It was just coming down from Maine and Boston. We were, we worked four days on and four days off, like I said, so we had time. Some of the time was spent in Rhode Island because Genie had family there. Some time was spent in New York, but also time was spent in Boston. So we would just go to different places and so we decided to move to Boston and, and find a job.
Story_ID: 369691
Speaker 1: This is 1967. You moved to Boston [Massachusetts]. Now, is this when you worked for OIC [Opportunities Industrialization Centers]?
Speaker 2: It is.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: I got a job working for OIC and I started out as a counselor since I now had all of this years' experience under my belt as a counselor from young women to adults, because OIC was an adult re-training center.
Speaker 1: Yeah, it's similar to Job Corps, but it's for adults, I understand.
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: Opportunities, industrial--
Speaker 2: Industrialization Center.
Speaker 1: Center, right. That's headed up, founded by--
Speaker 2: By Dr. Sullivan.
Speaker 1: Reverend Leon Sullivan. Sullivan, yeah.
Speaker 2: And, I started out as a counselor and then became a counseling supervisor. That was my first supervisory job, and I've not been an individual contributor since then, now that I think about it. After counseling supervisor, I was directive training and then I was assistant director at OIC. I didn't want to be the executive director, and I'd been there for probably about six years when I decided I'd like to do something different and the person who was the executive director when I first went to work there, Gary Robinson, was then working for the state and Gary helped me get an interview at the Office for Children, which was a newly created state agency which was responsible for coordinating children's services across Massachusetts. It was, it was exciting because it was new, it had an extensive mandate. It was, again, something else I hadn't done before and so there were people I had to pull together to make things happen. There were really antiquated regulations for children's care in Massachusetts and so we pulled together to have hearings and develop regulations for foster care, for adoption, for group care facilities in Massachusetts, and I was assistant director and then became in charge of all of licensing, so it included day care licensing. So, we developed regulations and so I got to pull together the kinds of people I had not dealt with before, because I had not known state agency work or people who were connected with these kinds of agencies, but I hired staff and we made it happen.
Speaker 1: So you had to basically create this, a lot of it (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That was the fun part, really. And then we started licensing, and we were responsible for licensing private agencies and giving approval to state agencies having to do with children. After about three years, it started, we were unencumbered by civil service because it was a new agency and so we didn't have to hire from the civil service list. We hired people we thought could really do a good job, whether there was civil service or not. But after a while, that was beginning to wear off because you're a state agency, you hire from the civil service list and it wasn't feeling as exciting around the office, and I looked to see around state agencies where else might I want to be? What might be, offer more excitement? And, I didn't see anything and was wondering what would I do next?
Story_ID: 369692
Speaker 1: When I was at OIC [Opportunities Industrialization Centers] as director of training, one of my responsibilities was to coordinate the advisory board that ICI had, OIC had, rather. And, the advisory board was made up of high level people in industry and their responsibility was to help us develop a really top-notch curriculum to teach the adults that came through there so that they could get a job, so teach something that made sense for what they would be looking for, whether it was a keypunch operator, or, you know, there were entry level jobs but you wanted to make sure that you were teaching right so you had people from Polaroid [Polaroid Corporation]. You had from Wang [Wang Laboratories]. You had from Digital [Digital Equipment Corporation]. From, so you had different kinds of people. I say that to say at the time that I was trying to decide what I wanted to do next, I got a call from Paul Newman, who was the person from Digital Equipment Corporation that sat on the their advisory board for his boss, who was Jack Smith, who ran all of manufacturing for Digital, and Paul said, "Are you ready to work yet?"  And I said, "You know, funny you should ask, because I was trying to decide what I wanted to do," and he says, "I think you should come talk to me because I really want to talk to you about something I have." And I did talk to Paul, but since I was talking to Paul and private industry was a thought, I talked to some of the other folks that I knew and that I had worked with and so, to make a long story short, obviously I went with Digital. All my interviews were held in Maynard [Massachusetts]. I lived in Boston [Massachusetts] and Maynard was a bit out, and that's where Digital's headquarters was. I knew the job they were talking to me about was in Westminster [Massachusetts]. But I had never heard of Westminster, didn't know where Westminster was, but it was like, okay, can't be that far away, and I got the job as training manager in Westminster, and then I said, "Well, where is it?"  And Paul said, "You know Route 2, you know how to get to Cambridge [Massachusetts]," and I said, "Sure."  He says, "Right after, you stay on Route 2 and you'll come to Concord [Massachusetts], and you stay on Route 2 and after a while you'll come to Fitchburg [Massachusetts] and then Westminster and if you get to, if you get to Gardner [Massachusetts], you've gone too far, but the plant is right off Route 2."  No problem. It took me an hour and twenty minutes to get there (laughter) and I did that for a while and then I eventually moved, but my first job was a training manager. About six months later, Paul says, "Congratulations.  You've done an incredible job. I want to give you a promotion to employee relations manager." And I said, "What is that?" He says, "It's something new we're starting. We want to have employee relations," and he says, "So you, that will be something that I'd like for you to do," and Digital at that time was, I don't think, could have been a better place for anybody to be. It was during the time when they were hiring people of color, they were hiring women, their affirmative action was in sort of the watchword, you might say.  Paul was very serious about it, but Westminster was a long ways out and there weren't many of us in Westminster, but before you knew it there were a number in Fitchburg and Digital grew all over Massachusetts and New Hampshire, so it became--at one point, I probably knew, other than my family, maybe ten people outside of Digital, because it was just that kind of environment. Very shortly after, becoming employee relations manager, maybe a year-and-a-half, I became the personnel manager in, in Westminster.
Story_ID: 369693
Speaker 1: Westminster [Massachusetts] was a final assembly and test plant, which meant that all of the other plants in Digital [Digital Equipment Corporation] would do parts and send it to Westminster and that's where it would be put together and sent to customers. It was the largest facility that Digital had and, at one time, there were over two thousand employees in that plant. It was like a million square feet, because we were building a site in Salem [Massachusetts] and so you had some of the folks who were going to Salem hired into Westminster to go to Salem. It was a fascinating place to be because anyone, we used to say anyone who's anywhere in Digital had done time in Westminster because it was just that kind of place, you know, to kind of spend time and you were known because it was a final assembly and test plant. The person who was the personnel manager in Westminster, I got to be very good friends with and am still periodically in communications with, there weren't many blacks in management in Westminster, but there is a person who is very near and dear to me still, Ralph Gillespie, who was in Westminster and Ralph was hired into Digital in Westminster and we were very close and we still are very close, and it was just the time when, and it was in manufacturing, when there was the whole piece around affirmative action and what did it take to bring the whole person to the job.  Digital was in the forefront of all of that kind of thinking and having core groups where blacks and whites and Latinas got together to discuss why do we walk on eggshells, and because there weren't many African Americans in management, it seems like I was one of the favorites to be a part of the core group because it was like, I was in the one for the senior level managers and learned a lot about space and there weren't, like I said, many of us in management. I won't say senior management at that point because it was more at the plant level and we weren't plant managers. I later went on from Westminster to be a group personnel manager, which means I had several plants working for me. Ralph went on to be the plant manager of the Roxbury plant in Boston [Massachusetts]. I was a group personnel manager in manufacturing and then became a group personnel manager over manufacturing and engineering operations and then because the person who is a group personnel manager for marketing went to school for a semester, I had manufacturing, engineering, and marketing for the low end (cough) and I used to joke that only Ken Olsen and I really could see the vantage point of what was going on across the disciplines because you had manufacturing that was over here and you had engineering that was here, and you had marketing over here. But the engineering group manager that I worked for wanted to, to bring together engineering and manufacturing closer, and so when the manufacturing group personnel person left, I took over both those roles, and so it was just an incredible opportunity, but I got that opportunity because, as a group personnel manager in manufacturing, the group manager that I supported was placed somewhere else, someone else came in, and for the first time in my life, I was ousted from a job and it was the most devastating thing that could have happened to me and the best thing that could have happened to me, because it was, it was a wakeup call because things had been just clicking for me and it was going up, up, up. In doing this the devastation or embarrassment because, like I say, there weren't many of us around so I was pretty well known and it was like, so what do I do with this?  What am I, what am I gonna do next? And, I got more in touch with who I am and what I wanted to do.
Story_ID: 369694
Speaker 1: You just lost the function of one of the same things that you were running?  Or were you (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I was group personnel manager, and the person in human resources, which was personnel then, or finance, usually the, the person in charge, the line person, wants someone that they are comfortable with. I didn't want to work for this person anyway, and I intended to move out of that position and find something else, but I, he moved on me before I could move on him, and, but I wasn't far out of the company. I was just (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, you were just moved out of that job.
Speaker 2: Moved out of that job.
Speaker 1: Was that necessarily a demotion or--
Speaker 2: No, it ended up not being a demotion. I just didn't have a job.
Speaker 1: But you were still employed (laughter).
Speaker 2: I was still employed. But I had no job. And my job was to decide what I wanted to do.
Speaker 1: Okay. I just wanted to be clear about that, I, you know, okay.
Speaker 2: And so I talked to the person who was running manufacturing at that time and it was, it was, I did work, I don't know if you remember PMS [Pacific Management Systems] in California, Price Cobbs [HistoryMaker Dr. Price Cobbs], Mike Brown [Michael E. Brown] and Ron Brown [Ronald Brown].
Speaker 1: Right, right. Price--
Speaker 2: Digital [Digital Equipment Corporation] was doing a lot of work with Pacific Management Systems at that time. I was taking folks out on trips around affirmative action, and understanding this was sort of what got in the way of people working together, and so when I--
Speaker 1: Price Cobbs, the author of 'Black Rage' [William H. Grier and Price M. Cobbs]--
Speaker 2: That's correct. So, I went and spent some time with Price and Ron and Mike, trying to decide how did I let this happen to me? What was I doing?  How come I didn't see this coming? And there was another woman, Kaleel Jamison, that I did some work with and it was all personal development work. I came back from that and I was told that if I wanted to, I could take a line job. Then, but what was also going on at that time was the engineering job. I had grown up all my time at Digital, the manufacturing, and that's where I thought it was safe. That's where I thought, you know, manufacturing is where it's at. Where, it's making all the progress and the job in engineering was a group personnel job but it was engineering. You know, engineering was very different than manufacturing. I opted not to try to find a job in the line at that point and I took another job in personnel, and I told the group manager that I really thought that personnel needed strong people too, because he said, "You're strong, you should come into the line," and I thought that personnel needed strength also because I, Digital did value personnel. That's the one thing that they did. Digital valued people who had something to contribute at that time, and it didn't matter who you are or what function you were in. If you had something to contribute, you could make a difference. And so, I opted to take the job with Jim Cudmore [James Cudmore] in engineering, and that's how I got the manufacturing piece and the marketing piece.
Story_ID: 369695
Speaker 1: And then I got a call one day from Ralph [Ralph Gillespie] and he says, "I'm leaving this plant. I've been promoted to another job." He says, "Are you interested in running a plant," and I laughed. I said, "Ralph, you called me out of a meeting to ask me about running a plant. You know that doesn't happen here," because plant managers came from engineering or they came from these materials. You had to be technical in order to be a plant manager in Digital [Digital Equipment Corporation]. He says, "Why don't you just wait and see what the job description is and you decide from there," so I said fine. I went back to my meeting.  But, it was at a time when I had moved from Boston [Massachusetts], I lived in Marlborough [Massachusetts] for a while, then in Chelmsford [Massachusetts], and I was getting to the point where I wanted to, if I didn't move back into Boston, I wanted to be closer to Boston. I felt like I had been blessed, I had learned a lot of things and I wanted to, wasn't so much go back home, I wanted to give back and be closer to be able to do that, and so I was in the process of trying to think about where could I work to make that happen and so Ralph's call caused me to do some thinking, although I thought it was the longest shot in the world, but when the job description came out, it played to my strengths as opposed to my weaknesses. I didn't have the technical piece but I knew Digital. That plant was a low-end manufacturing plant and that was the group that I supported, so I knew the people there. They knew me. I knew manufacturing, after all I had been in Westminster [Massachusetts] for quite some time. I grew up in manufacturing. So, I went after that job with a vengeance and I competed with a person who was an engineer, I interviewed with the group managers, I interviewed, you know, with the plant staff and I was selected to run the Boston plant in Roxbury [Boston, Massachusetts]. It was such an honor. And--
Speaker 2: Now what year is this?
Speaker 1: Eighty-four [1984].
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: So, the Boston plant manufactured keyboards, but it was the highest volume manufacturing operation Digital had, and we had to go to three shifts because of the volume at that point. When Ralph was there, Ralph hired a really good staff and then, that's when he got a promotion, so I had great material to work with. These were really competent people and helped me to understand that I didn't have to know everything. What my job was, was to provide leadership and to bring people together to help to form a team to make that place really hum. It was at the time when just-in-time was coming in and I, when I, to tell you a story, when I went after that plant, I talked with the plant manager that I supported in Westminster and he told me, he says, "You know, you're probably gonna have to make some changes when you go to Boston."  He said, "We know you in Westminster; we know you in Maynard [Massachusetts]. When you say something, that's what you mean. You might not smile a lot or you need to show emo-, you need to show more emotion." And I said, "What are talking about?" Because for me, being black, being a woman, emotion is the last thing I want. He says, "Because people are not going to understand what you're really trying to say."
Story_ID: 369696
Speaker 1: You were discussing, we were discussing you being warned not to be emotionless, you know, when you go to California. Now what (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, this was in Boston [Massachusetts].
Speaker 1: In Boston, okay, yeah, to take over the Roxbury [Boston, Massachusetts] plant [of Digital Equipment Corporation], right.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: So, and you were--
Speaker 2: Not emotionless, but to be more emotional--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: And also not to be as direct, because people wouldn't be able to relate to me. That, but, gotta picture this plant though. It is much, much smaller than Westminster [Massachusetts] and you have the United Nations [UN] in there, because this is Boston. It's also during the time of the busing issue in Boston, and so you have people from South Boston [Boston, Massachusetts] and from Dorchester [Boston, Massachusetts] and Roxbury and all parts of Boston that no matter what was going on in their lives and their towns, when they came to this plant it was parked at the door and you had lots of languages, I think it was something like twenty-one languages, that were different languages that were spoken in there and so when I got there, it was basically, I think we had only one shift at that time, but it was expanding. I got there and would go out on the floor and people would do one little thing to the keyboard, then they'd push it down and somebody else would do something else, and somebody else would do something else. I was bored watching and so it was like, in talking with people I'm saying, "How does this feel?" And they would have to wait for the materials to come and, like I said, this was during just-in-time. Now, I'm not a material expert but I do pride myself on being intuitive and because I did come from personality charmed background before, this plant was an opportunity for me to practice what I've been preaching because now I was on the line. I wasn't staff. I was responsible for the line and how do you treat people? What do you do and how do you get the best out of people? How do you get people to want to come to work? And I didn't think it was by being something I wasn't, and I didn't have time to retrain myself anyway, and what ended up as with the staff that was there and with the folks on the floor, we came together to pull off something that was pretty unique at the time. It's not anymore when you're talking about teams, so we formed teams as opposed to one person doing one thing and then pushing to someone else. We formed teams and people were responsible, the team was responsible for a certain amount of production and they can make some decisions as to how they got that done and what they needed to make that happen. Now we know what we had to do, but how it worked, they had much more to say about it and we also then went more to a just-in-time system, and I have a picture of Ken Olsen coming when we celebrated our millionth keyboard there and he came to speak to the folks in the plant. So it was, and it was platform also to do more in Boston than I would have been able to do because now I had the backing of Digital Equipment Corporation, and it was a very generous backing.
Story_ID: 369697
Speaker 1: How did the team, how did it help them to do it as a team, I mean, I know there's one, are they making like several keyboards at once, or are they, what do they (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, they could because what was going on is you do one thing--it wasn't like one person making an entire keyboard, one person who was doing one function and then pushing it to someone else to do something else. When you form a team, then the team would be responsible for that one person, then got to know how to put together an entire keyboard themselves, and then there would be decisions as to who would make decisions today, in a sense, around, if they had to do a hundred keyboards, then how would that get done? You know, would X number of people do it and Y number of people go get the material, or allotted, so it was the team's decision as to how the production happened, not waiting for something to come to them to do one little thing to pass it on, and they felt that was much more exciting, and I also found out that being me didn't mean that folks didn't understand me at all. It meant that, because I got a poem from one of the folks on the floor out of the group, and it pretty much said that and I think I still have it somewhere. I don't know. But it was like understanding that I care about people. I may not take care of people, but I do care about people and that came across in that I was interested in getting the best out of people. I want the best out of me, so why wouldn't folks want to have the best. You come to work, you've gotta be there, you might as well use all of you to make these kinds of things happen. So, it was an exciting time and then after Boston [Massachusetts], I got promoted to Maynard [Massachusetts] to work for Bill Hanson, who was in charge of manufacturing and I was responsible for helping with the strategy of manufacturing [for Digital Equipment Corporation]. That didn't last too long. Oh, the other thing that happened while I was in Boston is I got married for the second time just when I started working in Boston, and I got pregnant when I was in the, in the plant.
Story_ID: 369698
Speaker 1: Now where did you meet your husband [Albert Brown]?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) I met my husband a long time ago. I met my husband when Genie [Eugenia Nicholas] graduated from college and I, when we both graduated from college [Florida Agricultural and Mechanical University, Tallahassee, Florida].  It sometimes gets a little confusing for people, because people know Genie as my sister, but she's really my husband's niece, and I met him then for the first time but he was married. I got married. He got divorced. He moved to Washington [D.C.], remarried, and so lots of water went under that dam before he and I ended up getting married.
Speaker 1: Okay, so, and when was this? When did you get married (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) We got married in 1984.
Speaker 1: In 1984, okay.
Speaker 2: And Dorian [Dorian Brown] was born in 1987. So I was still in the Boston [Massachusetts] plant at that time. I just, when I got pregnant I had just left the Boston plant, that's what happened. And then I went to Maynard [Massachusetts] and I found I'm not cut out, being, the job was just not as exciting and I was sitting in my office one day when this, the person who caused me to go to Cupertino, California came by. He said Bill Hanson, and Bill was in charge of manufacturing.  Bill was also the person that once I decided to go back to manufacturing, told me I had passed the test after being removed from my job and once I started, he says, "You passed the test," and I said, "What kind of test?"  He says, "It's not like it was designed but you've been successful all of your time here and it's easy to look good when you're successful." He says, "It's how you handle yourself when things are tough that proves how well you're going to do, or what kind of person you really are." He says, "That's the test that I'm talking about." So, at any rate, Bill talked to Chris McGill and told Chris he should talk to me about a job in California. So Chris comes down to talk to me about this job and, again, I laugh when he comes in about this job because it was Cupertino, it was the most technical operation Digital [Digital Equipment Corporation] had, and it was the most money Digital ever spent on a project being spent on the Aquarius project [VAX 9000], and I said, "Chris, you know I am not a technologist," and he says, "I know," he says, "I don't need one more technologist," and the lesson of Boston came back to me. Maybe I should just listen to what's needed as opposed to assuming what's needed, and, he said, "We have problems. We have trouble with the line we bought, technology." Digital had never introduced a complex technology outside of Maynard before, but they bought this company and he says, "I need help. I need someone who knows manufacturing. I need someone who knows Maynard. I need someone who can provide some leadership out there and can help make some connections," so again, it played to my strengths. To make a long story short, my family and I moved and he says, "And it would be a great place for Microdot [ph.]," and that's what he called my daughter and that was the name she, that stuck with her because it was a fab in Cupertino, and we fabricated wafers and when I got there, come to find out that what we thought was a product was really not even a prototype. It was still being walked through by the engineers, and so we had to really start this area and it was, the difference for me, there wasn't equipment so I had to get equipment. I had to understand how to get regulations in California, which is a very litigious state, and go through the entire process, but we did it. Again, it was hiring the right staff. It was understanding what it took. I, in Boston I could walk out on the floor, I could talk to the folks on the floor, I could find out what's going on because they always know what's going on or what should we be doing, and just have a conversation. In Cupertino, once we got the fab going you had to, I had to go and wash my face before putting on the bunny suit and the booties and the caps and the goggles, and so I had to learn to recognize people through their voices and their eyes because that was all, to be able to have a conversation and get to know who people were and find out what was going on.
Story_ID: 369699
Speaker 1: What I learned mostly in Cupertino [California] was, again, not that I had to be the expert, but I learned how to ask questions to, and also learned that when people really know what they're doing they can tell you, and they can explain it in English, and so that you can understand, and ask questions in a way that I wasn't trying to determine what the line width should be, but I could ask enough questions as to if there was a deviation, did we follow a process? Was there a process? If so, did we follow it? And, if not, why not? And so, but during that time we had an earthquake. We had fires. We had hiring, like I said, there was no real manufacturing line and we ramped up out there, up to, at one point we had about a thousand people in Cupertino. I had the manufacturing piece and part of the engineering because Chris [Chris McGill] felt that I could do part of the engineering piece. The Jack Smith, the person I told you who ran manufacturing, now runs manufacturing and engineering for Digital [Digital Equipment Corporation] and he's the person under Ken [Ken Olsen], and when I was going to Cupertino, Jack told me that I should think about that seriously because I had grown up in manufacturing and I knew part of the engineering and I had run the Boston [Massachusetts] plant, but doing Cupertino was different and that it would probably not be as forgiving if I made a mistake out in Cupertino, and so I asked him if he had concerns, real concerns of me going, and he said, "No, because if I had real concerns, you wouldn't go." So, I went to Cupertino and after we got the lineup, after we probably two years later, Jack came out and he says, "You know, I gotta give you credit." He says, "I thought it would work just knowing you," he says, "but I was very pleased with what's happened out here."  We did, we brought, we made sure that what was needed really happened in Cupertino.
Story_ID: 369700
Speaker 1: The sad piece around it is that Digital [Digital Equipment Corporation] was having lots of discussions. I was back and forth around what was going on with the technology, not the technology but technology, period, and feeling the need that maybe we had too many people in the company and after we ramped up for the Aquarius project [VAX 9000] and did what we needed to do, somehow it wasn't selling and so we had too many people, we had too much product and it wasn't only Cupertino [California] that was pretty much going on in manufacturing, but the discussions were if we ever in Digital laid off one person, even if that person was in Germany or that person was in Puerto Rico or anywhere, it would change Digital forever, and so there was a lot of concern about laying off, but there was nothing else to be done in Cupertino. You couldn't move somebody from the Cupertino operation to another plant. There wasn't another plant in California and so probably if it could be done, California was the place to do it because in California people didn't have the same level of loyalty that he had on the East Coast, the Northeast, because people moved around all the time out there. In the Northeast you didn't move around. You joined a company and you stayed. People got laid off out there and it was like, what can you do for me, the company or the company working on somebody. To make a long story short, we made a decision to lay off in Cupertino. I made the decision and it was the most difficult decision I have made in my career and I still get a bit (laughter), because this is something and I've had to do layoffs since, they're never easy, but my first one, and the first one in the company, and it's like these people didn't cause this problem. I, the, we had three shifts and I, we did it probably in the most humane way possible if you're gonna lay somebody off. Much more generous than normal in the Valley [Silicon Valley, California], and I cried my heart out the night before, I went in the next morning, I stayed for every shift until everybody who was going to be told was told. Anybody who wanted to talk to me could talk to me. I walked around and I went home that night and I cried again. But it was the right thing to do.
Speaker 2: How many people had to be laid off?
Speaker 1: I don't even remember the exact number, but I think the first time around we had to lay off almost a third.
Speaker 2: Okay, so that's about three hundred and some people (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah. And after that, I knew that Digital was not the place I wanted to be anymore. I did what I needed to do. It was the right thing to do, and there was, I don't think we could have done it any way differently, but we had come to be a family out there, because I brought a lot of people out of Maynard [Massachusetts] out there to help start up. We hired a lot of people from the Valley who worked out there, and in order to make it happen, we had to come together to make it happen and, like I said, we had an earthquake. This is a fab [fabrication]. So, you just don't go back in and pick up the keys to put on back in a box. This messes up a whole bunch of stuff, but it didn't ruin our production over, you know, we were on line, back on line in no time flat. You don't do something like that without people rallying to make things happen. We had a fire in the fab. You don't pull things back together like that without rallying to make things happen. So, I didn't leave right away but I knew that my days would be numbered.
Story_ID: 369701
Speaker 1: What year is this?  This is--
Speaker 2: I joined Sun [Sun Microsystems, Inc.] in '91 [1991], so this was around '90, [1990].
Speaker 1: In 1990?
Speaker 2: Yeah, '90 [1990] or '89 [1989].  We went out, Dorian [Dorian Brown] was born in '87 [1987] and she was a year-and-a-half old when we went out there [Cupertino, California]. I was out there about three years before joining, before, yeah, I went out there in '88 [1988] went out in '88 [1988] and I joined Sun in '91 [1991], so--it was like around '90 [1990].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And, then it was time to decide again what I wanted to do and I got a call, I got a call from Scott McNealy who said he had heard about me and wanted to meet me and wanted to talk to me about something, which was personnel, I mean HR [human resources]. It was HR at that time. There was no more personnel.  His HR person is the person I knew from Digital [Digital Equipment Corporation], and he was going back to Scotland and Crawford [ph.], and told Scott he should talk to me and I talked to Scott. I met Scott and we talked about what I liked doing, how I liked doing things, he talked about himself and then I didn't hear form Scott for (cough) excuse me, for probably, maybe a week, you know, because I thought I had really impressed him and over a week went by and then I got a call from Kevin Melia who was another person. There were a lot of people from DEC [Digital Equipment Corporation] that were at Sun, so Scott had a lot of information he could have gotten about me.  He called me in and he says, "I'd like to make you an offer." (Cough) He says, "I'm going to send you an offer," because this is the way Scott is, and it was a couple of weeks. He says I'm going to make you an offer and, I'm going to send you an offer and then I'd like to, for you to come in and talk to whomever you want to talk to about it. And I thought this was an offer about the HR job, which I had gotten clear on that I didn't want, even if it was Sun Microsystems, that I really like the line. I liked making things happen, and that was what I wanted to do next, and the offer was to run, start up and run SunExpress. He never mentioned SunExpress and when I saw that and I went in to talk to him, he says, "I clearly got the impression that you're much better on the operation side than the staff side." He says, "I have put an ad in the paper. I have interviewed a number of people who have done this kind of stuff before, who run these kinds of main operations," he says, "But I got a sense," and Scott's really intuitive and smart too, not just the intuition, "I got the sense that I could trust you and that you would make this happen. You know people on the East Coast and I want it on the East coast, and it's a start-up, but I am now splitting the company into separate legal entities." So, this is my first time thinking about a total P and L [profit and loss] operation. I had to figure out how to make money, how to get revenue, how to do everything. So, you know that was exciting, and so I, and it was double my salary. (Laughter) So, I accepted the offer and came back east to start up SunExpress. My family says, "Yeah, that's nice for you," but by this time, Tammy [Tammy Terrell], I always say I have two daughters, one biological, the other one came to live with us when we were in California.  She's my niece. She's my brother, Charles' [Charles Terrell, Jr.] daughter, and Tammy calls me mom, I always say I have another daughter, I raised her, and Tammy was going into the eleventh grade and so she says, "These are my friends, I want to graduate from Saratoga High [Saratoga High School, Saratoga, California]." Tammy was Miss Saratoga, you know, the first time a black girl was ever Miss Saratoga out there. She was popular.  She's really into sports and she came out kicking and screaming and then fell in love with the place. So, Al [Albert Brown] and Dorian [Dorian Brown] said, "Okay, we're going to stay with Tammy." They liked the weather out there. I always traveled so I never got into California. And so we, I, came back east. They stayed out until Tammy graduated, but I commuted and came back and started SunExpress.
Story_ID: 369702
Speaker 1: What is SunExpress?
Speaker 2: SunExpress was the after-marketing company for Sun [Sun Microsystems, Inc.]. We sold through direct marketing techniques, so if, in most companies you will get the best sales people when you have a big deal. They will come out, they will wow you, they'll promise you the moon, talk to you about the equipment, sell you lots of stuff. After that, they're on to the next big deal and pretty soon you want some more memory, you want more storage, you want another computer, you want a little something here, a little something there, and trying to get that salesperson again is a big problem, and Scott [Scott McNealy] realized this was a big problem. It's a big problem for most companies. Then you get Dell [Dell Inc.], and then you know, so, you get other companies that now sell their after marketing products differently. So Scott wanted a company. He had a computer company to sell all of the big stuff. He had a software company to sell the software. He wanted a, this is how he was splitting up the company. He wanted an after-marketing company but not to go out to sell, but to sell through direct marketing techniques, the phone, the fax, and we introduced electronic, e-commerce [electronic commerce] and Sun because, since we couldn't go out, we had to find all the ways of getting our customers to come to us, to feel like they were getting what they needed. So, my staff and I had to figure out how to go into countries, what countries to go into. We went into Europe very differently. Now, it's done all the time, but we went into Holland [the Netherlands] because we wanted to sell into Germany and France and the UK [United Kingdom] and other countries, but we couldn't afford to go into each one of the countries, and in Holland they speak all those languages and they speak English and we weren't trying to be devious because we would tell people where we were, but it was very economical and now, you know, you've got the call centers everywhere, and that's the way we went into Europe and we did it.
Story_ID: 673018
Speaker 1: So I'm gonna slate the interview, my name is Julieanna Richardson and I'm the interviewer and Matthew Hickey is the videographer.  And it's a pleasure being here today for the history, 'cause Dorothy plays a very special role with us.  And just made a special gift to us, which I'm not supposed to talk about, but since it's just the two of us I am.  But I want to have you start out by saying and spelling your name again for us.  And your, well we don't need your date of birth and things like that, but today's date and our location.
Speaker 2: Dorothy Ann Terrell [HistoryMaker Dorothy Terrell], D-O-R-O-T-H-Y, A-N-N, T-E-R-R-E-L-L, today's date is March 9th, 2017.
Speaker 1: And for the record we are also hosting a program at the Perez museum [Perez Art Museum Miami, Miami, Florida] that was Dorothy's brainchild so we're, we have a full day ahead of us.  Okay so--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: And we're at Miami Beach.
Speaker 1: And we're at Miami Beach.
Speaker 2: Florida.
Speaker 1: Right.
Story_ID: 673019
Speaker 1: I'd like to take you back to your childhood because you talked about really being a tomboy growing up, right with your--so can you just share some more memories of your time and Hallandale--dale [Hallandale Beach, Florida] because you spoke a lot about you know looking over across you the, you know the way, the dividing line, and what that was like growing up.  You talked a lot about community and growing up in the community and, and really feeling almost like a privileged existence, even though you're you know your mother [Pearlie Weeks Terrell] was a housekeeper and your father [Charles Terrell, Sr.] a gardener.  So can, can you, can you talk the, the hou- you didn't say you were a tomboy, but it see- it seemed like you were.
Speaker 2: I didn't use the word?
Speaker 1: Unh-uh, you didn't.
Speaker 2: Most of the, the kids in the neighborhood were boys, so--my brothers, my cousins--the only other girl was my friend next door, who was my very best friend. And she was older than I was, her name, Vianna Hayes [ph.].  And so Vianna and I had to keep up, up with the, the boys in a sense.  Although there were times we would go off on our own and to do girl things, I don't remember really dolls that much.  But I do remember cowboys and Indians [Native American] more than, than the dolls, I have scars to prove it and from playing cowboys and Indians.  Running behind the boys and they had this trap that they had, had laid where--had glass, and somehow I ran across and I fell in the trap.  And so there's a cut on the bottom of my foot right now, that--that shows that.  But somehow we, we never thought of it as vicious, it was just games, swinging, and trees.  But I hadn't thought of it as, as really as being a tomboy, it was just the games we played (simultaneous).
Story_ID: 673020
Speaker 1: And you were, but you were also a daddy's girl too right?
Speaker 2: Yeah I like to think so.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Can you talk about your relationship with your father [Charles Terrell, Sr.]?
Speaker 2: My father was a gardener and became a deputy sheriff.  I was the oldest girl, and, and we would just, he would take me on, on rides around the, the--the community.  That was, that was basically my world and we would go into, to, to different places and he was just at, at one point sort of like my, my father only hit me once.  My mother [Pearlie Weeks Terrell] was the disciplinarian, she was--serious disciplinarian, and I think in these days it would be almost like child brutality.  But, and that woman can get under chairs, under tables to, to beat you--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: With the switches.
Speaker 2: --(laughter) with the switches, the belts, and but my father was the, more the, the peacemaker and wanted to make sure everything was, was, was fine.  And I now understand behind the scenes, my mother was carrying out a lot of the things my father really wanted to, wanted done.  My father was, was, was strict, so my mother was, had to be stricter in a sense.  But a lot of this is hindsight, you know.  It's amazing the things you understand as you, you grow up.  But that didn't take away from the fact that yeah I was, I was a daddy's girl.
Speaker 1: Can you talk about some of your times with your father that you can think that were formative for you, you know, any special memories of your times with him?
Speaker 2: My father, my, my parents but basically my father had property in Hallandale [Hallandale Beach, Florida] so there were apartments.  And, and he would take me with him when he would go to collect the rent or, or make repairs.  And just would always talk about the importance of education, of owning your home, of property, of, of giving back.  He was a deacon in, in the church [Greater Ward Chapel African Methodist Episcopal Church, Hallandale Beach, Florida] and, and so we had those kinds of, kinds of conversations.  Sometimes I thought it was more of him wanting to lecture but those were important lessons that in--again, in, in hindsight stuck with me.  Because education was really, really important in my family.  My parents didn't have a chance to complete college.  My father went for a short time; my brother who is older was the first in, in our family--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Charles [Charles Terrell, Jr.], right?
Speaker 2: Charles yes, to, to graduate, and I was behind him.
Speaker 1: And was there a, was there a younger, no it was just the two?
Speaker 2: No, there--Levon [Levon Terrell] also--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Also went to Florida, Florida A and M [Florida Agricultural and Mechanical University, Tallahassee, Florida]; and Althea [Althea Terrell] also went now she didn't graduate from, from Florida A and M, she was more the rebellious one.  And the other, the, the first three of us never thought anything about not going to, to school, not finishing.  And she eventually did and as a matter of fact Althea at sixty-five is working on her master's [degree] and will complete that next month.
Story_ID: 673021
Speaker 1: I wanna also take you back 'cause there was another que- what is your earliest memory of growing up?  Do you remember an earliest memory?
Speaker 2: The earliest memory?
Speaker 1: Earliest memory.
Speaker 2: My earliest memory would be running around the yard in Hallandale [Hallandale Beach, Florida], we lived on the street that I had described before.  But on the, the side of the street where we were, I, I can't remember if I said before my best friend's house was right on the corner.
Speaker 1: And that's?
Speaker 2: Vianna [Vianna Hayes (ph.)].
Speaker 1: How do you spell Vianna, V--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: V-I-A-N-N-A, and Vianna was actually closer to my older brother's age.  He [Charles Terrell, Jr.] was five years older than I am but we were the, we, we were there in, in the community.  Our house was next door to the, the house that Vianna grew up in.  My [maternal] grandparents [Jane Griffin Weeks and Joe Weeks] lived next door to our house and my godmother and godfather lived next door, so that was the block.  We had some property that my, my father [Charles Terrell, Sr.] owned behind us, but that was the street, and that was a block.  So I remember being always--there were lots of people around, and always feeling safe, because you can run in the backyard and you run from house to house.  Or the people behind, although they weren't relatives, they lived in the apartments be-, behind us.  Which, when I say behind us, I'm not talking a big difference either--a big distance rather.  And so every, all the kids played together, all the adults looked out for whoever might doing whatever, and that was the entire community not just that block.   That was the entire community that I grew up in, so those were some of my, my earliest remembrance.  My father also had some property where teachers lived, because the teachers at that time lived in the community also.  And so the teachers that were my first and, and second grade and my third grade teachers were people I knew.  Just from, from being, being right there, kind of look at it as a cocoon in a sense.  Some people I think would think isn't that awful, you know, the way you had to grow up, you know, on that side of the street.  And that, you know, only being surrounded by blacks and not knowing what the other world was like and I don't feel that way at all, not in the least.
Story_ID: 673022
Speaker 1: So you, you were part of the A.M.E. church too, right? A.M.E. [African Methodist Episcopal] is where you grew up, so talk about your church and how involved you know the family was in the church, and--
Speaker 2: My father [Charles Terrell, Sr.] was the, the deacon in, in the A.M.E. church, my mother [Pearlie Weeks Terrell] initially went to the Baptist church 'cause my grandmother [Jane Griffin Weeks] went to the Baptist church.  But after I would say shortly after my brother was born, I know when I was born my mother came to the A.M.E. church.  And that's where we all went to church.
Speaker 1: And the name of the church?
Speaker 2: Ward Chapel [Greater Ward Chapel African Methodist Episcopal Church, Hallandale Beach, Florida].
Speaker 1: A.M.E. church.
Speaker 2: Yes, A.M.E.  And, and, and so you had pretty much--there were a few churches in, in town.  But the, the bigger ones that I remember was the Baptist church, Ebenezer [Ebenezer Missionary Baptist Church, Hallandale Beach, Florida] and Ward Chapel.  After my father died, and we were much, much older my mother eventually went back to the Baptist church.
Speaker 1: See you know 'cause church a lot of times there are large discussions about Baptist versus the A.M.E. and who the minister is and what the doctrine is, and did you have any of that going on in the home?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: No, okay.
Speaker 2: We were A.M.E. and that's what I, I really remember.  I, I know my grandmother went to the Baptist church, but we didn't go to the, to the Baptist church with my grandmother.  When we had a surprise eightieth birthday for my mother, it was at the Baptist church because she had gone back to, to the Baptist church.  And Cecil who you know would--transformed that church, until people would walk in they thought they were in this big fabulous hotel, ballroom. But in that--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: When your mother had the celebration, [HistoryMaker] Cecil Hayes did that?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Oh that's lovely.
Speaker 2: I was living in Boston [Massachusetts] and we wanted to have something, I wanted, I wanted to have something special for her.  And my brothers, brother [Levon Terrell] and, and sister [Althea Terrell] agreed we, we have to do something but, but no one was in Hallandale [Hallandale Beach, Florida] but my mother.  We had my brother, that really was my nephew [Kevin Terrell], his wife was helpful but wouldn't be able to pull it off the way we wanted to, to pull it off, and it was to be a surprise.  So Cecil stepped in and made it happen.
Speaker 1: Wow, and that was for you said her eightieth, I see.
Speaker 2: But it was at the, the Baptist church.  So there, there was people went back and, and, and forth.  There were a couple of things that I had issues with, with the Baptist church, but I wasn't part of it so.
Story_ID: 673023
Speaker 1: You were talking about you had issues when you were growing up?
Speaker 2: I couldn't understand some of the doctrine.
Speaker 1: So talk about that.
Speaker 2: When in, in the Baptist church where my, where my [maternal] grandmother [Jane Griffin Weeks] went, and she and I talked about this too.  If a, a girl became pregnant and wasn't married, then she was basically put out of the church.  I, I don't know if it still happens or anything like that.  But for me that's when I, I, I would think a person needed the church more.  They weren't put out of the community but they were, they were put--officially put out of the, out of the church.  After the baby was born, they could come back, that didn't make a lot of sense to me.  But that was not what we did at the A.M.E. church [Greater Ward Chapel African Methodist Episcopal Church, Hallandale Beach, Florida], so yeah that was a, that was one of the, the differences.  And but that was, that was a, it was, at that, it was disturbing.
Speaker 1: You know I, I had the same Bapt- church, church, A.M.E. church thing and I remember getting in discussion with the minister about how he said, and I was just going into puberty, that if boys and girls dance they would have babies (laughter).  And that didn't make any sense to me.  So you know, but I, I understand that there was a strictness sometimes.  You're--so you're talking about maybe the harshness or the, the, the things that were sort of strict that didn't really make sense when you--but you're questioning at that point, that's what you're, you're at that point of questioning.
Speaker 2: Which was I, I, I, you know I hadn't really thought about this until you brought it up.  Where the--the real questioning came in, because in, in my family, you pretty much, there were--kids had a, a role and adults had role.  The kids you know you, you didn't question so much but, but that's, that is something that my, my family always en-, encouraged.  And, yeah, and, and it, it and it sort of at a time when you didn't question authority and, and of course adults were, were the authority.  There weren't lots of conversations that you had with, with, with adults per se.  But I, I did have those con- kinds of conversations with my father [Charles Terrell, Sr.] and he, he would just tell me what, what he thought was, was important.  And I'd always wanna know why about something so.
Speaker 1: So he engaged that?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Um-hm, um-hm.
Story_ID: 673024
Speaker 1: I wanna ask one more qu- I, I wanna get to high school 'cause that was what was also not covered, but I want to ask you about your family life.  Can you describe the family life or a day in the life of, Terrell (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: Family.  Lots of people all around--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Because you've got family on all--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: We got family on all sides but also family would go and come from elsewhere.  My family, my [maternal] grandmother [Jane Griffin Weeks] if, if there was someone in the family that needed a place to be for a while, they ca- they lived with my grandmother and grandfather [Joe Weeks].  The same happened with my, my mother [Pearlie Weeks Terrell].  I, I tell you I have three brothers, I have two biolog- I have two biological brothers [Charles Terrell, Jr. and Levon Terrell].  The third brother wa- is really my nephew, but he was raised my, my folks took him in from the time he was a baby.  So he was, he is my brother and I, I've talked about Genie [Eugenia Nicholas] who I met in, in college [Florida Agricultural and Mechanical University, Tallahassee, Florida], first year.  And she came home, and so I, we always had the doors open in a sense and, and that was not unusual throughout, throughout the community.  So--
Speaker 1: But what was the family house, you know so you said there were a lot of people around, but--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yeah--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: What--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: It wasn't a big house, I mean I, I, I wonder sometimes now we had one bathroom and we had, there were all you know all of us and my parents and--
Speaker 1: How many bedrooms?
Speaker 2: There were three--
Speaker 1: That's a large house back then.
Speaker 2: It, it was--sort of an aside, I look at HGTV [Home and Garden Television] now when I want to do something that's mindless.  And people will say, "I want," they say, "this house has four bedrooms and two baths and living room, dining room, kitchen, den and it's like eleven hundred square feet.  That's, that's kind of small, but lots of rooms," and the house was small but lots of rooms (laughter).  So and there was a, there's a porch out that you, that faced the, the street that you kind of sat on, but we weren't in the house for the most part.  You know, you ate in the house, you slept in the house, but as a kid we roamed the neighborhood.  And when, when I went to college, my folks moved to a big house, probably one of the largest in the, in the, in the community.  It had belonged to a doctor who had come on, on hard times.  My father [Charles Terrell, Sr.] who was always trying to figure out how to improve our lot by hook or crook (laughter)--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: In life, right?
Speaker 2: Yes, got it and so that was where--I don't consider where I grew up, because I wasn't used to that house.  It was really right after I left for college that, that they moved there.
Speaker 1: So who was in the house at the time that they moved then, your two youngest or were they there your, your neph- so--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: They moved?
Speaker 2: My brother, my young, youngest brother--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Von and--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: No, Kevin [Kevin Terrell] is the, the one that--
Speaker 1: Kevin, okay.
Speaker 2: I always will say I have three brothers--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Or had 'cause Charles is dead.
Speaker 1: Right, right.
Speaker 2: But Kevin and Althea [Althea Terrell].
Story_ID: 673025
Speaker 1: Let's talk about, now elementary school was, elementary, junior high--no elementary then to high--
Speaker 2: Oh okay.  For elementary and middle school I went to Lanier [Lanier Elementary School and Lanier Junior High School; Lanier-James Education Center] and that was in Hallandale [Hallandale Beach, Florida]; and for high school, I went to Dillard [Dillard High School] in Fort Lauderdale [Florida].
Speaker 1: So with that can you tell me how far apart are those areas and that's what I'm wondering.  Where, and how far are we from--I'm totally challenged in Florida I have to say (laughing) I don't know if I--I should always have a map when I'm talking.  But how far are we from Hallandale now?
Speaker 2: I, it would take probably about a half hour, maybe if you're really did, depending on what part you are, you're going into.  Maybe a half hour max.  To get to Fort Lauderdale it would take forty-five minutes, about forty-five minutes.
Speaker 1: So how--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: No, may-, yeah, little, little more than forty-five minutes, now, because of the highways.
Speaker 1: But when you were, when you went there for high school how are you going to Dillard for high school, that's why I'm just trying--
Speaker 2: I understand.  I was the only one that went to Dillard for high school, my brother also went but--(simultaneous)
Speaker 1: Charles [Charles Terrell, Jr.].
Speaker 2: Charles went, but when, when you graduated from, from middle school in Hallandale, you, traditionally people went to Dillard--I mean to Attucks [Attucks School; Attucks Middle School, Hollywood, Florida], which was in Dania [sic.], which was closer.  So there was a bus that would take kids to Attucks.  My brother went to Dillard; I went to, to Dillard not at the same time because he was gone.  Dillard was actually a better school and I, I talk about the, the teachers I had.  The, my second and third grade teacher was the same person.  And she became a principal in Pompano [Pompano Beach, Florida] which is a little past Fort Lauderdale.  So she would drive to her school to where she was a principal.  When I graduated from middle school, went for high school, she drove me, dropped me off at Dillard.  Went to her school, picked me up in the afternoon and took me home, so that's how I went to school.  I, I wasn't, so I wasn't able to participate in sports or a lot of afterschool, like, activities.  But that's where I went to high school.
Speaker 1: So what, so that's phenomenal and when you think about that in, in a way you know.  Can you tell me was that an agreement with your parents [Pearlie Weeks Terrell and Charles Terrell, Sr.] or with your mother who, who's agreement that she would do that?
Speaker 2: Well she was a close friend to, of the family and understood that Dillard was, was a, better high school.  And better, I'm not quite sure what they, they meant by, by better at, at that time.  I did know that everybody in my class went to Attucks.  And, and I, she drove me to Dillard so my parents and she worked, worked it out.  And I'm trying to remember, because my brother went to Dillard also when everybody else went, went to Attucks.  But again it goes back I think to the idea that education was really important and whatever advantage we could get they tried to make sure we got it, and so we went to Dillard.
Story_ID: 673026
Speaker 1: So what was Dillard [Dillard High School, Fort Lauderdale, Florida] like at that point, can you tell me the racial composition?
Speaker 2: Dillard was all black.
Speaker 1: It was all black?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Oh it was all, so--
Speaker 2: I, I, I--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Dillard is not all black today right is it?
Speaker 2: It's predominately black.
Speaker 1: Black, okay.
Speaker 2: As a matter of fact you know I, I'll use Cecil [HistoryMaker Cecil Hayes] again, but when The HistoryMakers has--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --the Back to School [Back to School With The HistoryMakers], Cecil goes to Dillard--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: And it is predominately--now it's a magnet school.
Speaker 1: That's what I, I because see the only reason I say that is one time there was a in the before we got Cecil to go there was another person.  And she, I think flew herself back you know and she, and it, but isn't it one of the, it's a magnet school and it was.  I thought it's one of the best schools, right?
Speaker 2: Now?
Speaker 1: Now.
Speaker 2: I, I'm not sure--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: I'm not sure, but, okay but so it's, so these are all, so within the community, you're determining what is a better school for that.  Okay so the teachers are all black?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: And so what is, is there any difference like that is, like you know, between your community and the fact that you go, you know the other kids are going to, is it Act--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Attucks [Attucks School; Attucks Middle School, Hollywood, Florida].
Speaker 1: Attucks, okay.  Is there any difference you know that, I go to Dillard, you know what, what is that, because you're being taken out of your community in some respects.
Speaker 2: It, the, I lost pretty much lost touch with, with the, the kids I'd gone to school with before.  And, and primarily because I didn't go to school with them, but I, I, I never, I never did a lot of the things the other kids could do, my folks were strict.  So I didn't date until my senior year in, in high school (background noise) and that was only to say I could go to the prom but the, with this boy.  But I had to be home by twelve o'clock.  Now, who wants to go to a prom and have to be home by twelve o'clock when all of the after parties--so I never went to a prom.  And so my folks were, were, were strict, I didn't go; there was a club in Hal, in Hallandale [Hallandale Beach, Florida], well known club at the time called the Palms [Million Dollar Palms]; and on Tuesday night, I still remember this.  On Tuesday night, it was teenage night, and you would have the best performers in--black performers--in the U.S.  The Platters, the, I mean you name the group, they came to the Palms, and on Tuesday nights, it would be teenage night.  Well guess who wasn't there on Tuesday night (laughter)?  So by not going to school with, with the, the kids, I don't know, because I only really saw them in school or when we were just playing around.  I lost, pretty much lost touch and because I wasn't really part of, of the Fort Lauderdale [Florida] community, I never really totally got into that, although I knew Cecil at Dillard.
Speaker 1: You met her there right?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: We weren't close friends at Dillard, we became friends at Florida A and M [Florida Agricultural and Mechanical University, Fort Lauderdale, Florida] and roommates (audio disturbance). (Pause) Cecil was my roommate for several years.
Story_ID: 673027
Speaker 1: --Talk about FAMU [Florida Agricultural and Mechanical University, Tallahassee, Florida].  We have so-, you know some of this already recorded.  But who is your ro- like what is the decision about where to go, and what are you deciding then?  And who, let's go back to who influences you, so, you're between two communities, your parents [Pearlie Weeks Terrell and Charles Terrell, Sr.] are real strict, and I have to, I won't, you know I have to say this.  You are, you're an internal person in a lot--you're a quiet person, internal.  But what is, what is forming you, what is, what's influencing you, what are you thinking, you know what are you wanting to be, what are, what are those?
Speaker 2: There were just lots of questions; I'm not sure what was informing me more than the, the drive to have some questions answered.  More like what's out there, I can be satisfied doing what I'm doing being where I am, but wondering what el- what else?  And so I, I, I think a part of this, the silent piece is to do with the fact that I was, I ju- I, I can be alone thinking about what, what am I doing?  What I really wanna do (background noise) and what's important, and what else?  So I, I don't, I'm not sure how to answer that question.
Speaker 1: But, let me as- let me ask it a different way.  Who, who are you at that age, I mean what things were important to you and what, who are you?
Speaker 2: What was important I, I think I was just like most kids I, I wanted to try to fit in, but I, I didn't.  I was--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: So there was a awkwardness?
Speaker 2: I, yeah I was always tall so I was probably the tallest in, in the class and taller than most of the boys.  I remember I, I didn't even know I was bowlegged until one of the boys go, "You bowlegged," and I'm, what's bowlegged?  So I mean just another thing of not, not fitting in.  I can run around and play and during the day but definitely during the evening it was to, to be in.
Speaker 1: Doing homework?
Speaker 2: Doing homework, doing homework and not just because I had to.  My mother used to talk about the fact that if I made a mistake in, instead of ju- just simply erasing or something, I just had to have it right.  I would tear up the paper until I, I, I got it the way I really I wanted it to, to be.  So I, I didn't go out, I mean so there, there was so many ways I, I didn't fit in, and so I had to figure out more of how do you, how do you, you sort of accept some things?  But then look past that to that being, not being the end but it the means to, to getting there.  And FAMU was, was fun I, I--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: So when you were--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: That's my first time away from home, I thought I was, you know I went buck wild (laughter).
Speaker 1: Now how long did it take you go, go--'cause you know it's a time of exploration and you go into FAMU, it's 1962, right?
Speaker 2: Sixty-three [1963].
Speaker 1: Three [1963] okay, '63 [1963], '64 [1964].
Speaker 2: And I left in '66 [1966].
Speaker 1: Okay that's right.
Speaker 2: So I, I just wanted to finish soon, so I didn't I, I took, I went, I just, I did it faster than the, the normal four years.
Story_ID: 673028
Speaker 1: So what, I mean what went in your decision, how did you, what were your choices, or what were your thoughts about going?
Speaker 2: There weren't a lot of choices because I was black and there was still this thing called segregation.  So FAMU [Florida Agricultural and Mechanical University, Tallahassee, Florida] was where my brother [Charles Terrell, Jr.] had gone, and my father [Charles Terrell, Sr.] being in the, the A.M.E. [African Methodist Episcopal] church had asked me if I wanted to go to Bethune-Cookman [Bethune-Cookman University, Daytona Beach, Florida].  But I, I didn't really know Bethune-Cookman.  I, I didn't know Tallahassee [Florida] but I knew my brother had gone there.  And so it was if you go you go to Tallahassee, I got a scholarship, it didn't cover everything, I worked also.  Because my folks didn't have, you know they still had the, the others at home and they didn't have a lot, they had a lot compared to many others.  But in the grand scheme of things, they couldn't afford for me to, to go school without a scholarship or, or doing some work.  So but FAMU was, was it, it was as you know was, was, is historically black college [HBCU], and so that's where I went.
Speaker 1: So wha--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: And I wanted to, I was, I thought I wanted to be a journalist, somehow it was in my mind I wanted to be a journalist.  And, but and FAMU had a, a major in journalism.  But when I got there, in order to, there was no longer a major.  And in order to minor in journalism I had to major in English, so I majored in English and minored in journalism.  And when I finished, I didn't wanna teach and I didn't wanna write another word, and I just wanted to travel, I wanted to see something else.  I had never been out of Florida, so I think I said that along comes a recruiter for Job Corps in Maine.  And all they wanted was a degree, I had that and, and I wanted to, to travel and they offered that.  And so--off, off I went.
Story_ID: 673029
Speaker 1: Let me just understand something, can you just recap (unclear) at FAMU [Florida Agricultural and Mechanical University, Tallahassee, Florida] what was most significant about that?  Because what we're really talking about a worlds opening up, right, which will also be the case when you go into the Job Corps.  But--which is a totally different world in some respects.  So what, what does the world, because you've been in a pretty strict, confined, you know environment--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: And then you go there, what are you, what, what is transformative about that experience for you and--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: At FAMU?
Speaker 1: About FAMU.
Speaker 2: I, I thought was (laughter) as, as all folks should, I thought I was grown (laughter).  No longer the, the under the sort of the, the family roof.  And it was in Hallandale [Hallandale Beach, Florida] I, whether I could hang out with people or not, I knew who was there.  But at FAMU there were people from, from lots of other places.  You know from all over the, the U.S. in a sense at FAMU, so different worlds opened, opened up, I could decide where I wanted--well pretty much, let's say within limits, because it was still a segregated environment there.  But around the campus again it's, it's like running around Hallandale in a sense.  But, but I could decide a, a lot more than, than being at home, now there was a curfew and you had to be in by the curfew.  Which is you know unheard of now in, on, on college campuses, but it's just, there were just different people that were there.  People had come with different experiences and so it was, it was just different.
Speaker 1: And who did you, so who did you befriend there, so Cecil [HistoryMaker Cecil Hayes], so your first year roommate is who and then?
Speaker 2: I had my, my first semester I had, I just, I 'can't--Charlene [ph.], her name was Charlene just came to me, and I don't remember her last name.  But we were put together, we were assigned a, a dorm we were assigned a room.  And although Cecil and I went to high school [Dillard High School, Fort Lauderdale, Florida], we weren't friends in high school.  But we were friends at FAMU very quickly, and so and then there was another person from Fort Lauderdale [Florida] that went to FAMU, Betty Ethridge [ph.], and that was, that was there.  So we were all in the same dorm because there was a freshman dorm, McGuinn Hall and so it was easy to get to know who was there and Shirley was in, in McGuinn.
Speaker 1: [HistoryMaker] Shirley Kinsey?
Speaker 2: Shirley Kinsey was in, was there.  So we, Cecil and I became very fast friends, and then became roommates after that, we were roommates until I left.
Speaker 1: So what were you doing during summers, were you going back home to Hallandale or what?
Speaker 2: I went to school during--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Oh to, oh so you, that's what--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Not every summer but, but--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --enough to graduate--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I grad- I went, I went to FAMU in '63 [1963] and graduated in '66 [1966].
Story_ID: 673030
Speaker 1: So I'm interested--also that's why I thought it was '60 [1960].  So--'62 [1962].  I, I'm also interested in, you said there were recruiters coming to campus, right?
Speaker 2: Um-hm. Um-hm.
Speaker 1: And that's how you got the job--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --with the Job Corps, so this is the time really that the Job Corps is starting you know in some respects, so, Maine?
Speaker 2: Yeah (laughter) I mean what was I doing, what was I thinking?
Speaker 1: So (laughter)--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: I didn't know, you know I was geographically challenged, so Maine seemed like it was a long ways away.
Speaker 1: It was.
Speaker 2: And it was, but it was away and I didn't, I somehow I, I think growing up in Hallandale [Hallandale Beach, Florida] I think being at Dillard [Dillard High School, Fort Lauderdale, Florida], I think being at FAMU [Florida Agricultural and Mechanical University, Tallahassee, Florida] there was, I don't know.  There was a comfort, there was a sense of encouragement, there was, there was something that said to me I can go to Maine.
Speaker 1: Surprise, so when you go--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: I was naive, I was young.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) I know, I know (laughter).  So when you went to Maine, can you tell me what the program was, tell me a little bit about it?
Speaker 2: Job Corps.
Speaker 1: Job Corps.
Speaker 2: Job Corps center, it was Poland Spring Job Corps Center for Women [Poland, Maine].
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: And what, it, it, it, what they really did was to take young women, sixteen to twenty-one from the inner cities, the major inner cities, Detroit [Michigan], New York [New York], Chicago [Illinois] and take them, send them to the Job Corps for vocational training.  I, I kind of likened it in hindsight to when people back had tuberculosis, they sent them to the country for some fresh air or something.  You had these inner city girls going to Maine, I mean it was like me going to, to Maine in a sense.  Probably none of us knew what we were really getting into, but I was a counselor, me, a counselor.  They knew more about life--as they said, you know, "Listen, college girl, listen to me teach you a few things."  And, and they did.  I mean I had, I enjoyed working with, with, with them, it was four days on, four days off.
Story_ID: 673031
Speaker 1: Genie [Eugenia Nicholas] who I befriended and became, my folks [Pearlie Weeks Terrell and Charles Terrell, Sr.] became her legal guardian also went to Maine.  But she was from Rhode Island so she--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: You met Genie in Maine?
Speaker 1: I met Genie at FAMU [Florida Agricultural and Mechanical University, Tallahassee, Florida].
Speaker 2: At FAMU but she also went to Maine with you?
Speaker 1: Yes she and I went.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: So in a sense that was a lit- a little level of, of comfort--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: So where were you in Maine?
Speaker 1: Poland Spring [Poland Spring Job Corps Center for Women, Poland Spring, Maine].
Speaker 2: Poland Sp--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Which is right near--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: It's near Portland [Maine].
Speaker 1: Yes not too far.
Speaker 2: And so how did you, because this is a totally, I mean it's a totally different environment--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: It is (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: --than you--anywhere experiences.  A lot of white people.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I'd never, ever dealt with whites, I had never seen a change of seasons, I'd never seen snow.  But it was there and I had to deal with that.
Speaker 2: And you told the funny story of you seeing snow for the, you know you were in a meeting--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: In a meeting.
Speaker 2: And then you were like (laugher) this, there's snow.  So--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: I learned to ski, so it, you know--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: And that was how you did that from 1966 to 19--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Sixty-seven [1967].
Speaker 2: Nineteen sixty-seven [1967] okay.
Speaker 1: I, I liked working with the, with the young women there, but I didn't care much for the administration, because I didn't think they were treating them, treating them right.  They would arbitrarily--they would not establish rules, but, but apply them, so I didn't think that was right--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: You're talking about to the, young, the young women that you were--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 2: Okay, okay.  Well these programs are getting started pretty quickly you know and money's coming available.
Story_ID: 673032
Speaker 1: But then you went to OIC and that's was, and you know this is Dr. Leon Sullivan--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --right, who started that.
Speaker 2: Genie [Eugenia Nicholas] and I went to, we, we left Maine to go to Boston [Massachusetts], and we really were going to you know just go different places, but somehow we got stuck in Boston.  I eventually, I went to California for a while, but Genie never did, she loved it, and, and, and stayed.  But OIC was, but, it was in--right when a lot of the sort of the War on Poverty, Dr. Sullivan's OIC, Opportunities Industrialization Center [Opportunities Industrialization Centers], and it was a retraining center.  So I started as a counselor there because now I have a year's experience, I'm, I'm, I'm really (laughter) I'm experienced.  And then I worked from being a counselor to counseling supervisor, to director of training and then director of operations there.
Speaker 1: But this is, so you were at OIC for how long and you were there for let's see '67 [1967] to '73 [1973], this is in Boston?
Speaker 2: In Boston.
Speaker 1: Okay so how are you, 'cause Boston is also a different place but there a lot of young people there, but you're working as a professional.  And so I know Boston and I know, I mean I know Boston as a student--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: But I don't know Boston to work there and so I'm wondering, where are you living and, and who are you, where are you living, let's start there.
Speaker 2: We got an apartment on Huntington Ave [Avenue].
Speaker 1: In the Back Bay [Boston, Massachusetts], the Huntington, oh, no, no, no.  It's on the--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: On the train line--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: By Northeast--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yes, it's up past Northeastern [Northeastern University, Boston, Massachusetts].
Speaker 1: Nor- Northeastern, okay.
Speaker 2: It's near what's now Brigham and Women's [Brigham and Women's Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts]; used to be--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --used to be Boston (unclear).
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, okay.  And what are you learn--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Right on the train track.
Speaker 1: Yeah, what are you learning about the, like was Mel, was it Mel King [HistoryMaker Melvin King]--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Was he active then?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay, so what are you, who's important in that, in the, in your formation there in your work and, and what's--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Mel King you had the, the Baino's [ph.] you had--
Speaker 1: But fa--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Gary Robinson; I mean, so you had, you had, I'm look, I'm seeing her in my mind, I'm almost--what is her name Edna, Eth- Lewis.
Speaker 1: Oh Ed- Ed- Edna Lewis [sic. HistoryMaker Elma Lewis].
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Edna Lewis with her--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --her, her art, art center [National Center of Afro-American Artists, Boston, Massachusetts]--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Her bun, that's what I can--yes, exactly (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: That's right, that's right.  And you have, you also have the, a strong Muslim population with the bean pies and you know all that sort of going on--
Story_ID: 673033
Speaker 1: But what work were you doing in the community? Can you talk about that and the structure of the OIC [Opportunities Industrialization Centers]?
Speaker 2: OIC was an adult retraining center, and so it was just that it was--now I'm really dating myself, not even just with OIC but keypunch.  So they had various tra- training programs.  At that time though, what OIC did and what, when I became director of training, I was responsible for, is that was working with, these are the titans of, of industry around what were they looking for so that we could train and place.  But you also had that going on while you had people who were given a second chance, we, we had a recruiter who had just been released from prison.  You know, but they, they had work; they didn't have all the query and all the recs, rest of that.  And so we had training--we had recruitment, training and placement.  That was, that was really important.  The training was right on because it was working with the, the Digital Equipments [Digital Equipment Corporation], it was working with Gillette [The Gillette Company].  It was working with, with Wang [Wang Laboratories], and at that time you had major corporations that were located in Boston [Massachusetts] and they wanted to see what they could do.  You had something called the Vault at that time in, in Boston and--with helping to, to place trainees.  And, and so that's what a lot of what was just a lot of stuff that was, that was going on, a lot of new stuff for me too at that time.  Because going from, from school [Florida Agricultural and Mechanical University, Tallahassee, Florida] to Maine and now in the, the big city just new things to, to experience in a sense.
Speaker 1: And there's a, the reason I'm interested in this period, Dorothy [HistoryMaker Dorothy Terrell], is that this is the--and especially because the OIC stories, we weren't able to do Leon Sullivan and, well I had wanted to do.  And this is really, it's early '70s [1970's] period is really important in terms of entry into Corporate America.  You know 'cause things are opening, but they opened through--it's the Urban League [National Urban League] and it's OIC that I think of mainly.  You know there are other job, job, there other training programs and everything, but how is OIC run that's what I'm saying.  And are you, you know it's headquartered in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], right at that point.  So are you going back, are you--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: No I wasn't.
Speaker 1: No oh--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: But Gary who, Robinson [Gary Robinson] who was the executive director would go back and, and, and forth.  And Dr. Sullivan as you know with the Sullivan principles were, that was, that was, that was him.  And with, with Corporate America.  My, my work was as counseling initially and then became counseling supervisor.  But really took off when that, with, with as director of training, because I was working with the senior vice president from Digital or a, of the young manufacturing--or the, the, the, the top person.  Not, not the CEO's but they would always have someone right below the CEO who was responsible for making sure.  And it wasn't, I don't remember a lot of HR [human resources] people there, but a lot of hands-on from, from senior vice presidents.  But in the case of Digital, the senior vice president of manufacturing and engineering had his, a person who was over all of HR sit in for, for him.  So I got to know those, those people and work with them, because that's the way we targeted the training.  And that's, that's who hired our, the trainees at that time.
Speaker 1: And so what were you judged on then, were you judged on placements?  You know getting people placed, trained and then placed?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: And how many were you training in a year?
Speaker 2: I don't remember.
Speaker 1: You don't, okay, I'll come--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: I don't remember.
Speaker 1: I'll come to that, yeah I know.  Okay--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: It depend on the classes.  Like keypunch might, might be a bit shorter than, than automotive or, or whatever.  But it, there were all, was all vocational training.
Speaker 1: But the industries were computer with the keypunch--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: And then automotive with, and were there other industries?
Speaker 2: Electric- electrical.
Speaker 1: How about banking, any banking?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: No banking, okay, okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: Unh-uh.
Story_ID: 673034
Speaker 1: Do you get restless and, I mean or da- how does the opportunity come up with the, the Office of--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Office for Children (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: --Children, um-hm how does that, 'cause at this point in time you are, you're twenty-, how old are you (background noise), twenty--
Speaker 2: I was twenty-one when I left, left school [Florida Agricultural and Mechanical University, Tallahassee, Florida] at twenty-two, yeah I was about twenty-three at, when I started at OIC [Opportunities Industrialization Centers], I was in my twenties let's say, early twenties.
Speaker 1: Right okay and then, but when you become assistant director how old are you twenty-thr- ?
Speaker 2: No I wasn't twenty-three, you mean at OIC or at the Office for Children?
Speaker 1: Office, Office of Children.
Speaker 2: I was at OIC about six years, so--
Speaker 1: Six years, okay. This is something wrong (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: So I was still in my twenties but I, that would be towards the, the latter part of twenties--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Twenties, okay.  So tell me about that, that position there.
Speaker 2: I was assistant director--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: And why did you take that, why, what was that opportunity and how did it come?
Speaker 2: I was assistant director at the Office for Chil- I mean at OIC and the only position--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: So what at that point were you, you sa-, was Gary Robinson--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: No Gary was at, working for the state at that time.
Speaker 1: Okay, so who was director at that point that you--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Clarence Donelan.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It's amazing these names are coming back, but Clarence was the, the executive director at that time.  And I was working under Clarence and had everything else, and I had no interest in being the director.  Gary had left to work at the state and Gary is the one that gave my name to David Liederman who was the director of the Office for Children.  The Office for Children was a newly created state agency at that time, and it was responsible for coordinating children's services across Massachusetts.  So I think, see the, the, the trend here is I tended to go into things I had no idea what I was doing.  And somehow figured it out and made it happen.  In this instance the position was coordinating licensing or less, licensing of, of private agencies and approving state agencies.  But first we had to develop regulations for doing that, there were, weren't really that regulations.  And it was for adoption agencies, foster care agencies, group care facilities and later on I was given responsibility for all daycare licensing across the state.  So it, it was pulling together the, the right folks to be able to pull together the other, bigger, right folks to develop these regulations for each one of these and then to apply them.  And that's, that's what we did.  So it was Gary that--who I, whom I had worked for and with at OIC that had given my name and that's how I got into, to there.  Now because it was a new agency, you didn't have to go through civil service or any of that kind of stuff.  But probably three, about three years later, then civil service is saying, you've had your fun now you should hire from the civil service rolls.  And before you could hire whomever you thought could really get the job done, and so that wasn't attractive to me.  And I started to look around the state to see if there were any more new agencies that were, were being developed that, that might be new and exciting, but there weren't.
Story_ID: 673035
Speaker 1: And at the--that time, I got a call from Paul Newman whom I knew from Digital [Digital Equipment Corporation] and--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: And you had met him when you were at OIC [Opportunities Industrialization Centers] (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: Director--at the OIC.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: And he said, "You know are ready to do some work?" (Laughter) And I said, "What do you think I've been doing," so he was teasing from that perspective.  But he says, "I, I really would like for you to consider to coming to work for Digital."  Well since I was going to leave the Office for Children anyway, I decided that perhaps I should just talk to some other people that I had also worked with in other companies to see if, if there might be something interesting.  But the long and short of it is I did go to work for Digital and I started at the best place possible.  Although I didn't know at the time and, in Westminster [Massachusetts] and that was my entry into Corporate America.
Speaker 2: So can you tell me by the, about the statement that you just made, that you went to work for the best place possible, that you didn't know it at the time.  Can you talk about that?
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: 'Cause you know I often, '76 [1976] is when I'm graduating I'm at Brandeis [Brandeis University, Waltham, Massachusetts], it's right, you know that corridor became like the main corridor and who would've--I didn't know that graduating.  So I'm, I'm just want, can you talk 'cause that's the one, is it the 128 [Massachusetts Route 128]?
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: That's 128, but I, but where I went was further out.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: But, but they talk about the 128 corridor because that was the, where most of the companies were there or out past that.  That's so the corridor is, is out there.  You had Digital, you had Wang [Wang Laboratories], you Data General [Data General Corporation], you had, you name it, it was what people think of now as Silicon Valley; it was the Silicon Valley of, of that time.  And where I went to work was Westminster, although I didn't, living in Boston [Massachusetts], I had no idea where Westminster was.  I knew the job was in Westminster, so I figured I could find it.  But all of my interviews were held in Maynard [Massachusetts] which was closer then.  And so I go through the interviewing process, I get the job and as Paul says, "It's in Westminster," I said, "Yes I know."  He says, "Do you know where it is," I said, "No." He says, "Well you get on route--do you know how to get to Cambridge [Massachusetts]," I s- "Yeah," you know.  Cambridge is, as you know is not far, but when you are in Boston you, you don't go to Cambridge.  Or when you're in Cambridge, you're not coming to, to Boston, they're, they're kind of different worlds of sorts.  But Route 2 [Massachusetts Route 2] takes you past Cambridge, and you go, he says, "Just stay on Route 2 and you'll get to Leominster [Massachusetts], Fitchburg [Massachusetts]," and he says, "and Westminster is right past that, if you get to Gardner [Massachusetts] you've gone too far."  So I'm thinking okay, I can do this, I didn't know how far it was, it was a long ways.
Speaker 2: How long is it?
Speaker 1: It's over an hour, well over an hour, and it's a good think I started early on my first day.  But you, you try doing that when the snow is falling or ice and there's a little slight incline, it, it was, it was something.
Story_ID: 673036
Speaker 1: But, Westminster [Massachusetts] was the largest facility that Digital [Digital Equipment Corporation] had and was called the FA and T: facility--final assembly and test.  And that's where all of the other facilities that were doing this part or that part would ship it to Westminster.  And it would be put together and then would be shipped out the door to the customer, so it was a plant that really had the, the customer interface, it was the largest plant.  And anybody--we used to say, anybody who was anybody in manufacturing had done in the time in Westminster, so people were familiar with that plant.  That was a really important plant, and it happened to be the plant that I started out as in, in employee relations.  It happened to be at a time when Digital was very serious about affirmative action.  Paul Newman and his boss Jack Smith were very serious about affirmative action.  And, and the timing was great because we were just coming out of a, a tough time for the industry.  And when Digital went through that time, they never laid off anyone, even though they had too many people, they painted the, the parking lot or whatever.  But they would, had come out of that time and now we're into, let's hire, let's hire some good people, and let's make sure there's some diversity.  Digital had plants in New Hampshire, they had plants all over and somehow they were able to recruit from not just Boston [Massachusetts], me, but across the U.S.  Recruit, recruit people of color and develop communities sort of around it, so it wasn't a one or two people, there would be a lot of us that they would, would hire.  And so I started in Westminster, I started in employee relations, then became--a year later; this is when you could get be, get promoted right away--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Every year, right?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Maybe sometime--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: I mean it was incredible.  And it was also at a time that if you had something to contribute, they would listen.  You didn't have to be an engineer to be able to say your opinion.  You voice your opinion, if it made sense, if it was right, somehow it was just fine.  So then I became the, I was employed, then Paul decided, Paul is in Maynard [Massachusetts]--I mean Westminster, and I worked for, it'll come to me pretty soon.  But I worked for the plant manager, so there were like, there's a million square feet at that plant.  And I worked for the plant manager, they decide, well this is pretty big, we need an employee relations manager, and have all of the employee relations people report to this person.  And so, they said, "That's you."  So I became the employee relations manager, and then Dick, Dick Farrahar [Richard Farrahar] was, was the person I worked for.  Dick went to work for as a group personnel manager which meant he had several plants reporting to him, and I became the, the personnel manager for the plant in Westminster.  And it was also a time when they were building a, another large facility in, in Salem [Massachusetts], but until it was built the people who are hired for that were in Westminster.  So I became the plant personnel, which is HR [human resources] now, for all of it, so everything in the plant reported to me.
Speaker 2: So how many people is that at that plant?
Speaker 1: It's a couple of thousand I guess.
Speaker 2: A couple--
Story_ID: 673037
Speaker 1: So you start out as the human resources manager but then you, and then, say that again you're, you're the human--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: I started as employee relations manager (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: Employee relations manager (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: Which means that you work with one particular group within the plant and then there was employee, I'm sorry employee relations and rep, work with one particular group.  Then as employee relations manager, so I had all of the employee relations reps reporting to me.  And then I became the HR or personnel manager, which means benefits, the whole everything.
Speaker 1: So what are, I know you say that this is common sense, but it's a thousand employees, what are the things that you have to do?  And what training are they providing?  And then at the same time the, the high tech is really moving more into--and this is high, you know we think of Silicon Valley, but that can I, can I, let me ask one question.  The area, Boston [Massachusetts] was it because of the schools that the high tech was able to emerge there--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And, and where are you recruiting--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: A lot of them came from MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: You know Ken Olsen was at MIT.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: A lot of the folks came from, from MIT that was the, it was just a, a cadre of, of those entrepreneurs at that time.
Speaker 1: So are you doing, you're doing a lot of recruiting on campuses or do you not have to recruit is at that point?
Speaker 2: We're doing, doing a lot of recruiting, campuses, other areas I don't you know, I was the ma-, I was the senior level person at the plant, but I wasn't the only person of color in that plant by a long shot.  And being so far out of Boston you'd think that that would, would be unusual.  But Digital [Digital Equipment Corporation] really did do, they were serious and so when you're a company saying, now, "Can't find anybody, people don't wanna work here," something else is going on.  Because if you could get companies like Digital Da, Data General [Data General Corporation] and those to establish communities in New Hampshire, or far out Western Mass [Western Massachusetts], and people live there.  And that's why you would have a number of, of blacks now living in, in some certain parts of New Hampshire.  They came with Digital, they're still there, you know.  So, no something else is, is afoot.
Story_ID: 673038
Speaker 1: So they gave you, so what are the, what are the challenges during this period and where are the opportunities and what are you learning, let me put it that way.
Speaker 2: The, the challenges are because it was such a fast moving environment, I'm not a technologist.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: So I'm, I'm learning all, all over the place, I didn't--the, the HR [human resources] stuff for me, I'm not even an expert in that, so everything is, is new.  I moved to, out of Boston [Massachusetts] to Marlborough [Massachusetts], because it was just taking too long to get to, to Westminster [Massachusetts], and so I lived in, rented a place in, in, in Marlborough, so lots of challenges.  People coming, new people from again, if I thought at A and M [Florida Agricultural and Mechanical University, Tallahassee, Florida] there were lots of people from other parts, this is, this is altogether very different.  It's also at a time when Digital [Digital Equipment Corporation] was, was looking at valuing differences, and so they're starting to set up what's called core groups.  And they would be made up of, of whites and blacks and men and women.  To talk about what gets in the way of you being your most powerful self, what, you know, and because of where I was (laughter) in, in, in the, in, in the plant and my level, I'd be with like the senior vice presidents.  And so I got to know these people and so lots of challenges, lots of, of, of opportunities.  And then after Westminster, I became a group personnel manager, which meant I had several groups, I had several plants reporting to me.  And so the plant HR personnel managers reported to me and I'm still growing in, in, in Digital.  And--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Dorothy [HistoryMaker Dorothy Terrell], were you the only, not only but who was most senior in terms of African Americans at Digital when you're there?  And, and did they separate on the, you know you're on the, the--
Speaker 2: HR versus line--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: H side versus the engineering end?
Speaker 2: No, no, one of my best friends to today is Ralph Gillespie, Ralph was an engineering manager and I met him at Westminster.  And because we were, I was most senior woman, he was the most senior man, when he first got there they're going, "Oh isn't this nice, maybe they'll get married," because I wasn't married at the time.  And then his wife comes and they go oh wow (laughter).  Ralph and I are still really, really, really close friends, he since divorced and remarried.  And I'm friends with the ex-wife and the, the, the current wife.  But so I, they were other senior line managers there.  When Ralph left Westminster, he was the plant manager in Boston, before him, Leroy Saylor was the plant manager in Boston.  So you had African American plant managers, I think I was the first African American woman to be a plant manager in the U.S.  But there were plant managers who were, were black men in, in, in Digital.
Speaker 1: You know why I'm asking this question 'cause you think of tech now and you know when, the, it's hard you don't see a lot of--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --blacks in tech and yet this was the first tech, and I don't wanna say first tech, but you know definitely IBM [International Business Machines Corporation] and Xerox [Xerox Corporation].
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Story_ID: 673039
Speaker 1: And when I look at your career, you're having--but, whether it's here at Digital [Digital Equipment Corporation] or at Sun [Sun Microsystems, Inc.], you know you're sort of rising up it seems relatively easily.  What were the cultures of these organizations at that point in time and are you experiencing any you know any issues, like running, you know being a plant manager or anything?
Speaker 2: In, at Digital, we used to say R before I--relationships before issues.  And so in (unclear), I don't care who you were, when you were hired, you weren't hired to make decisions right away.  And so you met people.  They'd say, "Go meet this person, go meet that person, meet that."  So I'd meet you, and you know have a conversation, who are you, who am I and stuff.  And then a few months down the road when now it's the rubber's meeting the road I'd call and, "Julieanna [Julieanna Richardson], hey it's Dorothy [HistoryMaker Dorothy Terrell]."  "Hi how you doing," "I'm doing fine," we chitchat and then say, "How can I help you?"  And then I tell you what the issue was and you'd say, "No problem, we can work that."  So it was relationship before issues.  When I got to Sun, I had back to back meetings the first week, and I'm thinking oh isn't this nice, people want to get to know me.  Wrong, those--at Sun it was I before R, issues before relationships, and you didn't have a relationship if you couldn't work issues.  So people wanted to, they would come, this is a problem, I mean I, I had, I had a new group that just been formed at, at Sun.  But you know they had this issue with that, this issue and that issue, and so it was a totally different environment, totally.  But one was in the East Coast kind and gentler and now this there's a West Coast where it was you know rough and tumble.  The good news of that for me was even though Sun was located in the West Coast, Scott McNealy whom I worked for, the CEO of Sun sent me back to the East Coast.  He wanted to start up a group on the East Coast, and because I had come from the East Coast, he knew, he, he, he felt that I could hire the talent.  Because at that time, Digital and Wang [Wang Laboratories] and those, were having serious trouble, it had started laying off and, and weren't doing as well.  And so, wisely, Scott felt that, that there was talent to be had on, on the East Coast.  And I had the, the, the relationships back there when and could start up this--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: I see (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: --new operation--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: I see (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: --that he wanted to start up, and find out if he could make some money in, in that particular business.
Speaker 1: I see, okay.
Story_ID: 673040
Speaker 1: I wanna go back to Digital [Digital Equipment Corporation] a bit before, because when you become plant manager, the plant, now I have the plant in Roxbury [Boston, Massachusetts]; is the plant in Roxbury?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: But you're, are you in Westminster [Massachusetts] or you moved to Ro- you, you, are you reverse commuting?
Speaker 2: I would, no, no I, I was in Westminster and then I was in Maynard [Massachusetts] as a group--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --personnel manager.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: And then I, I worked for the senior vice president for manufacturing doing a strategic job for a while, which I didn't really care for.  And then I went to be a plant manager and--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: That's 1984, I have.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah I, I got this call from Ralph [Ralph Gillespie] and he was going to, to do something else.  And he says, "Do, do you wanna be a plant manager," and so I laughed I mean I really, I mean it was like I, like a belly laugh.  You know 'cause I'm thinking, Ralph, I'm in a meeting why you, you know, there were no plant managers in Digital, that didn't come from materials or from engineering.  And so he says, "Well why, why you laughing," (laughter) and so I reminded him of that fact.  He says, "Tell you what, why don't you wait to see what the requirements are, and then you decide whether you're interested or not."  And so I said, "Yeah sure."  Then the core requirements come out and I see they played more to my strengths.  This was a learning to not automatically assume that I can't do something just because of others who had done it.  And there were, Ralph had, had pulled together a really great team of individuals, and they wanted to now pull together a, a team.  And I, someone who knew Maynard, I'd been in Maynard, I knew Maynard, I came from that, the engineering I, the, did--the Boston [Massachusetts] plant, Boston, Roxbury plant made keyboards for every computer in, in Digital.  I worked for as a, as the group personnel manager for the person over all of manufacturing for  low end manufacturing, and that was that plant was under that, that group.  And also for low end engineering, so I had engineering and manufacture and I, and, and for a while, I had low end marketing also.  So it was like, nobody else, the person that worked for the engineering VP [vice president] wisely thought I worked closely with these groups.  Why don't I, why don't we also have mar-, I mean manufacturing, so the manufacturing VP said, "That makes sense, why do we need two people."  So I was the person that, that brought those two groups together.  That plant was one of the plants under that, so I knew that plant, I knew those people.  And as Jack [Jack Smith] says we, they knew the extent to which they could trust me, and they knew who I knew, they knew what I knew.  They knew who I could call on if, if, if I needed to, to, to call on someone.  So it really played to my strengths and I went after it, and I went after that job with a vengeance, because it was located in the inner city.  That's where I had come from, I--it for me was a chance to give back and, and to have a platform to do it.  And I went, I competed with an engineering manager for this job, and interviewed, the interviews were held with the, the group's staff as well as the plant staff interviews.  And I got the job.
Speaker 1: Oh wow.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 673041
Speaker 1: And so one of the, I was so excited about this, and I remember the, the plant manager I had worked for in Westminster [Massachusetts] saying, "Okay now, now you got to kind of, kind of cool it a bit."  I, he says, "You gotta be a little more emotional, a little," no he says, "you gotta show more emotion," that's what it was.  And I didn't understand what he saying at the time, but he was, he was giving me some really good advice.  Because you know, blacks and women, the--what we don't wanna show is that kind of emotion to people and that kind of thing.  And, but what he was saying is I should, I could show a little more emotion.  He says, "'Cause when you say something, you we know you mean it."  But when you work in, in the manufacturing, people and, and, and, and may not quite know how to take you, you know.  I, I tend to be direct.  And he says, you know, sof- soften, you know little back off a little (laughter).  The range of emotion once I, because Digital [Digital Equipment Corporation], you asked me once before what, what kind of training did they do?  Digital helped us to understand a lot about ourselves.  I could go out on the floor and understand how to, to make things happen on the, on the, on the floor with machines and that kind of stuff.  Westminster worked twenty-four, seven, so I mean I could come in and, and look at the end of the quarter this was big, big, big push end of quarter.  And so you were there a lot and, and you could, I could understand what was going on.  What Digital did was to really help more around understanding yourself and your interactions with people, and those core groups help with what gets in the, what really gets in the way.  Or kneejerk reactions, you, 'cause you can react to something that you don't even know why you're reacting to it.  I was introduced like I said with some, with the most senior people in tech because they weren't a lot of me going around.  There were a lot of blacks but they weren't a lot of at my, at my level not a lot.  And so you know, a simple thing like the senior vice president of manufacturing and engineering talking about space.  And the tendency of women to come into a, a room or a, a meeting and we tend to just put our stuff, I'm generalizing.  But we tend to put our stuff, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So that we not imposing on people. Men tend to come in and they put, you know so it's like there is no boundary in a sense.  So you know kind of even just understanding of the, you don't, I don't have to go in and, and space it out.  But when I see someone else spacing it out, I know exactly what's going on and, and they're bit more on automatic than I would be.  So it just, those things was a lot more important to learn.
Speaker 2: So how did you, were they doing that, to did, I mean 'cause nowadays people have coaches, but this is pre, were they doing that--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: This is on office--this is time.
Speaker 2: This is office time?
Speaker 1: Yeah this is like a core group meeting and I can't remember how often we would meet but I, I was, on, on, on, on a couple of them.
Story_ID: 673042
Speaker 1: And Digital [Digital Equipment Corporation] was on--not all--I, I rose quickly in Digital, I rose far in Digital and, and I really thought I was something, you know?  But I got bumped off, off that pedestal, but it was the folks that helped me get up there that helped me get myself back together.  I was the, before going to be plant manager, I was the group HR [human resources] person for one of the groups, I forgotten the group.  And the, the person I worked for went to do something else, so in comes another group manager.  And he wanted his own, the person who had worked for him before as his person.  I didn't really care for him either but he moved on me, before I could move on him, or before I could move.  And, and I felt--I wasn't out of a job, I still worked for Digital, but I was out of that job, it was so embarrassing.  You know I was like I said I was like even though I was HR, I was top African American in, in, in the company, in HR except for the person who was over all of HR for Digital.  So and he would, he was an African American man.
Speaker 2: The one who moved on you?
Speaker 1: No.
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Not him.
Speaker 2: The one who was head of all H--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Was black, John Sims.
Speaker 2: John, wow, so Digital was pretty, you know this is, it was pretty diverse.
Speaker 1: He worked for Ken Olsen; he was Ken Olsen's person--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: So Ken Olsen was, Ken Olsen so--should get a lot of credit though right, or what--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Let me tell you this Ken Olsen does--should get a lot of credit, but I think a lot of stuff also happened, Ken didn't stop it, let's put it that way.  You know like when, when the plant, like the plant I was, I was, the plant manager, we did the millionth keyboard.  It was the, the most num- sort of the number exceeded anything anybody, any other plant had done.  And Ken came to talk to the, the folks in the plant, the pl- my--the plant was in Roxbury [Boston, Massachusetts], it was during the, the busing time.  But when you walked in that door, it was about work, so there were blacks in that plant, there were whites in that plant and worked together you know.  And there were Ken's, like I said John Sims worked for Ken Olsen, so there was a lot going on.  And it wasn't like I, I can name some other folks who would get more direct credit, but Ken pretty much knew what was going on and, and didn't stop it.
Speaker 2: So who were the other people that get more direct credit, who were they?
Speaker 1: Jack Smith would be one, Bill Hanson; manufacturing was more progressive in, in Digital than anywhere else, although Jack had all of manufacturing and engineering.  And when I went to go to Cuper- to Cupertino [California] which was the most technical operation Digital had, there was a clean room environment, and they asked me to go out there.  I talked to Jack, Jack is the one that I knew back from the OIC [Opportunities Industrialization Centers] days, and he was over, like I said all of the manufacturing, all of engineering worldwide for, for Sun [sic.]--for Digital.  And what he said to me is, "Are you sure you wanna do this?"  Because I was leaving in a sense manufacturing going to it, this plant was in engineering.  Because it was so technical, there were two new technologies they wanted to develop.  And he says, "Engineering is not as forgiving as manufacturing," and so I said, "Well were you concerned when I when I, I went to, to Boston [Massachusetts]?"  He said, "No, because if I was, it wouldn't have happened," so I said, "Are you really concerned about this?"  He says, "Not really, but just so you know, if you don't do this you're kind of"--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Done, you're done (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: You're done. Yeah.
Speaker 2: 'Cause it wasn't as forgiving?
Speaker 1: Yep.
Story_ID: 673043
Speaker 1: So but, you know what is also interesting to me and I don't know if it was at that time but later.  But you were in line positions, you know because you can't, you, you know a lot of times African Americans and I, you know in corporations were put in--well HR [human resources] was considered or it was, it was key, you know government relations or, or communications.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: You didn't have, well but you're telling me that there are African Americans in line positions at Digital [Digital Equipment Corporation].
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Basically running things.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: You know because you have, you have things, you have things you have to meet you know so what I read was that you did things like you--and I'm wondering if these were set by you or things that, you know that you set or things that were set by the organization?  Like I have that you decreased product cycle from ninety days to seventy-five.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Those, the, the measurements were in the, in, in those days you had to, you just had to ship.  You know hey, I remember getting something from one of the managers and, that I worked for.  And if there was you know you ship, but again there are certain things for me that, that make sense.  When I got to Digital, not Digital to, to Boston [Massachusetts] plant in Rox, in Roxbury, one person would do a little of this, and then they'd pass it down to somebody else to do you know.  So it was like a line like that.  I always go out and talk to people, because they're the ones that know what's going on.  And, and here's where the advice that Bob [ph.] gave me before, I, I didn't really take it and I'm glad I didn't.  Because they had, people understood me and, and that was, I was, I was still direct with people, but I encouraged them to be direct with me.  You know it's like that's the only way we can make this, this, this work.  But I, that bored me to see somebody doing a little of this and push it down, so for me it made sense to have teamwork.  And a team be responsible for making something happen, and that way a person could do a little of this.  Then they can change to do a little of that but they had a responsibility for making things happen, they'd figure out how to make it happen.  And that's how we, we did, we went from the line individual to teams, and with the teams we decreased the, the cycle time.  And, and increased the, the input those, those, those kinds of, kinds of things, and that's, that's the way we got it done.  My te- my pattern if you call it is to work in teams, I never think I'm the smartest person, and I, I never think I have all the answers, and not being technical.  And all the other things I didn't have going for me, then what I had going for me was ability to select really good people who wanted to do a really good job.  And they liked the idea of being responsible for results, and so together we can, can make things, make things happen.  And that was the way it was with the, the about anything that I've done.  And when I went from HR to the line, it was a chance to apply the things I had been telling people, you know, work with people, or you know treat them with respect.  It was a chance to see if, if that (laughter) stuff really worked.  And it does (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: So--
Story_ID: 673044
Speaker 1: What did you learn being also line manager, besides, or what challenges did you have?  'Cause it seems like everything was going; it went fine in that position, right?
Speaker 2: As a, as a in the plant?
Speaker 1: In the plant, I'm sorry as plant manager, I'm sorry.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Everything, so, so you did well as plant manager.  Now were there other plant managers around within the, the Digital [Digital Equipment Corporation] system?  There other plant managers how many of them--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: No women.
Speaker 1: No women, so you would get together would the other plant managers get together, and how are you doing vis-a-vis those other plant managers that were--?
Speaker 2: I have to tell you initially I was, I was really concerned because I was doing what I thought the, the way it shou-, it, it should be done.  With involving the, the, the, the st-, the staff, my direct staff as well as, I always go on the floor and talk to people, that's just the way I do it.  And because I did it that way, my staff made, you know they would make sure that I wasn't hearing something for the first time, if I'm going out on the line.  And, and, and having what you know what if, I empower my staff because like I--these smart people.  Not hiring you know people who don't know what, what they're doing, or why they're doing it or just wanna be in a small box.  And so I'm thinking this isn't as difficult as the way some of the guys talk about this.  Like it's, it's all consuming, it's all this, now it's, it's not ea-, I'm not saying it's, it's a piece of cake.  But the way they had talked about it I thought, I must be doing something wrong or not doing something.  And then I realized it's maybe it's just the way people, or some people, or some men, talk about their jobs, you know.  And my tendency is just to get things done and most things I, I won't say they are a piece of cake.  But if you have the right people then it makes things a whole lot easier to, to get things done, and to not only just survive you know, I really believe in thriving.
Speaker 1: So you're saying you didn't have like, you know how women talk about being first in something or you know people trying to trip them up or minorities, you know.  I mean you know the, the--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: No I had--no I'm not saying that that didn't happen.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I'm not saying that didn't happen at all, there was, there was one person, even when I was in the, in the plant that just and he, and he was a line manager.  It's almost like had kind of had it in for me in a sense.  And I talked to Ralph [Ralph Gillespie] about it, and Ralph's one of the smartest people I know in, in, in dealing with, with people and, and or how people might look at things or whatever.  And, and he helped me a lot with, with how to really app-, approach that and who I should talk to, to kind of let them know what, what was going on so that there were no surprises with that.
Story_ID: 673045
Speaker 1: When I was let go from the, the job that that I was telling you about--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: What, and ju- and what job was that, that's--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: It was, it was a group HR [human resources], this was before line--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: This was before the li--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Yep.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And I mean I--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: But you were let go from that job but you still--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Not from the company.
Speaker 2: But not from the company.
Speaker 1: No, I could you know they, I had time to look around, there were a lot of folks who were in shock.  I was a known entity throughout Digital [Digital Equipment Corporation] worldwide, so it was embarrassing for me, for, if nothing else.  And the first person I called was the woman who is doing all of the, the core groups and everything else, we were really good friends.  Named Barbara Walker and, and I thought Barbara was really, really smart and she, not was, she, Barbara is smart.  And, and so she came right, she, her office was up the, the hall and I, she came right down, I boohooed, closed the, I boohooed.  And the other I called was two guys who been part of the, the, the core group I was in, because these two guys and I would go out to dinner every so often.  And just, you know it was a give and take, and one of them I worked for, it was that kind of, kind of thing.  And so Barbara comes down, I'm, I boohooed you know she, you know, "It's gon' be okay, it's gon' be okay."  And the second was these two guys and we went out afterwards have a drink and, two great pieces of advice.  One from Barbara later on that night, and she calls and she says, "How you doing," and I said, "Oh how you think I'm doing?"  You know and she says, "Well what, what, what have you lost, what's, what's up," I almost said, "I've lost"--and then I thought about it.  And if she hadn't put it the way she did, and she hadn't pushed me, if she just let me cry, I probably would, wouldn't be sitting here with you today, I don't know.  But she said, I said, when she asked that question, I was thinking I lost, then I realized, I didn't lose anything.  And I won't lose it unless if give it up, I didn't, I'm thinking I lost myself self-respect and my dignity, you know that kind of stuff.  And I really hadn't, she says, "You lost a job, that's all, and you have everything else.  You don't, you're--unless you give it up, you're fine."
Story_ID: 673046
Speaker 1: And so I'm with Dick [Richard Farrahar] and, and, and, and Kevin [Kevin Melia] afterwards and we have a drink and they let me just talk about this guy like, "Oh, all yeah awful," blip, blip, blip.  And so then at the end, getting ready to leave and he said, they say, "So what you gonna do tomorrow?"  And I'm thinking I'm gonna stay home and keep the covers (laughter) over my head and just wallow in this.  I mean goodness, and they said, "What do you mean," they said, "you make sure you go to work on time," not that I had this job but it mean there had to be a transition.  It wasn't like (gestures) gone.  So he said, "You go to work on time, and you keep your head up, because people will be watching you.  And they'll take clues from you, and yep you can, you can tell us, you can talk to Barbara [Barbara Walker], but for the rest of the folks (shakes head)."  So I did what I needed to do, held my head up, I kept my dignity 'cause I wasn't giving it up and my self-respect.  And the vice president who's over all of manufacturing [at the Digital Equipment Corporation] afterwards, because I also went to, talked to some folks around what do I wanna do next, really do next?  He wanted me to, to go into line at that time, I didn't go into line at, at that time, I, I made a conscious decision to stay in HR [human resources], because I thought they needed strong people.  And that's when I went to be the HR person for the engineering and the manufacturing group that I, that I, I had.  And he says, "You passed a test," and I said, "What do you mean," and he says, "Not like there was a, a real purposeful test that was, that was given.  But it's easy to look good when things are going wrong, it's the easiest thing in the world, it's how you come through adversity.  And that's the test you passed, so let's look at what do you wanna do next?"  So I took the job in engineering manufacturing, best thing I could have done, because that was the steppingstone to the line.  And that's when I made the, the transition to, from staff to, to line to run the Boston plant [in Roxbury, Boston, Massachusetts].
Story_ID: 673047
Speaker 1: Can you talk about--so, so you had, you had a very diverse workforce, right?  So I had read that there were twenty languages and people from forty-five countries and you generated, you did just in time manufacturing, and, what is just in time manufacturing?
Speaker 2: If you remember when I was talking about people doing one thing and then pushing it and then just building, that's not just in time.  This is when something is really called for; you do it as it's needed as opposed to just stocking inventory.
Speaker 1: I see.
Speaker 2: Inventory is not something you wanna have, I mean you want to build something and have it move up.
Speaker 1: And have it moved up the, so were there lessons in that and then what is, were there lessons that you learned in the process in that?  And when I say that, I'm talking about Digital [Digital Equipment Corporation], you know and what was the industry itself calling for?
Speaker 2: This was when at one time inventory was what everybody wanted, you wanted to have lots of inventory, just in case, as opposed to just in time.  And so it was just when things were beginning to change to understand that you didn't need to have just in case, because you could have a lot of things but it could be a lot of the wrong things.  And if you knew what was coming in and what you needed, you could build it and then have it go out.  So I think it was when things were beginning to change, I, but because of, of organizing the plant into teams, they were able to come up with this.  And, and, and also because of the staff that I, that I had the person who was over materials, who, who later became the plant manager after me, Harold Epps, do you know Harold?
Speaker 1: I do know Harold.
Speaker 2: (Laughter) See small world.  Harold was the plant manager after me, he was my, he was the heir you know.
Speaker 1: 'Cause he's in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] now.
Speaker 2: Philadelphia.
Speaker 1: I can't believe, small world I'm on a committee with him, at Comcast [Comcast Corporation] I cannot, okay.
Speaker 2: So Harold was, was in, I had a great team working for me, you know the, and it, we became a team.  And then he was, that just permeated throughout the, the, the plant.  But and part of it, I, I, I know comes from also just involving people and people want to be involved, so it worked.
Speaker 1: And then--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: It was a, you know it's a three shift operation there and, and there, like I said we at one point did the millionth keyboard.  And it and we were doing keyboards for all of the, the computers for Digital, so it had to be different languages, and different, and different whatever.
Story_ID: 673048
Speaker 1: So who were your competitors most on, on let's say keyboards who were, who were the other competitors at the time (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: There might've been some that were after marketers but it went keyboard, our keyboards went with computers, so--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --our competitors at that point were like Wang or Data General.
Speaker 1: Okay, and how--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: And IBM [International Business Machines Corporation].
Speaker 1: Right, and IBM, right.  So were you, can you also talk about the industry at a whole, as a whole during that time period?  Like where was Digital [Digital Equipment Corporation], as opposed to Wang [Wang Laboratories] and well there and you're all local, located very close to each other.  Wang and Wang and what was the other, you said--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Data General [Data General Corporation].
Speaker 1: Data General, so who, who was one, who was one, two and three in that group?
Speaker 2: It was, it was kind of different because we were doing some, some different kinds of things.  Digital came about because it, we did minicomputers, you know IBM was doing the big mainframes.  And Digital then said we can do that kind of computer you, but with minicomputers as opposed to having--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: These big mainframes (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: --this whole big thing.  Now you wonder why if you do that kind of thinking to say that mainframe, mainframes could be displaced by although that with this still main--some mainframes.  Could be dis- pretty much displaced with minicomputers, we didn't take that to the next level to say what about personal computers?
Speaker 1: Which is what IBM did?
Speaker 2: What IBM did what a lot of other companies did.  Digital because be-, I, I know this was had three initiatives going on for personal computers.  But they were competing, they weren't working together.  And Ken [Ken Olsen] didn't really believe that anybody would want a computer in their home.  So it wasn't emphasis on it, and then what happened you have Compaq [Compaq Computer Corporation] which is personal computers buying Digital.  I was gone before then thank god (laughter).  So but you did have a Wang and you had, you, what you have in Silicon Valley, in that day and time you had in Massachusetts.
Speaker 1: Okay and so where there how, salaries were, so salaries were competitive and all of that?
Speaker 2: Um-hm that's why there was no need for, for unions.
Speaker 1: Unions, because you were, you were paying well.
Speaker 2: We were paying very well.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: For then.
Speaker 1: Were there stock options at that point and--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: Yes I had stock, yep and great benefits.
Speaker 1: Okay--
Story_ID: 673049
Speaker 1: When you got the promotion, you had talked about this with Cupertina--Cupertino, California.  What, how does that come about?  I mean, you said you, you were told, but how does that come about and is it Rick [sic.] who makes an opportunity available?  Or is it something--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Cupertino?  I'm--working in Maynard [Massachusetts] and trying to decide what I, what did I really wanna do next because Harold [Harold Epps] now has, has the plant.  I am now a mother, I am re- just lots of things are, are changing, I was working for Bill Hanson.  And I hadn't been there that long either, can't even remember it was a, it was, it was like a strategic type, type position.
Speaker 1: You mean at Cupertino?
Speaker 2: No, no, no, no.
Speaker 1: No at, at--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Maynard.
Speaker 1: In Maynard.
Speaker 2: And for, McGill, Chris McGill who was, who was the group manager for the Cupertino plant came in, into my office and I, I didn't really, really know Chris.  And he says, "Bill Hanson asked me to come down to talk to you to find out if you'd be interested in going to help us out in  Cupertino."  And it was, this was even more absurd to me than when Ralph [Ralph Gillespie] called about the Boston plant [in Roxbury, Boston, Massachusetts].  Because Cupertino was the most technical operation for us.  Digital [Digital Equipment Corporation] was in the process of building its most expensive computer.  And always had plants that were close when it came to the, the technical piece of it.  And they'd bought this operation in Cupertino, and there were two new technologies that were needed in order to have this computer be successful.  But we were having problems in Cupertino and it was a FAB [fabrication plant], so it was a clean room environment.  And I mean I, I knew that everybody at Digital knew, knew there were issues.  And this was the, the VAX 9000; this was where the big bucks were going to come from.  And for him to come down and ask me I want to go to Cupertino (laughter).  So I really didn't really know Chris but Bill Hanson was over all of engineering, I mean all of manufacturing for, for Digital.  And that was one of the reasons I went to talk to Jack [Jack Smith] because Bill even reported to Jack, and Jack had all of engineering.  He had all of, of manufacturing, I mean he was.  And, because what Bill was saying if I was, if I want to be, or be perceived as engin- for engineering and manufacturing in man, in Digital, I, I really did need to do this.  And Jack was saying well engineering is not really forgiving 'cause this is not just manufacturing, this is a FAB, this is an engineering operation.  These are engineerings, engineers rather that, that you're going to be dealing with out there.  Yeah, you start up a FAB, it is manufacturing but it's, it's technical, they're engineers.  They, they're the ones that look at the wafer and decide where the lines are, those kinds of things.
Speaker 1: These are silicon wafers, right?
Speaker 2: Yep.
Speaker 1: And what was the, what were silicon, what are well at, silicon wafers?
Speaker 2: It what it's made of and--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Okay, but the wafer what role did it play within the, the machine?
Speaker 2: Oh there's so much material on the wafer, just like now you have the, the little drive thing, there's lots of information that was--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: That can fit on the wafer okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, yeah.
Story_ID: 673050
Speaker 1: Okay, so you got offered, you accept that and it's, you accept that opportunity, do you move lock, stock and barrel as a family out there?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay so you're located where in Cupertino [California]?
Speaker 2: The, the plant is in Cupertino, yes.
Speaker 1: But where were you living?
Speaker 2: We lived in Saratoga [California], at that time I, you know I was married--Dorian [Dorian Brown] was, was a year and a half old, Al [Albert Brown] was working for, for Digital [Digital Equipment Corporation] also at that time.  And we had a live in and, and so everybody moved to Cupertino, to the, to California.
Speaker 1: Okay and tell, so you had that position, how long that's where I don't have the exact dates of that.  So that, and I also have a London [England] stint is that different, that's in market--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yeah I didn't go to, to London I, I left before that.
Speaker 1: You left before that, okay, okay.  But can you tell, can you just tell me so you moved there in what year, do you remember?
Speaker 2: I moved to Cupertino, let's see Dorian was born '87 [1987].
Speaker 1: She was born in '87 [1987].
Speaker 2: So she's a year, '89 [1989] something like that.
Speaker 1: Oh you moved to Cupertino in '89 [1989]?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, I think that was--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: It was about then.
Speaker 1: But then okay, then this has to be wrong.
Speaker 2: I know I was--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Family moves to Saratoga--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Florida in '88 [1988].
Speaker 2: No Sar-, not Saratoga, Florida.
Speaker 1: Saratoga, Calif- (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: California.
Speaker 1: Oh California, see.
Speaker 2: Okay Dorian was born in eighty s- she was born in April--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Eighty-seven [1987].
Speaker 2: Eighty-seven [1987] so it was '88 [1988] yeah it was '88 [1988] or early part of--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --eighty-nine [1989] something like that (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, okay.
Story_ID: 673051
Speaker 1: So tell me, the clean room, you've mentioned that a lot about the clean room.   Can we talk about what the importance of that was?
Speaker 2: Yeah because in order for the wafer to be built it had to be in a sterile environment.   And this is where--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: And that's when people dre- you see people--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yes, exactly and that was something I wasn't used to, I was used to in, in Boston [Massachusetts] I'd walk out on the floor and I, I see you.  So we have a conversation, we have a dialogue.  In Cupertino [California] I had to wash my face and then put on the clean room, the whole garb to go in.  And so I had to learn to recognize people through their eyes and their voice, because you couldn't see.  But that's where the manufacturing took place, but it was, it wasn't the usual manufacturing.  You manufactured the wafer, but it was with engineers all, all, all around, and it was a startup, because we weren't getting the wafers through.  It was, we had to perfect the, the operation and ramp it up.
Speaker 1: Oh I see.
Speaker 2: So it was total startup.
Speaker 1: And plus the industry you're saying it was changing too so there was, was there a demand on the bottom line sort of at this point?
Speaker 2: Oh there's always a demand--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Right, right, right, right--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --on the bottom line.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, so did--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: There is more pressure around what's happening in the, in the, in the industry.  You know we were looking at building the VAX 9000 a big computer, big computing.  And others were looking at the minicomputer; Digital [Digital Equipment Corporation] had too many people.  There were conversations about laying off, Digital had not laid off before then, and manufacturing, I remember we had a discussion, lots of discussion.  I mean this gut wrenching for an organization like that, that if, if we ever laid off an employee anywhere in the world, it would have major consequences for the company, period, because it had never done that.  And what does that do to confidence, what does that do to end things?  And so Digital was at a point where it really needed to lay off.  So and here we are with the VAX 9000, I'm in California and California is a very different, you know, in--in, back east, it's more paternalistic.  You'll--went to work for Digital and you'd thought that's where you were going to be pretty much for the rest of your life.  And in California people came and, and went and they walked across the street and got hired for somewhere else.  There wasn't a loyalty to the people and the people (laughter) had no loyalty to the companies.  And so it was, it was a whole different environment out there.  And but we did it, I mean we, we ramped up, we perfected the, the operation, we had an earthquake, you know just this big earthquake.  Got back on track and so were able to ship.  Now these were two of the, the products I talked about we got both of them to the point where they could, could, could ship.  And then there wasn't a real belief in the company in this product.  So sales hadn't really sold.  I, I met someone many years later in, in life in, in Italy, who said that they sold one of the, the VAX 9000s.  This guy eventually worked for me, in, in another company in, in, in Sun [Sun Microsystems, Inc.].  But he was one of the first to sell a VAX 9000.  So Digital is where--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: So the wafer was for the VAX 9000?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  And it was interconnecting it was a, Digital's interconnecting and, and packaging, but packaging, not packaging like in a box, but packaging like small product.  And then we ramped up, we have a FAB [fabrication plant] that's humming, could hum rather and the product that wasn't being sold.
Story_ID: 673052
Speaker 1: Not only the, the--that, but throughout the company there's this whole thing around, it's, it's time, times they are changing, and they have too, too many people.  And the hardest thing I had ever done in my life was to have to lay off people.  Now I did it in California where it's not unusual, it's like it just happens, people are used to being laid off.  Well I'm not used to doing this, but I knew it had to be done, the people knew it had to be done.  But the day before I went to work--and I, I didn't have to say to an individual that you no longer have a job.  But I cried, talking about boohooing before when I thought I'd lost a job, I cried.  It is hard because it wasn't their fault.  And there were three shifts, I stayed for every one of those shifts, and I was out there so people could see me, you know not crying.  But if they had any questions and, and because it was Digital [Digital Equipment Corporation] it was done with such dignity of course, but still I took it harder than the people who (laughter) were, were laid off.  Because there were lots of jobs out there, and they could go and, and get another job, it was a really technical operation.  So it was what was done out there anyway, and that's why Digital bought the, the technologies from out there, because that was being done out there at that time in, out there in, in California.  But it was, it was it's, it's, it's hard and they were right you know laying off people changes, changes a company.  Especially if a company has had the kind of environment that Digital had.
Speaker 2: It's chilling 'cause the people are, have all kind of fears because, at that point in time too, even though the culture, people still this was where you, you could go and work twenty, thirty, forty years then.  And, and a lot, I mean at that point in time though, the, I say the '80s [1980s] were also the start--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: On the East Coast you could.
Speaker 2: On the, but I'm saying--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: West Coast that was never the case (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: Right, right, right, right, that was never that culture, but that culture was starting to come, come up.
Speaker 1: Yep.
Speaker 2: But--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: And it's best that I was out there if, if it had, if I had to do it any, anywhere, because you know I, I learned a lot being on the West Coast.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: About people not--you know maybe they might care, but, but it wasn't like they were invested (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: So--
Story_ID: 673053
Speaker 1: So 1989 you joi- you are in Cuper- and then when, when do you, how long are you doing that 'cause I, this is where the--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: After we got three, we did all that and then I laid off--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Nineteen ninety [1990].
Speaker 2: It was time they, they--I was asked to come back to, to, to Maynard [Massachusetts] and, and say what I wanted to do, but Digital [Digital Equipment Corporation] was not the same for me anymore.  And that's when I left Digital to join Sun [Sun Microsystems, Inc.].
Speaker 1: That's why I'm won- 'cause I was like (laughter), I said well she just went over to the competitor (laughter)?  You know so I didn't know if, if that was, were you at that point in time was it a recruiter?  Because recruiters are constantly calling or--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: It was, this was another one of those--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: 'Cause you had grown up at Digital or so to speak.
Speaker 2: I grown up in Digital but there were people, I got a call from the HR [human resources] person at Sun.
Speaker 1: Oh.
Speaker 2: Who was the person I knew from Digital, and Crawford [Crawford Beveridge] was the person reporting to, to Scott [Scott McNealy] and he was going back to Scotland to be the secretary of economic development for Scotland [Scottish Development Agency; Scottish Enterprise].  And he says, "I'm leaving and we need an HR person for Di- for Sun," and I said, "I'm not sure I want to go back into HR."  And he says, "You should talk with Scott and the CFO"--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Wait this is another Scott, you had a Scott, wait no, Scott's last name (unclear)--
Speaker 2: McNealy.
Speaker 1: Okay McNealy, okay.
Speaker 2: So he wanted me to talk with Scott.  The CFO at, at Sun was also from Digital someone I had worked with before.  And he says did, and he says, "And I talked with Kevin [Kevin Melia] and Kevin thinks that we, that you should at least have the discussion."  And since I knew I wanted to leave Digital because it was just time, you know when it's time, I had lunch with Scott.  Scott (laughter), Scott had a whoopie pie for lunch and I had a salad, because I'm thinking, (laughter) gotta, this is, this is a professional (laughter) interview here.  And we, we talked, we didn't talk about the HR job, we just talked.  But in that discussion, I understood that I didn't, I really didn't wanna go back into HR.  I really did like the line, I liked the bottom line, I liked having that kind of responsibility, and somehow he must've gotten that too.  Because I didn't hear immediately from Scott, it took a couple of weeks.  And I got a call from him and he said, "I wanna offer you a job," and I'm thinking now I gotta tell him I don't wanna the HR job.  He says, "It's as president of SunExpress," and, and I started, "What, what, what is (laughter) what is SunExpress?" I nev-, we didn't, he didn't, I didn't know, know what it was at all.  He says, "I'm breaking the company into separate legal entities; I wanna know where I'm making money and where I'm not making money.  And I want to start up this new group called SunExpress; it's an after marketing company," I didn't even know what after marketing was.  And he says, "Because there are some third party folks that are taking money that I think belongs to me.  And so I want you to do this," he says, "I'm going to courier over an offer to you, and once you see the offer, you can come in and talk with anybody about the position, about Sun whatever."
Story_ID: 673054
Speaker 1: So I thought this was the weirdest thing, but Scott [Scott McNealy] is, after working for him the re- the beginnings, he's, he's not only really smart, but he's really intuitive also.  And he understood that, that I really did like the line, the line, he had talked with people who understood after-marketing.  But somehow he said that, he says, "I've talk to about three people who run after marketing organizations."  He says, "But I don't get a good feel for them, and I do get a good feel for you and I want to start this on the East Coast."  Because everything else for Sun [Sun Microsystems, Inc.] was on the West Coast, "I wanna start my new group on the East Coast and you know that world.  And you know where there's good talent," by this time Digital's [Digital Equipment Corporation] laying off, Wang's [Wang Laboratories] laying off.  All, everybody's laying off because the east is not where's its happening anymore, but there's great talent back there, and Scott knew that.  And he's, he to his word, he sent the offer, and when I locked, looked at that offer, it was no way I wasn't going in to talk to people (laughter) whether I accept it or not.  I mean it was double my salary, it was more stock options, I mean this was, it was a title of president.  I had P and L responsibility, I'd never, even with all the responsibility that I had before, I'd never had profit and loss.  I all, you know it was more of a cost center, and it was mine to develop the way I saw fit as long as it was going to be profitable.  And so I go in and I talk to his staff, and most people don't really know what SunExpress is going to be, because this is in Scott's head.  Now he broke the company into, there was the hardware company which existed but he just split it off.  The software company which existed, but he split it off.  The services company, the same thing it, but, but SunExpress was the, the new part and it was after marketing.  In other words, what he knew is that salespeople like the big sales, and they would go into a corporation and, and they'd, they would sell, the, the big sell.  Like lots of computers, lots of software, lots of services.  But if someone wanted two additional computers or additional storage or whatever, the salesperson wasn't taking that call.  Because they were on to the next big sale, and who would take that call would probably be a third party person.  So Scott knew there was money that was being left on the table, and it was being left on the table because the salespeople wanted the big sales.  And he thought this was, they were selling his stuff but he wasn't getting them the, the money, at least not as much as he thought he could get.  So I took that job, came back East, but my family was not interested coming back east (laughter) at that time.
Speaker 2: 'Cause you had been there what two year, was it two years?
Speaker 1: No it be about--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: It was like--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Four years.
Speaker 2: Four years, what--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: We were there a total six years but they, they were there six years.
Speaker 2: Nineteen-eighty seven [1987] okay, I thought--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Nineteen-eighty seven [1987] was--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: I thought '89 [1989] you takeover with Cuper- with Cup- Cupertino [California].
Speaker 1: I took over Cupertino in '89 [1989].
Speaker 2: Nine [1989].
Speaker 1: And then and--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: But you were already in California when--(simultaneous)
Speaker 1: I was in California with Digital.
Speaker 2: When you took, I thought you moved to California in 1989.
Speaker 1: I did for Digital.
Speaker 2: But I have you taking over at Sun in 1991, I messed my numbers around.
Speaker 1: No, no, no, let's see.
Speaker 2: They might be wrong, okay.
Speaker 1: I can, we can correct the numbers, but--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Okay, okay, okay, okay go on.  So you, so they, they had got--oh sh- are we out, it's time to change already?
Speaker 1: Well let me look at the numbers, let's look at the dates.
Story_ID: 673055
Speaker 1: --Adopted dau- daughter (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: She is my brother's [Charles Terrell, Jr.] daughter (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: Daughter, but she--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: But I raised her.
Speaker 1: You raised her, okay.
Speaker 2: So she came to live with us when she was in ninth grade--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --or tenth grade and she went to Saratoga High [Saratoga High School, Saratoga, California] and so the adjustment was kind of not the easiest for her.  And when I got the job with Scott [Scott McNealy] he sent me back east.  Most people think I was with Sun [Sun Microsystems, Inc.] in California and Digital [Digital Equipment Corporation] back east.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: But I was with Digital back east and in California, and then I went to work for Scott and Scott sent me back east.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And by that time Tammy [Tammy Terrell] is now adjusted and she's in eleventh grade and she's saying, "But these are my friends, I want to graduate."  And Al [Terrell's husband, Albert Brown] is enjoying golfing every day and, the nanny doesn't even wanna leave (laughter).
Speaker 1: That's something else.
Speaker 2: I had a revolt on my hands.
Speaker 1: Even though you're gonna be president of your own (laughter).
Speaker 2: They (makes sound) my kids, you know for them it's I'm, it's, I'm just me.
Speaker 1: And, and the salary is double too.
Speaker 2: Yeah and, like, what do they care?  So I say, "Okay makes sense," I mean because Tammy like I said was difficult adjustment coming from Hallandale [Hallandale Beach, Florida] to, to California.  She said she's gonna be the drum major and everything else.  But my brother felt it best that that I take her, and, and she gets there and she gets into the, the Saratoga [California] environment at which, it was, she had a ball.  She was Miss Saratoga, she was the first black Miss Saratoga High [ph.], I missed that because I was traveling, but Al was there you know.  And it, it worked, because Sun was out there, I could go back and forth.  Because that was headquarters, but I was traveling so much anyway 'cause I was building SunExpress [at Sun Microsystems, Inc.], I was building the business.  And, it worked (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: So you're traveling between California and, and Boston [Massachusetts]?
Speaker 2: I'm traveling between California, Boston and Europe, Japan so wherever, it didn't matter so much that they weren't back east, because I wasn't back east a ton.
Speaker 1: That's a lot of traveling at that point.
Speaker 2: At one time I was on the road about 70 percent of the time, but that's what it took to, to, to do the business.
Story_ID: 673056
Speaker 1: I had Genelle on that road a lot (laughter).
Speaker 2: Right and that's what, 'cause you so you hired--Genelle, I, did you hire Genelle or Ge--
Speaker 1: (Nods head).
Speaker 2: So how did you build your team, it's a brand new company?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: So how, what are you, how, who do, who is given to you as part of the company at the time, do other people--like how are you building your team?  And how do you find, where does Genelle, does she come in through regular HR [human resources]?
Speaker 1: I didn't, there was no team, there was a manager that had just started there, but the HR person that I hired, I hired.  They was--in Sun [Sun Microsystems, Inc.] but I hired that person, I hired my CFO, I hired my, I hired everybody the sales, the international folks.  The, you know in Europe in, and Japan, I hired Genelle and when I or her--oh.  The HR person had gotten resumes, Genelle was not in Sun and a lot of the folks weren't in Sun.  Scott [Scott McNealy] gave me latitude to, to really do what I needed to do to build this business.  And I needed a marketing person, Genelle was, was a name that was given to me and I met with Genelle.
Speaker 2: Her name is Tra- Genelle Trader right?
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: We have to--
Speaker 1: And I interviewed Genelle, I liked Genelle and then I brought her in from California; Genelle was in California, she wasn't that excited about leaving California even.  And, and we're back east, right?  So I, I bring her into, to meet with the team and couple of the guys, and they go, "Um no, I don't think so.  I don't think she's gonna be a fit," you know.  Long story short I hired Genelle, they loved her of course 'cause she is so good, and it, it worked out.  And we were a real team and Genelle was my vice president of, of marketing and, and strategy.  Genelle was, Genelle is one of the hardest working people I know still, and I'd gone looking for, I was looking where I was going to, to, to really live.  And I went and I saw this condo and it was too small for us, but I thought, this is in Lexington [Massachusetts], this would be great for Genelle.  But this woman doesn't take time to go looking, and I have to make sure she's gonna stay.  So it was a Saturday, I saw this place, I went to SunExpress to the office, 'cause I knew that's where she was, and say I found you a place (laughter).  To make a long, it worked and she went to look at it, she bought it and that's where, where she was.  And, but I needed to make sure Genelle was stable and not just working and then decide "Meh, maybe it's too much work," and, and head back.  I needed her to, to be in a place.
Story_ID: 673057
Speaker 1: And so together the, the team--we, we started in the U.S. of course, we sold through the phone, I didn't have a sales force that went out to knock on doors.  We knocked on, on doors through phones or through the fax, that's why we developed the Internet commerce.  Because we needed that to be able to reach people and then Sun [Sun Microsystems, Inc.] adopted it; so we developed, SunExpress developed Internet commerce.  I mean Internet commerce is everywhere now, but we did that at Sun (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: But can you describe that, is that, describe that because I had read something and I'm wondering if it's the same thing.
Speaker 1: Internet?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Where someone could use the Internet to, to make an au- au--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Order.
Speaker 1: An order.  But you needed a place, we call it Sun Plaza when we, when we did it.  That people could go online and see, it's like an online catalogue, I mean it's nothing, today everybody's got it.  But we didn't have it then, because it wasn't needed, you had sales people that were going to make the big sales.  Because we were after marketing and because it had to be done in order to be profitable we just couldn't do.  Since I didn't have people going out I had to find a way to have people come in.  And it just, it just made sense.
Speaker 2: And--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: It's very new coming along at the time anywhere, so that's what the team did, we did put the catalogue online and people could call, order online.  And then Sun adopted that.  We had to have, I mean had to have, high levels of customer satisfaction.  Since you couldn't see people face to face, and you were dealing with them over the phone, you had to have a way that, that people felt comfortable, that they wanted to order.  And so customer satisfaction was really, really critical, and that's why we had such high levels of customer satisfaction.  And we had Gallup do customer satisfaction surveys for us; they were the highest in, in, in the company.  And so there are certain things that we were driven to do, and we had to have a finance system that allowed us to collect to build and collect quickly.  Sun had, you know could, it wasn't what like sixty days or what, it took them a long time to build a, a computer.  When I say long time, I don't mean like, like years or anything, but it took a while to get an order in, because there were lots of products that would be going out.  There were long periods of time when you get an order until it's shipped until it was billed.  At SunExpress, you called, we shipped it, we needed our money right away.  So we put a finance system in place where you shipped it and then you could bill and then you got paid right away.  So these are some things that were revolutionary at the time for major companies.  But common sense for us because that was the kind of business we had, and it was a different business than the computer business or the software business.  And so those are the things that we put in place and Scott [Scott McNealy] encouraged that, because in that he got money faster, he got more money.  We decided, well, we need to expand to Europe, but we couldn't go into every country in Europe to have a group of people.  And so we decided to go into Holland, because we found out that that's where people could speak all kind, most people don't speak Dutch.  So the Dutch speak various languages and they don't usually speak with, with heavy accents in these languages.  So we set up an operation in, in, in Holland and hired people to speak English, French, Italian from one place.  Now this was new at that time, it's done everywhere now, and we weren't trying to fool people.  But we did have to do things that were economical for the kind of operation that, that, that we had.  And so these people had to be really good, they had to be really friendly and had to be just like sitting with, with the person.  So it had to be that kind of relationship.  And that's, that's the way we went into Europe.
Story_ID: 673058
Speaker 1: How long did it take you, like I had read about this, that because that's your call center, your European call center.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: And I was just curious about how you found that, like is that, I mean first of all you are starting from scratch.  And, and what--one of the things you know with the systems like your, you know you talk about the Internet commerce.  But it's also you had a very personalized service; you know checking on people to make sure.  So who, is this Sun's, is this Sun's, is that your culture you are bringing in?  Are you then, are you sending it up as SunExpress because that, that's, so I'm just wondering how you do this?  And then you're doing the international piece and--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: We, this is, this is pure SunExpress; Sun [Sun Microsystems, Inc.], the other parts of the company had to do what they, I mean they were, they were more traditional.  They were more--it takes time to place an order because they were big orders, we had small orders.  It could be one little storage device or something, and so they didn't have to be the kind of company we had to be in order to, to make revenue, be profitable.  These are things that, that somehow we figured out that we needed to do in order to do that.  We needed to be more than just in the U.S., we needed to be other, in other places.  In order to be in other places, we couldn't be there with, in every country.  So we had to set up something, figure out a way and where could that be in order to, to deliver that level of service to other countries and make it work.
Speaker 1: So you had--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: And then we went to Japan.
Speaker 1: Right it was just ask about Japan.  So Japan and then you have identified that so why was, 'cause Japan, we often think of Japan as providing to us.  But you, you did Japan that we were supplying to that, you know that--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Well Sun was in Japan anyway--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But this was setting up SunExpress in Japan which was very new to (laughter) to the Japanese.  I, I went to Japan every six weeks for quite a while, and I had to do that because I found that the, sort of the, the maybe custom or whatever and it was to you had you know do the (nods head) yes, okay, right.  And then when, when you leave, (laughter) nothing was happening and so go, had to the, the, the constant being back, making sure, reinforcing what needed to, to happen.  So we, we, we did it in Japan, so we were in, we sold into what three continents and eleven countries, but we had, you know it's, it's like the, that saying necessity being the mother of invention.  I think that's, that's right because at Sun, what Scott [Scott McNealy] used to say is the hardware, software, SunExpress, all of us.  He called us planets, he says, "You're planets, but I wanna see when I'm making money, when I'm not making money.  And where I'm not making money, I'll just shoot you out of the sky," and he was serious.  So I took him at his word and I thought this is a way of building a, an incredible business.  I had an incredible team and I had an incredible group under that, and so we just would figure out different ways of going about doing things.  And so we became profitable in rec- in record time and we built--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: What was record time?
Speaker 2: We were profitable less than eighteen months, most comp- most businesses it, it takes much longer.
Speaker 1: How much do you think if you were you know venture funded, how much did Scott seed the business as?  I mean I know it's an internal--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: There was a budget, each business had a budget and it was like you could say in, in venture products that it was, this is what you, you've got and you had to make that the, the best of it.  But we had to buy products, you know it was given, the products wasn't given to us to sell.  We had to buy it to sell it, so you had to make money in order to buy to sell, I mean it was total P and L [profit and loss].  So it wasn't like you know it was profit and it was loss and I wasn't looking for the loss.  And Scott wasn't looking for a loss for a long, for any long period of time.  The, the other companies had money coming in, because there was a hardware company.  There was a software company, we sold services that kind of stuff, this was the new company.
Story_ID: 673059
Speaker 1: You know what this is what, you have been a plant manager this, I'm just wondering.  You are a CEO at this point--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --and you're building from scratch so--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: That what the title, president and CEO of Sun--SunExpress.
Speaker 1: So, so who is, who are you learning from and who are you, this is, it can be lonely at the top, and then you are not, well you weren't traveling like this before.
Speaker 2: No I--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: You were not traveling like this.
Speaker 2: No I was traveling back and forth to--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: California.
Speaker 2: To California.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: But with, with Sun [Sum Microsystems, Inc.] I had to travel everywhere.  I you know I, I don't know, I don't know what, what is driven me, I don't know how the things have, have, have totally happened.  I just know that it's been the, the people around me that have helped make it happen.  It's not like I've known any job I've gone into, but I had to learn it.
Speaker 1: Right but it, I, it's the, what I'm trying to understand is that it's the learning of it, but it's also the doing of it, while you're learning it.  And you're doing and there, there is the speed of all of this happening at the same time.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: And what I'm ask-, I guess what I'm trying to understand is he gives you, so you're totally surprised that you have this opportunity, totally like--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: It's not what you're expecting, you know.  And you get this opportunity and then you have to assemble your team.  How long did it take you to assemble your team first of all?
Speaker 2: Not too long.  I had, that the HR [human resources] person that I hired that was in Sun, that had been working a bit with SunExpress but was also been working at other part, became my HR person.  And so together we, we built that team.  He would bring me in people for me to, to interview; some were from outside the company.  A couple were from inside the company, so I'd hire my team and then they brought in folks that, that they needed to, to bring in.  So no, I didn't have long, I mean the thing that, that I, I te-, I tell everyone that I've been given some incredible positions and opportunities.  And they were given to me by people who trusted me to, to be able to make it happen.  To do the job, to do the job well, and I would take those jobs not wanting to disappoint those people.  For many, many, many years, people saw more in me than I saw in myself; it's taken a long time for me to feel like I can really make some things happen.  And I don't, it's not just me you know, I built, I built incredible teams, and, and we tend to work as a team.  And I hold people accountable, and I hold myself accountable, and so I set those expectations.  And so we set those expectations over, I set the expectations of myself, of them; I expect them to hold me accountable.   And, I don't hire, Genelle's [Genelle Trader] value to me was not just her marketing expertise.  My finance person's value was not just his marketing, I mean his finance acumen.  I like people who want to make a difference, want to make a change, who want to learn something else.  When--I could leave town, leave my finance person in, in charge of something that was going on.  Or I could send him to represent me, I could send Genelle, you know because I didn't, need anybody who was just, who was just narrow.  They had to know their, their function for sure, I mean that's almost like a given.  Because I'm not a CFO, I'm not the, the marketing guru; I'm not the international sales person kind of thing.  So I need the, the technical skills but I need more than that, and most people are very happy to wanna be a part of a team as opposed to again going back to, to Digital--DEC [Digital Equipment Corporation] and doing this little piece, and, and somebody else doing that little piece.  People wanna know what's happening for them, to the big pe- big picture.  And I would tell have, have meetings with the, the entire team, not just my team but, but the all of the folks in, SunExpress.  And I would go to Japan and do the same thing, and I would go to Europe and do the same thing, just to tell them what was going on in business and how we were doing.  And what we need to do and, and ask them, got some ideas, you know, because that's the way, that's the way we've--it's, it's worked.
Story_ID: 673060
Speaker 1: So you're essentially saying that the HR [human resources] part really played a big role in your success, I mean your beginnings in that played--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: I think so (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --played, played--and even you helping you identifying the talent that you, you know this what you were saying.   The something else, the drive, or the, the desire is something else.
Speaker 2: I knew I was gonna work hard but I didn't wanna be the only ones, only person that was working hard.
Speaker 1: How can you identify that in a person can you tell me that?
Speaker 2: You mean one of the, you mean what, what is it?
Speaker 1: Yeah what, what, what do you look for in a person to see that?
Speaker 2: I--usually it's not just the, the, the technical piece.  I'm--when I, when I interview people, if I'm interviewing the CFO, I'm ex- I'm, I'm expecting that the, the HR person has done the, the work to find out the person knows this is a business person.  They have the financial act, so the technical stuff comes with, that's like the price of entry.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: And I'm more interested in how people approach others thinking about doing business, whether they want to do something in, be a part of something bigger.  It's more of a conversation and, and I think that's what Scott [Scott McNealy] did with me.  Because like I said I, I didn't know anything about SunExpress, and we didn't exactly talk about, about H, HR.  We just, it was more of a, who, who are you and, and more about him, you know he was going he's, he's a big hockey guy.  He was going to, for, to, to play hockey after the, the interview, he wasn't married at that time.  But, but we talked about just a lot of wide ranging subjects just find out who a person is.  And what it, and what are the things they, they want?  I had such a great dis- great time with Genelle [Genelle Trader], and, and as you know, since Janelle is on your board and, and advisory her laugh is infectious.  That was also a part of the att- of attraction to, to her.  And just how she comes across, the way she thinks about things, the way she approaches a subject, you know, so.
Speaker 1: You know what, what is so lovely about that is you know you don't see that always happening in Corporate America, and you don't always see it with one black female to another black female.  You know in the, in the hiring, I'm not saying it doesn't happen, but you know it's just lovely to hear you say that.  So--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: I've always had a staff was reflective of the sort of the bigger world, that was, that's, that's been really important to me.
Speaker 1: And you know because in some companies do you think it's always encouraged you know 'cause there, there, there have, there are people that are that have more fear of that--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --you know in terms of--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --having the temerity to step out and--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --have diversity of staff so that--
Story_ID: 673061
Speaker 1: So, let me ask you, 'cause you know I've read, I've read things like, you know I've read about your outsourcing, your warehouse and shipping operations.  And I think there were like, I think two million customer contacts, 110 thousand orders, and you know the performance you, you've worked in teams, right?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay, you've put all those things in place.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay or you team put in, how large was your team and who were the, the key people on your team at Sun [SunExpress]?
Speaker 2: At Sun, let's, see I had Bob Cirrone was my CFO, Genelle [Genelle Trader] was the, the VP [vice president], senior VP of, of marketing, Pat Moquin [Patrick J. Moquin] was my vice president for HR.  I had a sales person for North America, Japan and for Europe; I had--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: I had a Art Carty was it--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Art Carty was North America.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Let's see Japan was Yoichi Hosoi and Pat, Paul--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Patty Long [ph.]?
Speaker 2: No Paul what is, Paul Munson [ph.] I think is, was, was Europe the vice president for Europe; and then I had Gerald Walker [ph.] who, Gerald was the materials and, and, and strategy person.  And eventually Gerald went to, went to Europe, he and his wife went to, and they're, Gerald is, is African American man that worked for me and, and went to Europe.  He went to Holland to for the operation there.  So I think, I think that's about it, I'm surprised I even remember these names.  But, but these were important people to me.
Speaker 1: I know it's like twenty years ago but still it's pretty (laughter) and you're not looking like twenty years has passed but anyway that's another, whole another story.  So I was looking right.  Okay so your philosophy was--I read--was give customers more than they ask for so a very customer focus, okay.
Story_ID: 673062
Speaker 1: Who is- also are you competing with, who was Sun competing with--SunExpress, I'm sorry.
Speaker 2: SunExpress was competing with others outside, that's who I thought we were competing with, with the third party resellers.  And but you know there was a lot of infighting going on, the sales organization or the, the actually the hardware company thought that SunExpress should be part Sun--of it.  The sales group wanted commission for the sales that SunExpress had, had, had sold because it was in.  So we knew it was a lot of, of maneuvering that, that that went on, and it was a, a part of that is what led to SunEx- I, for me, and, and, and it's the way I explained it to, to the team and to Scott [Scott McNealy] who didn't agree initially.   That SunExpress got to be so big, in other word- there were three hundred employees, we had $300 million in sales.  So that's like a million dollars by, per employee.
Speaker 1: Wow.
Speaker 2: And a lot of the things we did now are like (makes sound) but then, basically revolutionary in a sense.  But in order for SunExpress to really, really grow and not have a, you know infighting or the hampering over this, it needed to be part of the bigger organization; it really did need to be a part of it.  And if the bigger organization was smart enough it would take many of the practices.  And it would be better, because you don't need to wait so long before you bill somebody.  How you treat the con- the customers, there were just certain things that, that could be that the cycle time for billing you know, they were working on in the hardware company and we had gotten it down.  And so maybe you couldn't use exactly the same, but the principals would be sa-, would be the same.  And when I first approached Scott with that and he said, "No, no, no, no this, this you, you can do with more."  So we did and then you know it, it, it got it was still, it was rough you know.  I remember--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: You mean the infighting?
Speaker 2: The inf- yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: The biting at the heels?
Speaker 2: Yeah, you know I had an interview with a person on, on the staff and when, when I was, when Scott had given me the offer and the person said, "You know you think that the competition is on the outside.  And when you come back that it's all team you know because it's vicious outside, you want to have more of a team inside.  So but in, in the meetings, you really do need to bring your guns and put them on the table.  Because you gonna need them sometime before that meeting's over."  And I laughed you know I just laughed, and 'cause I thought how could that be, you know?  This person was, they're joking you know, it's an analogy, but they're joking.  And it wasn't too much longer after I was in the company that I realized they weren't joking you know.  It was, I, you know, past competitive, it could be a little somewhat vicious.  And I so I stop laughing about that and then I began to understand enough to be able to laugh at it again.  And not because it wasn't true, at first I was laughing because I thought it couldn't be.  But, but, but because it just didn't make sense and for me it didn't really make a difference.  I had to learn how, it was a learn--it was a teachable moment let's say.  How to really understand what was going on in an environment, what people were really like.  And not take it personal, it wasn't personal, this was business, this is the way they operated.  But once I really understood that, I realized I needed to know that, but I didn't have to be that way to, to make things happen for, for what I needed to do.  So it was, that was a big piece of difference between you know east and west and DEC [Digital Equipment Corporation] and Sun [Sun Microsystems, Inc.] and, and those kinds of things.  But through it all, I mean Scott used to say, "Have lunch or be lunch," but I, I took that to mean he meant that outside.  And some people must've taken that to mean inside, but Scott was nothing be supportive while I was there.  And so as I go up against this, but he knew what I was trying to do, he was very encouraging, because I was delivering, my team was delivering.
Story_ID: 673063
Speaker 1: When you're in tech at this point who are the other--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Women in tech (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: --women or minorities that are in this level of position where they're running their own company?
Speaker 2: I, I, (pause) well, (laughter) let's see, at that time, I was, I was on, on the cover of Black Enterprise and there were the, it was the edition for, I think it was the twenty top, I may have the number wrong, African Americans in Corporate America.  And--
Speaker 1: Right.  That you're in there with Lloyd Trotter [HistoryMaker Lloyd G. Trotter]--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: I think I came across that.
Speaker 2: Right, right.
Speaker 1: I came--as I was doing research.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: I couldn't see, 'cause it was a Google search so--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: I saw that, that the two--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: I'm trying to remember who, I think I was, I was on the cover, Ken Chenault [Kenneth Chenault] was on, on, on the cover.  I don't know if Ken had American Express [American Express Company] at that time.
Speaker 1: I don't know if he had at that time, I don't think so it think it's--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: He was doing something--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Later, it's later.
Speaker 2: So there, so there, there were others, but in technology, or running a technical, I don't, I don't know.
Speaker 1: I don't think so, and what about, so you mentioned the one person who, Carol her name who ran, who went to--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Carol Bartz.
Speaker 1: Bartz who went to run auto--who was CEO of Autodesk [Autodesk, Inc.].
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah she was the, the sales; she was on the sales for Sun [Sun Microsystems, Inc.].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So we were peers for a hot second before she left to, to run Autodesk, but there weren't any other no, there weren't.  The only the, the, the most senior black people in Sun worked for me.
Speaker 1: And that's?
Speaker 2: Genelle [Genelle Trader].
Speaker 1: Genelle and--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: And Gerald [Gerald Walker (ph.)].
Speaker 1: And Joe [sic.].
Speaker 2: Gerald.
Speaker 1: Gerald, so those are the two you brought on and those were the two most senior?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: I see.
Speaker 2: And then at the next--
Speaker 1: At the next level.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Story_ID: 673064
Speaker 1: How are you managing all of this? That's, I mean I, I'm trying to, I, I you know I have the question on one hand is how are you managing this?  And then I mean 'cause you're it's almost like lightning speed like when you tell me you're going to Japan every six weeks.  Obviously you have a very supportive husband, you know right?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Because there's no way, I mean he, he's taking care of the home front in many ways, right?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: 'Cause it can't--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Al [Terrell's husband, Albert Brown] was, was when we moved to California he was working, and then he became ill, and so a lot of, of the home front as you, as you call it, he, he just did it.  He was, he was my number one fan, he was there when I couldn't be there for the, the kids.  Now I always say I was still the mother because there just some things that even the nanny or Al might not think about.  And so you know I was always bugging him about you remember this or, or that.  But, but if it wasn't for him, well I don't know how, how I would've of done it.  And so he knew that I had to travel when my, when Tammy [Tammy Terrell] was Miss Black Saratoga [ph.], you know he was, he was there.  She played basketball; Dorian [Dorian Brown] was going to, to kindergarten or when we moved back to, when I finally got them out of California, after Tammy graduated.  Then everybody came back, including the nanny, and, and so Al was, Al was just always been the, the rock.  The, he was the go-to person and you know and, and that was the good news and, and the not so good news.  Because once Al died, then it wasn't--how would we--I have a different relationship with my girls.  You know so that, that, that it had to be the--us and we didn't have, have Al you know--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: That's sort of the intermediary right?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Right, um-hm.
Speaker 2: Right, and the, the woman who I said nanny, but, but Angela [ph.] stopped being the nanny a long time ago and--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Became part of the family.
Speaker 2: She is part of the family, yeah and Dorian, she, she came to, to, to take care of Dorian when she was six weeks old.  And as I said she went to California with us, she came back from California, and she stayed with us until we moved into Boston [Massachusetts].  So Dorian hadn't, hadn't several years back gone to boarding school, she wasn't even at the house.  Tammy was, was gone and Al's grandson was living with us for a while, wasn't there, but Angela was, it was, was essentially still there when we moved into town.  Probably the only reason Angela isn't still with, with me is because we moved into Boston and we didn't have enough space (laughter).  But yeah I helped her get a job at, at MGH [Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts], she, when I'm in Boston, we still I know when, before Dorian moved back to Boston, I knew when Dorian would come into town that I would know, I would see Angela because she, 'cause she still has that bond with, with that, with Dorian and the family.  And whenever we would have gathering Angela would be there and if she wasn't there, where's Angelo [ph.] you know?  That's what we call her, Angelo, and so she was, was and is a godsend.
Speaker 1: 'Cause you look at the support systems that are necessary--
Story_ID: 673065
Speaker 1: --because this is a time, I mean you are very early on, I would, you know $300 million is a lot of money back then that's like a billion dol- I don't know you know what it would be in current, current terms, but you know you were, as you said running a very significant business.  How did it change you in some respects, because I keep thinking about you know you were a journalism and English major.  You know and you're in these industries that are heavily engi- you know especially when you get into tech.  Heavily engineering focused, can have, you know especially the MITs like you know there's no--you know you're not a scientist if you don't come out of MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts].
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: And, and as you said then there's the, the what I call Bay Area [San Francisco Bay Area, California] it's just like, like everybody eats everybody for lunch.  You know and there's no loyalty and then, I mean you just sort of like sprout up, that's all I can (laughter).  But that, what does that say about you, I mean (laughter) I'm saying; I'm thinking what does that, I mean you look all smiling and everything.  But I'm like how does a person like that rise up you know?
Speaker 2: I, I, I don't know, I think you're asking what is the secret sauce or what--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --and I don't, I don't know.
Speaker 1: I mean you said hard work but everybody's working hard out there, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah everybody's working hard.  I, I, I, I, I really not sure.  I'm not, I don't remember being in a position where I had time to totally think about these things.  You know it was like I had something to do and I had to do it, and I wanted people around me who, it's I, I keep going back to the people.  Now the one thing I have found about myself is I really and truly care about people, but I don't take care of people.  And I don't think for the most part people want somebody to take care of them.  I go back to the, the conversation with the guy at the plant, the plant manager who was telling me people might not understand me, and I mean, because I'm direct.  And, and maybe a little hard to take, but after a year at the plant, I got a poem from one, from one of the teams.  And I don't remember the exact word, but it, it said, it captured me, they understood that, that I really did care about them.  But I didn't have time to take on everybody's problems, but I would listen.  I can give you my opinion, but whether, if somebody does it or not, that's, that's totally up to them.  I want to hear what people have to say, I can give it and I expect to take it.  So things had to move fast, I didn't have a lot of time, so I, I, I you know what, I, I don't know, I never knew what I was doing in a sense.  I never had enough time to totally second guess what needed to be done, because it was always something new.  Going out to, to you know Boston [Massachusetts] was pretty established, but that wasn't good enough, I had to change that.  And, and, and so we, we changed it, but after that, nothing else was established, it was new territory.  Even, even OIC [Opportunities Industrialization Centers] was new, you know, Office for Children was new, you know, they were--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: The, the govern, well the, that was a new office at--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: So I always done or going into something that was basically new, SunExpress was total startup; after SunExpress I went to NMS [NMS Communications Corporation] and, and that was, that was, that was new.  So it's like you, you do or, I don't know, or you don't.
Story_ID: 673066
Speaker 1: Who makes the decision that, that your position [as the president of SunExpress] will be eliminated as--you know that it was gonna be taken in? Who, what, when--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Scott [Scott McNealy].
Speaker 1: Scott, so what happened, does he bring you into his office?
Speaker 2: No, I go into his office and, and this is the next year after I've said it should be, and he says no, and I go in again.  And I said, "It's time, it really is time," so again it's just like with DEC [Digital Equipment Corporation], it wasn't like I was going to be out of the company [Sun Microsystems, Inc.] but I needed to be out of the company.  Because you know Scott says well you know--I'm, I'm reporting to Scott, I don't want a st- you know a strategy job, reporting to Scott.  I, I want a line job I, I know that about me now, and so when he agreed, he says, "Now so what do you, you wanna do?"  And I said, "I think it's time for me to go," he, he said that, "Well no what about, just--something is gonna come up."  I said, "That's like waiting around for somebody to die or get hit by a car."  The other positions were filled and it really was time, and that's the way it happened.
Story_ID: 673067
Speaker 1: And so you, did you take some time off after that to spend or, 'cause--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: NM right?
Speaker 2: N-, before going to NMS [NMS Communications Corporation].
Speaker 1: So um-hm, how many years to?
Speaker 2: No years.
Speaker 1: What?
Speaker 2: Months.
Speaker 1: Months?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So now I--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Probably about three or four months, because (laughter) I tell the, the story I, I, I'm on the board of General Mills [General Mills Inc.] and it was--at the time I, I'm had--starting the conversation with Scott [Scott McNealy].  And General Mills has a board meeting and--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: So when did you go on General Mills' board?
Speaker 2: In 1994.
Speaker 1: Was that your first board?
Speaker 2: That was my first board.
Speaker 1: That's a big board for your first board.  You know people; you know there's all these strategies around boards now.  You know you get a little baby board, I mean that, but this is in the earlier.  I mean General Mills is a big board.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: Well you had a big position but it's right and there not a lot of black people running companies you know.
Speaker 2: You know when I, the, for, for General Mills, people said, "Well how did you get on the, the General Mills board?"  And it was at a time when just, now things are very different, everybody goes through a search firm--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: I got a call from the CEO of General Mills and wanted to know if he could come to visit me.  I was working for Sun [Sun Microsystems, Inc.], and he came and his heir apparent, because he, they were looking at spinning off companies.  And he was in the process, he was going to leave and the next person was coming, so the two of them came to visit.   Well you, it was like me, a board, and so it was, it was like another disbelief kind of thing.  But General Mills at that time wasn't really international; they were just starting to do some things.  They were in, in manufacturing but no one was on the board in manufacturing, and so I, I mean I brought that thing, the international piece, the, the, they're a marketing company but, but the, the st-, I mean on top of, let us not forget I'm black, and a woman.  But the things that they we're looking for were all of the things.  And as--again it goes back to the not assuming that, that you know what's, what's needed until you are told what people are really, are really looking for.  I joined General Mills and I joined the next board after General Mills was Sears [Sears, Roebuck and Co.].
Speaker 1: And Sears is what year?
Speaker 2: Two-thousand five [2005].
Speaker 1: Okay so you were, but that's what I'm wondering how, how is it--
Speaker 2: No not 2005, I'm sorry '94 [1994], '95 [1995].
Speaker 1: Ninety- so a year after you, you--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Ninety-five [1995], '96 [1996] something like that (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Clears throat).
Story_ID: 673068
Speaker 1: How do you, that's what I'm wondering, how do you handle board commitments when you're running your own company [SunExpress]?
Speaker 2: The boards are scheduled years in advance so you know when the meetings are going to be held.  And it's a matter of working around those and know when (background noise), when Scott's meetings were going to be held.  And so you, it's that kind of, kind of planning--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: And Scott encouraged that, he didn't discourage that?
Speaker 2: No he did not at all because I had to get clearance, as a matter of fact, I think with General Mills [General Mills Inc.] they talked to Scott [Scott McNealy] before they talked to me.  (Pause) Yeah.
Speaker 1: So what positions, you know 'cause on boards it's the corp- you know which committees you're on, so what committees did you serve on?
Speaker 2: I've been on every committee in General Mills (laughter).  I've, I'm now on nominating and governance and public responsibility for a number of years I was on audit, I started out on audit.  You know because a lot of times they felt audit is the one that would help you to understand a company.  And so I was on audit for a long time, and General Mills has finance, I've been on the finance committee and so.  But now it's, its nominating governance and public responsibility.  And Herman Miller [Herman Miller, Inc.], where I'm still on Herman Miller, I just recently got an offer, I was chairing nominating and governance.  And so it's actually one committee in, in the foundation.  When I was on, on Sears [Sears, Roebuck and Co.], I was on audit, compensa- executive compensation and so I mean at, at, at some point at, in, in some company I've been on just about every board--I mean every committee.
Story_ID: 673069
Speaker 1: Often when you were on these boards you're the only--are you the only black person on the board, are you the only black woman on the board?  Are you a twofer?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) No, when I joined General Mills [General Mills Inc.] there was another woman.
Speaker 1: And who was CEO at the time?
Speaker 2: Bruce Atwater, and Steve Sanger [Stephen Sanger] became the CEO immediately after Bruce, and I think Ken Powell [Kendall Powell] is now the, the CEO.  There was another woman on the, the General Mills board, and her name Judith Hope [Judith Richards Hope], and now there are five women on General Mills.
Speaker 1: Out of the total board of (unclear) what size?
Speaker 2: Thirteen, I think twelve outsiders.  And on Herman Miller [Herman Miller, Inc.] when I joined--no, when I joined the Sears [Sears, Roebuck and Co.] board, Sybil Mobley [Sybil C. Mobley] was on that board.
Speaker 1: I haven't, she still?
Speaker 2: No, she passed yeah.  But Sybil is the person who recommended me for the Sears board because they called her--again before talking to me, they called her.  I think Bruce called her, Bruce Atwater called her, and asked her if she, if she knew me, and asked her.  So there was lot of do you know or would this be a good idea before even approaching me that I didn't know what was going on till long afterwards.
Speaker 1: So before and even now, it might be there are committees, there's training how you get on, so before the search firms and everything it's sort of a network.
Speaker 2: Oh it's totally--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: It's a--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: It was totally--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --network--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Totally--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Totally.
Speaker 1: So what you know because I remember when Vernon Jordan [HistoryMaker Vernon E. Jordan, Jr.] you know he talks about being at his first board (laughter) and he's just sitting there.  He doesn't have a clue, you know he doesn't know what to say, he's afraid, but you, you're at the next, you're the next generation of board member coming in.  But I'm not even saying--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: From Vernon?
Speaker 1: No.
Speaker 2: No I think we might--close.
Speaker 1: No, no I said you're the next gener- well he started in the '70s [1970's] so Leon Sullivan is the first but--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Um-hm, okay.
Speaker 1: Do you see what I'm saying?  So you know we're woman you know like Jewel Lafontant [HistoryMaker Jewel Lafontant-MANkarious] was on a board, you know they were on--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Sybil was--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Sybil, right.  But you're the next, so you're, you're the next generation coming in sort of, but you're coming in with real like they were, you know you're coming in with real corporate experience.  You're coming in--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --and technical, this is, that--the whole technology thing is, is brand new to, to the, to them at that time.
Speaker 1: Right so is it easier, do you feel like--you don't feel on a foreign land when you go on the board, is that--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Now yeah but, but then.
Speaker 1: Then I'm asking then.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I mean I knew, I mean knew I had the, the technical--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: 'Cause you have to learn how to be a board member, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah I had not done, I'd, at Sun [Sun Microsystems, Inc.] I had presented to the board but was not sitting on, on, on board meetings.  So let the, the technical end of the, the manufacturing and its sales international that kind of stuff.  But, but I didn't know these people, I mean these were people who were CEOs of major corporations.  So I might've had the title of president and CEO but you know I wasn't Scott McNealy, I didn't have, I wasn't the CEO of, of Sun, was a subsidiary of, of Sun [SunExpress].  So yeah I'm it was different, it was new it was so, it was another--yet another learning experience.
Speaker 1: But that also gives you a lot of stature out, you know outside because still people are not, you know a lot of people are not on, serving on these boards.  But can you tell me like how, when, how do you, did--do people mentor you on there?  Or do they take a liking to you?  I mean what is, because you would, there would be interest in you especially on the, no, the General Motors you said--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: General Mills.
Speaker 1: General Mills, who was on that board also black?
Speaker 2: Nobody black when I--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: So you were the first one?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: I see.
Speaker 2: (Pause) Now there's another woman on there, but no, Bob Johnson [Robert L. Johnson] came on after me, and, and left.  And now there is another black person on, on General Mills board, but no I was, was the only one in the beginning.
Story_ID: 673070
Speaker 1: What did you see your role then or what did you identify, like you, you know 'cause even audit, I've heard that that's a really big committee to be on, I've heard that.  That's when you know a lot of people desire to be on audit and you prove our worth on audit.
Speaker 2: I don't know if people really desire to be on audit, that's usually the first stop in a sense, because in audit, you see the entire company.  And you get to, and, and it is a way of, of understanding a, how a company works or a different pieces of it and what's going on.  But it's a lot of work, and I, it means more than anybody else (laughter).  So there are more meetings, longer meetings, that kind of stuff.  And so it's, it's just like a lot of the other things I've done, I didn't know what to expect, and, and it took a bit to be comfortable.  And eventually you get there, the, the next one was easier, and then after that, they become you know, Herman Miller [Herman Miller, Inc.] was the next and yeah so.
Speaker 1: And you've been on a total of how many, Dorothy [HistoryMaker Dorothy Terrell]?
Speaker 2: I've been on four public boards and one private board.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And goo gobs of nonprofit.
Speaker 1: Lots of boards, (unclear) except ours, we're too small (laughter).  Okay you keep telling me that.  Okay so let me before, just one other question before I leave the board.  Why do you think it's important for companies to have African Americans or diverse boards, can you speak to that?
Speaker 2: Absolutely you, you look at sort of the, the universe, it's important to have, sort of everybody at the table when you're making a decision about things.  This, this, this isn't a, a, one race universe we have here, and they miss out, there's, there's value to diversity.  There's a great value to, to diversity and I think boards are finding, finding that out.  Especially when, who you're selling to, who you, your, your customers are, you want the best you can get.  And if you're looking at the, the employees, the employees are looking who's on the board, who, who looks like me?  At, it's, it's, it's pretty critical 'cause you now you looking at customers are looking at who's on, on boards.  Who am I buying from I, and I've been fortunate enough and with, with General Mills [General Mills Inc.] that I wasn't the, the first woman on, on the board.  And that they see the value to diversity you know. [HistoryMaker] Roger Ferguson's on that board now--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: On General Mills?
Speaker 2: On General Mills.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That you have a number of women that are on the board, there is someone from, that's international, that's on the board.  And when we have a discussion, it's a rich discussion, it's a very different discussion than, than, I mean I can see from, from the time of starting on boards.  The kinds of discussion we're having now, when you have more diversity.  Alicia Boler-Davis just joined the, the General Mills board and she's very senior at General Motors [General Motors Company].  And you know I, I, and I would not feel right if I was the only at the table.  So I, I see it as part of who I am and what's important to me that, that I'm not the only one.
Story_ID: 673071
Speaker 1: I had a recent conversation with John Rogers [HistoryMaker John Rogers, Jr.] and he had said that some of the growth that had stunted, is that true?  You know when you see 'cause you're talking about you're really a twenty year history of being on, you know corporate boards.  And I'm just wondering what you would describe as the trajectory and where we are what you see the future?
Speaker 2: I don't, I'm not sure if stunted it, it hasn't, hasn't, I don't, think it's, it's propelled.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I think it's probably you know it's been--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Even?
Speaker 2: It might've gone up a little and then leveled off, but I don't know if it's ever been you know like that (gestures) to do that (gestures).  But we haven't, you know like, once you're on a board, it's easy to be on another board.  And probably most of us are more than, than, than one board, and now it's, you look and it's time to bring on some younger people.  So that if you keep it going, and it's also our responsibility to make sure, or insist, and feel comfortable.  'Cause it takes a little while to, to feel comfortable saying you know we need to have some more people that look like me, look like this, look--you know, on the board.  Herman Miller [Herman Miller, Inc.], I'm, I'm, I'm about to age off Herman Miller.  But we have another African American woman that joined the board a couple of years ago, now I was also chairing nominating governance, you know.  And I really, I would've consider it a personal failure if there wasn't somebody else that didn't.  You know I think that one is you know that's, that's the price of entry in a sense.  That you need more than one because it, it gets kind of lonely.  And it doesn't mean you gonna be best buddies, it just so happens that the women on the General Mills board [at General Mills Inc.] are pretty close.  And even some had just, just joined, it's still pretty close.  We can agree, we can agree to disagree, but it's all, I just went to, we had a meeting in, in Latin America.  And one of the women and I went in early and just to, some sightseeing and, and, so I mean it's, it's, it's that kind of camaraderie.  But it's, it's been, it's been a incredible experience because of the people you meet.  Because of the business information and, and discussions and challenges that you see that are different than what you would normally see on a day-to-day work.  That, that you know it's, it's an experience let's put it, different experience.
Speaker 1: Do you think when you look at where Corporate America is you now globally--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Do you think that it will maintain its, its dominance or you know--
Story_ID: 673072
Speaker 1: --you have any thoughts about Corporate America and its position in the global economy, maybe that's--
Speaker 2: U.S. Corporate America?
Speaker 1: U.S. Corporate America sorry yes that, well that's true--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Well that's true you know, I forget, okay, that's what I mean because I, I'm back at, I'm way back when, I'm in the '80s [1980s] you know but I meant U.S. Corporate America, yeah, sorry.  Maybe that's wrong, maybe that's not even a good question.
Speaker 2: No, I'm not--I'm not gonna say it's not a good question, I'm thinking of it as, as you're, as you're asking it.  And it, it's--U.S. companies are very powerful and have gone internationally, and we have--I don't know, I, I don't know that history you know.  But it's been a long time, it's been extremely powerful, and, and I'm just thinking aback to even with DEC [Digital Equipment Corporation].  DEC sold international and there were international--there were companies, there was I mean there was Digital in company--throughout the sort of the world in a sense.  But it was a, a U.S. based company, and you have so many U.S. based companies that are outside of the U.S.  And, and you look at the U.S. and you say, well it's only growing so much, but you look outside of the U.S. and lots of growth outside you know the developing countries are really developing and they're growing.  And that's, they're going, they have money, or will have money or what, or whatever.  I don't know what happens now with some of these regulations about, some think it's, it's a good thing that people, that companies outside of the U.S. had a difficult time of bringing money back into the U.S.  You know, so it's a good thing bring money back being able to, to repa-, repr- repatriate the money, probably.  But what does that mean for, for outs-, I really, these are uncharted territories we are about go into now.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Very much so.
Speaker 1: And a reverse of like of forty or fifty years of planning.
Speaker 2: One day there's gonna be backlash or what backlash is going to be from U.S. beginning, you know looking like now we're kind of hugging ourselves.  What does that, what does all of that, that mean, and I, I don't know.
Story_ID: 673073
Speaker 1: I wanna talk about MN, MN--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: NMS [NMS Communications Corporation] (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: NMS and what that opportunity represented.
Speaker 2: I--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: First of all what is that NMS?
Speaker 2: Natural Microsystems, it, it's telecommunications company, it's still technology but telecommunications this time.  And when I left Sun [Sun Microsystems, Inc.], I was not sure what I wanted to do, I still had the boards and did I want another full-time job or, in Corporate America or what?  And I, I met Bob Schechter [Robert P. Schechter] and, Bob was looking for--N, NMS was a smaller company, but it was located in Massachusetts, since I was in Massachusetts, it was in Framingham [Massachusetts].  And I met Bob Schecter through a mutual friend; he used to work at Lotus [Lotus Development Corporation].  And June Rokoff [June L. Rokoff] is someone who used to work at Lotus, and someone that I was friends with.  June and Bob were friends and June, he told June what he was looking for and that someone that, he wanted to start a services business.  And he described to June, June says, "There's someone that you should hire who'll do an incredible job for you.  But you aren't going to be able to hire her," which he considered as a challenge.  So when I did talk to him, 'cause June asked me if I would please talk to, to him, he describe the service business he wants to start up.  And I said, "I'm not interested, that's awfully small (laughter)," so he said, "Well what do you want?"  I said, "Well more than that," and so Bob came back with starting up the services business and also taking over manufacturing and IT [information technology] and HR [human resources] and supply chain for the company, which left him with sales (laughter) and finance.
Story_ID: 673074
Speaker 1: Starting up a services business was the next thing I would've thought about in Sun [Sun Microsystems, Inc.], like, would've been interesting for me to, to do services.  I hadn't, done services before, so that was, that was kind of interesting to start it up.  And it was worldwide it, it would've been worldwide, NMS [NMS Communications Corporation] was worldwide, selling internationally.  But there was no real services component to it, so I said okay that, that--a bit more challenging, because I had all the other pieces of the business.  And I started the sales piece didn't do so well but it was self inflicted, it wasn't anything from the outside.  It was not having things in place that needed to be in place.  So I was going to Australia with my, my family, I remember at a, at a mall shopping for this trip, when he called me and asked me if I'd takeover sales, and this was in worldwide sales.  And I said, "Well that means you don't have anything to do," (laughter) so.  I said, "I, I can, I can do sales and I want the services but you have to do something else with the HR [human resources] and, and the supply and the manufacturing piece."  So I took that over the, the sales piece and it was a matter of putting processes in place and, and, and the right people, and going about it differently.  So I had an incredible person I hired who was my finance person who is just like the other people that I described for you.  Who was just a business minded person who, and so we did it you know.  And there was a person in Japan, I mean not Japan, for Asia, there was a person for Europe there was someone for, for North America.  And we just put things in place to make things happen and, and we got back on track.  And, and then it was you know I'm really, I, I, this you know after a while you get tired and, and I decided that I wanted to, I didn't know what I wanted to do.  I knew I didn't wanna do anything else for a while.  And this is after about five years in, in the company, but lo and behold, 2008 happened, and I thought, I can't leave the company when things are looking like it's about to turn down, that's, that's not right.  And, and I thought if we, if I just stay for, you know maybe six months and see this through.   Because we weren't unprofitable, we weren't even losing money at that time, but you could tell things were really shaky.  If I could just stay for six months to see it through, I can leave and things will be fine.  Well six months later, things weren't fine, and a year later things (laughter) weren't fine.  And a year and a half later things really weren't, they were, they were, things were getting worse I think, but I was tired.  And I told Bob [Robert P. Schechter] I said, "You know I've been hanging in here, and now that's, this is it," and he says, "You're right."
Story_ID: 673075
Speaker 1: So, tell me this business, tell me how this business, what was it, what, I know what was, where you in the marketplace (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: We sold to--we sold to tele- teleconference, telephone companies--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Companies.
Speaker 2: --internationally so it would be--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Where were you manufacturing?
Speaker 2: And it was through--it wasn't like, what were we manufacturing?
Speaker 1: Yeah, what were you manufacturing?
Speaker 2: Oh again this is software.
Speaker 1: Okay, oh so it's software--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: This is not, yeah.
Speaker 1: So it's your first software and what--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Total software company [NMS Communications Corporation].
Speaker 1: Total software company 'cause and it was in--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Framingham [Massachusetts].
Speaker 1: What, no but what kind of software is it, for any kind--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: For telephony.
Speaker 1: Tel- oh for telephony, okay, okay, okay.  And so what were the, what were the challenges you think at the, this, this point in time?  Why this venture was you know was so much of a challenge?  And what were your, what were your annual receipt--?
Speaker 2: It really wasn't that much, and this was less of a challenging than any other company other than the ser- part of the services piece.  Because I had not run the services business, but I had run sales before, so I knew what, what we needed to, to have a sales organization, even and international sales organization.  I had not had feet on the street before, but, but so now we had, I had folks going out to make a call as opposed to staying in to make a call.  So that was different, but it wasn't as, as dramatically different.  This was strictly software and it was selling into telecommunications, so that, you know there were some things that were, that were really different.  But the company was small and I was used to, Digital [Digital Equipment Corporation] was--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Like how small?
Speaker 2: Sun was--I mean SunExpress I think was larger than--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: It was, I--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: I remember.
Speaker 1: I thought it was $300 million.
Speaker 2: SunExpress was 300 million.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: And but Sun [Sun Microsystems, Inc.] was, was became, be--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Bil- bil--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: About $14 billion--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Billion, right.
Speaker 2: Sun and Digital would've been fourteen you know, that, that size, so this was small and it was more like a startup, you know (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Eventually this was, this too was, was sold but I was, but I was, I was gone by then.  I think I left there in, I've forgotten--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Oh it did get sold?
Speaker 2: It did get sold.
Speaker 1: In a, in a, okay.
Speaker 2: After, I mean I was probably a year and a half, two years after, after I had left.
Story_ID: 673076
Speaker 1: But I left to not work in Corporate America--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Again.
Speaker 1: --again.  I didn't know anything that would attract me in Corporate America again, and it wasn't anything that was wrong with corporate, it was just--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: It was that you--it was time.
Speaker 1: Been there, done that, and tired.  And then I, you know what I did, nonprofit.  Talking about going, going full, full circle.  And I had no intentions of doing that either.  But I got a call about ICIC, the Initiative for a Competitive Inner City.  The attraction was that this was Michael Porter and was using his, his factors around competitiveness and strategies that he used in countries and, and corporations and states, wherever he worked he had this, model and he was applying it to the inner city.  And the attraction for me was looking at the inner city from a position of strength, as opposed to a deficit model like every place else in, in--usually looked at the inner city.  And so I thought this, I think I can, can make an impact here.  It's not Corporate America it's a whole different, different thing.   But it was, it was something that, that interest me you know I came from, from the inner city, the Boston plant [of Digital Equipment Corporation] was there.  I (unclear), for me that's where I could, where I thought I could make a difference and, so I took the position.  It wasn't international you know, it wasn't gonna totally str-, you know broaden my horizon, stretch--this is where I thought I could, I could really make a difference.  And it was looking at things that said the inner city is a place where it, where it can be competitive.  There were competitive advantages for corporations and businesses to be in the inner city, not all.  But there were advantages and that you look at the inner city and lot of people see just a lot of poor people.  Yep there are a lot of people in, inner city, but when you look at the buying power that's in the inner city that, that a lot companies never even think about.  You had like this area out, when in Boston [Massachusetts] where Stop and Shop [Stop and Shop Supermarket Company] went into and, Best Buy [Best Buy Co., Inc.] went into, they became the highest grossing stores in their cha- in com- in the chain.  Because there weren't anyone else there, and it was a need, I don't know what they're doing at this, at this point.  But you just have to know that there, there're people there they might, might, might need some training, but they're there.  All inner cities are near highways and, and train stations and, and airports and so you're looking for location, the inner city could be there.  The just the things that, that we were able to, to point out, but I wasn't there, I was there from two, three years, about that.  And then Al [Terrell's husband, Albert Brown] became really ill--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Ill.
Speaker 1: --and so I left.
Story_ID: 673077
Speaker 1: So is that organization still around, ICI is it still--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: ICIC [Initiative for a Competitive Inner City]?
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: Yes but that, I'm not quite sure what it's--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --it's really doing now.  We did the Inner City 100 which was showing that businesses could prosper in the inner city, and these weren't fly by night organizations, they had to be in business for five years.  They had to have a certain number of employees, they had to have a certain revenue and, and say that (unclear) just highlight them.  And say that, that these, these are kinds of businesses, that are doing really well in the inner city.  There were, the studies of cities and when Ka- Katrina [Hurricane Katrina] happened, not Katrina, yeah when, when New Orleans [Louisiana] happened--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: That's Katrina.
Speaker 2: Yeah and, and people were saying that, people on the those rooftops didn't wanna leave 'cause you know they were waiting for their checks.  You know, we could show that the buying power at the inner city community in New Orleans before that.  It means so there, there were, there was information we had gathered about various cities, about states, about that was, that we thought was, was pretty helpful.  And we did also the Inner City Connection [sic. Inner City Capital Connections] where you looked at, at bringing financial institutions in to work with inner city companies to, for and ed-, educating some companies that didn't always mean you had to sell your company.  But what, what it, what it mean to have financing and also for the, the, the banks to understand.  They were, there's really something substantial there.  So I think but it's, it's (unclear) in a whole different form and I don't know what's, what happening.
Speaker 1: Because that is, that could take off in every inner city, I mean there's need for that, and I, I heard that discussed.  And you know I even heard that discussed in Chicago [Illinois], but I haven't seen anyone doing it in a very successful way.
Story_ID: 673078
Speaker 1: I wanna ask, 'cause Al's death was, you know that's the loss of a partner, you know and but, you, you've reinvigorated yourself.  And you're on a new chapter, and I was wondering if you could talk about this chapter of your life.
Speaker 2: You thinking Miami [Florida]?
Speaker 1: Mi- I'm just thinking well you, well first of all you were very instrumental in Deval Patrick's [HistoryMaker Deval L. Patrick] campaign.  And, and, and that is, that's after, isn't that after Al's death?
Speaker 2: (Shakes head) Unh-uh.
Speaker 1: It was during the--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Al's yeah, Al [Terrell's husband, Albert Brown] was still alive, and you know it was, Al was still alive, because Al was alive when Barack Obama [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama] was, was--
Speaker 1: So 2008.
Speaker 2: Um-hm, Al died in 2011 in January.
Speaker 1: Eleven [2011], okay, okay I'm getting, okay.
Speaker 2: So it's six years ago.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And Al is the reason that I have this place, because he was, was, we had rented in this building, in, in '08 [2008] I think it was.  And he liked this building, he was really ill, I mean like, really ill, and wanted to come to Florida for, for the winter.  He said it was gonna be really cold and wanted to, to be in the warm.  He had been in, was in rehab and he was supposed to come home one weekend and wasn't able to come home.  So I used that weekend to come down here to find somewhere, I was bound and determined as my [maternal] grandmother [Jane Griffin Weeks] would say, to find somewhere that we could spend, spend the winter, and I came down, I knew he liked this building and he, he knew it, but I looked around and I didn't see anything that that I really liked.  And I even for the, even though it wasn't mine it wouldn't have been for the, for the, the, the winter.  And so I did see this, it wasn't for rent, it was for sale, and, and it was you know basically furnished and it was okay for the, the, for what we liked and everything.  And so I told Al you know I don't, I really can't find anything to, to rent, but I, but they, there's this apartment for sale.  And he was really thinking about getting away for the, for the winter.  And, and now I wonder if he just knew, he wasn't going to.  But so I bought this in November, but he wasn't able to make it, he died in January.
Story_ID: 673079
Speaker 1: So, I came down here anyway and for the--because I needed to get away from, from Boston [Massachusetts] and so this has been the right thing to do.  You know, it's, it's I--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: It brought you home in a ways it sort of--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: You know it brought me back to Florida--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Florida.
Speaker 1: But I don't, but it's not home.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: You know I grew up in Hallandale [Hallandale Beach, Florida], I don't know Hallandale anymore, I don't know the people in Hallandale.  Miami [Florida] is a very, very different place and it's like I was destined to come here.  My brother was really ill and when he was ill, I would come home to visit him, and my other brother, my--Levon [Levon Terrell] would, was in Hallandale at the time.  And Charles' [Charles Terrell, Jr.] one joy was for the three of us be in a car and drive from Hallandale down to the beach and make that turn at, at down end of the street down here.  And then go back to Hallandale and I don't know how many times we did that, I mean but during that time when he was ill.  But that was a draw to Miami, he had a thing about Miami, and so it's not liked we stopped or went to eat here or anything else.  But, but it was something about that, and I came down once for another meeting.  And a friend of mine had a condo here, and then I, she insisted I stay while I was here I was by myself.  But she had this fabulous condo and, just like, this is a very different place than when I grew up.  'Cause when I grew up I didn't even come to Miami, you know we didn't come, come down here, it was a different world.  But this was a world that was beginning to feel like part of a draw.  And when Al [Terrell's husband, Albert Brown] and I spent that winter here, he really liked it, and then coming back.  And now it's like establishing a, a community down here, and think it's been easier than if I were trying to do the reverse and, and head to Boston.  Miami is so diverse and because so many people come from so many different places, it's more of a welcoming place.  And with lots going on, lots of cultural kinds of things, different people.  I could go out in Boston, now I know who the black people are in Boston, because I know them I've been up there long enough.  But I can go out probably five nights a week and not see anybody look like me, it's like we're in different, different places.  I go out here, I'm always gonna see somebody that looks (laughter) like me, and it's just a lot of things going on down here.
Story_ID: 673080
Speaker 1: I've joined the board of the Perez Art Museum [Perez Art Museum Miami, Miami, Florida], and from the very beginning, Perez Art Museum has only been around a few years.  From the very, very beginning while there was the Knight Foundation [John S. and James L. Knight Foundation, Miami, Florida] and Jorge Perez [Jorge M. Perez] gave a combined a million dollars.  So that they could continue to collect--because they did have some African American art.  So they had a celebration for that year, and you talking about us turning out, well we just had the fourth one.  And there it's not only blacks, but majority who would and they were probably about, there were over 800 people.  And its, it really is a celebration and it was totally funded by the, the Knight Foundation.  Now next year, we're going to change that and start having more as a fund raiser.  But that museum is, it's got, it's is, is we like to say the community's museum, and has African American art but the, the real purpose for that is to really begin to, to have a really fine collection, in addition to the art it has, of African American art in there.  So that it's, it's represented.  So you have like the Ed Clarks [HistoryMaker Edward Clark] in there, and you have--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: [HistoryMaker] Elizabeth Catlett.
Speaker 1: Yes, we have I'm trying to think of--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Oh there's [HistoryMaker] Betye Saar, there--I mean there--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Yeah, you, you name and now it's what we're working on is an endowment so it is not just collecting now, but also making sure that we collect for the future (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: Collections will continue in the future.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Story_ID: 673081
Speaker 1: So this, so, what is your life right now? Can you talk about that just a little bit about you're here and then you're getting ready to move to Newport [Rhode Island].  And I'm just--you're on your boards I mean, but you're moving from Boston [Massachusetts] to Newport.
Speaker 2: Yes, I'm doing that yes, and how long that might last, I don't know.
Speaker 1: But, but what why Newport?
Speaker 2: Al [Terrell's husband, Albert Brown] and I used to go to Newport during the summers, he, his best friend--Al was born in, in, in Providence [Rhode Island].  And his best friend lived in Newport and, so we would go and visit him and I really liked Newport, and we, we bought a small tiny place there when, when Dorian [Dorian Brown] was born.  And when we moved to California we rented and sold it, and then came back, then we stated going to New--to the Vineyard [Martha's Vineyard, Massachusetts].  Al didn't like the Vineyard in the beginning because he had terrible memories of the Vineyard when he was little.  Al was dark skinned, the Vineyards had the, you know, we always had--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: The, the they had the color, they had--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: We always have our color thing, you know, but Al was very dark, and so he didn't like going to, the idea of the Vineyard.  He was, he was very young, because his brother who was much older and lived there with his wife; and he would be sent there during the summer.  So all of the people, I knew we were going to the Vineyard, I convinced him to go back to the Vineyard, and so we started going to the Vineyard.  And then we, and once this particular summer we couldn't rent this place we wanted to, to rent where we had been renting, we got you know this fabulous place on the water and that kind of stuff.  So we said, "Let's try Newport again," and so went back to Newport and really liked Newport.  I know how I really, really, really ended up buying this place, because I had (laughter) I sold our place in Boston.  I rented in the same building and I would still go to Newport during the summer, but I was, Boston was the base, Newport was, I would rent there.  And I just, things happened, things like I got tired of dealing with this guy I had been renting from.  Because he was difficult and I'd been renting for like four years and every year it was a negotiation and it was the security.  Although I kept his place better than him, and I didn't feel like doing it this year, this particular year.  I had made an offer on this, this apartment before, I'd forgotten how relieved I was when the offer didn't go through, because we were so far apart that my realtor says, "Let's go back and, and make an offer."  And I said, "I'm not going up," she says, "Well you know these people don't need the money, maybe they must rent it or sell because their place is, is ready."  So I end up with Newport to take the offer, and then I have to think about now what about Boston, because my lease is coming up, do I try to renew?  And they wanted me to stay longer than I had anticipated, so I said, "Now it's time to just try Newport and see what happens."  And I like Newport, I like my place and I've done quite a bit of work to it, I haven't been there, because it was finished a week before I moved here.  So I moved in (laughter) and a week later I'm in Miami [Florida] and so I'll see how it works, and I plan to be in Newport and, and Miami.  I know that if I'm in Newport, that Newport will be more real, real summer.  'Cause right now, I mean before, when I had Miami--Boston, I know the people it's easy to stay, so I kind of lollygag.  But with Newport it really is a summer place, so I'll come back here earlier I'm sure.  Miami is home right now.  I enjoy going back to Boston, I have friends there, I was there last weekend, The Links [The Links, Incorporated] had a really big event, it was fun.  But I came back and if it feels too strange not having something in Boston, then I'll have something in Boston and probably Newport and definitely here, I'm a Florida resident.
Story_ID: 673082
Speaker 1: --the Deval campaign.  Deval [HistoryMaker Deval L. Patrick] was a successful governor of Massachusetts and, you know in we in Chicag- he's from, originally from Chicago [Illinois].
Speaker 2: I know.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So can you talk about your role there?
Speaker 2: I, politics and, and--was not something that I was real deep into, I got more involved with, with that with Deval's run.  And I won't say I was so in, I mean I was on the com- on the committee, I raised, help raise funds for Deval.  I'm very supportive of Deval and his wife, Diane [Diane Bemus Patrick] whom I think the, the world of also.  I got even more involved when, I was on the, the Boston committee, called Boston 2004 [Boston 2004, Incorporated].  And that committee was to raise funds to bring the convention [2004 Democratic National Convention] to Boston [Massachusetts], so we were to raise the money and then get the convention in.  So the convention was coming to Boston but you needed to have money, so I was on the, on the, on the board for Boston 2004, to raise the money.  I say all that to say, I was in, in the gardens [Fleet Center; TD Garden, Boston, Massachusetts] the night that Barack Obama [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama] spoke.  Was like, who is this.  It was incredible, it was just a totally moving experience.  Shortly after Barack Obama who is now senator, who is senator comes to Boston for a fundraiser.  He wasn't saying he was running for, for president, but kind of in, in the air, and Barry White gave the one of the first fundraisers for him, and definitely first fundraiser in Boston.  And Barry sent something recently; he said he was going through some of his mat-, his old materials, throwing things out.  And he came across this flyer that had gone out for that fundraiser, and I was listed as, as one of the, the, the co-host for it.  Because it was like you just knew this, this guy was special, and so one of the first fundraisers, the first fundraiser in Boston, one of the first probably else, else, elsewhere for the hope fund [Democratic Hope Fund]--I was a part of that.  When he really declared and when he really mean, I mean he was running, I raised more money than I ever thought I could raise.  I gave more money than I ever thought I could give, I mean I was not going to wake up the day after that election and wish I had done one more thing.  I went to probably about six states, maybe seven to help with the, with the campaigning, and getting out the vote in, in the primaries.  I, I, I really was gonna do and did everything I could do, and was glad of it, to that, the morning after the, the election.  And you know the, the, the second run, was fine, but I don't consider myself you know that deep into, to politics like some of the, the people I know.  There, there are people and when, and when we have one of the, when--Kamala Harris was someone that I had met and, and also made contributions to.  And, and when we went from, I forget her name, South Carolina who is a representative who is running for senator--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: I can't remember okay.
Speaker 2: You know--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: She's gonna be running now this--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: She, is she running now again--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Oh--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: No she was just, she ran, she didn't make it--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, okay.
Speaker 2: She's still our representative that I thought was, was really sharp, so and now I am thinking okay, I think I'll take a break it's, but now the Florida, I'm getting now involved with, with Florida and the gov- the gubernatorial elections coming up.  And there is a young man [Andrew Gillum] who is the mayor of Tallahassee [Florida], who's African American, who is a Rattler [Florida A and M Rattlers], who is going, who is running for governor.  So it's time to get back in there.  Because if we aren't, in various places, if we aren't at the table, things don't happen.
Story_ID: 673083
Speaker 1: Dorothy what do you want your legacy to be? I mean when you think about, like I have been thinking for some reason for a while, 'cause I'm like, how does an English major know how to run a P and L [profit and loss]?  I mean you know and it seems and then you have, you have a personality suited to Corporate America.  You've got the very sharp sort of dispassionate you know approach to life--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Dispassionate (laughter).
Speaker 1: I mean you know, I mean you're passionate about things when you're very calm, you're the opposite of me.  But I, I kept thinking about you going around with your father [Charles Terrell, Sr.].  I couldn't, it's that image you know with checking, I'm like where did she get the business head?  But I wanna ask you as someone who was in Hallandale [Hallandale Beach, Florida] and you were, it was, you were looking for life outside and you really sort of burst on the scene.  But I wanna ask you this, given your journey, when you look at your journey, what do you want your, what will, what would you say you want your legacy to be?
Speaker 2: When, when I was in Hallandale I might've wanted and, and to and, and wondered what, what might've been out there.  What are the, the other things I can, that were available, but I, I was just kind of wondering, because I didn't, I didn't really know.  And I, and I wasn't exposed to a lot of things because, but there wasn't a lot of avenues to be exposed to, it was, we couldn't go lots of places.  And, and I, I don't know if I really think of, of legacy, I think of living.
Story_ID: 673084
Speaker 1: And, and while I'm here, and then after I'm gone, I want particularly kids to be exposed to things that they don't have, don't have a clue about.  I am usually on boards or associated with things that where I can make sure that there's access.  Because I think that kids probably don't know exactly what they might want to do when they grow up.  I didn't, but if they can see something--[HistoryMaker] Robert Battle who is the, the as you know over runs the Alvin Ailey [Alvin Ailey American Dance Theater] is from Liberty City [Miami, Florida].  And so he tells the story proudly that he's doing what he's doing because someone took him and on a school trip to see Alvin Ailey, you know.  How many more are like Robert and then, so that was dance, but the arts or, or whatever.  So I am very interested in working with Alvin Ailey in Miami [Florida], because Robert wants to do and maybe, maybe this, these things are legacy.  But what he wants to do is he comes, has his educational group because Alvin Ailey has the big edu- you know they have AileyCamp and all the rest of them.  And they come into the inner city in Miami before their performance, a week before, and go into an inner city school.  And now because of raising funds they can go into community center or two schools, and they work with these kids.  And then there's an afternoon when the art center is packed with inner city kids watching Alvin Ailey.  I can get behind that anytime just so kids can see this.  I, there's a school called The SEED School [The SEED School of Miami, Miami, Florida] in the inner city that I, I'm very much supportive of.  It's a boarding school for at risk kids, and so when I see something I be thinking I think the Seed School kids might be interested in this, or at least a few of them.  Whether it's Alvin Ailey, whether it's going to, to PAMM [Perez Art Museum Miami, Miami, Florida], whether it's New World Symphony.  Because I, I do believe the more exposure there is, the more (unclear) that these kids can say I can do, I can be, there are people who look like me and, and their, their opportunities abound.  And I didn't see a lot of these things when I, when, when, when I was growing up but it, but I do believe that if you can see some things, you might have even more of a, a, an idea of, of maybe not this but, but that or something like that, or entrepreneurship, or--it's so much now.  I and, and I think exposure is, is important.  So I, I, I don't know about so much the, the legacy, I, I just think that I want, I, I, I believe--while I can and while I'm here, I wanna do as much as I can do.  And I'd like to have kids who, who may not think that they can see or do as much--I'd like them to have to do and see as much as they can.  And, and who knows, you know.
Story_ID: 673085
Speaker 1: So your, your hopes and concerns for the black community as you see it?
Speaker 2: I'm, I'm, I'm concerned and I don't exactly--I mean this election has, every day I wake up--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Trump [President Donald John Trump], we're talking about the Trump election.
Speaker 2: Every day I wake up thinking, did this really happen, and it says something about us as a, as a country, as, as you know the black women showed up.  You know we showed up and we voted against Trump.  But not you know necessarily everybody else and, and I realize that, that we're--I, I, I didn't know that we were so far apart.  And so I don't know what all this, this really means, and I might've wanted to think it was the, the poorly educated that he says he loves.  And that, that's, that was where the, the vote came, that wasn't--no, that wasn't it.  And, and I don't know what I'm missing anymore, so I'm, I'm, that's a big concern for me.  And we thought we were making some, some progress.  What happens now?  I, being in Miami [Florida] is--like I talk about the diversity in Miami, but now there's a, there's a serious fear with a lot of people.  Who are concerns around--as to where they're, they're gonna be deported for no reason.  And the government can say that they are going after people with arrest records and things, but that is not the case, I've seen, that is not the case.  You know they are just going after people who are different, and you have people running across fields because they are fearful that ICE [U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement] is going to take advantage of them.  Or if they don't have papers, we're not talking about people who are causing any trouble.  So I, I don't know what's, what happens at this point.  I don't know why we have the president that, that we have, especially after the one we had.  And, you know, we have people who, we have so many more people, so many more people who are now have health care.  Maybe, maybe it wasn't the absolute perfect system but it, it, it was, it could've been, just like social security.   When it was rolled out, can you imagine the bumps in the road that must've had, but now try to take it away.  And I do think that that if we start having some many people who don't have security, and people think the jobs are coming back the way they were before, it's not going to happen.  It is not absolutely going to happen, and if poor people think Donald Trump really cares about them, I don't understand why, I mean I am baffled.  And now it's been what, two months and every day it's something new, and it's not good, so I don't even know how, how--I don't know how we go through this roller coaster for years when it's been two months, so.  I have new fears now (laughter).
Story_ID: 673086
Speaker 1: One last, what do you want people to say about you?
Speaker 2: (Pause) It may seem trite but that, that I did try to make a difference wherever I, wherever I could, something positive, something that would be helpful.  Because I didn't get where I am by myself, you know I give you all those names of people along the way.  And maybe they saw something in me but the fact is, that was helpful to me being able to, to be, to be where I am.  And, and so if I can be helpful then for me that's, that's important, and especially when it comes to folks who just need a little, I needed a little something.  And I got it, and that's, that's, that's not taking care of people, that's just, that's helping, that caring about people.  So I guess I'd like for people to think that I, that I cared, and I cared enough to do something.
Speaker 1: That's it, thank you.
