Story_ID: 449123
Speaker 1: Hello.  My name is Adrienne Jones and I am the interviewer.  Neculai Burghelea is the videographer, and there are no observers.  Sir, may I please get you to state and spell your name?
Speaker 2: My name is [HistoryMaker] Glenn Tunstull.  That's spelled G-L-E-N-N, Tunstull is T-U-N-S-T-U-L-L.
Speaker 1: What is your date of birth and where were you born?
Speaker 2: July 29th, 1950.  I was born in Flushing Hospital [Flushing Hospital Medical Center] in Flushing, New York [Flushing, Queens, New York].
Speaker 1: Today's date is September 13th, 2007 and we are at Skadden Arps [Skadden, Arps, Slate Meagher and Flom LLP] on 42nd Street in New York [New York].  What is your occupation?
Speaker 2: I'm a painter.
Story_ID: 449124
Speaker 1: To start out, I'm gonna ask you five People magazine-ish type questions.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: So, I'll just ask the question--
Speaker 2: Okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) and you just answer with whatever comes to mind.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: What's your favorite food?
Speaker 2: I guess I would have to say soul food or Italian food.
Speaker 1: What's your favorite time of year?
Speaker 2: Summer, summer, whatev- whatever time of year it happens to be or wherever it happens to be.
Speaker 1: What is your favorite color?
Speaker 2: Blue.
Speaker 1: What is your favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: I probably would have to say Brazil.
Speaker 1: And what is your favorite phrase or saying, do you have one?
Speaker 2: Not that I can think of, but I'm--I've been--I'm mimicked, so I know that they s- I say, you know, or--I can't think of the other one at this moment (laughter), but you know is kind of one and I'm very spiritual so maybe something of just stay in the moment.
Story_ID: 449125
Speaker 1: So let's start off by talking about your family.  I'd like to start with your mother.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: If you could tell us what her name was and where she was born and where she grew up if perhaps they're different?
Speaker 2: Her name is Mary Louise Shockency Tunstull [Mary Shockency Tunstull].  She was born in Loretto, Kentucky.  She was raised in Loretto, Kentucky.  Her family lived there for the most part.  She's from a very large family, I think eleven--there were eleven of them, nine girls and two boys.  Their family pretty much stayed in Kentucky, but she didn't.  She met my father [Edward Tunstull] in Louisville [Kentucky], and they moved to New York [New York].  I think all the rest of them stayed in Kentucky.
Speaker 1: Does your mother tell you any stories about when she was growing up in Kentucky with her nine brothers and sisters?
Speaker 2: Well, she went by the name of Louise because she was from a Catholic background, and in that time and period, people named their children after the saints, so all of the- she had several sisters whose name was Mary.  So, as a result, they went by their middle names, not by their birth names.  And she didn't really start using that name until she moved away from the family and I guess moved to Louisville and then later to New York.  They were very close, sort of close-knit family.  I think when you are raised in such a large family, you tend to have a world--it becomes a world unto itself, so I th- they relied on one another.  It was a farming household, so that kind of mutual responsibility was there.
Speaker 1: Do you know what kind of things were on their farm?
Speaker 2: I used to visit when I was a child.  My grandparents passed away early, as did my parents, so I don't--I remember chickens and horses and things that interest a kid (laughter).
Speaker 1: You said your grandparents passed early.  Does that mean that you did not know them or did you get an opportunity to spend any time with them?
Speaker 2: I met my grandfather and my grandmother on my mother's side so, yes, I did know them and, I was, again, like five, six, seven, in that age range.  They passed I guess probably when I was a teenager.  We didn't spend a lot of time there, though.  My father did not like the country; he was a city boy.
Speaker 1: So, how often would you say that you actually made it to Kentucky and visited the grandparents and perhaps the aunts and uncles?
Speaker 2: Well, in the very beginning, we travelled back and forth to Kentucky.  My f- they travelled often from Kentucky to Detroit [Michigan] to New York and it seemed like to me, in, in a kid's mind, it seemed like we travelled once a month and we were going to either Detroit or to Kentucky, back and forth, back and forth, back and forth.  And we would oftentimes stay with them.  My father would drop us off with my mother there and go to the city or sometimes we'd be dropped off with my--at our grandparents and they'd go to Louisville.  So, we went back and forth a lot.  Then, we moved to Detroit at the age of eight and I think going back and forth to Detroit be- I mean to Kentucky became more of an annual thing for the derby [Kentucky Derby].  They always went for the derby every year, so--and we would go with them and that type of thing.
Speaker 1: Do you know your grandparents on your mother's side?  Do you know their names?
Speaker 2: My grandfather's name was William Shockency.
Speaker 1: Can I get you to spell Shockency?
Speaker 2: Yes, S-H-O-C-K-E-N-C-Y.  And my grandmother's name was Bessie Shockency.
Speaker 1: And do you know anything about their occupations or their childhood or any of their history?
Speaker 2: Unfortunately, no.  My grandparents had a farm with a lot of kids and that's about all I can say.  I don't know their history.
Story_ID: 449126
Speaker 1: When you would go to visit for the Kentucky Derby, can you just tell us a little bit about that celebration?  Was that held at home?  Did you actually go to the races?  What was happening (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I don't remember going to the derby with my father [Edward Tunstull].  I remember always going to Kentucky and there always being parties and they going to these parties and these events.  To the actual race track, I don't remember going with my father to the Kentucky derby, though I went with him often to the racetrack [Detroit Race Course], but that was in Detroit [sic. Livonia, Michigan].
Speaker 1: And was there anything special or specific about the derby party?  Was there any special drink served or particular food or anything particular about it?
Speaker 2: Well, the one thing I can remember about my mother's [Mary Shockency Tunstull] side of the family is because it was such a large family, there was always so much food.  It was just common that she would have three to four different meats with every meal, so there'd be ham, there'd be chicken, there'd be maybe a turkey, there'd be a roast, something like that with every--seemed like with every meal, and then all the attendant, you know, side dishes and so there was always like lots of food in my mother's side of the family.  My father's side of the family, I guess there probably, it was kind of the same.  I just think that that's what comes out of the South, the soul food.
Speaker 1: And did they wear hats or, or derbies that day?
Speaker 2: Well, the women always wore hats, yeah, and the men always wore hats.  This is the '50s [1950s].  I mean, you just basically didn't leave your house without some type of--with that type of accessory.  It was like part of what you did.
Story_ID: 449127
Speaker 1: What does your mom [Mary Shockency Tunstull] do?  Did she work outside the home or was she a homemaker?
Speaker 2: She was a homemaker primarily but, you know, my mother was not an educated woman, so when it came to doing work, she would do domestic work from time to time, but not often.  My father [Edward Tunstull] was--well, he was a machinist technically.  That's what we always put on our--in school enrollments and things like that, father was a machinist in Michigan for like Ford Motor Company [Dearborn, Michigan] or GM [General Motors Corporation; General Motors Company, Detroit, Michigan].  But he was also a gambler, and I think his principal income came from that type of occupation.  He and my uncle, his brother, had like a gambling house, so they would have these ongoing parties, gambling parties.  And there were times when they were actually in our house, so there were times when they would have the parties in our house, so I grew up with a kind of raucous social background, people coming and hanging out, smoking and eating and playing cards and making money.
Speaker 1: What was your mother's opinion of that?
Speaker 2: She would make dinners and sell dinners and she was supportive of him.  You know, it's the type of--it's the type of thing you can hardly be--my father didn't want to go the regular route that was available to him as a black man, or the route that came with him as--coming out of his family. (Background noise) I'm sorry about that.
Speaker 1: (TAPE INTERRUPTION)
Speaker 2: You said your mother would--supported, supported your father's entrepreneurship as it were?
Speaker 1: Well, you know, it's kind of hard when you--when someone makes a lot of money doing something.  I mean, it was--it went both ways.  You'd either make a lot of money, or you'd lose a lot of money or something like that, but in either regard, this was the life that he chose.  It had the financial benefit.  I mean, my father was somewhat flashy.  That's probably the wrong word, but--he was charismatic; that's a better word.  He was a very beautiful man and out of that came this distracted life.  He had this charisma, he did this type of thing as a living and so the good part was there was a, you know, great, great financial thing from time to time, but there was also times when he was just not there, either he was working or he was involved in the other lives, and there were periods of time where we'd grow--where as I grew up where he was just not around.  So--but he always came back, you know, over time, in time.
Story_ID: 449128
Speaker 1: How would you describe your mom [Mary Shockency Tunstull]?
Speaker 2: I would say funny, stylish, eccentric.  She was warm, cuddly, supportive, my biggest fan, yeah.
Speaker 1: What was your mother's style like?
Speaker 2: Sh- well she was a buxom woman, which was the term that they used back in those days.  She had weight on her but it was in a figure, very that.  And she was known for her s- fur stoles and, you know, her looks.  She was just very pulled together, you know.  She would be very pulled together and, I guess she imparted some of that to me about the importance of clothing matching and things like that.  They were both very stylish.  I guess it was something that was important in their lifestyle.  I guess to some degree in my family in general, my father's [Edward Tunstull] family, they wanted to have that look, you know.  So, she was--she was like that.  She had fun jewels.  I remember playing with her jewels and playing with her fur stoles, especially the stone martens that had the little h- animal heads and things like that.
Speaker 1: And what about the family that she came from?  You indicated that there were lots of siblings.
Speaker 2: Yes (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What was their--and that they were on a farm.  But, what was their financial--
Speaker 2: I--
Speaker 1: --security like?
Speaker 2: I think that they were essentially a poor f- working family, farming family.  By the time that I came--she was one of the younger ones, so by the time that I came into their world, most of the older sisters had already moved out of the house and had their own homes in various places.  I even stayed with one of them when--with her husband in Kentucky during a period where my mother and father were separated, and my brother and I, my brother, Ronald [Ronald Tunstull], and I stayed with them for I think a semester in school.  So--and they had a big house in Louisville [Kentucky], a really huge house and I remember there was like seventeen rooms or something.  This was her and her husband.  But when I think back on it, it's a big house, but I don't see how they could have been a wealthy family.  I just think they had a big house, you know, and they didn't have any children.  And I say that because I remember my uncle ringing the neck of a chicken in the backyard.  It just doesn't kind of jive for me.  Anyway, the rest had their own homes and their own children and I just kind of was never very close with them.
Speaker 1: You said your mother was eccentric, how so?
Speaker 2: Well, I, I, I think that she believed in things that, you know, that were maybe a little different from the other folks.  She was--yeah, she had some--now that I think of it, yeah, there were some really funny things.  You know, she wasn't--she came out of the Catholic background and their family--they were--they had a religious thing.  There was a religiosity in my family on both sides, and there still is, but my parents were not religious in that regard, but my mother would go to church and strike up these ongoing church relationships with ministers that didn't necessarily preach the gospel for her as much as they gave her numbers 'cause she was into gambling with numbers, and that's back when it was illegal.  But she would go to these different ministry, ministries and drag me around with her to these things, which I really could not take, so that was--that--I thought that was really strange on her behalf, you know, that she would do this type of thing with religion.
Story_ID: 449129
Speaker 1: My father, I can't remember him ever going to church, and that's really odd since his father [James Tunstull] was a minister and his father came from a family of ministers.  I think there's like eleven ministers on his father's side of the family.
Speaker 2: So, let's talk about your father.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: What was his name and where was he from?  Where did he grow up?
Speaker 1: Edward Richard Tunstull [Edward Tunstull].  He was born in Tennessee.  I don't know anything about his life there.  He lived in Louisville [Kentucky] when he met my mother [Mary Shockency Tunstull] and he was already into gambling and that type of thing when they met.  He was a very kind of fast track type of guy.  I think the irony is that none of us gamble, none of his kids gamble.  He was in the [U.S.] Navy when they met, and I remember a story about him having gone AWOL [Absent Without Official Leave] to be with her, but I can't remember whether they ran off together--I think they ran off together, but he, he had an honorable discharge 'cause I remember the papers and all those things, so it must've been reconciled in some way and that must be just part of their legend.
Speaker 2: Do you know the story of your parents meeting?
Speaker 1: Not really, no, apart from their meeting and probably double dating with his brother or--and his sister, so that's probably mostly what had happened.  They were double dating, but I don't know exactly like what day, what h- how they encountered one another.  I remember them talking about going to the movies, but that's about it.
Speaker 2: How many brothers and sisters did your father have?
Speaker 1: He had a similar amount.  I think it was like nine or--nine brothers and sisters.
Speaker 2: And did they live nearby or in accessible places?  I know that you said you spent some time in Kentucky.  Did you spend any time with your father's family?
Speaker 1: Yes, my grandmother.  Her name was Bessie Tunstull.  She was in Kentucky and my Uncle Junior [ph.], who was the oldest son was in Kentucky as well with his wife, Rose [ph.].  My Aunt Dorothy [Dorothy Tunstull LaRue], she was there as well.  She was the baby of the family.  She was married to Alvin LaRue, who's a Tuskegee Airman.  He just came--he was invited to the White House [Washington, D.C.] recently to be honored for being a member of that--
Speaker 2: Medal of Honor [sic. Congressional Gold Medal]?
Speaker 1: And got the Medal of Honor?
Speaker 2: Is that L-A-R-U-E?
Speaker 1: Yes.  We call him Uncle LaRue, but that's his last name, but we've always called him Uncle LaRue.
Speaker 2: So, how would you--you told us quite a bit about your father actually, but if you had to describe him, what would you say?
Speaker 1: (Pause) They used to call him a sport.  He had cars and jewelry and wonderful clothes.  He taught me about clothes.  He was very good looking.  He was pretty much a warm person.  He was a dreamer, basically.  I remember him telling me once, I believe everything in life is a dream, and if you want something, you just have to dream harder.  I got nervous when he told me that (laughter).  I was like, hm, he's unstable.  I think that I came to that conclusion after we moved every year and I was always the new kid--the new kid in school.  But now that I look at it, I'm, I'm pleased that I wasn't in a family that was so regimented, that I could see life in many different ways.  Because of that type of exposure, I--I'm not--I don't--I'm not as limited I think as some people that I've encountered in my life.
Story_ID: 449130
Speaker 1: Can you describe your early childhood for us?  You were born in Queens [New York].
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And then--so can you just give us a, sort of a short rundown on the m- the movement that you were making, places that you were going to new schools, like how (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, we didn't move from city to city that much.  It was mostly from different houses to different houses in different parts of the city.  We lived in New York [New York] until I was about eight years old, and then we moved to Detroit [Michigan].  The reason for that basically I remember was my father's [Edward Tunstull] brothers and sisters lived in Detroit.  His mother [Bessie Tunstull] told him that New York was not a place to raise kids and so--and that there was all this opportunity in terms of the automobile industry in Detroit, and it was.  So, we moved to Detroit, but I--if I remember correctly, we had a number of places that we lived as a kid in New York and then when we--by the time we got to Detroit, that continued.  We lived it seemed like a year one place and then we'd move and it'd be a year someplace else.  By the time I got to high school [Cass Technical High School, Detroit, Michigan], we had lived in about thirteen different houses.
Speaker 1: And what kind of places did you live in?
Speaker 2: They were everything from single family homes to two-story homes--I mean, two family homes.  It was a variety of things.
Speaker 1: And, you said that your father and his--and his brothers ran gambling houses.  Were they doing that in Detroit?
Speaker 2: Yes, this is--well, yes, basically.  By the time that I became really aware of this, I--it was in Detroit.
Speaker 1: And was that happening at your house, or did they tend to have a separate location?
Speaker 2: They had it at the house, but they were all--mostly at separate locations.  It was generally someplace else.  And it wasn't always that they were running a house.  I mean, they would go to these gambling parties.  And to that ex- but beyond that, I didn't really know.
Speaker 1: And did you have any feelings about that at the time?  I know you're a kid, but do you remember what just your knowledge of that activity felt like at all?
Speaker 2: Well, when they had the parties at the house, to some extent it was enjoyable.  You know, there was people, there was a party atmosphere, music, you know.  My parents were not necessarily drinkers, so I didn't see them like debilitated in any way that really scared me or bothered me, though I imagine drinking, drinking was going on.  There was always liquor 'cause that was the era for that type of thing, and smoking.  What was bothersome was when he was gone.  I personally suffer from, I guess, abandonment issues because I remember specifically coming home from school and always looking to see if his car was there and being disappointed if it wasn't and being elated if it was, so these were the types of things that continue to, I guess, be a part of my issues in life (laughter).
Story_ID: 449131
Speaker 1: Do you have a sense of Detroit [Michigan] when you move there?  Understandably, you were a young person, but, you know, do you have a sense of what the atmosphere was like?
Speaker 2: Detroit was the best place to live in the country at that time.  This was the--I got moved there in '58 [1958].  By the time that I had a sense of even who I was, I was in a world where Motown had exploded.  Affluence for people of color and black families was everywhere.  You know, people were living in wonderful homes, driving beautiful cars.  You know, everything was just wonderful.  The issues of crime and things like that were just not part of Detroit's history, and I was there until '68 [1968]--'69 [1969], actually.  So, I basically enjoyed the best parts of it.  I felt really fortunate.  I would go to school and we would pass Hitsville, New- U.S.A. [Hitsville U.S.A., Detroit, Michigan], and we would see [HistoryMaker] Smokey Robinson or Marvin Gaye or something standing out in front of the building with their motorcycles or something like that.  When Diana Ross and The Supremes' hit became famous, they moved from the projects into my neighborhood, so they had three houses on the same block.  I mean, it wasn't the same block I lived on but, you know, it was a few blocks away.  And we went over there to visit them.  So, it was like--it was fabulous.  It was really quite wonderful to be in Detroit.
Story_ID: 449132
Speaker 1: And you said your dad [Edward Tunstull] was employed as a machinist with Ford [Ford Motor Company, Detroit, Michigan].
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: So, maybe if you could just talk a little bit about the auto industry and the impact that it had on the community that you lived in.
Speaker 2: It seemed like everybody was pretty much employed--if they weren't self-employed, or if they weren't a minister or something like that, I'm talking about black men in particular, they pretty much worked as factory workers.  I don't really know much more than what he did--what he did specifically there.  It was assembly line type of work, so you just say machinist, but I don't know what, what he did with that.  Other than, I had various friends.  My girlfriend's father worked for Ford and he was actually a designer and helped design the Thunderbird [Ford Thunderbird].  So there was a lot of opportunities and people were, were living very well and consistently, you know.  They had good hourly wages, they had a union.  There was consistency.  A lot of my relatives worked for these--on the assembly line, so.
Speaker 1: And what was the education of your father and your uncles and the people who lived in the area?  Were all of them educated working at these factories or were there opportunities for people (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) My father finished high school and I think that that's probably as much as any of them did.  I don't think any of them went to college.  And my mother [Mary Shockency Tunstull] didn't even finish high school, so this is what--the world that she came out of, so I can't really say too much about exactly what they had done beyond that.
Story_ID: 446358
Speaker 1: We were just speaking a little bit during the break about your feeling that you don't have a terrible amount of information about your parents [Mary Shockency Tunstull and Edward Tunstull] and their upbringing.  Why do you think that is?
Speaker 2: Well, primarily because I was so preoccupied with my own life that I wasn't interested in theirs, and probably by the time I became a teenager I didn't think that they had very much to offer me in terms of how to live my life.  I knew it was going to be different from theirs.  But when I think about it now, I feel like it's such a missed opportunity because historically, they lived through some of--really turbulent times.  They lived before civil rights, and, and they were part of that black community that was afraid to upset the cart.  That was afraid of what Malcolm [Malcolm X] and Martin [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] were going to do for their personal circumstances, that if, if there's a voice out there that was going to re- demand equal rights that they may suffer the blows of that at the hands of somebody on the streets who felt they didn't deserve it, so they were very circumspect in what they did publicly and where they went and, and they imparted that on us as kids, and it was all based on survival where one's life was dependent on knowing what you can and can do and what you can aspire to.  They just did not have the--especially on their educational level, they did not have that same level of opportunity available to them as individuals, though they did want us to have it, so that's why education was really important.
Speaker 1: Did your father and his enterprises ever come to contact with law authorities in Detroit [Michigan]?
Speaker 2: Yeah, my father had problems with that, you know.  Though I don't want to get into it, yes he did.
Speaker 1: Absolutely.
Story_ID: 446359
Speaker 1: Can you tell us what your family like was--life was like on a day to day basis?
Speaker 2: (Pause) Well, when I think about it, there were periods when my mother [Mary Shockency Tunstull] wasn't there 'cause she would either be out working, my father [Edward Tunstull] wouldn't be there, and I was the oldest, so I had a level of responsibility towards my brothers and sister, probably more my brothers.  I think by the time my sister came around, it was le- she was home more.  There were periods when my father, like I said, wouldn't be there and so I would have to assume some level of responsibility, not necessarily like working or anything, but just managing things, you know.  I don't know where else to go with that.
Speaker 1: Can you list your siblings for us?
Speaker 2: Well, there was my brother, Ron [Ronald Tunstull], who I mentioned, my younger brother, Richard [Richard Tunstull], and my sister, Linda [Linda Tunstull].
Speaker 1: And what about holidays?  How did you spend those?  What were--what, what was the most important or most important holidays and what did the household look like when they came around?
Speaker 2: I probably--Christmas was probably the most important, Christmas and Thanksgiving, Easter.  You know, Easter was always wonderful 'cause we got new clothes and Thanksgiving was wonderful because we--we'd have a big Thanksgiving meal.  Sometimes a relative would visit.  Christmas because it's Christmas.  You know, the house is decorated and all that type of stuff.  I remember having artificial Christmas trees and feeling very modern with that, you know.  Gifts were okay.  It's--I, I, I presume Christmas was not one of my favorite holidays for--probably because I didn't get the gifts that I wanted because right now Christmas is still a holiday that I really do not like.  I dread it and, hence, that's why I'm always in Brazil at Christmastime because I just do not want to celebrate it here.  That's about it.
Speaker 1: What's your earliest memory of growing up?  Do you remember--
Speaker 2: I remember (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) what do you remember first?
Speaker 2: --getting a--at Christmas, I remember getting some trucks when I was here in--living here in New York [New York].  I loved it.  That was my favorite toy ever.  That was--I guess I must've been about five, four or five.  I can almost remember the room or whatever.
Story_ID: 446360
Speaker 1: You said you moved around quite a bit.
Speaker 2: Um-hm (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) You told us a little bit about what those places were like.  When you were at home, did--what kind of entertainment did you and your brothers [Ronald Tunstull and Richard Tunstull] and sisters [Linda Tunstull] engage in?  Were you reading?  Did you have a television?  Did you listen to radio?
Speaker 2: Well, we were raised by gamblers, so we played cards.  We played every type of cards you could imagine.  We played for money.  We were playing poker probably at the age of seven, you know, blackjack, tonk, whisk [sic. whist], everything.  We played Chinese checkers and checkers.  I mean, my, my parents were very big with board games, especially my mom [Mary Shockency Tunstull].  My father [Edward Tunstull] didn't play with us that much, but my mother kind of--that's another eccentricity about her.  She would play all these board games with us.  It helped us develop sensibilities around numbers and memory and I had like a really good sense of memory around things like that and that's because I was raised doing it.  And we all did it.  It was--it was just a part of our life and no one realized that--we didn't realize that we were like the only family that was doing it.  We'd go to friends' houses and pull out cards and play cards with them.  It was really fun, and we still do (laughter).
Speaker 1: Does your mom take any magazines or circulars?
Speaker 2: I don't remember her having a subscription, though I do remember looking at Vogue magazine a lot when I was a kid.  And I can't imagine her ordering it as a subscription; however, I do remember it in the house a lot.  So, maybe she did.  I didn't order it.  But I used to go--(laughter) it's funny.  I remember my brother and I, we would go through Vogue magazine and we'd be--we'd find a, like nice outfit and we're like, "That's what my wife's gonna wear," "That's what my wife's gonna wear," and we'd go back and forth through the magazine, you know, picking out the dresses and outfits that we liked the best (laughter).
Story_ID: 446361
Speaker 1: What sights and sounds and/or smells take you right back to your childhood, to your growth period?
Speaker 2: Well, certainly music, certain songs by [HistoryMaker] Nancy Wilson, Aretha Franklin, just certain color--lights, blue lights, red lights take me right back.  It's the funniest things I get--I'll be triggered by, but I can't, can't think of all of them right now.  But, there are certain songs, even the time of year.  Like, I, I have to listen to Nancy Wilson at Christmastime because that's just what's part of it, you know.
Speaker 1: And the lights, is that just the hue of Detroit [Michigan]?
Speaker 2: Well, I guess it was the hue of the living rooms that I found myself in, our living room, Christmas lights like that.  The parties, you know, they were always the basement parties with the red lights and the sweaty walls, you know.  And, you know, they were funky and fun, you know, so I like that.
Story_ID: 446362
Speaker 1: I'm gonna ask this catch-all question.  Do you have any other memories of growing up that I'm not--that I might not be hitting on?
Speaker 2: Well, I'm--this kind of precedes what we've been talking about, precedes my life as it changed once I got into high school.  Once I got into high school, I went to Cass Technical High School, which is a magnet school of Detroit [Michigan].  It just celebrated its hundredth year.  It's a celebrated school nationally.  In fact, it may actually be considered one of the best high school in the country.  Everyone was brilliant.  I think that their moving to Detroit was--their whole reason and the whole purpose of their moving to Detroit was so that I'd go to this high school.  It exposed me to a world beyond my family, to my fellow high school students, who were both black and white, and it's kind of set me on a professional course for my life.
Speaker 1: Before we talk about high school, I wanted to ask you about your elementary and junior high school--
Speaker 2: Um-hm (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) background.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: So we can--we'll do that now.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Where did you go to elementary school?
Speaker 2: I remember one school was Winterhalter [Winterhalter Elementary School, Detroit, Michigan].  That's when I met my girlfriend, Virgena, Virgena Simpson [ph.].  That's just a classmate at that time.  I went to school in Kentucky--Louisville [Kentucky].  I don't know the school.  I went to another school in Detroit called Boynton [Boynton Elementary-Middle School].  It's hard to remember.
Speaker 1: Do you remember any of your influences from those schools?
Speaker 2: There was one at (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Did you have any favorite teachers?
Speaker 2: There was one teacher I remember very well named Mrs. Jenkins [ph.] that I really liked and that's because she was very supportive of me.  She was kind of like my mom [Mary Shockency Tunstull].  It seemed liked the other teachers I had some difficulty with.  I remember having difficulty with one teacher once and my mother came to school and that changed instantly.  I was surprised.  I remember my mother going to--coming to school and they saying wonderful things, really nice things about me and she would well up.  She was always very close to tears, like me.  I get that from her.  We both cry when it's t- when it's cold outside and things like that, so we were always very close to tears.  And I do have one memory, though, of an instructor--of a circumstance.  I decided--we were, we were discussing slavery in school and as a homework project, I think we were supposed to write something or do something regarding slavery.  There's a homework project, I decide to go home and do a sketch of slaves singing around a fire.  And I remember bringing it to school the next day and the instructor berating me because I had sketched them too black.  And, you know, I was mortified, you know, to be publicly berated like that is not something I'm accustomed to.  And I don't know if it didn't have some impact on my work because when I went into the world of fashion as an illustrator, I rarely drew black women.  Part of it was my sensibility.  The other part was the industry did not want to see it, and whenever I did, I had issues.  And they would--it was al- not to get into this, but just--they would say funny things like, "I don't like the way she's smiling. Could you redo it?"  Or, "Could you change the garment?" Which required me--meant redo it.
Speaker 1: Do you remember what school you were at, attending when--
Speaker 2: This was Boynton (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) the teacher made that comment?
Speaker 2: This was Boynton.  I must've been about eight years old or nine years old.
Speaker 1: And so you would say that the sensation and the atmosphere that you felt at that time was very similar to the working environment that you later entered--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --doing--
Speaker 2: And I was (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) illustration?
Speaker 2: And I was particularly sensitive to it because I came out of a pre-civil rights world, so I knew that there were restrictions.  I knew that people did not want to see black people highlighted or presented in any s- positive sense, certainly not as advertising for luxury items.
Story_ID: 446363
Speaker 1: How much drawing did you do as an elementary school student?  Was it a regular habit for you--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --by that time?
Speaker 2: I drew all the time.
Speaker 1: When did you start drawing?
Speaker 2: I don't think I remember when I started, though I do remember specifically on my seventh birthday doing a sketch that was an effort to duplicate a drawing--no sorry, to depict a drawing of my father [Edward Tunstull], his brother, and my mother [Mary Shockency Tunstull].  I remember this sketch in particular.
Speaker 1: So you were sketching--you were attempting to draw them or were you copying a photograph or a, a drawing that had already been done--
Speaker 2: No (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) of them?
Speaker 2: I was drawing out of my head.
Speaker 1: So when you were in elementary school, what kind of a student were you?  Were you well-behaved, misbehaved?
Speaker 2: I was always a good student.  I think that that's part of the MO [modus operandi] for a gay child, you know, not to be pulled out or to strike too much attention to their difference that they perceive but they don't see other people as perceiving.  We tend to be model students, so I was always good.  I was good in class.  I was good at the doctor's office, you know.  I was the good son, you know.  And it's part of my MO now.
Speaker 1: You said you perceived yourself as different as--at that time.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: How did you feel that when you were in school?
Speaker 2: In some, some ways the same way I feel it now.  I can't totally understand--I didn't necessarily understand how other people felt about things.  The way that they felt about it just didn't occur to me.  When I put a--when I put the gay lens on it, it was older. I was older when I realized that I didn't have the same drive to have sexual relations with my girlfriends or women or things like that that I often times heard, you know, the locker room conversations that I often heard. I was not sports oriented. I was just different. I just drew, you know.
Speaker 1: And you say you just drew.  Did you doodle?  Did you draw during class lecture?  Like, how did that manifest itself?
Speaker 2: Well, because I was the new kid in school, that's how I introduced myself.  I would sketch.  And I would always draw women.  My favorite character at the time was Cleopatra, and I'd do all these versions of Cleopatra in robes.  Prior to that, I think I used to do interiors of mansions.  I had this thing for doing staircases.  I would draw stair- intricate staircases going off onto different levels and things like that.  And then it, it--I think that evolved into women.  I have a thing for drawing, drawing maps and interiors of flat, like, architectural sketches of rooms and things like that.
Speaker 1: And would you share those with the other students in your classes (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, they'd gather around my desk and that's how they'd get to know me, and I always did it.
Story_ID: 446364
Speaker 1: Was junior high school similar to elementary school where you went to a number of different places for school?
Speaker 2: That's the one thi- that's where my life changed because I went to one school, Cass [Cass Technical High School, Detroit, Michigan].  I went in in the tenth grade and I went straight through, and we didn't move.  It was the first time we ever lived any place longer than a year.  We were there the f- whole four years.  And then--so, I was able to develop relationships with people that were ongoing, and I still have relationships with these same people, some of them (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Who were--who were some of the people that you--
Speaker 2: Most notably, my friend, Dwight Johnson.  He lives here in New York [New York].  He--we even went to college together, were college roommates more or less for--and post-college roommates.  I met him at the age of fifteen sitting across a--the table in a drawing class and we became best friends and then his girlfriend [Lorna Ballard Moody] and my girlfriend, we formed a quartet.  And throughout high school, we were, we were like our own clique outside of the other cliques.
Speaker 1: When you say quartet, were you singing or you were just a group of four (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, I'm just saying a group of four.
Speaker 1: And in your early education and at Cass, were you clear that drawing was something that you were gonna do for a career?
Speaker 2: I knew it.  I knew I'd be--I would do drawing--I knew I was an artist and I would be doing drawing, but my mantra was I'm not going to do physical or manual labor.  I did not want to work in the factories and there was no way that I was going to be a machinist or a construction worker or anything like that, it just wasn't gonna happen.  And I can't believe I would say that to myself literally every day.
Speaker 1: Where did you get that sensibility from?
Speaker 2: Just watching other people and how arduous their lives were and having a sense that this is where black people in America were relegated to aspire to.  Even at Cass, I was told not to--by my counselor, not to even apply to go to Parsons School of Design [New York, New York].  When they had--were sending representatives from Parsons and Pratt [Pratt Institute, New York, New York] to, to our high school to recruit students, my--he told me, "Don't even apply."  He said, "Your work's not strong enough."  So, I didn't.  I followed his advice.  I did, however, apply to FIT [Fashion Institute of Technology, New York, New York] and I got a full scholarship to FIT in apparel design.  However, just before I was supposed to go there, I had a car accident, broke my leg, and couldn't attend.  So, I created another portfolio and applied for Parsons and got a scholarship there.
Speaker 1: And wa- this was while you were still in high school?
Speaker 2: This was just after I graduated.
Speaker 1: And so you just spontaneously applied and decided--
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I said I'm gonna go to Parsons.  And then it was like, but the only way I could get there is if they gave me a scholarship because my parents [Mary Shockency Tunstull and Edward Tunstull] couldn't afford to send me to, to a school like Parsons at the time.  It was considered--it's still a very expensive school.  But then, it was totally out of range for me.  I probably would've gone to a community college, which probably didn't have a focus in fashion illustration, which is where I was in- what I was interested in.
Story_ID: 446365
Speaker 1: Now, what about your high school teachers [at Cass Technical High School, Detroit, Michigan], were any of them important influences?
Speaker 2: Mrs. Olbo [ph.].
Speaker 1: Obviously, your college counselor.
Speaker 2: Yeah, well that was Mr. Berg [ph.].  That's my college counselor.  But Ms. Olbo was our fashion illustration teacher and I had he- it was funny, I had that class with Dwight [Dwight Johnson] and his girlfriend, Lorna [Lorna Ballard Moody], and the three of us would sketch in this class.  My girlfriend was into medicine, so she was a pre-med student.  So, I didn't have classes with her.  But we all had this class together and we all excelled in it.  And it's--and I found that it was easy for me to draw anything that I wanted to.  For some reason, I just had a facility to draw anything, but I was most challenged with fashion illustration because fashion illustration is not drawing reality, it's drawing an idealized reality.  And so I was so much more challenged by that than just drawing what I saw around 'cause a lot of my training there was like drawing rooms and drawing chairs and drawing people.  But fashion was drawing people but making them glamorous, drawing clothes but making them sing, you know.
Speaker 1: And when you were doing that, particularly in high school, did you draw from a, a model or a source?  Or was--did the picture come completely out of your mind?
Speaker 2: I think that I probably used reference to some extent, but there were things that you couldn't use reference for, like she would have us design like an alligator handbag and shoe, and she would show us the technique of drawing alligator and then you--would leave it up to you to create a page or a look for alligator.  So some of the things would be like out of my head.  The figures, fashion figures, I imagine that I probably used reference material, but I probably drew from life, from my imagination, too.
Speaker 1: And did you have any magazines or periodicals that you were interested in at that time?
Speaker 2: Well, certainly Vogue magazine, Vogue magazine, Harper Bazaar [sic. Harper's Bazaar].  Those were the main ones that you can get your hand on, hands on.  We--I wasn't exposed to European magazines until later.
Story_ID: 446366
Speaker 1: And in terms of your social life in high school in Detroit [Michigan], were you all frequenting parties?  Were you--what kind of music were you listening to?  Were you doing the latest dances?
Speaker 2: Well, that was another change.  You went--you know, Motown [Motown Records] was big in junior high school and you came into high school and I was still listening to Motown and R and B, but because we were in a--this commercial art department where it was filled with white kids, suddenly my taste levels changed.  And with that came the advent of The Beatles and the Rolling Stones and things like that.  Just as they started changing the face of music in Det- in the United States, it was changing in Detroit as well.  And because I had so many white friends at that point, my musical taste expanded.  And we went to parties.  I think that I spent an awful lot of time with white kids more so than with black kids in my high school.  That was my high school experience, which was a source (laughter) of--sort of like a little ongoing, not battle, but Dwight [Dwight Johnson] would always tease me and we'd back--have a back and forth around it because I was like, you just gotta move.  You, you can't stay in a ghetto mindset.  You gotta move on.  And he was like, you know, you can't adopt a white world.  You have to be--you know, we have to continue with this Black Power movement that's going on.  So, we were--kind of were at oppositions.  It's kind of like--we were like two sides of a coin.  We were the same coin, but we both were reflecting different sides of it at that time.
Speaker 1: And what was the racial makeup and the racial atmosphere at Cass Technical High School [Detroit, Michigan]?
Speaker 2: I'd like to say it was probably about 60 percent, 60 to 70 percent white at that time.
Speaker 1: And did you find that people mostly, not yourself of course, hung out in segregated, what we would perhaps call segregated groups?  Did they really stick together, or was there quite a bit of intermingling?
Speaker 2: There was definitely a level of intermingling because you had all these classes together.  However, you did have your groups.  We kind of were our own group socially outside of the school.  We'd get together and do our own thing.  But something--I remember a saying once, it was birds of a feather flock together, and that's when I decided I was gonna hang out with all the kids that got A's, and they were all the white kids.  And that's how it--that whole thing occurred for me.  I figured, if I wanna get A's, I need to hang out with the kids that are getting A's, so that's--they became my friends.
Speaker 1: And you, you made A's?
Speaker 2: No, but I did well.  I was not the t- we had eight hundred people graduate in my graduation class.  I was somewhere like three hundred, but one of my best friends was number four.  And we're talking about, you know, your primary candidates for Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] and Princeton [Princeton University, Princeton, New Jersey] and Yale [Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut].  I mean, these are major brainiacs.  I had--and my grade point average dropped because senior year I had a terrible case of senioritis.  And Dwight's--I used to hang out with Dwight's girlfriend, Lorna [Lorna Ballard Moody].  We were best friends.  And she was a--she was very--had a very high IQ, a Mensa type person.  So she had this thing about she didn't have to go to school until it was time to take a test.  That was when it, it was important.  So, she'd go to school and she'd take the test and get an A or write a paper and get an A, but she needed a hangout buddy.  So, I would hang out with her and I'd come back to take my test and at the final year, I was not getting A's, so that's how my grade point average dropped.  It's my embarrassment, you know.  I--but I, I graduated considering I had missed forty-five days of school the last year going shopping (laughter).
Story_ID: 446261
Speaker 1: You indicated that you spent much of your senior year shopping.  What, what were your major department stores and shopping outlets that you and your friends would access in Detroit [Michigan]?
Speaker 2: Well, I guess one thing about us was we always went for high style, so we went--the main store at--of note at that time was J.L Hudson's [J.L. Hudson Department Store; J.L. Hudson Building, Detroit, Michigan].  It was on the main street, I think Woodward Avenue or something in downtown Detroit 'cause Cass [Cass Technical High School] was located in downtown Detroit, and people came from all over to be there.  And we were able to get to school and then walk to downtown.  So we'd spend apparently hours at Hudson's shopping.  You know, I could've been a fashion designer considering the amount of surveying I was doing.  And we would buy clothes and because we didn't have money, we had this wonderful thing that we used to do and that would be, we'd buy clothes, wear them to school and then take them back the next day or a few days later or whatever.  And this was a wonderful thing for me. You know, you, you buy it, you'd wear the sports jacket, you'd wear the pants, everything, blah, blah, blah.  You keep the labels in, and that was wonderful until my father [Edward Tunstull] caught me and he told me, "You can never acquire anything doing this--doing it like this," and that was the last time I ever did it.  So--but, I would basically go because both Lorna [Lorna Ballard Moody] and Dwight [Dwight Johnson] were fashion horses.  They wore clothes like crazy.  To this day, I've never known anyone that had the fashion taste of Lorna.  She still is an icon to me in terms of her sensibilities.
Speaker 1: How so?
Speaker 2: She could p- she knew how to put together clothes.  She should have been a fashion stylist or editor or something like that.  She was totally turned out every time you saw her and everything was impeccable.  And she looked like she stepped out of a magazine constantly.  It was just really unusual.  And for someone to not follow that sensibility into a career was always mindboggling to me.  I remember she sent her daughter [Piper Eaton] 'cause they had a daughter together, have a daughter together, she sent her daughter to visit once and her entire wardrobe was indexed on cards with what you wore with what--with what, so that when she got to New York [New York] visiting Dwight, she had her complete ensembles predetermined for her.  So, this is when brilliance and fashion blends.  She was brilliant.
Speaker 1: And what did she go on to do?
Speaker 2: I can't even say.  And unfortunately, she passed away just a couple of months ago.
Speaker 1: Oh, I'm sorry to hear that.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  But, we lost contact and never regained it and I don't know what she did with herself.
Story_ID: 446262
Speaker 1: So let's talk a little bit more about your--the end of your high school career [at Cass Technical High School, Detroit, Michigan].  You said that you ap- you did in fact apply to FIT [Fashion Institute of Technology, New York City, New York], but that you broke your leg and were unable to go.
Speaker 2: Right (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Did you apply to FIT because your guidance counselor had not mentioned it?  How did you know to apply to FIT but yet listen to him as to--as regarding Parsons [Parsons School of Design, New York, New York]?
Speaker 2: Long story short, New York [New York] was where the fashion world was.  I had been doing illustrations and I had gone to Saks Fifth Avenue in Detroit [Michigan] and--'cause I was looking at all these wonderful ads that they had and I was like I want to do these drawings for the Detroit Free Press for you and they said to me blankly, you know, "All of our work is done out of New York."  So, I knew I had to go to New York.  When he told me that my--when Mr. Berg [ph.] told me that my work wasn't strong enough to go to Parsons, the only other fashion school that I knew of, there was the three, Parsons, Pratt [Pratt Institute, New York, New York] and FIT, and because the Fashion Institute of Technology was what FIT stood for I decided I would go there.  And I applied, as I said.  I got into the scholarship in apparel design, which was really not my interest.  I did not want to be a designer; I wanted to be an illustrator.  So, when I had this car accident the day after Thanksgiving and I was supposed to start attending school that January, I wasn't able to.  So, I just took the time off and constructed another portfolio and submitted it to Parsons, resubmitted the application to Parsons.
Speaker 1: So, why--you said resubmitted your appli- oh, that (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, rather--
Speaker 1: You did that second application.
Speaker 2: Not resub- sorry. I did not resubmit. I submitted an application to Parsons. I never submitted it to begin with.  This was--I submitted it on my own after I got out of high school.
Speaker 1: What made you--what changed your mind about applying to Parsons once you broke your leg?  And why don't you just defer your entrance to FIT, for instance?
Speaker 2: I think it's all part of that thing they call manifest destiny.  You--I just knew that that's where I wanted to go.  It was the best school and I--was the best.  I considered myself the best, you know, for fashion illustration.  They didn't see me for fashion illustration.  They were looking--my counselor was looking at the wider range of s- of artistic skills that the school has to offer, you know.  So--and though I wasn't--I was--but I was a straight A student in fashion.
Speaker 1: And who--do you know of any fashion illustrators at this point?  I mean, are you aware of them by name?  Or--and if so, who do you admire at that point or is it a more general statement like, I really like Saks Fifth Avenue's--
Speaker 2: Exactly, precisely.  I really liked Saks Fifth Avenue's sketches at the time.
Speaker 1: And had you gotten a hold of any European magazines yet?
Speaker 2: Probably not.  I don't think so.  I--that, that appeared in my professional capacity when I started becoming exposed to things like that.
Story_ID: 446263
Speaker 1: So when do you enter Parsons School of Design [New York, New York], in September of nineteen--
Speaker 2: Sixty-nine [1969].
Speaker 1: --sixty-nine [1969]?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And what's that atmosphere like and who's there when you get there?
Speaker 2: Parsons was a rarefied world.  They oftentimes referred to it as a finishing school for rich girls, and that's exactly what it was in many ways.  They would learn how to put themselves together.  They were exposed to everything that was important for a young woman at that time.  It was a finishing school for a lot of them.  Some of them became very famous designers.  Mostly, it was rich American white girls.  There were a few blacks.  In my department, there were four of us.
Speaker 1: And you were in fashion illustration at this point (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I was in fashion illustration.
Speaker 1: Can you tell us some of the names that we might recognize, or important names who we might not recognize of both white and black women who were at Parsons?  And not limited to women.
Speaker 2: Well, I can't really say that.  I know--I mean, if I start to mention people, I mean like Donna Karan went there around that time, just about everyone that's famous in fashion went to Parsons.  Willi Smith was a year ahead of me.  He became very famous.  And, of course, now I'm going to start drawing blanks.  I'd have to--I could even research it a little bit better.  I'm sorry, I've just--for some reason can't think of the names.  But, if I just mention some of the names like Marc Jacobs as--went to Parsons and that's after I did.
Speaker 1: So, describe the atmosphere at Parsons.  What do you see when you get there?
Speaker 2: It was wonderful.  It was located on 54th Street, between Sutton Place and 1st Avenue.  So already you're in a neighborhood that you're seeing limousines and people with so much money, just--it's just what--you just br- you would breathe this wealth around you everywhere.  All the instructors were very successful people in the industry, illustrators, designers, art directors.  They were at the top, the people that ran, like Bergdorf Goodman or Bonwit Teller [Bonwit Teller and Company].  They were designers.  I, I had one instructor, she told us to go see her bank of windows at Bloomingdale's with her collection of clothes that she had designed.  It was just amazing.  It really was just amazing.
Speaker 1: Do you remember your most influential professors while you were there?
Speaker 2: Pat Steir was one of my illustration profe- professors.  She's a very successful fine art painter now, very well-known fine art painter.  Susie Cole [ph.] was the head of the department.  Albert Elia was an illustrator for Mademoiselle at the time, very influential to me.  There's another one, Mr. Bianchi [ph.], was another one who was very influential.  I don't remember what he did.  I believe he must've been an illustrator.  Murray Tinkelman, a very well-known illustrator who is very noted for his style of work, was one of my instructors and that was a tremendous influence on me.
Speaker 1: So, can you tell us about some interaction that you had with Mr. Tinkelman, perhaps?
Speaker 2: Well, Mr. Tinkelman so much, he was--I don't--can't remember any specific thing with him.
Speaker 1: But what about (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Though I--though he did inspire me.  Albert Elia was one who was a fashion illustrator so I can directly relate to him as a fashion illustrator, and I remember him saying something to me 'cause he always suggested we do things with our backgrounds, but I remember him saying to me specifically, "If you're putting something in there, have a reason for it.  What is your reason for this here?" You know, and that has stuck with me and it's something that I pass on to my students now.  I can't really remember (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I don't want to push you too hard.  Perhaps if you think of something later--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --you'll let us know.
Story_ID: 446264
Speaker 1: One thing I do want to know, however, is how did you remain clear that you were not interested in becoming a fashion designer?  Because from an outside perspective, it seems as if at least the initial work is quite similar where you're surveying clothes and you're also preparing them.  You know, you're illustrating them.  How do you not cross over into (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) There is--they're totally different 'cause one is--fashion design is the creation of something out of nothing in the form of fabrics and materials, and I just never had an interest.  It just never--it just never popped up, even in my sketches.  I mean, I was doing my Cleopatra girl, and I guess I was dressing her with shells and pearls and all that type of stuff, but it wasn't anything that could be considered contemporary clothing or for something--. It was more like costume design than anything.  I was a drawer.  I mean, as much as I drew women, I drew swings in the park or bicycles or, you know, horses, you know. I was a drawer.
Story_ID: 446265
Speaker 1: How long was the program at Parsons [Parsons School of Design, New York, New York]?
Speaker 2: It was a three-year program, of which I only did two years.
Speaker 1: And why did you only do two years?  What did you end up (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I got a job.
Speaker 1: Where'd you work?
Speaker 2: Simplicity Patterns [Simplicity Pattern Company, Inc.] was my first job.  My neighbor across the hall--there was a campaign at the time and it said, during that period, and it said, "I got my job through The New York Times."  And so this--my friend across the hall, her name was Linda Merritt [ph.], came to me one day and said, "Here's a--I was looking through the ads in New York Times, and here's a job for--looking for a sketcher at Simplicity Patterns."  So, I went to the interview.  And I always tell the story to my students because when I left Pa- Parsons and I didn't go back for the following year, I created a whole different portfolio from what I had developed in class.  It wasn't enough for me to just show what I had done in class 'cause then your work looks like everyone else because you're solving the same problems that everyone else was.  So, I created a whole 'nother portfolio.  And then, I thought I was gonna be something like an illustrator or work for a toy company or something like that.  That's the kind of things I was interviewing for.  And, so I got to this job interview, and the guy says to me, his name was John Young [ph.], he said, "We like your work. We want to see how you work in our format."  They had a certain size format and--which was like eight and a half by eleven [inches] and I drew large at the time.  So, I said, "Okay."  And then he took me to the side and he says, "If you really want this job, you'll do two."  Well, I did three, and I got the job.  That has always stayed with me, and I always share that with students.  You have to show an effort above and beyond what's expected for--of you for people to take you seriously, or to get that you really want it.  That's as much a part of it as being qualified.  'Cause there were other people that were equally qualified, I assume.  So, I got this job.  I now teach with the first person that I worked with there.  Her name is Josephine Vargas, and we both teach at Parsons, the same type of class, and she's li- 'cause I consider her my longest known professional colleague, and we have a very good relationship.  And I worked there for about a year.
Story_ID: 446266
Speaker 1: I'm gonna come back to your year at Simplicity [Simplicity Pattern Company, Inc.], but when you first left Parsons [Parsons School of Design, New York, New York], did you have any feelings about that?  Were you eager to leave?  Was it too--was it premature?  How did you feel about--
Speaker 2: Parsons was a challenge for me.  I didn't have any money.  I didn't have money for materials, you know.  I didn't come from a wealthy family, and these kids were using ma- you know, my competitors, my classmates were using all sorts of materials that enhanced their work.  All I could do was draw.  I--you know, and I was still outstanding in that capacity, but I often times didn't have materials.  I remember I'd show up for class and I'd have to borrow materials, paper, pencils or things like that from my classmates, which they all willingly gave me.  And then I would like, you know, whip up something, you know, that I would really like. Which now as an instructor, I always have materials for students.  A student can't come to my class, and if they don't have something, I've got it for them.  And if I don't have it, I've already asked the other students to be open and share whatever they have with others.  It's just part of our relationship as a family once you're in my class.  But I really enjoyed Parsons.  I loved--it was my brush with really fine living.  I mean, the kids were like de Kooning's [Willem de Kooning] niece and one was the daughter of Kate Lloyd [Kate Angeline Lloyd Traverse] who was the editor, one of the big editors at Vogue magazine and, you know, they all came from these illustrious backgrounds, and so it was really--and I got tied right into them.  And my exposure to this world, this white world of affluence and, and, and opportunity started at Cass [Cass Technical High School, Detroit, Michigan].  So it wasn't like it was something that I couldn't relate to or had trouble--
Speaker 1: Assimilating (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) partici- participating with, yeah.
Speaker 1: And did you feel--I had my words and I just lost them.  Did you feel at all like you felt as a, a child, that you needed to limit your creativity at all, or was Parsons a place--like, you were telling the story about not depicting black women for instance.
Speaker 2: Yes.  Yes.
Speaker 1: Did--how does that come across?  Maybe I should include Cass High School and Parsons.  Like, how--where is that developing with you?
Speaker 2: Well, by that time, especially in the world of fashion illustration, there were a few well-known--a few not very well-known black models, but they were nev- but black models and black imagery generally was not part of the illustrative world.  You just did not see it.  So you had to learn how to draw the white women and flowing hair, which I became very good at.
Story_ID: 446267
Speaker 1: Who were the black models, the not well terribly known while you were in Parsons [Parsons School of Design, New York, New York] in--
Speaker 2: Well Nao- (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) the early '70s [1970s]?
Speaker 2: Naomi Sims comes to mind and even then she was like a breakout model that became known to everyone, but there were some whose names I'm--would probably butcher if I tried to mention them now, [HistoryMaker] Ophelia DeVore who came out of the '60s [1960s].  There were a number of others, which will probably all come to me when I don't need it who were making strides, breaking boundaries, but they were not widely known.  And even--and they were making individual statements, but they were not changing the look of fashion illustration, which was the predominant form of advertising and promotion and to some extent editorial during the seven- '60s [1960s] and '70s [1970s].
Speaker 1: Who is defining that look?  So, I'm including white models here or white designers on--you know, who were the most important designers and who were the most important models who are in fact defining the kind of look that you're expected to be able to render?
Speaker 2: Are you saying at that time?
Speaker 1: Yes, at that time.
Speaker 2: Well, he--first and foremost, you had your--in my school, you had the head of the departments making those determinations, what was doing to work and what wasn't going to work.  The instructors and--who selected the models, we only had white models.  In the world of--in the industry itself, you had your art directors who would always say that the owner of the company would not necessarily appreciate this or like this as much.
Speaker 1: Like you mentioned in--Naomi Sims--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --who were some of the white models that you might mention from that period that were recognizable to you?
Speaker 2: Well, Twiggy immediately comes to mind out of the '60s [1960s], but I'm talking about--well, that's the end of the '60s [1960s], so Twiggy, Penelope Tree, those are the two that come to mind the most at the moment.
Speaker 1: And who were the most popular designers that sort of are in the air and who you might be resonating with at that time?
Speaker 2: Well, you had Courreges [Andre Courreges], which was this look of modernism.  You had Saint Laurent [Yves Saint Laurent].  You had Bill Blass in the United States and Geoffrey Beene.  I think they may, actually may have been more '70s [1970s] than '60s [1960s].  I don't know if Christian Dior was--he--I mean, he came out of the '50s [1950s].  Saint Laurent was doing Christian Dior at--early and during that period, some of those folks.  American designers, you--this is still while I'm in college, right?  I'm still learning a lot of things.  Sorry, I'm drawing a blank at this moment (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Are there any--while you're in college, are there any special events or special engagements that occurred that perhaps you went to, whether they were annual or just events where someone who you admired or wanted to learn about came and showed themselves either at Parsons or in the city proper?
Speaker 2: Well, again, I'm drawing a blank on names, though I do remember there were designers and illustrators that were always asked to come to Parsons, and we all invariably asked the same question, "How did you get started and how can I get there?" You know, and they were--but I can't remember the names of the people at the moment, I'm sorry.
Story_ID: 446268
Speaker 1: So let's talk a little bit more about--moving back into your career.  You take your first job at a pattern company?
Speaker 2: Yeah, Simplicity Pattern Company [Simplicity Pattern Company, Inc.].
Speaker 1: And what kind of patterns are you illustrating?
Speaker 2: Well, the thing is, is I was a sketcher.  In the pattern book business, you have a, a group of artists that work on staff that work with the designers to put together the looks, and I was a sketcher that was there to interpret their looks.  And then they would take my sketches and give it to their professional artist that they paid lots of money to that would illustrate it for the pattern book specifically, using their style and technique that reflects the, the look and feel of the company.  I had a lot of trouble at my first job because I was so editorially oriented, and I was just not commercial enough for them.  And I--my neck was on the line every single day for the work that I was doing.  It was just not what they would--wanted.  And the head of the, the head designer would constantly bring me into his office and show me other illustrators' work and say, "Can you work like this guy?  Can you work like this guy?  Can you do it like this?"  And always--and I'd go back and I couldn't.  I was me, you know, and so it was a little bit of a challenge.  And before they could fire me, I got another job.  I was so worried about losing that job that I went looking for another one, and I wound up getting another job at Vogue Patterns, another pattern book company, but they liked my work there.
Speaker 1: How--what was the life of a design or of a pattern design once you put it into a Vogue pattern book at that time?  So, you, you indicated that you were a sketcher and perhaps you'll tell us about another position that you did at Vogue, but how often are you updating these?
Speaker 2: Well, they would have like s- their books were seasonal, so you had like the four seasons and then they also had like specialty areas within the book.  And because I did women, I handled the--I drew women, I handled the women's part.  And basically, I would sketch maybe like three or four figures showing the basic shape of a silhouette and then the variations, long sleeve, short sleeve, you know, with a, with a tie, with buttons, without buttons, a zip- you know, things like that.  And then we would also do color variations because we had to--they had to work out the color story so that this page--these figures look nice together, and then this page looked nice next to this page, that type of thing.  And they were constantly updating every season.
Story_ID: 446269
Speaker 1: I did a similar work with Vogue Patterns, but my work there was more about color.  I was a colorist.  So, I really learned how to mix color and see color for the first time at Vogue Patterns.
Speaker 2: What medium are you using?
Speaker 1: Gouache on paper, so it was paint.  And this woman, Elaine Poprosky, she may still work at Vogue Patterns, was the most incredible person for me.  She--I like learned to see color and I'm now able to out of nothing mix things together to get exact colors if I need to.
Speaker 2: So, can you just talk a little bit more about that?  Learned to see color for the first time?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: What were you not seeing about it prior to Elaine Poprosky?
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Well, it's one thing to see color.  It's another to imitate it.  There's so many ranges of--and variations in just a single color, like red.  Red has the most range of color of any color, in my opinion.  So, to be able to just make it exact based on whether it's a little bit more violet, or a little bit more orange, or a little bit more dark, or a little brighter or a little--you know, there's these subtleties in color and in the world of pattern books, they were everything.  It, it was all about color.  And whatever color we came up with was, was what the final artist had to strive for.  They had to get the color the way that we've created it and that the designers had signed off on.
Story_ID: 449133
Speaker 1: So we're talking--now, you're at Vogue Patterns and you're really a colorist there.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Focusing on color, so we were talking a little bit about that.  And does the Vogue pattern house work similarly to Simplicity [Simplicity Pattern Company, Inc.]?  Could you tell us a little bit about the structure there?
Speaker 2: It was slightly different in that they had me working in a capacity solely as a colorist.  I did not--it really wasn't important that I captured the design of the garments.  I believe that they had flat patterns that they used for the art to give to the artist to give them the exact structure of the clothing.  I, I used that to some extent, but I didn't have to be really, really accurate to the degree that I had to be with--at Simplicity.  Vogue was all about--it was Vogue/Butterick; it was two pattern book companies combined.  It was all about these color relationships and exa- and exacting the perfect color, the right color.
Speaker 1: And ultimately, who was using a pattern that they--in the mid-'70s [1970s] who's getting it from Simplicity [Simplicity Pattern Company, Inc.] or Vogue?  Like--this is a at-home person who sews for themselves?
Speaker 2: Yeah, largely, as well as professionals.  A lot professionals at the time would take these bodies and use them to build their own creations from.  So, you had a professional edge and then you had the homemaker who probably grew up making their own clothes.  A lot of people did that.  It was before--you know, you, you have to understand, we're still at the beginning of the, the department store, and ready to wear.  Prior to the '70s [1970s] and the '60s [1960s], so many of designer clothes came--were being made for you.  You weren't going into a store and buying them.  You know, they did not have designer clothes on the thing.  You had Sears and Roebucks [Sears, Roebuck and Co.] and then you had like Bloomingdale's or something where you were actually buying expensive designer clothing.  And so you didn't have very many options.  So, if you wanted to get a designer look and that's one of the things that made Vogue stand out, they had looks from designers, Oscar de le Renta and things like that, that you can make for yourself.
Speaker 1: Well, my next question was gonna be, what--which designers did Vogue rely on that they are exposing to the homemaking consumer or to the semi-professional?
Speaker 2: I think it was mostly your American designers, so like Bill Blass, Oscar de la Renta, probably Norman Norell, the, the top tier at the--during the '70s [1970s]. Maybe Claire McCardell, maybe Bonnie Cashin.  Those were probably the type of designers that were reflected in their stable of, of designers.  And it was wonderful for me as an illustrator to draw these beautiful clothes.  You know, even though they were from flat patterns, I was still drawing them.
Story_ID: 449134
Speaker 1: How long did you stay at Vogue Patterns, and what did you do next?
Speaker 2: I was there about two years at Vogue Patterns.  The--it was funny thing.  I had gotten that job because in my effort to find another job when I was at Simplicity [Simplicity Pattern Company, Inc.], I went on a series of interviews and I met these women that said to--at this company that said to me, "We can't use what you're doing, but we have a friend that does what you're doing.  His name is Stephen Cervantes and we know him from home," which was like Salt Lake City [Utah]--or Kansas City, sorry Kansas City.  He was an illustrator for Women's Wear Daily.  So, they said, "Here's his number, call him up and tell him, you know, to--we said come see you." So I went to see him.  And this was like walking through a portal.  He became my best friend.  He was already an illustrator at Women's Wear Daily, introduced me to all the other illustrators, and then told me about another friend of his that worked at Vogue Patterns, which led to my going on a interview there, which led to my getting that job there.  In the course of, of working at Vogue Patterns, I became very friendly with the artists at Women's Wear.  We just were like all hangout buddies.  So, as a result, when they had a, a position available at Women's Wear, I knew about it.  And, this was wonderful, because they were so supportive of me, the artists that worked there already, and part of my thing was, you want a new job?  You do a new portfolio, so they helped me put together my portfolio.  Stephen was--had a habit of posing for all the artists 'cause he could affect these poses and move, just stuff like that.  He just had that about him and he had long hair and you could draw him like a woman.  So, he posed for me for an entire portfolio.  So, when I submitted it to the art director, there must've been, I would imagine thousands of artists who wanted that job, and I got it.  And I would've probably done the job for no money, but they wound up paying me more money than I was accustomed to and more money than I definitely was getting from Vogue Patterns, and my life changed in an instant.
Story_ID: 449135
Speaker 1: Before you tell me about how your life changed, tell me about Women's Wear Daily.  What is it and what's its importance in the fashion scene?
Speaker 2: Well Women's Wear Daily is a daily fashion apparel newspaper.  It chronicles first and foremost the changing look of collections from season to season, but it's also a trade paper, so it deals with the business of fashion, so it's like The Wall Street Journal of fashion.  At that time, it was called the fashion bible because it had--because of its business, because it was changing every day unlike a magazine, the people in the industry had to read it to find out what was changing, what were the new looks.  They, they were the ones that chronicled the trends.  They were the ones that chronicled the changes in people's positions, where they are today relative to where they were yesterday and things like that.
Speaker 1: And who ran Women's Wear Daily?
Speaker 2: It was Fairchild Publication [Fairchild Publications, Inc.; Fairchild Fashion Media], and John Fairchild was the president.  I believe he inherited the company and he was the president of it at that time and worked there along with Michael Coady who was the publisher.  June Weir who teaches at Parsons [Parsons School of Design, New York, New York] with me now was the fashion editor.  She was wonderful, wonderful editor.  And Etta Froio who is still involved with them.  I think she's, she's a senior fashion editor.  I don't think she works there full-time anymore, but she was editor in chief, was there at that time as well.  And they had access to designers in a way that no other publication had.
Speaker 1: And did they similarly have influence on designers--
Speaker 2: Yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) in a way that no other--
Speaker 2: They were very influential.  They were probably the most influential publication at the time except bar for maybe Vogue and Bazaar [Harper's Bazaar], Vogue and Bazaar because they basically had a customer--a market of customers whereas Women's Wear was a trade publication.
Speaker 1: My understanding was that Fairchild sometimes if unpleased with a designer might not print something about you in the paper or print something that was not complimentary.  Is that accurate or--
Speaker 2: Well, I can't (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) how did that work?
Speaker 2: I can't speak to whether or not he was accurate around his assessment of someone's work, but I do know that he was famous for having feuds with designers like Geoffrey Beene who they, they did not like how they were treated or did not like--or the designer did not like how they were portrayed, they would bar them from shows, or Women's Wear would not write about them or cover them or may be disparaging in their comments regarding them, so it was a double-edged sword.  You either--you had to really--you had a powerful machine that was influenced by human personalities.
Speaker 1: And you said Women's Wear Da- or Fairchild might bar you from shows.  Is Women Wear Daily a major funder or underwriter of fashion shows?
Speaker 2: No because they are an editorial organization.  They were the mouthpiece to the industry, to the buyers.  The people who bought your clothes or put them in their stores read Women's Wear and, and took cues from Women's Wear on whether or not these were viable clothes for whatever type of customer they were trying to reach.
Speaker 1: And you said that Women's Wear Daily was much like The Wall Street Journal of--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --fashion.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: So, what kind of specialized financial information is it like--was printed there?
Speaker 2: Still to this day, they'll tell you whether or not the season--whether or not you--how much money you--the--they grossed a season, I mean whether relative to the quarter before, the year before, whether they're expanding, whether they're--what their advertising budgets are, who's--who are in--who's getting that money, you know, what magazines and things like that.  They're telling you executive changes and strategic direction.  All those types of things are portrayed.  And then--and that's all in the side pages, but in the midst of it, you had pages full of these incredible drawings by the illustrators that worked there.  There were full-time illustrators and there was about ten of us.  I was there only for three years, but there was about ten illustrators that were there full-time that got a byline that had your drawing and your name out in the fashion industry globally every single day.
Story_ID: 449136
Speaker 1: How often were you personally able to have an illustration depicted in Women's Wear Daily?  Almost every day?
Speaker 2: Just about.
Speaker 1: And how did you come about those assignments?  Was there a--
Speaker 2: They would (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) structure for such?
Speaker 2: Well, you had a art director.  There were two art directors when I was there--three art directors, two associates and the main art director, Rudy Milendorf [ph.], who has since passed on.  But, Jean Griffith [sic.], who late- later--Griffin [Jean Griffin], who later became vice president in charge of, of group publications, was a black woman, was--worked with us directly, and they would give you the space that you had to work with and the croquis, sketch, or the--from the design house or a photograph or something like that and maybe fabric and say here it is.  Generally, everything at the time that I was there was in black and white.  They later switched to color.
Speaker 1: And was there any tension at that time for--between photography and illustration?  It seems in my mind that early fashion pictures tend to be illustrated, you were saying, even in magazines.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Can you talk a little bit about the advent of photography and, you know, what that meant?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I think that I came into the industry at the crest of, of illustration, when it had reached its high point.  Largely, the reason why illustration was preferred in daily publications like newspapers was because it was easier to reproduce.  You did not have the technol- technological advances that we now have where you can produce a photograph and it looks great on news print.  Prior to that, it just didn't--it just wasn't possible, so technology made a big difference.  Along with that, there came--illustration, fashion illustration is a somewhat solitary affair whereas a photo shoot is a glamorous affair that s- that incorporates a lot of people living lovely.  You know, I mean, it's a--very hard work, don't get me wrong, but, you know, you have the expense accounts for everything and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) It's costly.
Speaker 2: --the cost and everything is covered and, you know, and you're there with famous people because suddenly, the models went from just being clothes horses to being celebrities.  The photographers went from being a fixture behind a lens to being a celebrity.  So, it--and that whole patina made photography more appealing.  It meant--and it also meant that it was more modern.  That was the whole thing about illustration.  There were a lot of illustrators out there from other eras, so you--there was this whole feeling that illustration versus photography, it's just not as modern.  And for fashion, it's--not only has--does it have to be modern, it has to be the next minute.
Story_ID: 449137
Speaker 1: What about covers at Women's Wear Daily?  Did you do any covers?  Was there the opportunity for that?
Speaker 2: I was really fortunate.  Considering that I was young and new to the publication, I got a lot of covers.  I got a lot of covers.  I got a lot of back covers.  They sent me once to California to do an entire issue on the California market and there were some illustrators that worked there that had never received a cover, so there was a big appeal for my work, and I was very fortunate.
Speaker 1: You said there were about ten illustrators.  Were any of the other illustrators of color?
Speaker 2: No.  I'm still the only black illustrator they've ever had.
Speaker 1: You also said that you were paid more at Women's Wear Daily than you were at Vogue and--
Speaker 2: Yes (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) that it had a real impact on your life.  I don't necessarily mean for you to name your price, but can you describe to us sort of the difference in the money, how far it went for you personally when you were at Vogue versus Women's Wear?
Speaker 2: Well, Vogue Patterns, and I did work for Vogue magazine, too.
Speaker 1: I'm sorry, Vogue Patterns.
Speaker 2: Vogue Patterns, there was like--I think it was like 130, 160 dollars a week.  Women's Wear was like 200.  It wasn't that much different.  But the exposure had me--had su- people suddenly calling me from all over, so I was--you know, Neiman Marcus brought me to Dallas [Texas] to work for them for a period of time.  I did illustrations for, I think my first client was, one of my first clients, was Henri Bendels [Henri Bendel].  I was doing their ads for The New York Times.  So, at the time--so, while I'm working at Women's Wear, I'm doing ads for Henri Bendels and then it just went on from there.  You know, Saks Fifth Avenue, Gimbels [Gimbel Brothers], Macy's [R.H. Macy and Co.; Macy's, Inc.], you know, department stores around the country I was doing illustrations for.  So, that was--and I was very busy.  Then, it went into manufacturers.  So, then I started doing illustrations for manufacturers and then other magazines.  So, I was like constantly working and somewhere along the road I took a--Vogue magazine put me on retainer to work for them.
Story_ID: 449138
Speaker 1: It was wonderful.  I'd go to work at Women's Wear [Women's Wear Daily]--Women's Wear had banker's hours, so you didn't have to get there--as long as you got your work done, it didn't matter what time, your hours.  So you can get to work at 10, 10:30, and you'd work and do your stuff, so I'd, I'd work at Women--get to Women's Wear maybe about 10, I'd work 'til about 12, 12:30 or 1, then I'd shoot uptown to Vogue, and I'd work at Vogue for maybe two hours, and then I'd go back to Women's Wear and I'd finish up whatever I had to do there.  Then, I'd go home and I'd do my freelance work for department stores or some client or something like that.  So, I was like constantly on the go like that and it was probably the busiest--probably the busiest period of my life in terms of working for other people.
Speaker 2: And how long did it take you to produce a--I'm not sure what the unit is, is termed.
Speaker 1: A, an illustration, a figure.
Speaker 2: An illustration.
Speaker 1: Yeah, we usually call them a figure--
Speaker 2: A figure (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) 'cause you get paid usually by the figure.  I was very fast.  I mean, all that drawing for all those years, my Cass [Cass Technical High school, Detroit, Michigan] training, the Parsons [Parsons School of Design, New York, New York] training, and then working for a newspaper that demanded that you get something in the morning and it has to be ready to be in the paper for tomorrow, I was accustomed to doing a finished illustration in a couple of hours, two or three hours, you know, if that long.
Speaker 2: Were you partying in New York [New York] during this period of time?
Speaker 1: Yeah, well this was the '70s [1970s], so, you know, this was the beginning of disco.  I'd like to say that we actually--I was one of the people out there inventing disco (laughter).  So, we--yeah, we would go out and party all night.  You know, you're--I'm twenty-two, twenty-three, you know, twenty-four.  You go out, you stay out all night.  You're at a club that didn't open 'til midnight, you get there around 1 or 2, you stay there 'til about 7 or 8 and then you'd go to breakfast and then go to work.  And then you'd work, then you go home, get a nap or whatever and get up for the next time that you have to get someplace at 2 in the morning.  And this would--the weekends would start on Thursday and end on like Monday or Tuesday.
Speaker 2: Can you name some of the popular clubs at that time?
Speaker 1: Well, it--during the time of Women's Wear, this is when I first had my realization about my gay life or that side of me.  I started to go to some gay clubs, so Le Jardin [New York, New York] was a very popular club, the Tamburlaine [New York, New York] was the first club that I went to.  But, obviously, we went into the Garage [Paradise Garage, New York, New York] and Studio 54 [New York, New York], and those were the type of pla- the Limelight [New York, New York], the Saint [New York, New York].  Those were the type of places that you went to.  And, you know, you're young, you're gorgeous.
Speaker 2: And who were your--who--you said disco, but did you have any disco favorites at the time?
Speaker 1: I still love Donna Summers [sic. Donna Summer]. Of course, Barry White was a kind of more institutional type of music.  But, you know, you had Gloria Gaynor and Thelma Houston, Diana Ross' 'Love Hangover.'  (Laughter) You know, I mean, those were the type of things that--the Philadelphia sound--or no matter what you're doing, you'd stopped and bounced out onto the floor and danced until you were a wet dishrag.
Speaker 2: And in terms of your sexuality, was New York a great place in order to discover and express that or was it still a bit sticky?
Speaker 1: Well, you went into the fashion world where all your male colleagues were gay.  I shouldn't say it like that, that's too blanket, but so many were that it was not something that you had to hide.  It wasn't like other professions like working on Wall Street or working in retail for that matter, which has a fashion component, where you had to hide your sexuality.  You were creative and an artist.  So, you know, I mean, not only was it not an issue, it was almost expected.
Story_ID: 449139
Speaker 1: So you're working hard, you're staying up all night, you've got all of these--this clientele, you're well known.  How do you decide to take a break from that, and what do you decide to do instead?
Speaker 2: Well, it was really an amazing period and, you know, at the time being in New York [New York] at that time, The Pointer Sisters, I mean, just to think about all these folks, I had what they called a success stomach.  That's what my art director called it 'cause I would be tied up in knots all the time from all the stress.  You know, the deadlines never stopped.  They were constantly there whether it was for Vogue or for Women's Wear [Women's Wear Daily] or for the other stuff.  And I was in a long-term relationship with someone.  Though I lived in that period, I was always a serial monogamist.  I was never the type that was just out for the thrill of a sexual experience.  It was always about relationships for me.  And I was involved with the person named Toyce Anderson.  And we had been exposed to now some of the top illustrators in the world.  Kenneth Paul Block, which was probably one of the top illustrators of the time worked right across from me at Women's Wear.
Speaker 1: I'm gonna have to urge you to do a little bit of spelling.
Speaker 2: Kenneth Paul Block, B-L-O-C-K, wonderful, incredible illustrator, which I was somewhat friendly with.  I mean, and there was also Steven Stipelman who sat right next to me.  Stipelman is spelled S-T-I-P-L-E-M-A-N [sic.], and Steven is S-T-E-P-H-A-N.  Nope, sorry, S-T-E-V-E-N.  I have to be careful.  He was a tremen- he's like the head of--one of the head--department heads at FIT [Fashion Institute of Technology, New York, New York] right now and he taught me so much as an illustrator.  He sat--I sat right next to him.  Robert Passantino.  This is all at Women's Wear.  P-A-S-S-A-N-T-I-N-O.  There was Pedro Barrios, B-A-R-R-I-O-S.  He was just such an incredible cutting edge artist.  The thing about Women's Wear and there's a book out called 'Women's Wear, the Illustrated Years' [sic. 'WWD Illustrated: 1960s-1990s'], that the--from the '60s [1960s] through the '90s [1990s]--that has all of our illustrations in it.  And it's just an incredible like compendium of all of our work.  It is by Michele Wesen, W-E-I-S-E-N [sic.], Wesen Bryant [Michele Wesen Bryant], her last name is Bryant, she's married, B-R-Y-A-N-T.  But it was--the book makes the point how cutting edge Women's Wear Daily was from a cultural perspective because these artists were reflective of all these attitudes, whether they were social, political, cultural.  They were--it was showing up in all the work at the time.  And, you know, to some degree you have that in your photography for fashion, but I think it was a little bit more extreme.  Not extreme, that's the wrong word.  More accentuated (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Evident?
Speaker 2: --through illustration or evident as--in the illustration.
Story_ID: 449140
Speaker 1: What happen- so, out of all of this, again, we're going back to why did I leave, the other artists of note at that time which I had a chance to meet on a trip to Paris [France] was Antonio Lopez, probably the most famous of all the illustrators.  He was--he had worked at Women's Wear Daily at one point.  Antonio Lopez, L-O-P-E-Z and his partner, Juan Ramos, R-A-M-O-S, and they--he had worked for Women's Wear and then left and went to work for The New York Times, and then later moved to Europe and was very close friends with Valentino and Karl Lagerfeld and Gianni Versace, and all these folks.  He was like top, top.  And we were in--we made--we stayed in communication.  So, he moved back to the United States from Europe and it was at that point I decided, well, well he's moved to the United States, let me move to Europe.  And so my partner, Toyce Anderson, and I decide we're going to Europe.  And so Antonio gives me all these contacts of people to see.  Not only contacts, he gives me specific jobs.  So, I arrive there with work to do that he couldn't do but--in Italy.  So, I arrive to--in Italy and I've got lined up with eleven pages in full color in Italian Vogue [Vogue Italia] and Linea Italiano--Linea Italiana.  He introduces us to Anna Piaggi, P-I-A-G-G-I.  She's a famous fashion editor for Italian Vogue and she writes an article on us in Italian Vogue, you know, saying here they are, you know.  They've arrived, so to speak.  And we were going to all the fashion shows in Italy and, you know, making friends with all these folks, and it was wonderful.  We had a great time in Italy and for a while.  Then, we left Italy and went to Africa for like a short two-month trip and then moved to Paris and spent like the balance of a--it was like a two-year span, the balance of that time in Paris.
Story_ID: 449141
Speaker 1: You've told us a little bit about your Italian experience.  You said that you visited Africa for a short time.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Where did you go?  Where did you visit?
Speaker 2: We went to Liberia.  We had a friend who had the monopoly on paint in Liberia, so we went to visit him in his home.  I think he had the banking and paint monopoly, something like that, very wealthy guy and very tied into the power structure.  So, all of our associations with people there were like the ministers and their kids and we even went to the inauguration of the president, Tolbert [William R. Tolbert, Jr.], at that time, which was interesting to me 'cause it was the first time I'd been--it was Christmastime and the first time I'd seen Christmas in a hot climate and an inauguration in a hot climate where someone decides to wear a fur hat.  (Laughter) It was a little, you know, odd.  But, we had a nice time there.  We stayed about two months.  We met with also the Masacua [ph.] family, which is--which are survivors because so many of the people including the person we went to visit was assassinated f- during the coup that they had.  So, it doesn't--Liberia was--is nothing like what it was when we were there.  When we were there, it was still a very--in a way, it seemed like the South in the '50s [1950s].
Speaker 1: In what year are you there?
Speaker 2: This is '76 [1976].
Speaker 1: And you said it's like the South in the '50s [1950s]?
Speaker 2: Yes, it felt like the South in the '50s [1950s].  In fact, they used American currency, and they spoke English, but everything was somewhat--felt a little slower, you know, than you would normally--than what I was accustomed to coming out of New York [New York] or Italy, you know, okay.  But, we were treated very well and made some really good friends there.
Story_ID: 449142
Speaker 1: Okay, I didn't ask about your experience in Italy.  Were there other black fashion illustrators?  What was, what was that like?
Speaker 2: (Pause) There was--the other--only other black American that I can think of off the top of my head was a textile designer named Ron Nelson [ph.] that was in, in Italy at the same time as we were.  Other than that, it was mostly Italians.  And they had this wonderful way--the Europeans could not hire you outright, but it never stopped the Italians.  They just paid you under the table, took you out for a three-hour lunch, you know, they loved your work and toss you thousands of liras [lire] under the table, which was really wonderful.  You never had to account for it or anything, and I never had trouble getting paid.  They always seemed to have so much money, and they--their way of living, you know, it was just--we were exposed to another way of living.  You know, in New York [New York], even in the '70s [1970s], you're having lunch on your feet in between doing this and doing that, you know.  Dinner, you know, you--nowadays you do go to dinner quite a bit and but they're still relatively fast events because you've got waiters pushing you out of the--away from the table.  There, you're there, you own the table, whether it's at lunchtime or dinner.  No one's ever gonna rush you, and you can be there 'til one, two o'clock in the morning just sitting around drinking and talking and things like that, so it was a whole 'nother way of living in Europe that we had never been exposed to.  In terms of--there were not a lot of blacks from the United States that I could remember.  We did stay with my dear friend, Romney Williams, who still lives in Europe.  She now lives in Germany.  She was a successful model there, very successful model.  And she's a beautiful woman, still is a very beautiful woman.  In fact, sh- when she lived in the United States, she was on Mademoiselle's best dressed list.  She's another one of these people in my life that has this ability to put together clothes, and she's still like that.  She is now married to this guy named Westernhagen [Marius Muller-Westernhagen] in Germany.  He's like the top rock star in Germany, so she's living the life of a rock queen these days.
Story_ID: 449143
Speaker 1: So, you leave Liberia and you go to Paris [France].  You told me on the break and so I'm assuming that you didn't do illustrating in Africa, but you do get work in Paris.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: So can you tell us about the Paris experience, where you're working and what's it like?
Speaker 2: Well, I get to--we get to Paris and we have forty dollars between the two of us [Tunstull and Toyce Anderson], forty dollars.  I had--I had the fortune while I was in Paris--we had the fortune one evening to have dinner with James Baldwin and I said to James Baldwin, I said, "I had--we got to Paris and we had only forty dollars," and he said, "So did I," and his eyes (gesture) get big, you know, and it was just amazing.  And later I read in an article in Essence magazine that he had--that they had done the Paris issue in which my friend, Carol LaBrie, was on the cover.  He said he arrived in Paris with forty dollars.  So anyway, we had--we checked into a hotel and on (unclear) Saint-Michel [Boulevard Saint-Michel], which is directly across from Notre-Dame [Notre Dame de Paris, Paris, France].  That was our view, Notre-Dame.  Very inexpensive, Hotel de Suez [Paris, France] was what--was the name of it.  And we had to find work immediately to make money 'cause, you know, people tell you we'll be there for you and then you start calling them or writing them from Paris and you don't hear back from them.  So anyway, we went out the very first day or so and we went to this magazine called Gap [Gap Magazine], which was an illustration, fashion illustration magazine and met with the art director.  Well, the art director knew me immediately because they are acquainted with Women's Wear [Women's Wear Daily].  So, we walked out of there with an assignment and were--worked for them quite a bit during the time that we were there.  I mean, we got like constant assignments and then we were getting freelance assignments from companies like Maggie Wolf [ph.] and Hermes.  So, we were doing pretty well in a way.  The problem with Paris, which was different than Italy was when they say you can't work for them, you can't work for them, and they're not willing to pay you under the table.  So, we had to go through so many gyrations.  The companies could only pay us in a ch- with a check that said--that was made out to au porteur, which means the bearer, whoever the bearer is.  Well, that was fine and dandy 'til you got to the bank, and then the bank didn't want to cash a check from two black Americans with something saying au porteur.  So, then they'd have to call the company, and then the company would--there would be a haggle back and forth before the bank would agree to cash the check, and it was just--it was--it was--it happened all the time.  It just went on and on and on like that.  So, Europe--Paris was more of a challenge financially, but we still were getting work and still trying to work towards getting working papers, which ultimately never happened.
Story_ID: 449144
Speaker 1: Because it felt leaner--life in Paris [France] was very lean and very difficult initially for the two of us, Toyce [Toyce Anderson] was an incredible artist, and we had taken a cue from Antonio [Antonio Lopez] and his partner, Juan Ramos, to work together.  So, we moved to Paris and we changed our name.  We went from [HistoryMaker] Glenn Tunstull doing illustrations to Glenn and Toyce, Toyce and Glenn.  We would vary how we would sign the work because we didn't want it to be just one person getting all the recognition.  And Toyce was like a collagist--a collagist in the spirit of Romare Bearden, who was a mentor to us once we got back to the United States, by the way.  And so Toyce--we would do a combination of drawing and collage, which became kind of special and, and unique in and of itself, so we had a lot of fun doing that type of stuff for the publications in, in Paris.  And one of the first people that we met was Carol LaBrie and her husband, Uli Rose.  Our friend, Ron Nelson [ph.], said, "When you get to Paris, contact Carol."  So, we go to her house this first day and they're sitting down to dinner, she had two babies, and we hit it off immediately.  She decides she's gonna take us out, so we go out to a bar and restaurant, and next thing you know, it's the next morning.  We done went out and hung out all night and we became like fast, fast friends, and we're still--she's one of my best friends still.  She lives in the United States now.  But at the time, she was probably the top black model in Europe.  Everybody came to her house.  We got to know everybody in the world of fashion because of h- because of her and her husband, Uli Rose, who is a very well-known fashion photographer.
Speaker 2: Who?
Speaker 1: Carol LaBrie.
Speaker 2: No, no, who in fashion are you meeting at her home?
Speaker 1: Oh, well, let me see.  Loulou de la Falaise who was Yves Saint Laurent's muse, Karl Lagerfeld, Jackie Rogers, just about every well-known fashion model at the time.  They just stream in and out of her house.  Some people we didn't know.  But, I mean, designers, just lots of people, Tan Giudicelli, all these folks, and Kenzo [Kenzo Takada].  And because she had started the company Kenzo, her and her--with her first husband, Gilles Raysse, R-A-Y-S-S-E, Gilles is his first name, they were like the toast to Paris.  Kenzo was at the height of his success.  Everyone knew about Kenzo globally.  He was a Japanese designer, is a Japanese designer, and you didn't cover the collections without covering Kenzo.  And he was known for doing five collections at once.  And she was the face of the co- the collection, not to mention the money behind it initially.  So, when times got really lean, it's like having a family member that just takes care of you.  So, when we couldn't get checks paid or didn't have resources to met--to connect with something, they were always there like a bridge for us, and she's like a sister.
Story_ID: 449145
Speaker 1: And how, when you first return to Paris [France], did you end up dining with James Baldwin?
Speaker 2: My connection with Women's Wear [Women's Wear Daily], I had--the--they had a French bureau, a Paris bureau, and the head of the bureau [Judy Fayard]--why am I not remembering her name right now.  There was Edwina LaFarge and--I'll come back to her name.  She was the bureau chief, and she was a friend of James Baldwin.  And she said, "I'm having over--having him over my house for dinner and I'd like you to come over and meet him."  He was living in the South of France in Saint Paul de Vence [France] at the time, but he happened to be in Paris this week, a weekend or something, and she invited us over to have dinner with him.  And we sat there all evening and drank and talked and they smoked and it was--it was wonderful.  And James Baldwin was as animated and alert and, you know, thought-provoking.  I mean--and it--the funny thing was, I hadn't read any of his work up until that point.  So, I'm sitting here listening to him speak and then later I go out and I get every one of his books, and he spoke like--he talks just like he writes.  It was just this--and all on the same subjects.  I mean, it was like really just going on and on, but it was a lot of fun.  It was really impressive meeting him.
Story_ID: 449146
Speaker 1: And your partner, Toyce Anderson, you mentioned that he was a collagist.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: 'Cause initially I was gonna ask you if he was also an illustrator.  Could you tell us a little bit about his life and times?
Speaker 2: He was an incredible artist, just totally creative, the type of person that could never stop drawing.  He was--he--you know, some people are like--do doodles, but his--not--they were not doodles, they were like totally finished sketches, but he's sitting there constantly producing, constantly producing.  And he started doing some collage work.  And we had gone to an exhibition of Alexander Calder in Paris [France], and fell in love with his work, and suddenly we were doing three-dimensional collage mobiles, and they became really popular.  I mean, people started, you know, collecting them and everything.  We were--started them in Paris, but we really--we--and we worked together, so whether we were working on illustration or these fine art pieces, we were working together and signing them Toyce and Glenn [HistoryMaker Glenn Tunstull], Glenn and Toyce.  And they became--I remember once we got back to--when we got back to the United States, these mobiles, someone had heard about them at Saks Fifth Avenue and they sent someone over to see them and the next thing you know, they were in the windows on 5th Avenue [New York, New York].  The entire front of 5th Avenue were--had them in the windows behind a c- [HistoryMaker] Stephen Burrows' latest fashion collection because our colors and his colors all went together.  And it was really like a height for all of us to have had this--to have this occur.  We have a few friends that we're in contact with that still have some of the pieces and he's passed on, so his mother [Martha Anderson] has some of the pieces.  He later went on to produce collages and paintings and he was represented by the--June Kelly at the June Kelly Gallery [New York, New York].  He was very successful.  He was very well-known for that work, but he became very successful as a fashion stylist for musicians.  So, he would do styling for Diana Ross.  He was famous for Cameo, the look of Cameo, Tina Turner.  In fact, he called me up one day and said--and I was on deadline for Bloomingdale's and, you know, they're like sending a truck for the--for the illustrations.  They need it like the next day.  It's like a full page in The Times [The New York Times] or something.  He calls me up and says, "Can you come down and do this illustration for a drawing on the ground for this video that Tina Turner's doing, 'What's Love Got to do With It'?"  It was for that video, so at the very end of the movie, they had--the video, there's this scene and this artist has done this piece that she kind of walks over, and it would've been my work if I'd had that m- that moment.
Speaker 1: Who was it?
Speaker 2: I don't--I don't know the artist that did the actual piece, but Toyce did her clothes for the, for the video.
Speaker 1: And can you speak his full name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: Toyce, which is a very unusual spelling, he gets from his father--name that he gets from his father, T-O-Y-C-E, Anderson, A-N-D-E-R-S-O-N.
Story_ID: 449147
Speaker 1: (Background noise) So, in between our discussion of James Baldwin and Toyce Anderson, you're coming back to the United States, so could you talk a little bit about deciding to leave Paris [France] and coming, coming back?
Speaker 2: Paris was wonderful.  You really got a different sense of a lifestyle.  We were working with, like I mentioned, Hermes and Kenzo and we met Gianni Versace, who asked us to work exclusively for him in Italy, which we opted not to do.  We didn't want to do any exclusivities and now I wish I had because to have--'cause it didn't pan out.  We told him we wanted to go to Africa first and we'd come back.  Well, by the time we came back, he had hired someone else.  So, we didn't get a chance to, but it was really nice to meet him.  And we met everyone, Issey Miyake, like I mentioned, Karl Lagerfeld, all these designers over there and models and things.  But, in the--being an expat, and you can--might know--feel this, too, we missed black American culture.  We met a lot of Africans but we weren't meeting a lot of black Americans, and when they did come to town, they would often come visit us.  We had a call out of the blue, [HistoryMaker] Ntozake Shange.  Do you know her?  She calls out of the blue, she's coming to Paris, they couldn't find a hotel and she comes and stays with us.  This is--and she's currently have--on Broadway 'For Colored Girls / When the Rainbow is not Enuf' [sic. 'For Colored Girls Who Have Considered Suicide / When the Rainbow is Enuf,' Ntozake Shange] so she's like this big major hit on Broadway in New York [New York] and we don't even know who she is.  But we didn't need to know who she was because she was so much herself and she was so, so incredible.  But she stayed with us for a like a couple of weeks with a friend of ours named Andrea [ph.], that's how she knew us, and it was just incredible.  But any- but because we were one of the few black Americans like Carol Rose or Carol LaBrie Rose, when people of color came to Paris, they were always sent to us or--so we had all these--that type of thing.  But it only helped make you miss America and black America.  I wanted some pork chops and fried chicken and I wanted to hear some James Brown, Aretha Franklin and, you know, those types of things.  Judy Fayard was the bureau chief of Par- of Women's Wear Daily, and she was the one who introduced us to James Baldwin.  And she--when--she was from Mississippi--Mobile--no, sorry, Alabama.  I think she was from Mobile, Alabama.  She brought from the United States for us Stevie Wonder and Bootsy [Bootsy Collins].  I forget that, that album.  And even whenever I hear those, I'm--I immediately--those albums, I immediately go back to Paris 'cause that's all we played.  And it was just that longing for my culture (background noise) that brought us back.
Story_ID: 449148
Speaker 1: We get back to the United States and suddenly we're something else.  We're not what we were.  We're Europeanized, or something.  We're more sought after, you know.  Suddenly we had that patina that comes with European exposure and success on the continent, so to speak.  So we wind up getting--our first client is Spring Mills [Springs Mills, Inc.] and we wind up doing these double page campaigns that appeared in newspapers and magazines that was a combination of our work, drawing and collage, that were always these fantasies.  They were predicated on new fabrications.  They had nothing to do with fabric.  They just kind of maybe had a print or something and--but we would do these drawings of people in space capsules and figures jumping out of children's books and, you know, we were--we had so many--they were so fantastic.  It was--the campaign was called Start Here [ph.] and it was like just this fantastic opportunity to just really like hit America on--with all this imagery.  And we were working for some other clients, though I can't remember.
Speaker 2: Polo, Ralph Lauren?
Speaker 1: That's later because what kind of started happening was after the--it's been years, we were together seven years, we were pulling in different directions.  He was being pulled into the fine art and I was being pulled back into the fashion and they really did not operate at the same--together.  But, because we were being pulled apart, we clashed.  So, we dec- ultimately decided that it was better to go separate directions and so we separated and that's when I went on into--back into fashion and he continued to build a name for himself in the world of fine arts.  And this is New York [New York], 1977.  We were living on Park Avenue and 38th Street, a beautiful apartment.  Everyone used to stop in.  You know, the one thing I learned about living in Manhattan [New York].  If you live someplace convenient, you've always got guests dropping by, and we always had guests dropping by, so.
Speaker 2: When you started talking about the whimsical creations that you were making like the spaceships and the children's story book, it really resonated with me that thing your father [Edward Tunstull] told you about, imagination and about dreaming about things.
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Did, did you at all think about that when you were doing that work?
Speaker 1: So much of the whimsy came from Toyce [Toyce Anderson].  I was at that point more a--I felt more like a craftsman with a flare, but we could work together and come up with these amazing pieces.  I wish I had some of them now.  I think about my father's perspective more now than ever because I realize that he really had a key to life and it really was not--you can't plan everything, but you definitely have to have a sense of what it is that you want and to be able to be with what it is that you want, and just by doing that, everything else kind of arranges itself so that it can--it will be that.
Story_ID: 449149
Speaker 1: You're working for designers, and when do you start teaching in New York [New York]?
Speaker 2: It's funny.  I always wanted to teach.  I think it's a calling for me, but I never applied to teach ever.  I said some- something in me was like deciding I was gonna go to Parsons [Parsons School of Design, New York, New York].  I said when, when it's time for me to teach, somebody's gonna ask me to.  And sure enough, I get a call out of the blue and someone says, from FIT [Fashion Institute of Technology, New York, New York], would you like to teach?  It was Harvey Boyd [Harvey T. Boyd], another--a black illustrator now, now that you mention it, out of Europe, too.  He's American, but he worked out of Europe, an incredible illustrator that had a whole fine art feeling to his work, Harvey Boyd, B-O-Y-D.  And he was--he was working at FIT and I think he might've been head of the department, the il- the apparent design department.  And he calls me up and asked me to work there.  He called me up through my friend, Renaldo Barnette, who's a fashion designer.  Barnette is B-A-R-N-E-T-T-E, very well-known designer.  And suddenly I'm teaching at FIT, which I really like and I did that for about three years before being invited to a senior fashion show at Parsons by my friend, Felice DaCosta.
Speaker 1: What are you teaching at FIT?
Speaker 2: I'm teaching illustration to basically merchandising students, so it wasn't inspiring because the students were not interested in being illustrators nor were they interested in being designers.  They were interested in merchandising, which is a whole another element, you know.  It's like sales and marketing type of things and display and things like that, but they needed to know how to draw.  So, the type of drawing that I taught them was very formulaic for someone who really is not interested in drawing.  It was very basic.
Story_ID: 446287
Speaker 1: Okay, before we go back to your teaching career, I remember my question that fell out which was, name some of the visitors that came to your conveniently located Park Avenue [New York, New York] digs.
Speaker 2: Well, I guess we, we had some great friends, notably, Debbie Allen and [HistoryMaker] Phylicia Rashad.  Debbie--we've known--we knew them before either one of them made it.  In fact, they were just out of college at Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.] when Toyce [Toyce Anderson], when I first met him, was their next door neighbor and became best friends with them as literally next door neighbors on the Upper West Side [New York, New York] and just fell into their life.  We worked on and designed Debbie's wedding gown for her first wedding, did a mural for Phylicia.  Phylicia was a very good friend.  Still, we're in contact.  So, they were the type of people that would come by.  George Faison [HistoryMaker George W. Faison] who was the choreographer for 'The Wiz.'  Nick Ashford and [HistoryMaker] Valerie Simpson were visitors.  By the time we had come back to the United States, Peggy Dillard [Peggy Dillard Toone], who I had met when she was like a fifteen-year old, before she ever started modeling, had now become like the top model in America.  She was a black woman that had been on Vogue magazine three times, which is unheard of.  I think she still has--holds the record for that, for American Vogue.  And, so she would show up with Claude Montana, which is a very famous French designer and Peabo Bryson, so she'd--I mean, it would be a range from folks like that, you know, that would show up at the apartment.  It was just amazing.  It was just--Frank Stewart who's a--do you--have you ever heard of him?  He's a famous photographer.  I mean, these were like your cohorts, Romare Bearden.  I mean, these are the folks that would be like coming through and that's that convenient location.
Speaker 1: Well, I'm glad I asked.
Speaker 2: Yeah (laughter).
Speaker 1: My (laughter).
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Story_ID: 446288
Speaker 1: I interrupted our timeline between your first not so interesting classes at FIT [Fashion Institute of Technology, New York, New York] and then you said that you attended a fashion show, I think?  You were invited by someone who was with you originally at Parsons [Parsons School of Design, New York, New York]?
Speaker 2: Yes, Felice DaCosta, who still teaches at Parsons and is a wonderful artist and designer, invited me to be her guest at their annual benefit show.  It's a major show for not only Parsons but the entire fashion industry.  So--it's black tie--so I go with her and all the faculty was there and because of my career, a lot of them I knew.  And so many of--they introduced--so many of them were coming up to me and saying hi and things like that and, you know, they knew that I was at FIT and they kept saying stuff like, "You should be here.  You should be here."  So, they introduced me to the head of the department.  At the time, it was Frank Rizzo.  He said, "Bring your portfolio and come have lunch with me next week."  So, I showed up next week.  He looked at the portfolio after everyone was telling him that I, I should be there and offered me a job the next semester.  So, the next year, I worked at FIT and Parsons, and it was very difficult because this was at the same time that I was doing a lot of freelance illustration.  I think it was after Bloomingdale's 'cause I did the Bloomingdale's campaign for like four years with Antonio Lopez, very busy, very high profile.  You know, the full pages in The New York Times and in the magazines and things like that.  And then that campaign ended and they went to photography, and then I started doing Lord and Taylor, but I think this was just before Lord and Taylor started.  I started teaching at these two schools, but it was still a lot, so I wind up giving up FIT because going back to Parsons was like going home.  I knew the sensibility.  I knew the regimen.  I could relate to driving the kids crazy, you know, and working them to death because that's what I came out of, being worked to death.  And that's part of it, you know, to really strengthen their skills and their ability to survive in an industry that has demands like that.
Speaker 1: What were you teaching at Parsons?
Speaker 2: I was teaching the same thing I'm teaching now and that's basically fashion design- I teach fashion designers how to draw the fashion figure and how to paint it and how basically to convey their concepts in a way that is accurate and appealing.
Speaker 1: Now, that's still not illustrators.  Are they--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: --yet more interesting than merchandisers?
Speaker 2: Much more so.  First of all, most of them are very skilled artists.  They've been trained before they get to Parsons.  You can't get into Parsons without some type of acumen.  And their interest is--they're very steeped in fashion already.  Most of my students have a better grasp of what's going on in the industry than I do and I've been in it for many years in terms of at least what's happening now with fashion design.  But, they're, they're motivated, whereas the merchandising students just were not motivated.  It was like something they had to do.  Here, these kids know that this is a means to their fulfilling their dream.
Speaker 1: And I understand that you've also taught at the Pratt Institute [New York, New York].
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Was that a contemporary experience or--?
Speaker 2: Yes, I, I taught at Pratt 'cause when I--I lived in Brooklyn [New York] right around the corner from Pratt in Clinton Hill for quite a number of years and, again, the situation, they called me up and asked me if I'd be interested in teaching there, and I taught there about three or four years.  And it was again their fashion design students, wonderful students, some of the best that I've ever had, and it was a wonderful working environment because it had a beautiful campus and the kids were great.
Story_ID: 446289
Speaker 1: So between your classes at Pratt [Pratt Institute, New York, New York] and Parsons [Parsons School of Design, New York, New York], are there any students that--whose names you might want to share with us, just either because you thought they were fantastic or that you think that they'll become notable?
Speaker 2: The most notable students, the ones that are probably the most famous right now is Jack McCollough and Lazaro Hernandez.  They created this label called Proenza Schouler, and it's a very popular label.  They--I had them for senior year and they were my students when they created this breakout collection that really revolutionized Parsons.  I mean, it was like a once in a lifetime opportunity.  They went from being college students to being the darlings of Vogue magazine, Women's Wear Daily, all within three months, you know, of producing this collection, and they were both my students.  And they have an interesting story how they came together as a team, which I don't know if I should get into that or not (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Please, at least share a small bit.
Speaker 2: Well, they were contemporary students in the same class and everything and they were friendly as always, but 9/11 [September 11, 2001] happened and Jack had an apartment in Lower Manhattan [New York, New York] that he couldn't move in--couldn't go back to, so he moved in with Lazaro and they became friends on many levels.  And out of that, they started doing their senior- working their senior thesis together and it was the first time if I'm not mistaken where a senior thesis--two things happened.  First time where you had a senior thesis where there was two people coming together to produce something that I'm aware of, I may be wrong, and the other thing is that this was the first time where an entire collection was produced for a senior thesis.  Before, it was an individual garment that a student put out.  They must've had, what, twelve, fifteen garments or something.  It was an entire collection that they were able then to show the rest of the world.  And, and this was largely because of--two things had brought--made this happen.  Are you interested in all that stuff?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Well, first of all, the semester before, the, the juniors staged a revolt because they were not getting the same type of respect for their shows and they decided to produce their own show.  Was it the juniors?  Sophomores, sorry, sophomores decided to produce their own show and they put on a show where they had like a number of garments instead of one.  It had always been one garment.  They produced on a show totally outside of the bounds of Parsons, and it was such a big hit that Tim Gunn was smart enough to alter the entire curriculum so that instead of students producing one garment, they produced collections.  The other--the thing that came out of that was, the collections, if they had shown all the students' work, the collections and shows would've gone on so long, so they started selecting the top collections, and that's how the, the school operates now.  And they were the first senior group to put on entire collections, and they knocked it out the park.  It was incredible--
Story_ID: 446290
Speaker 1: You were telling me earlier that you were recognized at an event at FIT [Fashion Institute of Technology, New York, New York] with [HistoryMaker] Carmen De Lavallade and some others?
Speaker 2: Yeah, [HistoryMaker] Geoffrey Holder and Carmen De Lavallade were the main persons.
Speaker 1: What year was that?
Speaker 2: Two thousand and four [2004] and it was--it, it was an event that was put on by the Fashion--I have to come back to you with that.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: The Fashion--Fashion Outreach, Fashion Outreach.  It's an--it's a, a (unclear) black organization that is based at FIT, but they have a big outreach.  And so they decided to honor pioneers in the world of fashion, so they had a number of black fashion--I mean, black models, stylists, illustrators, I think I was the only illustrator, writers, people of--and, and then Geoffrey Holder who's a fashion designer, a costume designer himself, and then, of course, his wife, Carmen De Lavallade.  But I was honored alongside with [HistoryMaker] Teri Agins.  Do you know who she is?  She's the (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) She's not the person at The Wall Street Journal?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: (Unclear).
Speaker 2: Yes, senior, senior fashion editor of The Wall Street Journal.
Speaker 1: And her column also is business oriented.  Obviously--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --she's at The Wall Street Journal but--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --similar to Women's Wear Daily--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --it's a trade.
Speaker 2: Exactly.  And she gave me her book that she wrote called 'The End of Fashion' ['The End of Fashion: How Marketing Changed the Clothing Business Forever,' Teri Agins], which is an incredible book, just a wonderful book.  I think it's required reading for anyone interested in fashion and especially the business of fashion.  But you had--[HistoryMaker] Diahann Carroll gave an award to--gave the award to Geoffrey Holder.  Bryan--[HistoryMaker] Byron Lars, sorry, Byron Lars gave me my award.  I can't remember who gave Teri Agins her award.  Lou Willard [ph.] was another person who was honored.  It was a wonderful who's who in--of--in the world of fashion.  We're celebrating years, the people who broke the barriers, the first black model to pose and publicly for their work with Christian Dior and things like that, you know.
Story_ID: 446291
Speaker 1: And what about being honored as a keynote speaker in the best of fashion and beauty illustration at the Society of Illustrators museum [New York, New York]?
Speaker 2: This was a really special event because the Society of Illustrators is a very well-known organization on East 61st Street [sic.] that highlights and, and applauds the work of illustrators and it's a whole building that's dedicated to that, but that does not include fashion illustrators.  We're a breed of our own.  And I think this was the second time, first or second time in their history that they've ever had a show that was dedicated to fashion illustrators.  And so they reached out to everyone and so everyone's work was in the show including my own.  And they had me speak that evening along with Antonio Lopez's partner, Juan Ramos, 'cause Antonio Lopez had passed by that time, and Ruben Toledo who you may know as doing the work for Nordstroms [Nordstrom, Inc.] now.  His wife is Isabel Toledo, who is currently doing the Anne Klein collection.  And they are quite a noted fashion pair.  And so it was the three of us on stage having these discussions about our careers and I felt very pleased that the organization, which was called the Fashion Roundta- I believe it was the Fashion Roundtable who put on the show, yes. Kenneth Paul Block's--they used his work for the poster, which was a beautiful piece of work that he had done. Ah. There's nobody with a flair for drawing the female figure emotion like Kenneth.  And I have received another honor, but we'll come back to that.  That's--for, for, for just this moment, it just kind of went out of my mind (laughter).
Speaker 1: Do you remember the import of what you or perhaps what you felt like was the most important thing that you communicated during that discussion at the Society of Illustrators museum?
Speaker 2: Speaking, I felt that I was very--I was very much at ease that evening and spoke very easily about my career and the genre and the specialness of fashion illustration and how--'cause I was speaking to an audience of the converted.  Most of the people were fashion illustrators and how maybe overlooked it is a genre and yet how, how difficult it is and challenging to make something look so easy.  You have to be the best at everything else and then you go to fashion illustration and make it look like it's nothing and it's more than a notion and is--and people I think have to be born with a flair for it and I think that pretty, pretty much that must've been what I came up with.
Story_ID: 446292
Speaker 1: I'm thinking about the fact that we were talking about your return to New York [New York], your freelance work, we talked about your teaching career.  How do you begin to make a shift from fashion illustration to painting?
Speaker 2: These were one of--it was one of these fortunate times in one's life that you don't look at as fortunate, you look at as the most devastating time of your life.  I had been doing ads for Lord and Taylor.  This was after my work with Ralph Lauren and I worked actually at Calvin Klein for a while.  This was the only other job that I ever had.  After Women's Wear [Women's Wear Daily], I never worked a job except for Calvin Klein, I worked a year as a supervisor in their design department, overseeing--co-supervisor, overseeing the work of their artistic team.  But then, I started doing this freelance work for Lord and Taylor, and they had a sensibility that was different in a way from what I was accustomed to.  It was like the American style and they were a lot more commercial than anything that I'd encountered at Bloomingdale's or Ralph Lauren or Calvin Klein.  I mean, their sensibility was really to appeal to Middle America.  And it really--I felt for the first time so constricted in my expression that I grew to hate illustration and it must've shown up in my work because they stopped using me.  And the industry itself had ultimately yielded to photography.  So, there were--there was not a lot of work to be had.  I was in my relationship with Joe Steele at this--at this point, and life with Joe Steele involves travel.  So, we were traveling everywhere all the time and I decided to stop--to start sketching my environments 'cause I'm finding myself in all these beautiful places.  We spent a summer in Sag Harbor [New York], the beaches and the houses and the folks.  I mean, we were in Martha's Vineyard [Massachusetts], we were in Europe.  I mean, we were going to different places and these were like--these are incredible settings and I could draw.  So rather than photograph, do a sketch.
Story_ID: 446293
Speaker 1: So, I started doing these little watercolors and they were kind of like locational.  You know, this--I'm looking at this beach scene here, and I'm looking at you over here and these type of things.  And all of this was because I did not want to have my ability as an artist atrophy.  If you don't use it, you lose it, and that's especially true for painting.  You--and drawing.  If you don't draw, you lose the ability to do it.  So, ultimately, I had a lot of drawings and something just told me one day, show these drawings.  And I had a studio apartment.  We had two apartments in Brooklyn [New York].  And one was this studio and the other was where we lived.  So, we decided to con- turn--convert the studio into a place to show work, so we moved a lot of stuff out and all this stuff and then create--started--and produced a show.  And it was like of all these watercolors.  I never had a show before.  I did--I framed them, did invitations, never done any of it before, send them to all our friends and things like that and the whole time I'm thinking, who would want to buy this?  Who would want this?  You know, and just very nervous.  Who's gonna show up?  All these people showed up and it's like--they bought like they've been waiting to get their hands on my work for twenty years.  They just bought and bought and bought.  It just never stopped.  They just--was just buying all these pieces.  It was the best show I think I'd ever had.  I mean, I made so much money in just this one weekend.  And these were watercolors, you know, so they weren't--I wasn't charging a lot for them, but they were going.  And then there were some fashion illustrations, I said, well I might throw a fashion illustration or--those went.  You know, who knew that people wanted my fashion illustrations too, but they did.  So, suddenly I realized I have a new career: I can continue to travel 'cause we were gonna do that anyway, do paintings, and s- and sell paintings.  So we started producing shows in New York [New York] and the Hamptons [New York], we would do--produce some shows and invite people and the people would come and they would buy the paintings.  None of the shows were like as--on the same--I didn't get the same energy that I got from the first show.  I think it's because it was the first show and you just didn't know what to expect, but I'd always had good sales from all the shows, but they were expensive to produce.  So I've stopped producing the shows, and now I'm more associated with the galleries now, but we still, like I just had a show last month in Martha's Vineyard [Massachusetts] and it's like a major event on the Vineyard.  It's like the seventh or eighth year, it's the busiest week on the Vineyard, especially for the African Americans who come there.  You know, it's right in the middle of the week where they have illumination, the fireworks, major events, and my show, and everyone shows up for it.  It's like a major turnout.  I mean, everyone--people call--they call now to book their selves next year, finding out what time the show--when the show is gonna be.  You know, because you gotta book a year in advance.  So, I gotta like start letting people know when it's gonna be for next year, for some people 'cause they just wanna make sure that they're there for that as well.  And so some people, they only see one another at that show every year.
Story_ID: 446294
Speaker 1: So, I've gotta ask, Joe Steele.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Can you tell us about him and what kind of work he does, particularly that keeps him traveling?
Speaker 2: Well, Joe Steele is a f- a force of nature.  He's got a lot of energy.  He's funny and fun.  He reminds me of my mother [Mary Shockency Tunstull] in that regard.  He's funny and he's fun and he's good looking, and he was one of the few people that I met that had seen more of the world than I had.  He's the type of person that you name a location of the world and he could probably tell you a restaurant or a museum or a hotel or something to go do while you're there.  When I met him, he had a travel agency, very short lived 'cause he didn't like the administrative work, but he, he said to me--I--our first relationship was around his arranging a trip for me to go to Puerto Rico with another person.  That person didn't go and I invited him.  And, you know, after some hemming and hawing, a few weeks later, he agrees to go and so I always say our first date was to Puerto Rico.  And I got to know him and I asked him, where did he go to school, out of the blue, and he said something, and I said, "Did you say Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.]?"  No, he said Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts].  He's double Harvard degree, very bright.  He graduated summa cum laude in international business.  He's got his M.B.A. from there [Harvard Business School, Boston, Massachusetts] too.  So, he's like really a brainiac on that level and he just has this way with--a quick facility with being around people, making them comfortable, as well as understanding global financial politics and the machinations of all that stuff.  He's now a executive coach, so he works with corporations and he does group processing with organizations, and it's generally your Fortune 500 companies and he works all over the world.  So, we just came back from Beijing [China], he was working in Beijing.  I've worked--been with him to England where he worked, to Australia.  It's just a lot of different places.  And he works mostly in the United States, though.  And probably the most supportive person--you know how your--you have--you--they say you always marry your parent.  Well I married my mother, supportive, funny, witty, you know, a card, someone everyone likes to be around.  That's the kind of person Joe is.
Story_ID: 446295
Speaker 1: Name some of the people who visit your Martha's Vineyard [Massachusetts] show.
Speaker 2: Well, the people there probably are not known, you know, in a public sort of way, but they're generally very--they're very es- a lot of them are very established folks and people that you would easily hold in very high regard.  I guess [HistoryMaker] Charlayne Hunter-Gault who is one of--a person that comes to the show all the time and has commissioned me to do work for her is probably one of the more well-known peop- persons.  I think that's one who probably has the highest profile.  But, Martha's Vineyard is a special place.  You know, Martha's Vineyard.  So, you have your judges, your lawyers, your presidents of your colleges, you know the doctors, the head of corporations.  These are all your African Americans of substantial means, you know, or your senior vice president of IBM [International Business Machines Corporation].  I mean, what's his name?  Lloyd Trotter [HistoryMaker Lloyd G. Trotter] and his wife, Teri Trotter.  Lloyd Trotter was the CEO and president of General Electric industries [GE Industrial].  They've collected my work. Folks like that.
Story_ID: 449150
Speaker 1: I next wanted to talk a little bit about work that you had been commissioned to do and some of the, the influences that you have that have influenced your painting, like some people who've influenced you.  First, I wanna ask you if you know Bob Hayden [HistoryMaker Robert C. Hayden].
Speaker 2: Yes, I know Bob Hayden.  Unbelievable that I--you mention Bob Hayden.  He's an amazing man that I met on Martha's Vineyard [Massachusetts].  He wrote the history of African Americans on Martha's Vineyard and Nantucket ['African Americans on Martha's Vineyard and Nantucket: A history of people, places and events,' Robert C. Hayden].  He's the go-to person for the--and of historical record for the African Americans on the--that island.  And we play golf with him and I did a portrait of him playing golf.  Actually, it was a painting of him playing golf, so it wasn't a portrait, but he's the central figure in a golf setting.  I don't really play, but my partner, Joe [Joe Steele], plays, so--Bob and, and he go out from time to time and play together.  But, Bob is an amazing historian who we know also through another colleague and friend named Pat Cusick, who is no longer with us who was mover and shaker in Boston [Massachusetts] politics.  He was the person who almost helped revitalize the South End of Boston by forcing the government structure there to build and develop housing, not just for the wealthy who were moving in but for the poor who were being forced out.  But they were--Bob and Pat were colleagues and Pat was a very close friend of ours as well, Cusick, C-U-S-I-C-K.
Speaker 1: Is that a, a portrait that he keeps himself?
Speaker 2: Yes, he bought the painting.
Story_ID: 449151
Speaker 1: Did you say that Hunter-Gault [HistoryMaker Charlayne Hunter-Gault] had commissioned work from you?
Speaker 2: Yes, Ch- Charlayne, the first painting she had me do was of her house in Martha's Vineyard [Massachusetts], of her view overlooking the Oak Bluff Marina [sic. Oak Bluffs Marina, Oak Bluffs, Massachusetts].  She keeps that in her house in Johannesburg [South Africa].  And then she had me do a painting of her husband, Ron Gault [HistoryMaker Ronald T. Gault], on the golf course.  So, I was--the, the technique that I have now kind of came together in that piece, starting coming together in that portrait of him and they keep that in his office in Martha--in Johannesburg, too.
Speaker 1: The technique?
Speaker 2: Well, there's a style of painting that is like pointillism.  It's kind of based on color being the foundation of everything.  Everything is color and it--color has no separations.  It's just--comes together in different intensities and different groupings to define elements, and that's how my work looks.  But because I don't do points to create colors, I use dashes with my paintbrush.  And so we're calling it dashilism.  You know, it's Tunstull's [HistoryMaker Glenn Tunstull] dashilism, is basically what we're calling it.
Speaker 1: And I asked this question awkwardly earlier, but are there any painters who have influenced you?  I mean, who do you like and who do you feel--
Speaker 2: There's (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) you attempt to emulate?
Speaker 2: Oh, I'm attempting to--I'm aspiring to capture the vibrancy and passion of van Gogh [Vincent van Gogh], the skill and beauty of Klimt [Gustav Klimt], the light and, and warmth of Edward Hopper, and just a general loveliness of life that you find with Monet [Claude Monet].
Speaker 1: I thought of Monet when I looked at some of your work.
Speaker 2: A friend of mine said to me, "You have no angst or anger or, you know, upset days in your work."  I said--he said, "Doesn't that bother you?"  I said--he said, "Does--does that work for you?"  I said, "It worked for Monet."  Who better, you know, to be an inspiration?
Story_ID: 449152
Speaker 1: So I don't want to lose any commissioned work that you've done that you either want to tell us about, and, and most important on my list is work that perhaps someone might be able to go and see if it is on display.  The answer to that might be there is none, but--
Speaker 2: No, the--
Speaker 1: --I want to make a (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) All of--all the commissioned works that I have--
Speaker 1: --swipe at it.
Speaker 2: --are in private collections.  I did a wonderful view of Doctor [Alfred Goldson] and Amy Goldson's [HistoryMaker Amy Robertson Goldson] view from their house and I did a wonderful portrait of a yacht that Charles Reynolds and his wife, Reesa [Reesa Motley Reynolds], has.  Now, they--as a matter of fact, I've done two paintings.  One was a wat- two was--two of them were watercolors and one was a oil of this huge yacht called the Whatever II [ph.].  I've done Connie [ph.] and Phillip Preston's [ph.] grounds, a, a area on their grounds.  Monica Lyle [ph.], I just did a portrait of their porch in Martha's Vineyard [Massachusetts].  So many of these pieces are pieces on their vineyard.  I also do portraits of people, but they're little bit more like capturing the countenance of somebody as opposed to like just painting them, so they become a part of the painting.  So, they're like--it's, it's not a portrait, but they're a subject in the painting.  So, I did a piece of Shahara Wyche called 'Lady in Blue,' which was a big, big hit in the last show.  Charlayne Hunter's--Gault's [HistoryMaker Charlayne Hunter-Gault] daughter, Suesan Stovall, which is a very well-known artist herself.  I did a piece of her called the 'Blue Bicycle.'  My very good friend and my muse for many years who I did all of my Bloomindale's work with and you just name it, Vogue, Bloomingdale's, her name is Deborah Thomas.  I did a piece called 'Girl on the Beach' [ph.] of her.  So, there's a lot--those are the main ones in this technique [dashilism] that I've done.  Other things are like sketches that I've done of people and including Debbie Allen and [HistoryMaker] Phylicia Rashad.  In fact, I did a, a--used Phylicia, and she brought it up to me, she came over and posed for me for a Mother's Day, full page Mother's Day ad that I did for Bloomingdale's of her and it was wonderful in lingerie (laughter).
Speaker 1: Do you have a preference between watercolor and oil?
Speaker 2: I like--they're different.  Watercolor is fast and direct and it's like being on a tightrope, you know.  You--no mistakes and you gotta do it right away.  It's really challenging.  You can't put down the wrong colors--well, you can but you have to be careful.  Oils, I can express something more than immediacy.  I can express a mood and develop it.  And I--one is something that has to be worked out really right there kind of in a moment, that's the watercolors.  The other is a puzzle that has to be resolved over a long period of time.
Story_ID: 449153
Speaker 1: Tell us a little bit about illustrating a book.  I'm not--I think that the title of the book is 'Kai: A Big Decision, Africa' ['Kai: A Big Decision Africa, 1440,' Sharon Shavers Gayle]?
Speaker 2: This is a funny story how this came about because my very good friend, Pat Cummings, is a very well-known children's book illustrator and author and she even writes--she has written children's television scripts or series.  And she's well known--she teaches at Parsons [Parsons School of Design, New York, New York]--for inspiring people to write books and even getting books published.  So many of her students take--are clamoring to get in her class just because they know they could possibly be published and it happens a lot.  Anyway, she insp- kept telling me, "You should do a children's book, you should do a children's book," you know, and she would talk with me and try to get me to do it.  And I've known Pat, she was the second person I met when I moved to New York [New York].  I just had dinner with her last night.  She--so I'm walking around my house going, I want to write a children's book.  I want to--no, I want to illustrate a children's book.  I want to illustrate a children's book.  The phone rings and this woman says, "Would you like to illustrate a children's book?"  I don't know how she got my name or anything.  Suddenly, I'm illustrating this children's book.  Sharon Shavers Gayle was the author of the book and it was my--the only book that I've ever done.  It was a labor of love.  It's about an African princess who, who in the restrictive society of the African culture aspires to be something more, something that only men are allowed to be and that is an artist.  And by way of trying to save her village, she goes to another community and meets a priestess there that is an artist and inspires her to be that.  And it's an inspirational book.  It was Girlhood Journeys who produced the book.  And I did all these great watercolors and I--it was wonderful.  I hired a woman to--a woman that gave me styling, Yoruba styling, 'cause it's all from Yoruba based, so styling of the clothes.  I learned about how prints are not supposed to match in Africa, you know.  Coming from my background, you know, all your colors match.  Well in the Yoruba culture, they're not supposed to match and so there's a general, like you--they look like a mosaic, like a quilt or a collage or something when they're walking down the street.  And I had my nieces pose for me, I--people--I had various people work for me to produce this piece of work, and people still comment about the book.  It's still out there so I'm really pleased.
Story_ID: 449154
Speaker 1: Since photography is so important now in fashion magazines, is fashion illustration still a thriving occupation?
Speaker 2: You would think that it didn't exist, but for us illustrators, we're always looking to see if there's a resurgence.  There's always people saying how much they would like to have illustration back or how they think that it's more unique and inspiring.  Fashion is so cyclical, you just never know if it's gonna come back one day as the very--the next thing, the only way to show your look or the way to be different.  Because what happened when the world of department store promotions and advertising, every store had its own look.  Every illus- there was a illustrator associated with every store.  Lord and Taylor had Dorothy Hood for many years, J. Hyde Crawford was at Bonwit Tellers [Bonwit Teller and Company], Kenneth Paul Block was doing Bergdorfs [Bergdorf Goodman].  You know, so they all had their look.  Richard Rosenfeld was doing Joseph Magnins [Joseph Magnin Company] out on the West Coast.  Now, you look at these ads, you can't tell Bloomingdale's from Lord and Taylor from Macy's [Macy's, Inc.] from anything.  They all look the same and they are not really looking for--and they wonder why they don't stand out in- distinctively or individually.  So, my hope is that people will be reeducated.  The problem--the problem exists because the people that are coming out of schools are not exposed to fashion illustration as even an option, so they get into these positions without that knowledge, without the--they've never seen it.  They don't know that it could work.  They're either told that--they see something old and they think that's it from a--from the '40s [1940s] or '50s [1950s] or even from the '70s [1970s] and it's like, that's old fashioned.  They don't do that no more and they don't even try, but you never know.
Story_ID: 449155
Speaker 1: I'll just ask it plainly, what would you like your legacy to be?
Speaker 2: Since I've reached fifty, I've been thinking about legacy.  It's not something you really consider before fifty.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: Please continue.
Speaker 1: It's not something that you consider before fifty.  I think I've been fortunate to have had a career that has brought me some noteworthiness in the world of fashion.  I feel that what's occurring now suddenly with my fine art will leave a pictorial history for me as well.  I'm pleased that I can--that the two are there and can be combined.  I so enjoy what I'm doing now that my hopes are that this will actually supplant the fashion as what my legacy really is, but I'm proud of it all.
Speaker 2: We're gonna thank you for taking the time to illustrate fashion--
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: --and for taking the time to talk with us today.  It's really been enlightening and very interesting.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) And I'm telling you it was so cathartic for me.  I mean, to be able to talk about all of this and just to let it out has just been amazing.  I have to really thank you.  I mean, your insightfulness--I mean, you got a career as a psychotherapist (laughter) if you want because you've left me feeling spent in a way, like I got it all off my chest and it was a very loving and respectful interview.
