Story_ID: 645383
Speaker 1: So we're going to start the interview.  My name is Julieanna Richardson, I'm the interviewer and Matthew Hickey is the videographer; and I want to start out by having you state your name and spell it, including your middle name.
Speaker 2: Okay.  My name is Frederick Oneil Terrell [HistoryMaker Frederick Terrell].  My middle name is spelled O-N-E-I-L.
Speaker 1: Is, is there a hyphen in that?
Speaker 2: There's no hyphen.
Speaker 1: And it's a small N.
Speaker 2: It's a small N, and I think it was a doctor's name at the hospital where I was delivered (laughter).
Speaker 1: And Terrell, spell Terrell.
Speaker 2: Terrell is spelled T-E-R-R-E-L-L, sorry.
Speaker 1: Okay, and your date of birth.
Speaker 2: November 29, 1954.
Speaker 1: Okay, and today's date?
Speaker 2: Today is July 13, 2013.
Speaker 1: Okay, and your occupation?
Speaker 2: I'm an investment banker.
Story_ID: 645384
Speaker 1: And I want to, I'm, we're going to ask five People magazine-ish questions, just short answers.  What's your favorite food?
Speaker 2: Creamed corn.
Speaker 1: Favorite time of year?
Speaker 2: Fall.
Speaker 1: Favorite color?
Speaker 2: Blue.
Speaker 1: Favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: California.
Speaker 1: Favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: (Pause) I have to think about that.  My favorite, my favorite saying: I get it.
Story_ID: 645385
Speaker 1: I want to start out by talking about your, let's talk about your mother first, and I would like to have her name and what you know about her family background.
Speaker 2: Well, my mom was raised in the South.  She was one of three sisters and a family that included eleven children.  She is from Huntsville, Alabama, and she grew up at a time that, from talking to her--she died in 1991--but from talking to her through the years it was a, you know, it was a challenging life; not unhappy, because she had lots of family and she had a big family but, you know, challenging as it was for black people in the South.  She worked very hard.  She told me stories growing up about working on farms in the field, you know, picking fruits and vegetables and such, you know, you know riding on a truck, you know, afterwards.  It's like anything, you know, you would look at it and say, "God, what a tough, tough life." But I didn't get the sense that she wasn't happy but in looking back at it, it was, you know, they were not unhappy people but not people with a lot of money and they were working very hard, I mean all people worked hard and her family did, and I got the sense that it was a very tight knit family.
Speaker 1: So, how--where was she in the birth order?
Speaker 2: She was the oldest of the girls and I believe she was nearly the oldest of the eleven children.
Speaker 1: So, she had maybe caretaking responsibilities for the other kids.
Speaker 2: She did.  She was born in 1918 and I think that she did.  I mean, she looked after, later in life she had a relationship with my uncles that were, that was like the relationship that an older brother would have with a younger brother or an older sibling with a younger sibling.  My Uncle Lee [Leotamas Robertson], Little Lee, my Uncle Bob [Robert Robertson], you know, they're all younger and, so you know, I think she did.  I think she did.  I think she was looked to as an older presence, not that much older than her sisters [Clovita Robertson and Vera Robertson] in the family, but certainly a little bit.
Speaker 1: Now her name?
Speaker 2: Wilda.
Speaker 1: Wilda.
Speaker 2: Wilda Robertson Terrell.
Speaker 1: Now do you, did she know or do you know how far back on her side do you know?
Speaker 2: I never met my, I never met either of my maternal grandparents.  My grandfather [Elijah Robertson], her father had died awhile back.  I never knew him.  I remember attending the funeral of my mother's mother or my grandmother [Sophie Robertson], but I never knew them.  My brother, my older brother, I have a brother Emmett [Emmett Terrell, Jr.] who is six years older, he knew them a little but not a lot; knew my grandmother but I didn't know either.
Speaker 1: So, did you go to the funeral and was your grandmother in Huntsville at that point or had she--
Speaker 2: My family was then in Tuscaloosa [Alabama]--at least the funeral was in Tuscaloosa--I can't remember how we got there, but our lives seemed to center around Tuscaloosa.  It was the city in Alabama that was central for us and so not very far from the University of Alabama [Tuscaloosa, Alabama], but literally and figuratively far enough from it, and I remember, I remember attending the funeral.  I don't remember much else about it, but I remember, I remember the sadness of it but I hadn't put it in, in any context at all, and I, and I didn't have any sense of her until I literally saw her in her, in her casket. I--that was the first time I really laid eyes on her briefly, so.
Story_ID: 645386
Speaker 1: So, how would you describe your mother [Wilda Robertson Terrell]?
Speaker 2: Oh, my mother was, you know, in a different life, in a different age she would have, she would have done, she did great things and she had a great life, but she would have done things that she would have viewed as more important and more worthy of being celebrated.  She was really a smart woman, a very practical woman.  She had a great sense of humor.  She liked to sing.  She would sing around the house usually, church songs.  I would joke with her sometimes, you know, great sense of humor and I would play with her and we had a really wonderful relationship; sometimes, as a kid I would, when she would scold me I would sing (singing), "Sometimes, I feel like a motherless child" ['Sometimes, I Feel Like a Motherless Child'].  That would make her like go crazy (laughter) because that was the one song I could remember but she, you know, she was just--I'm gonna get emotional here--she was a really terrific mom.  I remember we had a, we had a you know, special fondness for each other.  She was, you know, my brother [Emmett Terrell, Jr.] would say the same thing.  She taught me how to, I remember I came home from school when we were, when I was about, it must have been second grade and there was a relay at school [California Elementary School, La Puente, California] and the relay, there was running and jumping and skipping.  I could run and I could jump, but I didn't know how to skip and I came home and I was miserable because I had made our team lose because I didn't know how to skip and my mother, you know, spent that afternoon, excuse me, teaching me how to skip around the, around my front yard and I--I'm sorry--
Speaker 1: It's okay, people get emotional.
Speaker 2: And--
Speaker 1: Do you want tissues?
Speaker 2: --I don't know, all right.  But I remember her doing that and (grabs tissues)--. Thanks. You know she was just that type.  She would tell me about when she was in school.  She was a good student.  I don't think she finished anything past what we would call grade school, you know, that might have been sixth or seventh or eighth grade.  Neither of my parents finished.  My mother probably finished more school than my father [Emmett Terrell, Sr.], but she, she remembered, she told me about the pride she had in winning a spelling bee and the word she spelled correctly was dollar because it's not O-R, it's A-R, you know, and how proud she was of that, and she'd repeat the story over and over again--it was really important to her--with laughter, not like it was a huge deal, but she was proud of the education which she received; you know, really humble beginnings and my sense of it is that my, that my mother worked very hard, that she as the oldest, or one of the oldest had to do a lot of things to set up the family for my, my uncles.
Story_ID: 645387
Speaker 1: The girls in the family, to my knowledge, my aunt Clo [Clovita Robertson] and my aunt Vera [Vera Robertson], probably didn't go to school much more than my mother [Wilda Robertson Terrell], but the brothers, the boys, as is the case and was the case in many black families, the girls got short shrift relative to the boys.  The boys had to build the house and home and families, so my uncles on my mother's side were all educated men.  They went to, they went to college.  They went to seminaries, they became very prestigious in that field and in education, and in the [U.S.] military.  I have a really outstanding set of uncles, you know.  Many of them passed away, my uncle Osie [Osie Robertson] and my uncle Robert [Robert Robertson] who I am blessed to say are still with me and they were all, you know, great gentlemen and well educated, smart guys.  Didn't all do the same things, but seemed to be on top of it and it was a very tight knit family so she seemed to really love her family, but I know now that I have some perspective on life, that, you know, given my own age, that it was a tough life; I think, a tough life growing up.  I remember hearing at a recent reunion in Chicago [Illinois] at my uncle Robert's house, and he was really been really the stalwart, sort of the center of the family, and I would say for the last twenty-five, thirty years and, and because he has a very large family himself and all the kids went to college, it's really a great family.  I'm really proud of him.  And, I have lots of cousins who have really benefited from their, from their parents and pursued education.  I'm very proud of my family, both sides of my family, but I would say from my mother's side, they really viewed education in a very important way and I was about to say about at the family reunion, I just lost my thought.
Speaker 2: Well, you said that his, his family has sort of done well and, you know, he cared about education.
Speaker 1: Yeah, go ahead please (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) But, let me ask--let me ask you with, so, he, okay I'm, I'm not gonna ask that question, let me ask--
Speaker 1: And I'll think of what I was gonna say.
Story_ID: 645388
Speaker 1: --With your mother [Wilda Robertson Terrell], are there things that she told you that still stay with you?
Speaker 2: I, I probably could think of them at a different time (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay.
Speaker 2: --but I, but I'll tell you something, a story that I remind myself.  When I was, I had graduated from college [La Verne College; University of La Verne, La Verne, California] and I just received a fellowship with the Coro Foundation, which was a fancy fellowship so I thought, and I was living in Los Angeles [California] on my own for the first time after college.  In L.A., relative to the smaller community, I grew up in La Puente, California, it was night and day.  L.A. was a big, big city and my father [Emmett Terrell, Sr.] actually had fear about me going to L.A. whenever I would venture in.  But when I was living there, I had a little apartment near downtown, not much of an apartment, just what any kid would have after college and I didn't have anything to put on walls or anything, you know, I didn't know enough to have any posters up or anything like that.  I didn't know what I was doing.  I had a bed that you pull out of the wall, that kind of thing, so I put up, I think I put up every plaque I had ever received; you know, various certificates that were framed and things and they were all on the wall, and it was ridiculous.  As you look back, it was really crazy but I was, you know, twenty-one, and my mother came over to visit her son's apartment in Los Angeles and she walked in and she looked at the walls and she said to me, "Oh, that's nice, oh, if you feel like you wanna do that." And it completely took the air out of the balloon and I took them all down and it was really a message about my own self-awareness like and it was like, you don't need to that.  It was too much.  I couldn't see it because, you know, I was proud of the achievements, and so on, but she was, it was her own caution, like don't take yourself so seriously.  She would never say that.  She was very proud of me and my brother [Emmett Terrell, Jr.], you know, we were two kids in a tough community and we made it out.  There weren't very many kids I grew up with who went to college or even finished high school; not very many at all, and but she was giving me a little bit of a, just a pull up my coattail to say like, you know just, you know, just back off a little bit.  I took them all down.  You know, for me it was, it was just in its own way without saying anything to me, it was just like, it was a nice message.  I--I remember it all the time.
Story_ID: 645389
Speaker 1: Now, your father.  What about his name and his side of the family (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, my, my father is Emmett Terrell [Emmett Terrell, Sr.], no middle name.  They met, my father and mother [Wilda Robertson Terrell] met, as I remember, in Huntsville, Alabama.  My father's family is centered in Memphis, Tennessee, so I have real southern roots.  We used to go visit my uncles--mainly on my father's side but my mother's side too--my mother's side around Tuscaloosa [Alabama] and my father's side centered in Memphis, in actually Millington, Tennessee and my uncles were, they were farmers.  They had small farms in Millington.  I don't know how they got them.  I don't know how that all happened, but my grandfather, who I did know, his name is Houston--they say (pronunciation) Terrell [Houston Terrell].  My father says (pronunciation) Terrell.  He said Terrell.  He used to joke, he said, "Well, it's Terrell when we have money, it's Terrell when we don't."  That was his joke.  My father had a big sense of, big personality, whoa, man.  Big personality.  But, but his, he grew up in a big family too.  I'm at a loss to think how many.  I can see my aunts and uncles but I don't remember the exact number and total, but it was a big family and I didn't know my grandmother [Margie Sanifer Terrell] but I did get to know my grandfather, who actually visited us in California once.  My father was very proud and my grandfather was, he lived to a pretty ripe old age and I want to say in his eighties; a tall man, he was about 6'4" or 5", tall, good looking guy.  My father was 5'9" and as he grew older, he humped over so he was, you know, 5'9", probably looked a hair shorter, stocky build, strong guy.  My--what I remember about my grandfather is he was tall and a little more thin, like me, and, but, but they grew up, you know, tough life also.  It was just, my father was born in 1911.  I just think it was a tough time in the South.  They saw lots of things that they took for granted that we would be appalled at to see.  We know, we know our history.  We know our history.  We know what was going on in Jim Crow South, but they lived it, and--
Speaker 1: So, where was he in birth order?
Speaker 2: I believe he was the oldest.
Speaker 1: They both, then--
Speaker 2: I think so.
Speaker 1: Okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I think he was the oldest or nearly the oldest, because my uncle Grady [Grady Terrell] who was said to look a lot like me, we were always paired together like we looked like each other, but he was always viewed as more of the kid of the brothers; and my father was viewed as one of the older brothers.
Story_ID: 645390
Speaker 1: If he [Terrell's father, Emmett Terrell, Sr.] wasn't the oldest, he was near the oldest; and he met my mother [Wilda Robertson Terrell] in Hu- in Huntsville [Alabama], I believe, and--
Speaker 2: But how in Huntsville?  It's not like Millicent is next to Huntsville.
Speaker 1: Yeah, Millington [Tennessee]. It's not (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Millington, sorry.
Speaker 1: --I don't know the answer to that.  I don't know how they met and why there.
Speaker 2: And he's seven years older than your mother.
Speaker 1: That's right, that's right.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: And, as I'm told, he thought she was a pretty girl and my mother really was a beautiful woman.  I don't know all of it.  And, my father died when I was eighteen and I never really had the chance to go into it, to talk to him about it.  I wasn't old enough to really get to know him the way I, you know, when you think about it, you know, having children of my own, I'm just getting to the point now where my kids are twenty-six [Matthew Terrell] and twenty-two [Evan Terrell], when I can have a real conversation about life, but you can start having a little bit of that when you're, what thirteen, and so when I think about it, I didn't spend that much time with my father, even though he was a full time dad and, you know, a great husband and all that, but I don't feel like I spent very much time with him, so I don't know a lot of those stories.  I've gotten some of it from my mother, but even that's been a long time.
Speaker 2: So now, how do they get to California, that's--?
Speaker 1: They get to California--I was born in Michigan.
Speaker 2: So you were born in Michigan (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)I was born in Hamtramck, Michigan, because my father had migrated from Huntsville, to Memphis [Tennessee]--my brother [Emmett Terrell, Jr.] would kill me because he would know the story much better (laughter) and the sequencing than I would, but my recollection is from Memphis to Detroit [Michigan] because Detroit was an opportunity for many African Americans for jobs and my father worked in the Chrysler plant [Hamtramck Assembly Plant], either in Hamtramck, I think it's in Hamtramck, or it was in Hamtramck, and then he went there for a job and so that was the great migration for us and, of course, my, I had a good deal of my family that was already centered in Chicago [Illinois], that had already migrated to Chicago, so, we, I was born in Hamtramck in 1954, and we lived there, I don't know how many total years, but I wasn't there very long before we ended up moving to California and Northern California or central California and then later to Southern California where I really think of as my home and that started, my first recollection was living in South Central L.A. [Los Angeles, California] on 92nd [Street], near Avalon [Boulevard], we call Watts [Los Angeles, California] today, and then moving from there out east, spending a little time in Riverside, California, and then finally where it was tough going, as I recall, we were almost run out of town in Riverdale--Riverside.  These were very white communities in California, not very hospitable to black families at all, and my father was looking for work and doing odds and ends, I take it, but we moved from there into Los Angeles, and then from Los Angeles to La Puente, California, which is about thirty-five miles, thirty miles east of L.A., and what I say to my close friends who are in the ghettos, suburbs, but it was the suburbs and it was a blue collar white community.  We were, we were blockbusters.  He moved out there.  He had a job in L.A. at Boys Market [Boys Markets, Inc.], a maintenance job at Boys Market, it was either Compton [California] or South Central L.A., but then he found a job in La Puente working for Sav-On drugstore [Sav-On Drugs, Inc.], which was the main job that I knew during my time, my life with him; and that was, that's where we lived and that's where I grew up.
Story_ID: 645391
Speaker 1: So, really, you're telling of a lot of move in the early--you know your par- they move from the South to Michigan to Northern California and then to Southern California (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That's right.
Speaker 1: And this is probably all trying to find work in some respects, or money (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I think that's right.  I think it was around work and opportunities.  They did some odds and ends.  My father [Emmett Terrell, Sr.] worked in a nightclub for a while as a co-owner of it or somewhat of a manager or something.  I've seen pictures of him.
Speaker 1: Was that in California?
Speaker 2: In California, I think near Vallejo, California, and I've seen pictures of him, you know, looking like he is going out.  I mean, he was a guy that liked a little bit of that life.  You know, he wasn't impractical about it.  He wasn't out in the evenings but he was involved in some sort of thing like that.  And then, you're right.  We did move several, but I think it was always in pursuit of a better opportunity, and in L.A. [Los Angeles, California] my mother [Wilda Robertson Terrell] worked, the last time she worked was in Los Angeles at a place she used to call ElectroData [ElectroData Corporation] and it was later I found out it was Ross Perot's company.  I had no sense of that until much later in my life, but she worked.  I'm not sure what she did there but I remember that she worked there, but when we moved to La Puente [California] from L.A., to La Puente, she didn't work anymore and she stayed home and my father worked at Sav-On drugstore [Sav-On Drugs, Inc.], and that was the job he had until he died.
Speaker 1: So this, now what, what age were you when you were in La Puente, do you remember?
Speaker 2: I go to first grade there [at California Elementary School], so I'm six years old.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you know, the other thing I want to address because our researchers that look--Millington [Tennessee]--do you know much of the history because--
Speaker 2: Well, it's got a [U.S.] Navy base [Naval Support Activity Mid-South] in Millington, and I don't know much else about it.
Speaker 1: But, you know, it was only created as a town in 1878.
Speaker 2: Is that right?
Speaker 1: You say your father was born in 1911, so it's a relatively new town.  It was named after they named, there was Mr.--Mr. George Millington, who donated the area land to a group of settlers in 1878, so it's a new, you know, and really it's a very small place.  The Navy brought the naval base to the community--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --and eight thousand people were involved in the community, so it would be interesting, you know, to, I meant to tell, I think, Ray, Ray McGuire [HistoryMaker Raymond J. McGuire] this yesterday, but from a genealogical perspective, my mother [Margaret Richardson] is adopted.  It turns out North Carolina, if anyone has North Carolina roots, they have huge records and--huge, huge records--I don't know about the other places.  My father's [HistoryMaker Julius Richardson] family is from Alabama, a small town called Burnt Corn.
Speaker 2: Burnt Corn.
Speaker 1: Burnt corn (laughter).
Speaker 2: What's the big city near Burnt Corn?
Speaker 1: Mobile [Alabama].
Speaker 2: Mobile.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.  So anyway, I just wanted to sort of (laughter) to say that (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I didn't know that.  I didn't know that, but Harold Ford [Harold Ford, Jr.], who is a more recent New Yorker, but obviously a Tennessean, I joke with him because I know highway 51 [U.S. Route 51], which is Elvis Presley Boulevard, and he laughed when I told him, you know, I've been in Millington, I spent summers in Millington, picking, you know, peas and, you know, and playing softball because we would go there in the summer to visit my uncles; and so I spent summers, a couple summers in the South, which were very nice.
Story_ID: 645392
Speaker 1: Let's talk about your earliest memory of growing up.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Well, I, La P- (laughter), La Puente [California], I'll start with the town.  We lived on a street, it was Glenshaw Drive, 1315 Glenshaw Drive.  It was a small house.  It seemed big enough then, you know.
Speaker 1: Well, it's only the four of you, too.
Speaker 2: Just the four of us.  It had, I think we had three bedrooms.  It was on a street where there were very few blacks.  There was no black.  In fact, I think we were, we were not the blockbuster, as they called it in California then, my aunt and uncle were.  My aunt, my father's sister, and her husband, my uncle Sam [ph.], my aunt Eunice [ph.].  We both moved to the same community at the same time and we both lived on Glenshaw Drive.  They lived at 1440 and we lived at 1350, and so we were very close and they were very close as brother and sister.
Speaker 1: So this was on your father's [Emmett Terrell, Sr.] side.
Speaker 2: My father's side.
Speaker 1: Now, were they close in age also?
Speaker 2: They were close in age too.  I think she might have been the oldest girl, and she was a very close aunt to me because--in proximity she was down the street--her kids and us, we all grew up together and both of our families were the first blacks in the neighborhood of blue collar whites who weren't happy about it, and some became our friends, most moved out.  So, this was white flight in the early, early '60s [1960s].
Speaker 1: Well, this is really, if you're six, it's 1960.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  And this is, it happened over a period of years but it seems pretty quickly.  But, there was a lot of controversy around it.  We were shielded from it, but I think, my guess is that was a very, very tough thing going on and nobody liked the idea of blacks moving from L.A. [Los Angeles, California] to La Puente.  And, I remember growing up initially on our street with a few white kids and then they moved, but I got along with them and it was okay.  Every once in a while there was an incident.  I remember the school I went to wasn't very far.  I could walk to school.  I was laughing because of my children [Matthew Terrell and Evan Terrell], you know our kids today in New York City [New York, New York], you know, and around the country, many parents--and I don't think this is true for all parents and we're lucky to say this--but you can say well, is the school right for your son or daughter.  Well, I think the school was down the street.  There was no right or wrong, that was the school you went to, so I went to California Elementary School [La Puente, California].
Speaker 1: It was called California--
Speaker 2: California Elementary School and it was, we'd walk to school and I don't remember very many black kids at all.  I remember getting in a fight because I was called nigger, and that was really the first stinging time that I had heard it.  That really experienced the word, when I was, it was around race that kids were gonna have with each other and, you know, I remember that.  That's why I'm so sensitive.  I'm sensitive like a lot of people in my generation are sensitive to all of the use of the word in hip hop, as if; as if it's okay.  I mean it's ridiculous, and to placate people like me.  "Well, we're keeping real.  What's the difference?  We're taking the sting out."  No, no, no, no, no, no.  No. And so, I I've taught my kids over time that, and I'm glad to say that they've come to understand kind of how I see it, but I remember it being a, I remember it being a tough time that way but, you know, look.  We were making it--
Story_ID: 645393
Speaker 1: I also know that my father; god, my father was such a great, great man.  And I'm, I'm really very lucky but my dad was a janitor at Sav-On drugstore [Sav-On Drugs, Inc.].  Now, he's a very proud guy but he was doing a very menial job, but he did it with such pride.  I mean it's really a lesson about whatever you do, do it really well.  And, I can think about all of the things he would have to go through in that job, in that community at that store.  You know, cleaning up for kids because they threw up on the floor or, you know, "Emmett [Emmett Terrell, Sr.] do this, Emmett do that." Or, but, you know, he persevered.  I mean, he sort of had a way of getting through all of it and with great pride and also teaching a lesson and getting the better of the adversary.  He just had a way of doing it that was an important lesson; but, on the block it was, you know, it was contentious, probably much more than I knew.  But gradually--and this was the thing I remember--the great turn in my life was when South Central Los Angeles [California] figured out that there was a place they could move to thirty-five miles away called La Puente [California], where there was starting to be more black people, and by the time I was in third grade all hell had broken loose and my school [California Elementary School, La Puente, California] all of a sudden had a critical mass of black kids from the hood (laughter) and it was never the same.  It was never the same all the way through high school.  To my benefit, it was great.  There were names like Popeye and just big families, families with single mothers and just lots of complicated relationships, lots of names in the same family; well, how could his name be that.  I didn't know.  But all these people descended on La Puente.
Speaker 2: Think about that. That's over a two year period, that's--
Speaker 1: Over a two year period.  It couldn't have been any more than, maybe it was three.  I could have been in fourth grade.  But it wasn't very long.  Certainly within three or four years you started to see many, many more black kids move.  In my neighborhood, the white flight was, was accelerating and before too long there were just fewer and fewer white families left and what had moved in were more black families and our neighborhood became more black and probably over a ten year span became predominantly, predominantly black.
Speaker 2: Now, what did the flight or the change happen before the, the riots--the riot?
Speaker 1: Well, in '65 [1965], because my father and I travelled to Memphis, Tennessee, to Millington [Tennessee] in 1965, I'll tell you about that in a second, but it was around that time.  It was around that time when that was all happening.  I suspect that the white flight was around it, before it, and certainly after it.  It was a very different place after the Watts riots [in Watts, Los Angeles, California].  That was a, you know, a lot of hatred in the air, a lot of anger in the air between whites and blacks and a lot of distrust.  You know, a lot of bad things happened to black people.  And for us, La Puente has an interesting, my friend (unclear) were two of the survivors, we say, from La Puente High School [La Puente, California].  His upbringing was very similar to my upbringing and he would be a good person to talk to, by the way.  But La Puente was, it didn't have the celebrity of Los Angeles.  It was a small town in an unincorporated area of Los Angeles County [California], and so things that would happen to us and would be harmful to black people, nobody would ever hear about.  It wasn't as if for all of the, for all of the, I'm forgetting the police chief in Los Angeles that was, that was Parker [William H. Parker], who was around during the Watts riots.
Story_ID: 645394
Speaker 1: For all of the head beating, and for all of the tragedy of the Watts riots [in Watts, Los Angeles, California], for all of that, that was going on all the time.  Not that way, but, but police were rounding up kids and beating them up.  You know, you knew in La Puente [California] it wasn't the L.A. Police Department [Los Angeles Police Department], it was the Los Angeles County Sheriff's [Los Angeles County Sheriff's Department], and boy oh boy, there were no cameras around.  There was nobody worried about it so, in many ways, we didn't have the benefit of the lights to show our plight and later in life, I remember in growing up in my community in high school [La Puente High School, La Puente, California] there were police cars on the campus all the time.  We thought it was normal.  They were parked there.  It was just a very, very tough place but nobody knows about it because in the shadow of L.A. [Los Angeles, California], which is, you know everything about L.A.  But growing up, when I was in elementary school [California Elementary School, La Puente, California] and junior high [Willow Junior High School, La Puente, California], the neighborhood started to really reflect a lot of the bad habits from some of the kids.  A lot of their parents wanted to do better but the kids weren't as interested in going to school.  I found myself as one of the kids who cared more about going to class and cared more about doing better.  I don't know why my parents [Wilda Robertson Terrell and Emmett Terrell, Sr.] were just always pushing me.  They were very strict about it, about my homework and about doing well and getting an education.  They had no idea about what it meant or the path.  When I was in sixth grade, I was identified as a, something called in the district, a mentally gifted minor.  It was the MGM program.  You know, what's that?  But, there was talk about me even going to a different school.  I had been tested.  I tested really well in the IQ tests and so on, so my father was so proud of that.  He would go around making up numbers, IQ numbers and telling people I know--he would have me like Einstein [Albert Einstein], you know, and the neighborhood knew that I was a kid that had potential.  It was really funny.  But, that gave me a distinction among my peers, the guys I was growing up with, that lasted from junior high, and the trick for me and the thing I'm most proud of is that I always hung though.  It wasn't like I was trying not to be with the kids who were the bad actors and the little hoodlums, and there were.  That was the era when you were just starting to see drugs, and so on.  All of that was going on.  We were having fun and all that, but it was all around us, but I think, I don't know how it was, but I, just early on I decided that I was going to try to do something else.  I wanted to be a lawyer.  I never met a lawyer.  I never saw a lawyer.  But, maybe from watching television--I know that I watched a lot of TV and read a lot about politics--I really, I watched news programs when I was, I must have been in fifth grade.  I mean, I would watch a lot of that Sunday news stuff and I just knew I wanted to be something like that, and I would say the same thing is true for my brother [Emmett Terrell, Jr.].  It was pretty clear to both of us that we were gonna, that we were straighter kids relative to the others, but our friends were all the others.  I mean, I'm being very pointed about that because there are, I know places where kids make a choice and they become almost disaffected from their community.  They're, they're almost at a different place.  I've seen it, and they, they grow up not knowing the black sort of inner city, you know, that experience.  It's not all positive.  It's a lot negative.
Story_ID: 645395
Speaker 1: I got to know it all; and, and I got the--my, my friends who were the kids who didn't get out of that community went to jail.  Many you know, who didn't live.  I mean, kids were getting shot, beaten up.  There was gang activity, not like Crips and Bloods yet, but it would have led to that.  It was a precursor to all of that.  Gangs, people from other outlying cities that would come to La Puente [California] and they'd pick fights.  There was a lot going on.  It was just a tough little neighborhood that nobody knew about, and part of my life was navigating through the community and through the school and trying to keep it together so I could do something.  I didn't know where it was going but along the way, in some ways because of this distinction I had as being a smarter kid, I think that gave me, it gave people more interest in me and probably more self-esteem and maybe that helped me out, and just two parents and just no BS-ing around, you know, active dinner conversations mainly about chopping up the world, my [paternal] aunt and uncle joining my mother [Wilda Robertson Terrell] and my father [Emmett Terrell, Sr.] sitting around talking about who's good for the Negro, which white man is good for the Negro, and the irony of this last election is that I grew up thinking George Romney [George W. Romney] was a great guy, because George Romney, Charles Percy, Nelson Rockefeller, were all white men good for the Negro.  Those three guys were all the liberal guys, so the irony that all these years later, you know, feeling so differently about his son [Mitt Romney] is really incredible, but I remember being very steeped in a deep political conversation for a long time.  We, we talked a lot about politics.  My uncle, particularly, loved it but all of us, my people, my family were real race people.  My father was a member of the union.  He was very proud of that.  They gave him a distinction at one point he was really proud that he had been a member of the Retail Clerks Union [Retail Clerks International Association; United Food and Commercial Workers International Union]; no office or anything like that.  I don't think blacks were doing that kind of thing.  But, he was a janitor, a member of the union, attended union meetings.  He was, I'm rambling a little bit, but he was, he was a guy that just made the most of what he had and he worked three jobs at a time.  When he was working at Save-On drugstore [Sav-On Drugs, Inc.], he was also in the evening washing off the parking lot in the little retail mall center where, you know, dragging a big hose around, you know, just late at night, coming home late after his regular job.  I remember him driving with my uncle out to the desert for hours after going into wrecked homes and pulling out what were ballasts, they're called.  They're conductors for electricity in buildings there.  But you could bang them and you, somehow you took them to the desert and I remember going with them a few times.  You put 'em in a big pit, you'd light 'em up and you'd burn off all the excess and you'd leave with this copper that they would sell.  I mean, you know, so I'm impatient with people who don't work hard.  I mean, I'm impatient with people who don't think that there's something you can do to further your family, so that's my baggage.  I'm not very tolerant of the idea, well, I can't find anything.  Just do what you gotta do, because my father was a guy that did what he had to do and my mother was a completely supportive, great wife, who gave him advice to raise the kids [Terrell and his brother, Emmett Terrell, Jr.].  But, he worked very hard but he was always trying to figure out the next angle.  He would, he one of my great memories of him was driving out to the desert when he had this stuff to do which I just described, but he also picked up a truckload of watermelons and he brought the watermelons home and he drove up and he said, "Hey, I got all these watermelons."  There must have been 150 watermelons, and we put them in front of the house and he had me sell them for a quarter a piece, which was not very much money, but I think he just wanted to give me the sense of what it was like to sell stuff.  It wasn't that I was making money. They were, I don't know what he paid for them, but he had me sell them.
Story_ID: 645396
Speaker 1: He would have my brother [Emmett Terrell, Jr.] and I, he would bring home the cars from the drugstore [Sav-On Drugs, Inc.] and my brother and I would wash the cars and return them to the--my brother could drive, return them to the kids.  He brought home the managers' shoes and I'd shine the shoes.  I mean, he brought home boxes of shoes for me to shine, so that was one of my earliest jobs.  I wasn't, I mean I was in grade school [California Elementary School, La Puente, California] but I was, he was just always thinking of stuff to do that I wish I was as smart as he is about my own children [Matthew Terrell and Evan Terrell], but just keeping us busy, not that fancy, we weren't going on great vacations, we'd get in the car and we would do cross country trips.  I remember driving to visit my relatives in the South and turning on the lights at night when we were traveling, because we'd always travel at night because black people weren't really moving around too much in the daytime.  I remember turning on the light to try to get a sandwich because, you know, you carried all your food in the trunk.  All the food was with you, and we had no clue about vacation.  We were just travelling in the car and I remember him, "Turn that light off."  I didn't get it, but, you know you didn't travel in Mississippi or Tennessee.  Those were the days when I visited my cousins I was standing in the colored only lines.  I mean, I'm the last generation.  My kids don't know that life, but I remember it very vividly, asking my cousins why am I standing in this line and what was different about the Dairy Queen stuff I was getting versus, and driving and him saying well, "This is where we play.  That's the white kids Little League, that's the white kids, that's the white kids." Over and over and over again in the segregated South.  My father [Emmett Terrell, Sr.] dealt with all of that in the South and--
Speaker 2: In the--California (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) in the West and, you know, in many ways California was as segregated and hard core as any place in the South.
Story_ID: 645397
Speaker 1: I want to tell one quick story about the Watts riots [in Watts, Los Angeles, California]. When my, my father and I took a trip, one of our few plane trips we took to, to Millington [Tennessee] and he was, we were at a church one day and, during the sermon the minister acknowledged that Emmett Terrell [Emmett Terrell, Sr.] was here from California and whatever you did, whatever your job was, when you went home you had a nice suit and a hat on.  He was dressed up, loved hats, and at one point in the service he stood up, it was a packed house and he just started doing this extemporaneous speaking about California being behind Tennessee and you've got it much better here.  This is when the riots were going on.  I remember he said, "Millington is sixty miles an hour and California is only at forty." You know, he was giving them a pep talk about their life versus what we were experiencing, no matter if they thought California was fancier.  It wasn't fancy for us and he was giving a sense of the progress around race.  But the thing I remember most about it, I've never had a, one of the great things, the benefits that I have, I've never been afraid and never, nervous sometimes, but I don't mind speaking.  I found it to be a great advantage in my life.  There are many things I wish I were better at, but I'm not a bad writer and I'm not unwilling or it doesn't bother me to get up and talk, and I think it probably comes from my father.  He stood up and gave one of the most beautiful talks.  This is a guy that's not an educated guy, not more than sixth grade.  He just stood up in the middle of this church.  I remember being so impressed; like, you don't know these people.  They don't know you.  He stood up and he spoke about ten minutes or five minutes, whatever.  It didn't seem like that long.  That was a lasting memory for me.  I just thought what a great man that this guy, he goes from there three thousand miles, he's in a jacket cleaning up something that's just what we would view as a fairly demeaning thing, and yet that was the way he fed his family.  That was the reliable work he had, and the people loved him and he had lots of dignity.  Every once in a while he'd take a picture.  He'd be at the cash register.  That was a big deal, to be able to, he would check somebody out.  For black people to work behind a cashier was a big deal.  I'm sitting here in an investment bank [Credit Suisse Group AG] but in the '60s [1960s], to be connected to money at all, to be able to push the buttons so, to have a picture taken with them pushing the buttons, I have no clue.  He signed his name Emmett, but he would do some star on the two Ts that was distinctive.  He just had a flare.  He had a flare and dignity and a real pride about himself that was just, as I think about it, just where did he get that?  Where did it come from?  You know, I think it was from his father [Houston Terrell] and from his upbringing, but such dignity.  I'm just so struck by it.  And as I think about him, that's, that's my lasting memory of him.  He was, you know, really, really a great man.
Story_ID: 645398
Speaker 1: You know, and you, you also think about, and I think about this a lot in, in the work that we do, that how people who were simple people, how they were so sophisticated.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: In many ways, and protective and raised kids to be productive citizens.  That, I mean there are a lot of people who have resources now and they don't have even a clue sometimes how to do that.  So, I think but I want to go back just a little bit, and I want to have you describe the sights, smells, and sounds of your childhood, and let's take them in that order.  Sights.
Speaker 2: The sights. Well, I see my street.  Is that the kind of thing you mean?  I see my street because Glenshaw was my summer camp, it was, again, the idea that you were going away on vacation was like, give me a break.  You might go visit your aunt and uncle, and we did that.
Speaker 1: But let me see. Describe your street.
Speaker 2: My street, Glenshaw Drive [La Puente, California], was one of three streets in this neighborhood that had been populated by predominantly blacks by the middle, late '60s [1960s] and it was a street where kids, we didn't all go to the same school.  One half of the block went to one school system, one went to another, but we all played in the street and actually my street was probably more independent than the others.  There were more kids who didn't get into trouble on my street.  We played sports.  We played baseball.  We did things like that.
Speaker 1: So are there lawns on the, you know on the--
Speaker 2: There are lawns, thank you, there are lawns and backyards, small, all very small, but they are, it's small suburban living, front lawn, and we kept our lawn, now you're reminding me.  My father [Emmett Terrell, Sr.] was very proud of our lawn.  We may have had the nicest lawn, and he had a grass called St. Augustine grass that he found.  It was a very tough grass and it looked good.  Later on, I've seen it on golf courses.  And he had a backyard, and when he'd have people come over to see us he would always say, he would gawk in a little backyard and he had plants all around the edges and he'd say, "There are 100 plants.  There are 100 different plants around here."  No way there are a hundred.  He just, you know, he made that up and he just, there was a little bit of a, what am I thinking of, just a little bit of a performer in him, but it was a very neat place.  Our house was very neat.  My mother [Wilda Robertson Terrell] was very neat.  She worked very hard.  My pants were pressed every morning.  They weren't new, but they were always pressed.  My shirts were every night.  I had my clothes laid out and I probably was one of the few kids who had that.  I just, you know, that was just the way it was, but I remember my house being very neat.  We put up Christmas lights every year.  My brother [Emmett Terrell, Jr.], we really did a lot of the heavy lifting.  I was sick.  I had asthma as I was growing up really bad, and one of the motivations of moving to California was also to get out of the cold, because the cold constricts your breathing passages.  But, I remember that.  I remember, you know, the sounds of like, the ice cream man, you know, that kind of thing.  I remember, as I grow older, when I was fourteen, one of the big changes of my life and maybe saved my life is too strong but (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Hold on, hold on to that. Okay, okay, you're talking about when you had--go ahead.
Speaker 2: No, I was about to mention the band I had.  The sounds, I love music from the earliest time I can remember and I remember singing in the talent show and winning a prize over the summer.  There were, there was a summer community center at my school and you could make beads and things like that and kids would come do that.  I remember liking music a lot.  I loved music, always, and there was always a lot of music in the house.  My father loved music.  He brought home a, you know, a used phonograph a 78 r- you know 78 records [78 rpm record].  You remember those, or maybe you don't remember those (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I do.
Story_ID: 645399
Speaker 1: But when I was a freshman in, in high school [La Puente High School, La Puente, California], there well--my brother [Emmett Terrell, Jr.] who was an eighth grader or freshman in high school, this would have been about 1967, '68 [1968], something like that, but we did go to church. The church was not very far from us.  It was called Delhaven Christian Church [La Puente, California].  It was a mixed church that over time became more black and much more diverse, but it started off as the white liberal church.  It was Disciples of Christ, which I've always described as the liberal arts major of Christianity.  My mother's [Wilda Robertson Terrell] family is Methodist, but, in this church there were activities and a band was formed that my brother was a part of where he was a member of a singing group and that band lasted for a few years and then the bass player, the guitar player in that band, and the band was made up of a number of kids in my neighborhood, you know, who were older, all older, and one of the things in my life is my friends are always older, maybe ten years older, twelve years older.  Even to this day, my best friends are older than I am, but then my friends were four years older and they had a band and the bass player was drafted to go to the Vietnam War and there was an opportunity to take his place if I could figure out how to play guitar, and I taught myself and I had my good friend, Pepper [ph.] help me and others helped me.  They liked me as a guy and I think I was already singing background, because I was a singer.  When I was in junior high [Willow Junior High School, La Puente, California], I performed and I was, I had a pretty decent voice until my voice changed and I was singing in this band and when my voice changed I was no longer good for them, so the only spot for me to stay in the band was if I could learn how to play bass guitar, and so I taught myself and with their help I learned in that band I joined, it would have been 1968 or '69 [1969], it sustained me and that became a band that I was in for the next fifteen years, or something like that, twelve or thirteen years, but it kept me off the streets, it kept me preoccupied, and the band became my hub and those friends in the band, we were not involved in the bad stuff; every once in a while we'd dovetail in it because we were hanging with our friends who were involved with getting beat up, beating other kids up, doing drugs.  There may have been a little of that in there for us, but we hung together as a group.  That was my group and it was cliquish.
Speaker 2: So what were their names?
Speaker 1: Oh well, I mentioned Pepper, he lived in my neighborhood just down the street, and he played keyboards and Kenny Burkes [ph.] played drums and his brother Howard Burkes [ph.] was the singer, and I'm forgetting my friend, Mickey Stenson [ph.], was a trumpet player.  We were a big group.  We kept adding people on, but we became pretty good.  We'd end up playing high schools and later colleges and later opening for B. B. King [HistoryMaker B. B. King] and for Friends of Distinction [The Friends of Distinction].  We were good.  We were a good local band.  We didn't know much about how the music business worked so we were always getting chunked by people who were backed by companies.  I remember one time we went to the guy named, we went to Warner Brothers [Warner Bros. Records, Inc.].  Somebody said we should go to Warner Brothers and we were good enough and someone interested--I forgot how it happened but we were, we had a sound and I think we played a little tape we had done.  We were very unsophisticated.  We didn't know the world we were in at all but the guy said to us, I was in the office, and he said, "God, you sound like this group we signed recently." And we said, "Who?"  You know, we thought we were pretty good, and he showed us a picture of a group.  It was Earth, Wind and Fire (laughter) and so we saw, we were like, "Oh, we never heard of them."  I'm not saying because we were that good.  We weren't.  But the point is we thought we were.  But for the neighborhood we were in, we were a thing.  Everybody knew us, and, and that was something that I got into and actually kept me out of trouble and kept me centered, and, and so on; and all these friends, they remain my friends today.
Story_ID: 645400
Speaker 1: Okay, what, what smells remind you of your childhood (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I remember my mother [Wilda Robertson Terrell] cooking.  My mother was a really good cook.  She made good basically--what we would call now, soul food.  But that doesn't give it enough credit.  It was country cooking, the cream corn, oh, the cream corn, oh, my god.  She knew I loved it when I would come home from school.  She, she just knew I loved it and it was, it was just wonderful.  It was off the cob.  It was fresh.  It was like--she cut it, she seasoned it, always bacon fat, the renderings or whatever--
Speaker 1: The drop--
Speaker 2: The droppings because that's the real stuff and everything tastes good.  It was not good for cholesterol, believe me, I'm sure, but it had that.  There was that, and, my [paternal] aunt, well, my mother had her dishes.  Her dishes were cream corn, wonderful, and peach cobbler.  Those two things to this day, peach cobbler and cream corn; I mean, it was killing, great.  My aunt, hers was the chicken and seasoning.  My aunt was even a better cook and my mother knew it.  My aunt up the street [in La Puente, California], that and the other thing she made was pound cake; even so much that later in life she visited me one time with my mother.  She brought a pound cake.  When I graduated from Yale [Yale School of Organization and Management; Yale School of Management, New Haven, Connecticut] she brought me a pound cake and it was just a wonderful pound cake, but I remember the smells of really great food, and she cooked for my father [Emmett Terrell, Sr.].  He would come home for lunch because the store where he worked [Sav-On Drugs, Inc.] was literally, I don't know, it was maybe not even a half a mile from where we lived so, conveniently we were not that far away.  He drove back and forth but he would come home for lunch and she would make him his lunch, you know, sliced green tomatoes and just really, she was really a great cook, not a ton of things much like my wife.  Jonelle [HistoryMaker Jonelle Procope] is a great cook.  Doesn't make a lot of different things, but the stuff she does is like really wonderfully prepared.  So, I remember that.  Those were the smells--just probably the cooking.
Story_ID: 645401
Speaker 1: So, you know, I, so you are at California Elementary School [La Puente, California], and then what is the junior high school?
Speaker 2: Willow Junior High [Willow Junior High School, La Puente, California], which, which was busing.  Willow Junior High was busing comes to California and to our school district.  We were taken out of my neighborhood and bused across town to a neighborhood that was predominantly Latino and white.  That's what Willow Junior High School, black kids in my neighborhood were driven about fifteen minutes away, twenty minutes away, but to a different, same district but there was no real reason why we should have been going there versus being closer to where we were growing up.
Speaker 1: So this is, are you in junior high in what, seventh grade?
Speaker 2: I'm in seventh grade junior high; seventh and eighth grade.
Speaker 1: So that would be about 1967.
Speaker 2: Nineteen sixty-six [1966] I graduated from sixth grade.  Yeah, it would be 1966 I would have started, started junior high and Willow Junior High was--again, La Puente [California] is a blue collar neighborhood.  By that time, poor whites, poor Latinos, poor blacks.  Just a poor community.
Speaker 1: So, are there any teachers that are influencing you, and are all your teachers white?
Speaker 2: All my teachers were white.  One teacher in sixth grade, Mr. Tabor [ph.], he liked me and I, he was the first teacher who, we would talk about articles we'd read.  He was from Kentucky and I remember bringing him a Sports Illustrated one time that had Adolph Rupp, this really racist coach in Kentucky [University of Kentucky, Lexington, Kentucky], a great basketball coach in the history of basketball, but you know, they played the great game against the all-black team [Texas Western College of the University of Texas; University of Texas at El Paso, El Paso, Texas]; but anyway, Mr. Tabor was a fan of mine.  I was student body president in sixth grade of my school.  I was president of the school.  That was an interest I had in politics.  I was always a student council kind of guy.  I was always looking for leadership kinds of things; and the same was true when I got to Willow.  I don't know what office I held--I did something.
Story_ID: 645402
Speaker 1: Now were you tracked?
Speaker 2: I was, that was interesting (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Because, you know, they were tracking back then.
Speaker 2: Well, in Willow, at Willow Junior High, that's when the mentally gifted minors thing kicked in.  At Willow, the question for me was whether I was gonna transfer schools.  There were people in this district.  I knew that I was being talked about.  I knew it because I had a psychologist in junior high who I would see periodically named John Phillips [ph.]; a white man who, he was the guy that told me and I say this because I'll say it the way, he would tell me that I was very smart and he would tell me, where I was testing and how I was testing and I was blowing the top off these tests and I would, there were two kids in the school, me and another girl, Marilyn Bieber, and she and I would periodically go meet with John Phillips near the principal's office and just talk about stuff, take more tests and just talk.  I had no idea, I had no context for any of it but it became known at Willow that I was that kid.  Now here's the down side.  I was not a very good student because I was really not that interested in school, so for all of the capacity I was supposed to have, I didn't, I wasn't performing.  I would do what I had to do, much as the way I complain about my kids [Matthew Terrell and Evan Terrell], and that really angered the teachers.  I was active in sports and, again, the community I was in was travelling there.  There was a lot of bad stuff going on.  Now, you could see the bad influences from the older brothers and sisters and the kids that I was going to school with, kids weren't going to class, just a lot of hanging out, just, a lot of stuff going on.
Speaker 1: Even when you were bused?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  We were on the bus.  Our bus rides were very animated rides, very animated rides, and I rode--and this is an interesting thing--I rode on that bus every day.  The black kids would all sit in the back and they would just hoot and holler.  It was just a circus and the bus driver, Alice [ph.], I knew her.  I was just a, I was a good kid.  I would always sit in the second seat and my friend Rick Moore, a white kid on the other side of town, I would always say save a seat for me, sit with me, and the black kids gave me a problem with it for a while because I didn't sit with them, I sat in the front.  It was hard to do.  But, you know, because I hung with them everywhere else, they just knew I didn't want to get in trouble.  It wasn't like I was trying to be white.  It was--I didn't want to be in trouble.  They kind of respected it, and over time they got, they dealt with it.  Every once in a while I'd sit in the back and I remember getting into a fight one time when I was in the back with another kid, not with them.  But I remember sitting with him for most of the rides--that's interesting, I just thought about that--any way, at Willow I had my, you know, it was a--what I remember about it was very positive, but I also remember that the teachers resented me.
Story_ID: 645403
Speaker 1: The teachers thought I was getting air cover--now I can see it--they thought I had air cover from the principal's office and from the psychologist  because I was thought to be this really smart kid who, and I was, I remember my science teacher after getting a C grade or something worse, and--can I tell you his name? Deckhoff, Mr. Deckhoff.  How'd you like to go through life with a name like Deckhoff?  (Laughter) What's his first name?
Speaker 2: Matthew [Matthew Hickey] (laughter).
Speaker 1: Matthew, you love that? Deckhoff (laughter).  His name is Deckhoff.  Anyway, Mr. Deckhoff--you can't make that up, can you? D-E-C-K-H-O-F-F--he said to me after I got a bad grade, he was my science teacher, he said to me, he looked at me and said, "You should be ashamed of yourself."  The words stuck with me.  But, the teachers had a bad time with me because I thought I could get away.  I was acting out in class myself, you know, going at 'em just because I thought I could.  It probably went to my head.  I ended up being asked to give the graduation speech because I wrote the best speech and not because they wanted me to, but I wrote the best speech and they chose it and there was a big controversy about it because they thought that why are you rewarding this kid who is acting out?  It's because you think he's so smart and I had also written the best paper.  But anyway, I gave the speech at my graduation.  It was a big deal and that was a big moment in my life.
Speaker 2: So that was, were you in eighth grade?
Speaker 1: It was eighth grade graduation.  I think that may have been one of my parents' [Wilda Robertson Terrell and Emmett Terrell, Sr.] proudest moments.
Speaker 2: So they came.
Speaker 1: Oh, yeah.  They came.  My brother [Emmett Terrell, Jr.] came.  I remember him giving me five [high five] at the end of it.  He had a Nehru suit on or something kind of cool.  I remember he went shopping with me to buy me a suit.  I had new shoes.  It was a big deal.  I gave the graduation speech at Willow Junior High [Willow Junior High School, La Puente, California].
Speaker 2: You don't remember what you said?
Speaker 1: It was called our quest and it was from four cards.  Our quest, I wish I had it, but it was a big deal and I was being tracked, I was being tracked in this gifted track.  I never went, if there had been a better chance I would have been routed or something.  There wasn't, Clarence Otis [Clarence Otis, Jr.], I shouldn't tell you this, but anyway kids who were in the city would have been into a program, but I'm in La Puente [California], so I don't get the program, there's nothing.  You know, now, we support, you know, A Better Chance.  All these programs that take essentially kids like myself, Ray McGuire [HistoryMaker Raymond J. McGuire]--
Speaker 2: That's right, that's right.
Speaker 1: Ray McGuire to Hotchkiss [Hotchkiss School, Lakeville, Connecticut], me to La Puente High School [La Puente, California].  You know, Ray's a very smart guy, smart guy to me, but that's the difference.  It's sort of where you are and my friend and I talk about this.  If I lived in Los Angeles [California], I may not have done as well and maybe it wouldn't have all come together.  There was no pickup.  At La Puente High School, you went from Willow to La Puente High School, which was not a very good high school at all.  Nobody, when I graduated from Willow and went to La Puente, La Puente just didn't, there were white kids; again, same poor, blue collar community, every once in a while a kid who was the son of a car dealer, but for the most part the blacks were very segregated.  This now we're into--
Speaker 2: It's really black.
Speaker 1: We're into black power now and I'm into it.  I've become political.  I've become not standing up at national anthems ['The Star Spangled Banner'], power signs, you know passing out Black Panther [Black Panther Party] stuff and all that stuff was real to me and I, I liked it.  I thought that was definitely it--that's when my hair grew--
Story_ID: 645404
Speaker 1: Who are the names you're talking about, and who are your heroes at this point?  Was it, I mean, who are the (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, oh, my heroes were all the, all the revolutionaries at the time; I mean, they were, they were the Stokely Carmichaels [Kwame Ture], they were the--Malcolm X, you know.  But there was Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] too. I saw the, the, now, now Mal- Martin Luther King is--Malcolm X is '65 [1965]? He died?
Speaker 1: Um-hm. I think it was--
Speaker 2: So Malcolm was '65 [1965], so way before, but the post Malcolm X and post-civil rights leaders--of the civil rights leaders, James Farmer was my favorite, the one with the patch.  I thought he was the smart guy to me.  I just recently saw this Whitney Young documentary. That was wonderfully done.  I wasn't smart enough to figure out how smart he was.  He was on a different track and doing great stuff, but I didn't appreciate blacks in business.  Remember I had never seen anybody with a suit on; never seen anybody with a brief case.  The idea that black people were going to college was like, nobody went to college from my high school.  Parents cried at graduation because they thought their kids had graduated from high school, and kids didn't and the black kids didn't go to school.  They hung out, smoked weed, and left, went to school.  Maybe they played some sports, but I hung with them.  You know, we hung.  I mean, I, the thing I'm really proud of is that for all the lucky things and fortunate things that happened to me, I'm pretty centered in my, I felt pretty centered in my community and my friends.  My friends were hoodlums, but they were my friends and I hung with them and my parents [Wilda Robertson Terrell and Emmett Terrell, Sr.] never knew the places I was and the things I was doing.  They would have been shocked.  One time, my father did have to come to bail me out a couple times.  It broke their hearts; but, you had to do that to keep it real.  You couldn't, you had to co-exist, you had to, you know, in these environments or you couldn't have a life; and I was having fun, and I had the band.  But, that was my high school.
Story_ID: 645405
Speaker 1: Now, what hap- what happened with the episode of sc- scoliosis when you--
Speaker 2: How do you know about that?
Speaker 1: Go on.
Speaker 2: Well, I, I had scoliosis.
Speaker 1: 'Cause, I mean, I thought scoliosis, is it hereditary at all, or is it just--
Speaker 2: It's genetic and it's mainly girls, not as many guys.
Speaker 1: My cousin had it.
Speaker 2: I played football and I couldn't play after they diagnosed it, but I had a real big curvature of the spine and--
Speaker 1: How did they detect it?
Speaker 2: I was in pain, real pain, and I would get hit in my back playing football, and I would scream.  I was a good player but I just couldn't handle it, the diagnosis and they saw that I had a real, real bad curvature.  My father [Emmett Terrell, Sr.] said to me, this was when I was a sophomore in high school [La Puente High School, La Puente, California], "Well, Freddy [HistoryMaker Frederick Terrell]." Freddy. He said, "Well do you want to do this now or do you want to do it later?"  And I said, "Daddy, I'd rather do it later."  He said, "That's the wrong answer" (laughter).  So, I went in and I had surgery done in 1970 and it was, you know, they opened me up and put a metal rod in my back which is still there, and I was laid up for about six months at home, and that was in my, I missed my--what is that, my sophomore year or junior year--I missed most of the year of school and I had home teaching.
Speaker 1: Sophomore year.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I had home teaching; I had home teaching but it changed my life and--I may have gotten the dates wrong--but that's really when I learned how to play guitar.  That's the guitar--that's when.
Speaker 1: Oh, that's when.
Speaker 2: That's when, that's when, I learned when I was laid up in bed.  Yeah, I got the dates wrong but that's when I learned and, because I had nothing else to do.  I cried.  I mean, it was a hard, it was very hard because--
Speaker 1: Did you have to wear a brace?
Speaker 2: I wore a cast.  I wore a cast for most, four or five months, like a full body cast, and I had tutors come there but it was, you know, very hard.  But I must tell you, I think it grew, it changed my life.  It made me grow up.
Speaker 1: Your father also had cancer.
Speaker 2: He was in the bed across from me.  This was when he was first diagnosed when I was like a freshman.  When I was laid up, kitty corner, I could see the room, the master bedroom as it were.  My father was there because he had been diagnosed with prostate cancer.  So, he was convalescing, as I was, and my mother [Wilda Robertson Terrell] in the middle so you can imagine what that was like.
Speaker 1: I can imagine.
Speaker 2: So, she was dealing with that and I was, you know, bed pan, you know the whole mess.  You know, I couldn't get out of bed, so bed rest for all that time, and you know kids would come visit, but it was very lonely but I, the music, I remember that's when I discovered James Taylor, that's when I discovered Elton John, and that really sustained me and my friends, but I was laid up for a while, and then after that I had a brace for many years, but it changed my life.  It gave me an independence, I think.  You wouldn't want that to happen but it was fortuitous in many ways because it gave me a sense of myself and self-reliance and so on, and I, you know, I--there--I don't ski because of it today, but I do everything else.  It's been fine.  But that was a, that was a big thing.
Story_ID: 645406
Speaker 1: So, you, how are your grades after that?
Speaker 2: My grades in, in, as a freshman [at La Puente High School, La Puente, California] were not very good.  My grades were sort of Cs.  I remember my science teacher telling me, I remember him telling me that I was, I had said afterwards, I said, "I'm gonna get a, I'm gonna get an A next time." And he said, I think I may have gotten a D.  He says, "If you just get a C that would be fine."  And he also said, and, I mean basically he sort of is telling me don't get crazy, and he had a right to say so.  I never was a good student until I got, was laid up.  And then when I, when I was laid up I missed the year, but I was tutored.  I had to make up a lot, but I, but then I got, I went back and I got straight A's.  After I went, after I went back after my injury I went back and I got straight A's and I may happened to have had a B or something but I graduated early.  I graduated a semester early after being laid up for, you know, half the year.  But it just was a turn, you know.  Just one of those turning points in your life.  That was my turning point.  I would say the band as a thing to keep me occupied and something that was non-sports related that I couldn't do any longer that sustained me afterwards and being laid up were the two things that sort of kept me centered, but I think, it's funny, I didn't know you knew that but that was a big, big turning point in my life and my parents [Wilda Robertson Terrell and Emmett Terrell, Sr.] were very, you know, supportive, obviously.
Speaker 1: So, how is your relationship with your brother during this whole time?
Speaker 2: Well, my brother, and I know this now from having children [Matthew Terrell and Evan Terrell], my brother is, my brother just looked out for me.  He's six years older.  He was a pretty straight kid.  He's a straight guy.  He was--
Speaker 1: So he wasn't, he didn't get in as much trouble as you did, or--
Speaker 2: Emmett [Emmett Terrell, Jr.] was a straight guy.  Now he did things that are bad that I'll go to my grave with, just between us.  He was hanging out through the same community I was.  He was a little older.  People looked up to him.  He had a job.  He worked for Edison Company electric utility [Southern California Edison Company] when he was in high school.  He was always working.  Emmett was always industrious.  He had better grades.  He didn't, he didn't get the focus I got because of the recognition of sort of sort of this thing, and sort of came after.  This was sort of a new thing that happened.  Very bright and he really, you know, really the power of siblings.  He really looked out for me.  I wouldn't be here without him.  He kept me out of trouble.  He kept me away from certain things.  He was a great role model.  He was working.  He loved cars.  He loved to take care of things.  Even to this day, you know, I love, my car will always be the cleanest car.  It's a California thing.  It's always, my father too, liked a clean thing, you know.  I can't stand it not to be, even though my office isn't always (unclear) but he just had a sense of order.  But, he'd like model cars and things like that.  I didn't have the patience he had for that.  He is, he would love to understand the details of how things worked and, but as a role model for me, I wanted to go everyplace Emmett went, and then, and then I didn't.  Then I split and we lived our own lives and I think that was an adjustment we had to make when I no longer needed him quite the same way; and, and we adjusted to that and, you know, and we figured it out at a different level.
Story_ID: 645407
Speaker 1: So, your brother, when you were eighteen, he's graduating from University of La Verne [La Verne College; University of La Verne, La Verne, California].
Speaker 2: He's graduating from Univ- La Verne College.
Speaker 1: From La Verne College (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I never say University of La Verne.  That sounds too weird to me. But okay, La Verne College (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay, okay, La Verne College.
Speaker 2: And I went there because he went there, and he graduated.  He had done well there.  Emmett [Emmett Terrell, Jr.] is just a pillar of the community.  I said, I spoke at his retirement.  He's just the right, he's just a good guy.  He just always does the right thing.  Everybody loves him.  He's the guy that you call at one o'clock in the morning and say, "I'm stuck on the freeway; guy, can you help me?" And he gets up and before you know it he's like there helping you put the tire on.  He's just that guy.  I mean, if he winces about it, it's only like a minute, but he's not the guy that says, I'm not coming.  He's the guy.  He's actually the guy that's always gonna be there.  I can't think of a better thing to say about somebody.  He's just completely reliable and he always knows the right thing to do.  It's really amazing, and I think for me having that and knowing that I have that, I was very proud of my brother.  He was always looked up to in the community as a guy.  He had gone to college.  He did well in high school.  He was a football team captain, both in high school and college.  He played lineman.  It wasn't a glamorous position.  He was, like, getting the work done, the hard work done, but always thought of as a good guy, and in the yearbooks always recognized as a good kid.  You know, just lucked out and he's six years older, so I wasn't in his world.  It was far enough away.  There wasn't sibling rivalry.  You know he was proud of his younger brother as I was proud of my older brother, but he really sort of set a path for me that made it easier for me.  If I, without him I would have been struggling. I wouldn't--but I, but he was like an anchor and particularly since my father [Emmett Terrell, Sr.] died in '72 [1972], or '73 [1973].
Story_ID: 645408
Speaker 1: So, was that not, so was that your junior year--'cause for some reason (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) In my first, that was my first year.
Speaker 1: First year. I had that he [Terrell's father, Emmett Terrell, Sr.] had died during--oh I'm sorry, I don't know--
Speaker 2: He died my--
Speaker 1: I got you.
Speaker 2: --he died my, yeah, he died in my second semester of my freshman year.
Speaker 1: So, how is that, because your father, I mean, he had been ill.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: But it's hard to lose a parent.
Speaker 2: It was horrible, it was horrible.  You know it was expected because he was terminally ill for the last year or so of his life.  We knew he was dying and he was in a convalescent home in our neighborhood, so I would go see him.  It was hard.  I mean, if you have the opportunity to have your parents die quickly or (unclear) time, you'd always choose more quickly; as long as you could have them, but it was a prolonged end where we knew he was terminal.  My mother [Wilda Robertson Terrell] would go see him in his little convalescent home every day, and I would come down to see him regularly and Emmett [Terrell's brother, Emmett Terrell, Jr.] would then we'd all shuttle back and forth and all of that, but we knew he was dying and he knew he was dying.  And, the last time he was to come, last time he felt well enough, he was continuing to get worse and he felt well enough to come home and he really wanted to come home, I suspect wanted to see home and he came home and he wanted to go by the store.  He wanted to go by Sav-On drugstore [Sav-On Drugs, Inc.] and, of course, you know when he walked in everybody knew that he was very ill and was dying, and I remember walking in the store with him and my bracing him and he would, he would, for that moment would try to walk on his own.  He was too weak to do that so I was literally carrying him, not carrying him but bracing him around.  But he was so happy, with a big smile and everybody came out to say hello to him, but he was feeling very weak and, you know, it was very sad and he was, he came home and I remember everyone, for a birthday he had, I remember people gave him blankets and stuff like, you know death stuff.  I alw- thought it was like death stuff, and I, and I made a point of giving him a hat.  I knew he loved hats, so, and that was a way of you know looking forward--
Story_ID: 645409
Speaker 1: For him.
Speaker 2: Ye- Yeah.
Speaker 1: Because he had been, I mean, you know you talk about your father and--
Speaker 2: Anyway, yeah, I got it, I so yeah that was a (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --(Simultaneous) He was such a, I mean just such a great man.
Speaker 2: He was, he was a, he was a great man.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: So anyway, but I remember that, and anyway, oddly enough and tragically enough, he died in the hospital, not from the cancer but because his bed caught on fire.  We don't know how.  My father was a smoker.  He could have easily been drugged up because he was, you know, pretty drugged up at the end and, you know, it could, a cigarette could have fallen in bed.  Or, the dark side of that is, you know, I had two uncles commit suicide.  I didn't mention but two of his, one jumped off the Mississippi River Bridge, the other shot himself in the head and I think both were about women or finances or something, but, I think a cigarette fell in the bed and so I got a call when I was at school at La Verne [La Verne College; University of La Verne, La Verne, California] one night--it was very late--that I should, I think it was my sister-in-law, said, "Your dad's been in a fire, come to USC Medical Center [Los Angeles County + USC Medical Center]." Which was, you know, about forty minutes away, longer maybe, you know, something like that, but that was the big burn center [LAC + USC Regional Burn Center].  USC Medical Center was a big hospital in L.A. [Los Angeles, California] connected with USC [University of Southern California], but it was the burn center, and that's where I went.  I drove and he went there and my family was there, and there was obviously pandemonium and that's where he died.  He really burned to death and I suppose the smell of flesh, I suppose that was a very ugly thing, but he was pretty much gone.  He did tell me, he did tell me months earlier, I mean, that was a very tragic end, very abrupt, you know, just crazy.  He did tell me at the end, we did have our last words and I always tell people when they lose their parents, I always remind them of how proud it is for a parent to have a child that's doing well.  That's all you really want, and he did say to me, you know, some very nice things like he said, you know, the best son a man could have, that kind of thing, and I cherish that.  I had my words with him when, you know, months before he died.  You know, he knew I knew, so it was very emotional but, and I don't feel like I had him that long, but I did have a really rich time with him.  I know my father, and I really do feel like I'm a reflection of him and I think my own whatever flare I have, and my own willingness to stand up in a crowd and just say something without, you know, there's a lot of downside as I tell a lot of kids all the time, but there's a lot of upside too and I get to talk to a lot of people at one time.  But, but I really do feel like I'm a reflection of both my parents.  I get something a little different from each of them, but pretty, pretty amazing people.
Story_ID: 645410
Speaker 1: What are the last two years of college like at that (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, the last two years--
Speaker 1: Well it's three years really 'cause (unclear)--
Speaker 2: Well, three years after his death I, I--college I, the light switch turned on for me.
Speaker 1: La Verne [La Verne College; University of La Verne, La Verne, California] is, college is how large?
Speaker 2: La Verne is only like eleven, twelve hundred people, I'm guessing, but it's between--
Speaker 1: So it's small.
Speaker 2: It's a thousand to thirteen hundred.  It is, I went there, I didn't know or have any idea about college or where to go.
Speaker 1: But your brother [Emmett Terrell, Jr.] had gone there.
Speaker 2: My brother had gone there and it made sense, and I was thirty-four minutes away, so he was encouraging and I said, sort of, why not.  It seemed like a good school to me.  I hadn't put a lot of time into researching college at all between the band and I just didn't have that influence telling me about many other opportunities.  Later I learned about some other schools that I might have applied to.  I had a girlfriend who went to Pomona College [Claremont, California].  I had never heard of the Claremont Colleges, and yet they're not very far away from La Verne.  They're obviously a good group of schools but I was happy going to La Verne, and he was there and so the first year I got involved with just the guys.  It was an interesting school.  It's a small liberal arts college.  It was primarily a teachers college.  That was the history.  It was in a religious brethren origins, but didn't then, although there was a chapel on campus, but it was, you know, I got a good education and yet I had enough time to do some other stuff as well.  I ended up working.  I was a poli sci [political science] major.  I had a full ride.  I had a full ride scholarship, fortunately.  I've been very lucky that way through life, and so I had enough money because there was certainly--my father [Emmett Terrell, Sr.], I remember him saying to me he was so sorry, he said.  He apologized to me for not having enough money for me to go to college.  It was, you know, it just breaks your heart.  I said, you know, "Don't worry." But he was very sad about that.  He was very proud of my brother, whom he did get to see graduate from college.  So, that was a big moment, you know, for him to see his son graduate.  But I, I studied poli sci, I found some teachers I really liked.  I ended up getting involved in the student government; again, I was hanging.  I mean, La Verne attracted a lot of kids who were okay students, you know.  It's not, I wouldn't say it's a rigorous curriculum as schools go.  They would be, my La Verne colleagues would be upset for me saying, it's a very good school, but it's not like, it wasn't Pomona College, I'll put it that way, but a good school and still is, and recently I've actually gotten more active with them, but at the time I got involved in the student government and in sports and the brothers on campus, we were very close.  I was a dorm proctor; you know, I was a part of the campus but the turn for me is I started working.  I started working--
Speaker 1: Aft- wasn't it sophomore--
Speaker 2: Sophomore year.  I got an internship with the City of West Covina [California], and the City of West Covina, ironically, was the city literally and figuratively across the tracks from La Puente [California].  It was where the white people who were more affluent lived.  It was the suburb that was more upscale and when blacks would have a chance to move on the outskirts of West Covina, that was a big deal, "Oh, I'm in West Covina."  West Covina High School [West Covina, California] versus La Puente High School [La Puente, California] that was town and gown.  I ended up working for the City of West Covina in city hall as an internship, and I worked there and I did a good job and they ended up hiring me full time as an intern, as an analyst, as administrative analyst.  So, I worked there in my sophomore year, but I worked there full time my last two years.  I mean, I worked it out so my classes were a certain time, I'd go from there so, I was, had a real job in my senior year, which was a job that was good enough if you were a graduate.  But, I had worked there for a couple years and I met some really good people; and, and I started to have a real interest in, in local government.
Story_ID: 645411
Speaker 1: So what are you learning about government and politics?  I mean, it's almost like a laboratory because you're, you know, a polic- [political science] (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I'm, I'm, yeah, I'm a poli sci major, I, when I'm a senior at La Verne [La Verne College; University of La Verne, La Verne, California], I'm student body president, but when I'm working in local government I'm just saying first I'm doing constituent complaints, you can imagine.  But I get a, you know, I get a good reputation for being able to work with people, and so on, but I'm working in the city manager's office [in West Covina, California]; now, for small cities who don't have full time staff, you know, the city manager is the professional manager who runs it, like the CEO and the guy's name was George Hiesa [ph.].  George Hiesa was a very tough nut.  People were really scared.  He was a screamer, he was really, you know, but viewed as a very talented guy and I was in his office and I was this little black face in this completely lily white city.  There may have been one other guy.  There was a guy there named Clarence Markham, who was an older guy that worked there who befriended me but it was pretty white, and I was there.  And, for me, I was there in the top--in the big office.  That was where the internship was.  So, I had, so I wasn't very senior but I had access.  You know, I was walking into the boss' office all the time and developing a pretty good relationship and I had that for the last two and a half years of college; I worked there and they eventually hired me even before I graduated, so I was making money.  I mean, I was making the money.  I had a real job.  I was helping to support the family.  I bought myself a car.
Speaker 1: So, how much were you making back then?
Speaker 2: I don't know, but enough to buy an MG Midget sports car, you know.  Enough to have enough money to do that and, but it wasn't a lot and I don't remember what the number was but it wasn't very much but it was a real job.  I was really proud of it and it was more than the La Verne people expected to happen.  I was probably the only intern that ended up getting a full time job and working in a city, that was a pretty good job.  You know, working as an administrative analyst, it was a pretty good job to have and there were no other La Verne kids there.  It was just me.  The other kids were from other schools.  Look, I don't want to say, it wasn't like L.A. [Los Angeles, California]. L.A., you know, it wasn't, it, the difference between being in the San Gabriel Valley and L.A. is night and day.  You were in the hinterlands.
Story_ID: 645412
Speaker 1: But, it was a big deal.  Now this guy, George Hiesa [ph.], you know everybody feared him, all of his senior people would come to see him. The story, I'll tell you a story.  One day, my office, my office, I share an area I sit in with two other, one other person who had graduated from college and was a level above me.  But anyway, I'm sitting, I'm doing my job and George Hiesa hits me on the buzzer and says, "Can you come in, Fred [HistoryMaker Frederick Terrell]," and I came in and in the office there were three guys; one guy ran public works, one guy did something else, and George Hiesa was sitting there and he asked me about something and I said something, Mr. Hiesa. I don't remember if we called him George or not, I think it was Mr. Hiesa.  I don't remember, but I, whatever it was I gave him a good answer, a quick answer and gave him what he wanted, some papers or something.  I went back to my desk and for something happened and the intercom was on from when he had called me before.  Something happened, but it was live.  I walked out of the office and back to my desk and someone in the room said, "That Freddy, he's really a high class nigger."  (Laughter), "He's really a showcase nigger." Not a high class nigger; showcase nigger.  So, you know, like well, so I remember being like livid, nuts, nuts.  So, I went home and I talked to my brother [Emmett Terrell, Jr.] about it and I said, "What should I do?"  I'm forgetting his advice, but I wanted to say something and he agreed and I ended up the next day, I walked in the office and walked into George Hiesa and George Hiesa would be the equivalent of, I mean this was a guy in that world, really feared, he was the boss and he didn't take any prisoners and I basically went off on him.  I said, "I heard you." He was freaked out because this was an era where the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] had some clout.  I happen to know the woman Dorothy Davis, who ran the NAACP and she was proud of me working there, but I went off on them and I said, I forgot what I said, but it was, I went off on them and he said, you know, whatever, he blamed it on the public works guy who was sitting there who said that, who apologized to me but I wondered whether I should quit.  I almost quit, but after I told him off and he was, he was a guy whose hands shook when he was like speaking in front of the city council [West Covina City Council], but it was nuts.  I remember him being very, very upset about it as I was full tilt.  I don't even know what I said, but I was, you know, twenty-one or twenty, and I went off and the guy apologized to me.  I ended up staying and working there; anyway, life went on.
Story_ID: 645413
Speaker 1: So you worked there for additional year. How does the Coro Foundation fellow--
Speaker 2: He was a Coro fellow, he was a Coro fellow, George Hiesa [ph.]--
Speaker 1: He was a Coro (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) he was a Coro fellow in 1948, and he thought it was the cat's meow, sliced bread, it would change his life, really a very innovative program, experiential training in all these different sectors of society and understanding how decision making was made, so on, and he would always talk about the Coro Foundation, Coro Foundation, Coro Foundation, as his graduate program.  He had gone to Berkeley [University of California, Berkeley, Berkeley, California] as undergrad, and one day I met the executive director of the Coro Foundation [Mike Rouse] who had come to see him as a former big Coro guy who was working in city government.  George works in the government and he was known to be a senior guy in municipal government and I said to George I would be interested in being a Coro--or the guy said to me, "Maybe you should look into being a Coro fellow." And George hadn't thought about that, and George all of a sudden said, "Yeah, you should do that."  So, I applied and he wrote a recommendation for me and I became a Coro Foundation fellow, and that was the halo effect.  That was a big deal in that city [West Covina, California], in that place, but also at school [La Verne College; University of La Verne, La Verne, California], I had really gotten what was viewed as a prestigious national fellowship to do this thing.
Speaker 1: Can you talk about the fellowship?
Speaker 2: Well, again, as I've said it a couple of times, between the band and scoliosis, it would be the third thing that changed my life, because I then moved from L.A. [Los Angeles, California], from La Puente [California] to L.A.  That's the great move for me.
Speaker 1: Because that's been your world.
Speaker 2: My world has been San Gabriel Valley [California], really low tech, I mean, not much in terms of opportunities, not any exposure.  No exposure, no matter what.  I was already, I had been, I had been in the newspaper for working in George's office, like on the front page.  It was a big deal.  I was known in La Puente as a smart young guy.  I think that's fair, and because there had been that sort of coverage of me, you know, because it was still early enough in the, this was the early '70s [1970s], you know, '75 [1975], right? Seventy-six [1976], something like that.
Speaker 1: Seventy-six [1976].
Speaker 2: Seventy-six [1976]?  So, it was happening--
Speaker 1: I'm sorry, '77 [1977].
Speaker 2: Yeah, '77 [1977], Coro fellow graduate, '76 [1976] I wasn't--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: But I went to Coro and, for the first time in my life, I met kids who had gone to big schools.  That was the turning--
Speaker 1: So where is the program?
Speaker 2: It's in L.A.  It's in Los Angeles downtown.
Speaker 1: And you get a nine month--
Speaker 2: A nine month fellowship in which you spend four weeks in labor.  I worked for the Teamsters [International Brotherhood of Teamsters].  I spent four weeks in media.  I worked for the Santa Monica Evening Outlook, and I wrote music reviews.  I'd go to the Roxy Theatre [Los Angeles, California] and I was a reporter.  I was doing, writing articles about various things, I was being assigned, I was working on the city desk.  I worked for, I worked on a political campaign.  I worked for a community organization.  I worked for Elbert Hudson [Elbert T. Hudson] in the business community, who became my second dad, and so Paul Hudson's [sic. Paul R. Williams], that's the Williams family--that was his father-in-law.  He's ninety-five.  That's my guy in life, and Karen [Karen Hudson Freeman] was documentarian herself and it gives you experiential training in a way in nine months that you wouldn't have had, so that was the Coro fellow, so I did very well in that, but I met, I met, I met kids that went to Princeton [Princeton University, Princeton, New Jersey] and UCLA [University of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California] and Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts], and Cal State L.A. [California State University, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California], and Pomona [Pomona College, Claremont, California], but places that were big schools, fancier schools, and that was, and L.A. was big to me, you know, huge.  They knew about L.A.  It would be like moving to New York City [New York, New York] from, you know, not even Jersey [New Jersey], but Pennsylvania or something, you know, and I don't mean Philadelphia [Pennsylvania].  So, that was the awakening that there was a big world out there.  It got me out of La Puente, it took me to L.A.
Story_ID: 645414
Speaker 1: My training director, a guy named David Abel, very smart guy, he you know, went to, went to, Claremont Men's College [Claremont McKenna College, Claremont, California], used to be called Men's College, and then went to Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] and he and I struck a relationship.  I was a trainee.  He was my training director.  I was a fellow, but it was a very rigorous, Socratic, what'd you learn today, why did you learn it.  It's a, you know, a very intense program, a lot of group think, a lot of different ways of approaching problem solving.  They're trying to get you to be a more enlightened decision maker, given more data than you know, like what does he think?  What is his perspective?  What are they all thinking about it?  And that idea, the power of that, really did change my life again.  I mean, the notion, working around very accomplished young people who didn't see me as, you know, having a very competitive education, quite frankly, but they acknowledged that I was smart enough to hang.  I had been a student body president.  There were five other student body presidents; one from UCLA [University of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California], one from Cal State Northridge [California State University, Northridge, Northridge, California].  You know, it was an aggressively interested policy sort of oriented group, smart people, and I did that for nine months and the training director became later my best friend, and later was the person who suggested that I come back east.
Speaker 2: I see, is that, that's David Abel?
Speaker 1: That's David Abel.
Speaker 2: Okay, so--
Speaker 1: Wow--well that you know this.
Speaker 2: So let me ask you this.  So, what happens next?  That's what I'm wondering.  You do this program--
Speaker 1: I do this program and then, in the political assignment, I end up working for a politician in a really conservative community not very far from where I grew up [in La Puente, California]; conservative enough that David Abel was checking on me to see if I was okay as I was walking precincts.  But on the side, I ended up working for a guy named Mike Rouse, who was running for state assembly [California State Assembly] and I decided that I was gonna commit lots of time to that, and I worked on his campaign and he was elected to the state assembly.  He was the Coro Foundation executive director, who had visited George Hiesa [ph.] years before, that's the connection.  So I decided to work for him.  So I was doing everything on the campaign, even walking precincts with his dad, who was from Tennessee, small world.  At the end of that campaign, Mike Rouse gets elected.  I think, and others believe, that I have a shot to be his legislative assistant, which is the job that you want if you're--Mike doesn't choose me.  I'm crushed.  He chooses a guy more qualified to be a legislative assistant, who knew more about politics practically, than I did, which was the right call.  But, in the classy, classy move he decides that he's gonna hook me up for a job working for the then city council president, or the then councilman in L.A. [Los Angeles, California], John Ferraro.  He talked to his friend.  He says, "I'm not gonna hire Fred [HistoryMaker Frederick Terrell].  You should hire him."  I end up going to work after Coro and after I spend a stint at Occidental College [Los Angeles, California] getting a master's [degree] that's connected to the program.  That's my overlap with Barack [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama], I can say that I went to Occidental too.  (Laughter) And, I end up working for John Ferraro.  John Ferraro, who's this Italian guy, pro-football caliber player at USC [University of Southern California, Los Angeles, California], big image, you know, later brought the Olympics [1984 Summer Olympics, Los Angeles, California] with Tom Bradley to L.A., but he ends up getting elected city council president [of the Los Angeles City Council].  So, all of a sudden in my first year there, there are no blacks because he never had anybody near a black.  He's a Republican.  I end up being the young black guy working John Ferraro's office in city hall [Los Angeles City Hall, Los Angeles, California], in a city hall where [HistoryMaker] Maxine Waters is working for David Cunningham [HistoryMaker David S. Cunningham, Jr.].  Like, "Who's this guy?"  And I came from left field.  I was like, I didn't grow up in South Central [Los Angeles, California], I didn't come through the channels.  I was like from left field inserted and I worked for John, and in the city hall in L.A., in the city council chamber, I remember as a young guy working for him being able to actually go up and sit next to your boss and you can do that; you can go sit next to him and you're in front.  It's pretty heady stuff, and I worked for John for three years.  While I was working for John, Jimmy Carter [James Earl "Jimmy" Carter, Jr.] got elected president, and a guy [Michael J. Pohl] from city hall ended up working for Carter as an advance person.  That guy ended up asking me if I'd like to, as a part time thing, do advance work--
Speaker 2: For, for--
Speaker 1: --for Jimmy Carter, and I did.
Story_ID: 645415
Speaker 1: So, you--you've had experience with the Republican that you're working for.  Is he a conservative Repub- (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No.  He's a he's a moderate.
Speaker 1: He's, he so he's like--
Speaker 2: He's a practical Republican.
Speaker 1: He's a practical Republican.
Speaker 2: He's a practical.  He's a Republican, but he's a football player, and I've always said if you can get the white guys into the locker room, it'll all sort itself, for the most part, because, again, this sounds odd but seeing people naked is a great equalizer, you know what I'm saying?  So, I'm just saying when guys are like, it's casual like that, it does break down a lot of barriers.  So, John had been a football player at college [University of Southern California, Los Angeles, California] at the highest level, recruited to play for the Packers [Green Bay Packers], turned it down, ended up going into business, made a lot of money as an insurance executive, went into politics.  I ended up getting asked to work for the Carter administration [President James Earl "Jimmy" Carter, Jr.], you know, as an advance person but I'm young, doing advance work.
Speaker 1: And wait a minute.  Who is the person who asked you?
Speaker 2: Michael Pohl [Michael J. Pohl].  He reached out and he asked me--
Speaker 1: Now where was he from?
Speaker 2: He was, he worked for the mayor.  I think he worked for Tom Bradley at the time.  This was the era of Tom Bradley.  Tom Bradley would get all the credit for bringing the Olympics [1984 Summer Olympics, Los Angeles, California], but my guy did the heavy lifting with the council [Los Angeles City Council].  Michael Pohl, I think, worked for the mayor and he had gotten this job somehow as head of White House press advance; that's working with coordinating all the press, the national press.  But the national press was Sam Donaldson, all the big names at that time.  And he asked me to do it, so I ended up doing several trips.  That's how I got that letter back there from Carter, which was in my basement under a bunch of trash and my son said, "God Dad, you should keep the letter.  That's kind of a neat letter."  But, I did that.  I have always said that was one of the best part time jobs I've ever had, so I was, at twenty-two, you know, I was standing on the tarmac with the president, working in city hall [Los Angeles City Hall, Los Angeles, California] for city council president, and I thought my life was headed toward politics and in the city, in L.A. [Los Angeles, California], once I was with John Ferraro, there were guys who would take me to lunch.  Chris Stewart, who ran the Central City Association, which was equivalent to the chamber of commerce with all the business interest.  They thought, and I don't want to blow this out of proportion, but they thought I could be groomed to be a Tom Bradley.  You know, I was young, but I had a good reputation.  I was working for a big guy, a white guy, you know Maxine [HistoryMaker Maxine Waters] was working for Dave Cunningham [HistoryMaker David S. Cunningham, Jr.], all the other blacks in the city are working for blacks.  I'm working for the big white guy as the black guy that they don't know, so it was an interesting dynamic.  I'm friendly with everybody.  I always say that because I'm not, I just pride, I'm with us, I'm always with us but I also appreciate, you know, the influence of being at the right place, and so on and I thought I was gonna do that, and so that was my world.  I worked for a few years and I was, you know, considered a guy that could run for office and that stuff, and I was kind of interested in that.
Speaker 1: Well, you did advance work for how long?
Speaker 2: I did it for about three years, I guess.
Speaker 1: Okay.  For Carter.
Speaker 2: For Carter.
Speaker 1: I see.  So you went from--
Speaker 2: I went from Ferraro while I was doing, 'cause advance work was just part time, and Ferraro, while I was doing that I was doing some advance work.
Speaker 1: I see.  I didn't know that you could do both at the same time.
Speaker 2: Well, these were trips that, you know, you'd be away for seven or eight days.  You'd go there way ahead of the president and then you'd be there and he had said all that stuff to you, all the walkie- you know all the [U.S.] Secret Service stuff, so I was getting a sense of all that stuff.  And I did that for actually more than, I did that, I did that for his whole administration.  When did he, when did Reagan [President Ronald Wilson Reagan], Reagan was 1980 and that's when I was just starting Yale [Yale School of Organization and Management; Yale School of Management, New Haven, Connecticut].  I did it from, I did it from '77 [1977] to '80 [1980].
Story_ID: 645416
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So, what are you learning about politics at this p-?
Speaker 2: I'm learning, well, interesting question.  At first--I love local government when I'm working with the City of West Covina [California], because I think forgetting all that big [U.S.] Senate and [U.S.] Congress stuff, and I do believe this, that people just want to get their streets swept and their trash picked up.  They don't want a lot of government.  They don't mind it, but they just wanted to do the basic things and if they do that, they'll love you for it.  So, I was all about getting the basic things done, the blocking and tackling, because fire, police, I thought that's what local government was about.  The policy stuff was cool, too, but if you get so mired in that you'll get away from what people really want you to do, which was a more minimalist government.  What did I know?  I, but I was seeing in John Ferraro's office, because I was doing his bidding on rent control, and at the same time, Tom Hayden--Tom Hayden was in Santa Monica [California] rousing everybody up to fight for rent control.  We are the pivotal vote.  Tom Hayden is coming to city hall [Los Angeles City Hall, Los Angeles, California], really negotiating with me.  It's Tom Hayden.  And, you know, it was all heady stuff but what I noticed about all of it, at the end of the day the business guys that would walk in the office and close the door with my boss seemed to come out with what they wanted.  That was the big turn for me.  I said, "Whoa, I like this policy stuff." But Atlantic Richfield [Atlantic Richfield Company] or Fluor [Fluor Corporation, Ltd.] or Edison [Southern California Edison Company], they were the guys that gave the money that made my guy want to do things; not inappropriately, but they always had a door open so they could be listened to and that was when I decided I want to know more about that.  That was the turning point.  I love the policy stuff and I'm not a (unclear) but I follow it more closely than your average banker follows it when it's not my business to, because I'm not a basher, I'm not a (unclear), you know the stuff you hear in the partners' (unclear), all that ignorance.  No, you want people, good people to go in that world, but for me, I thought the real payoff was going to be learning something more about business.  I didn't know how to get there.  I met two women who took me, while I was working in city government, two women, Karemu Jackson [ph.], Charlotte Bland [ph.].  I know them today.  One's married to a good friend of mine in New York, and the other, I just talked to today because a friend we had in common passed away.  And, two women, I was interested in both of them, neither liked me but they became good friends.  They had gone to business school.  Karemu had gone to USC [University of Southern Carolina, Los Angeles, California], Charlotte had gone to UCLA [University of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California], and they, on sort of a play date with the three of us, asked if I wanted to go see Earl Graves [HistoryMaker Earl G. Graves, Sr.] speak in L.A [Los Angeles, California].  He was speaking someplace, and I sat out there and for the first time I really saw a black man talk about business.  I've got to give Earl credit on that.  I've told him that and told his son, told Butch [HistoryMaker Earl "Butch" Graves, Jr.].  That was the first time I ever thought about it, never even thought about it that way.  I had worked for Elbert Hudson [Elbert T. Hudson] in Broadway Federal [Broadway Federal Bank] in my Coro [Coro Fellowship in Public Affairs]--but I never thought about blacks in business, or big stuff or running anything.  It just never dawned on me.  I have to say, the girls, the two women thought what I was doing was nothing.  They thought it was okay, but they were new, they were M.B.A.'s and I was a city government person, and that was a different level on the hierarchy.  They were wrong and narrow, they were like hyped up M.B.A.'s, like M.B.A.'s and all doctors.  They all think that when they graduate they know the most about everything.  But, they were not, they didn't hate it but they were more dismissive about what I did and I didn't like that.  I would never like to be taken for granted.  I guess that's sort of a core for me, but anyway, they, I knew that they just didn't--what I thought was kind of cool what I was doing, they thought was government and business was the thing.
Story_ID: 645417
Speaker 1: About that time, David Abel--about that time, David Abel starts saying to me, "You know, Fred [HistoryMaker Frederick Terrell], you should go to business school and then you should go into the Peace Corps, or you should go to the Peace Corps then go to business school." Pretty good ideas.  Two things I had no thought about.  Obviously I didn't do business, didn't do the Peace Corps, but he thought I should to business school, so he had me look into it and I looked into two places.  I looked into Harvard Business School [Boston, Massachusetts], and I went to visit a Coro fellow [Coro Fellowship in Public Affairs] named Lindsay Conner, who was at Harvard Law School [Cambridge, Massachusetts].  It was cold, I had never been on the East Coast, I had never been to Boston [Massachusetts], never been on the East Coast, never been in winter weather, and I think the combination of the howling wind and, you know, really cold temperatures and the bigness of Harvard and Harvard Business School--it felt like a fortress--freaked me out a little bit.  Yale [Yale School of Organization and Management; Yale School of Management, New Haven, Connecticut] was a school that was a new business school that was being designed to be, to think more about the public and private sector and leadership across the board.  I've been very involved in Yale in the last twenty-five years, but it is a business school, but it has a different slant on the world as Yale has a law school, as Yale has a medical school.  Yale as an institution just has a different slant on all of its graduate schools, which I think makes it a great place, and I ended up applying and getting accepted, surprising.  David Abel said to me one of the great lines of all times.  David says to me--once I called him and I said, "I got accepted." He said, "God, you probably don't even need to go now."  (Laughter) It was sort of a line about abusive credentials.  He says, "God, you probably don't even need to go now."  Anyway, I did go and that was just another life change and that led me to drop New York [New York]--I feel like I've always been looking for a bigger city and that's why I'm in New York, and I love New York and I love L.A. [Los Angeles, California], but--
Speaker 2: So, when are you working the summer at First Boston [First Boston Corporation, New York, New York], is it the summer before?
Speaker 1: No, you're, we're there, because I get to business school, I get to Yale and I am again, not unlike Coro, but I'm a bigger fish out of water.  I'm in a bigger pond now.  I'm in a huge pond.
Story_ID: 645418
Speaker 1: When I got there, I had never seen snow, I mean, I forgot what I wrote about myself on the face book.  I worked for the Teamsters [International Brotherhood of Teamsters], people had no idea about this black guy who had worked for the Teamsters.  I went to a small school that nobody had ever heard of, like not even, Bennington [Bennington College, Bennington, Vermont] was a small school that nobody ever heard of.  La Verne College [University of La Verne, La Verne, California] was like, "Huh, like where is that?"  And, I had a roommate from Fostoria, Ohio, named Tim Collins, and Tim had worked for Cummins Engine [Cummins Engine Company; Cummins Inc.] in Ohio, and done well there and he knew, he knew everything about investment banks, which I didn't know what an investment bank was.  I had no idea what an investment bank was.  I didn't know what a bank was beyond sort of your, a check.  I mean, I really didn't know very much at all.  I mean, this was, my world was pretty unsophisticated, but the sophisticated part of my world was in politics and policy.  If I were, the sophisticated part of it had to do more with government, local government, not even national although I had done work for the White House as an advance person [for the President James Earl "Jimmy" Carter, Jr. administration].  So, he knew all this business stuff and I was learning the business stuff and that got me interested in investment banking.  He knew all the names, Solly [Salomon Brothers], Goldie [Goldman Sachs Group, Inc.], all of these nicknames and all that stuff.  As I remember, he was brash, very smart.  He wasn't getting the offers at these places, but he knew them and he was, he's a very smart guy and grew up to be a billionaire.  But Tim taught me all about it, not trying to but I, observing, and I could see that all the smart people, well, that there were two big categories of employers that everybody seemed to want.  One was consulting, the consulting firms, McKinsey [McKinsey and Company] and BCG [Boston Consulting Group] and those, and the others were the investment banks.  And then, at my school the beauty about this, about School of Management at Yale [Yale School of Organization and Management; Yale School of Management, New Haven, Connecticut], the joint degree programs, the people from law school were fabulous and there were a lot of people who were really smart, but they didn't give a damn about investment banks.  They had, forget--, "You wanna do that, Fred [HistoryMaker Frederick Terrell]?  Great."  But they were really smart people, great in class, great conversations, but they had a hodgepodge of very talented people and while I might have thought investment banking was interesting, there were just as many people, not unlike New York City [New York, New York], "You do investment banking?  Great.  I do this.  That's great.  Let's not talk about it."  That's what I loved about it.  And, but I went off and worked for the summer at, in the investment banking.  I applied.  I was smart enough to figure out that the more I studied about it, the better chance I'd have in the interview, and that turned out to be true, and I've thought of questions to ask the interviewer.  I decided to focus on public finance because I hardly knew what that, I never heard M and A [mergers and acquisitions] say it but I thought I'd have a shot, at least, in thinking about I worked in the public sector.  Maybe they would see some connection if I was good, and I turned out to, I gave a good interview several times and along the way, you know, a couple people changed my life who don't even know it, changed my life as I've done for others since then, decided to give me a shot and they hired me for the summer working in public finance at First Boston [First Boston Corporation, New York, New York], a very prestigious firm viewed as a white shoe firm; Morgan Stanley [Morgan Stanley Group, Inc.; Morgan Stanley Wealth Management], First Boston, Goldman Sachs, nobody else.  Merrill Lynch [Merrill Lynch and Co., Inc.; Merrill Lynch Wealth Management] was a wire shop, Salomon was a bond shop, Bear Stearns [Bear, Stearns and Company, Inc.] was a junior of Salomon, DLJ [Donaldson, Lufkin and Jenrette] had not been created.  I mean, First Boston was a very fancy place and I got the job and I worked very hard that summer and during the summer there were a group of summer associates, only six of us at the time, one guy is here now and is a senior guy here and we laugh about it.  We were one of, there were two of six or seven summer associates.  The group was being asked to meet with the CEO.
Story_ID: 645419
Speaker 1: Now when you say you were two of six--
Speaker 2: There were six or seven summer associates (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Uh-huh. Were you--was he black also, or white?
Speaker 2: White, no, I was the only black one.
Speaker 1: But, but why are you saying you're two of six?  Two of six--
Speaker 2: Because he works here [Credit Suisse Group AG] now, that's all (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Oh, I see, I see--
Speaker 2: He's a leftover--
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, I gotcha, okay, okay.
Speaker 2: But we're two of six or seven of the whole.  Now, we hire 100, you know, it was a big thing.  But that was a small cottage industry then, yeah.
Speaker 1: Because it's really at the beginning of the industry.
Speaker 2: This was the beginning of the real breakout of investment banking as being the hot career.  So, to get that job was a hot thing on campus [Yale School of Organization and Management; Yale School of Management, New Haven, Connecticut].  It was really, "Whoa, I just got a big job."  And I--that summer everyone was given a chance to meet with the CEO.
Speaker 1: Now, who was the CEO?
Speaker 2: The CEO was a guy named George Shinn.
Speaker 1: Shinn.  That's right, okay.
Speaker 2: Great story here.  George Shinn went to Amherst [Amherst College, Amherst, Massachusetts] and maybe HBS [Harvard Business School, Boston, Massachusetts], I forget, but George Shinn was a great leader.  Everybody was going to meet with him that summer and talk to him; you know, he was going to see the summer associates.  I couldn't do it that day.  That day I was going to meet with him.  I was going to go on my first plane ride to work on business and I wasn't going to miss that, and I called up, I called my colleagues and (unclear) I said, "Is it okay?"  And they said, "Yeah."  They were surprised I didn't want to do it, but I said yeah.  I was going to Florida on a plane for business.  Man, I thought I wasn't gonna miss that, and I called up the secretary and I said, "Could you tell Mr. Shinn I'd love to meet him, but sometime in the summer. But I have, I'm working that day."  So she said okay.  The other summer associates met with him.  I went and did my thing.  A few weeks later I get a call from George Shinn's office, the same assistant who said, "Mr. Shinn would like to know if you wanted to have lunch today."  Think about that, now think about that.  This white man basically said, knows who I am, calls me, and I went and had what turned into, a one hour lunch turned into four, and we talked about his life and my life and what was important in being good at this business, the importance of family, the books we had read, the things that we thought, it was just a wonderful thing and I left there and I was really blown away, and everybody was.  Nobody could believe that I had spent that much time with the CEO of the company [First Boston Corporation, New York, New York] and he was a real visionary, a real player, and I got an offer at the end of the summer.
Speaker 1: That's a big deal too.
Speaker 2: Big deal, no, a big deal.
Speaker 1: That's a big deal (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Big deal. I got, I got an offer for an investment bank; and my, my--as I often say about my mother [Wilda Robertson Terrell], she would have said, "Oh Freddy [HistoryMaker Frederick Terrell], he got a good job." You know.
Story_ID: 645420
Speaker 1: I didn't tell you this but I, I the first thing I had done, I went to law school.  I went to law school.  It's not in my resume or anything but I went to UCLA law school [University of California, Los Angeles, School of Law, Los Angeles, California] for one year.  I applied, I applied to UCLA, I applied to three places, two places, to Yale and to UCLA.
Speaker 2: Wait, but this is after you've heard--
Speaker 1: No, this is before.  When I was applying to Yale, what I didn't tell you and it was a big step, I applied to UCLA at the same time for law school.  I couldn't decide law school or business school.  I didn't want to do a joint degree at UCLA and I didn't think I had any chance of getting into Yale Law School [New Haven, Connecticut].  So I applied to Yale SOM business school [Yale School of Organization and Management; Yale School of Management, New Haven, Connecticut] and I applied to UCLA law school.  I get into both.  I defer Yale and I attend UCLA law school for one year.  I went to law school for one year.  I liked that it was fine.  I took a leave of absence and then went back to SOM, and at Yale I did two years, well I did the year, I did the summer at First Boston [First Boston Corporation, New York, New York], I went back to my second year at Yale and after the second year at Yale, I had to then go back and finish law school.
Speaker 2: You finished law school?
Speaker 1: I didn't.
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: Because after I had that job and they were paying me the money I was gonna get paid for the summer, well then I said, "Well, maybe there's something else in investment banking I want to do." And I ended up working that second, for a second summer I ended up working at Morgan Stanley [Morgan Stanley Group, Inc.; Morgan Stanley Wealth Management] and I worked there as a summer associate as well.  So, I did a summer associate at First Boston, a summer associate at Morgan Stanley.  A guy named Bill Lewis [HistoryMaker William M. Lewis, Jr.] had just left being an analyst.  He was at Harvard Business School [Boston, Massachusetts], gonna come back to Morgan Stanley.  He was the big analyst, had gone away and coming back.  I end up working at Morgan Stanley, but not liking it as much as First Boston.  The guy ended up telling me at the end of the summer, he said, "We'd love you to come back but you have more school to do." So, whatever.  I ended up going back to UCLA, standing in the line at UCLA to register for what would have been my second year at law school, having done one, took a leave.  I jumped out of line and said, "I'm tired of school." And at the same time the First Boston, and once I did that it got word, somehow, to the First Boston people that I had done it and they said, "Well, you're coming back now, right?"  And, I went back to First Boston.
Speaker 2: That's, so why didn't you put that on your resume?
Speaker 1: 'Cause I didn't finished law school.
Speaker 2: I know, but it's nowhere, well I know, but UCLA--
Speaker 1: It just is, but I didn't finish it.  What would it be?  One year of law school.  I know a fair amount, I know more about contracts and civil procedure and criminal procedure than most people, or I remember most, and I was having a time of it but I just thought, I was older then.  I was tired.  I was burnt out and I had a really great job; not just an okay job, I had a great job.  So, I came back and I started working at First Boston.
Speaker 2: So, this is 1982.
Speaker 1: This is 1983 when I started.
Speaker 2: Three [1983].  I see, okay.  So now, am I right to say that Ron Gault [HistoryMaker Ronald T. Gault] is here?
Speaker 1: Ron Gault is there.  Ron Gault, Ron Gault came after I came.  He came in the public finance department, where I went to work.  I was, Ron had already had a great career and he worked for the city before, under Mayor Koch [Ed Koch], I believe, yeah, and Ron joined, oh the year after I came.  I don't remember when Ron--
Speaker 2: You know, it says he joined First Boston public finance group after in 1981--is that wrong?
Speaker 1: No, that's wrong.
Speaker 2: That's wrong, okay.
Speaker 1: He came after I was already here.  He would have come in '84 [1984].
Speaker 2: Okay, okay, okay.  But now, I have you starting a derivatives group here--
Speaker 1: I did.
Speaker 2: But in 1983.
Speaker 1: You do great homework.  I'm really impressed.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: I did.  I was in public finance for six months and I was bored.  I didn't like it.
Speaker 2: You didn't like it because--
Speaker 1: For all the things I loved about politics and policy, I hated about banking in that world.  It was not viewed as core to our business.  It was the backwater, the people in the hallway didn't take it as seriously.  The market was a different market, tax exempt versus taxable, so you really couldn't have the same conversation.  I didn't like how I felt in the hallway.  I was doing great, but it just wasn't cool enough, I think, and I didn't think it was the way, it was an industry that was in a, it was cottage--I used the word cottage--it was a big business and there were a lot of great firms and great people in that business today, but for me I didn't think it was gonna be my way--
Speaker 2: Up, up the ladder.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I didn't think it was gonna be up the ladder at the firm and, because I could see that they were viewed, the bankers were viewed differently, even though they're very smart guys, but people just beat on the public sector.
Story_ID: 645421
Speaker 1: Well, well and also (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And every, and every, you know, it's just unfair, but they beat on the public sector as government people, they beat on the public sector as business people covering the government sector.  So, I just thought there's a guy, you know, as you go through this, and as I go through this with you which has been, you know, a great way to think about your life here, and you think about all the people who have made one little call about you that helped you out.  The guy, Roger Leaf, was starting a derivatives group in public finance in '83 [1983]. He noticed me, he thought I was a sharp associate.  He asked me would I want to help him start it and we started the first derivatives group on the street that covered public demand, so I was an associate doing something called, working on something called interest rate swaps when they were brand new.  This was like cutting edge stuff, black box, crazy smart stuff, and it isn't because, you know, some things come to you.  I am sure there are things in law school which you struggle, maybe you didn't, but some things that you just sort of had it; you know, just when your mind thinks you can get around one thing easier.  Well, for all the things that I can't get my head around, there's something about that little thing and options in general and--stuff like that I just got, and I got it pretty quickly and I got it well enough so even as a second year associate in this group I was like the guy.  I was very young.  I was only a second year associate giving presentations to big rooms of clients in the tax exempt business as the whiz kid guy who knew interest rate swaps, and this was, and so I'm talking to all of these local government types, but now I'm not covering them, I'm not engaging with them in a deal, I'm sort of the fancy product guy.  I like that thing.  That was a smarter way to deal with that business and that allowed me to really have real big firm facing time, real big time in writing documents of how it works, putting it out on the street, you know, all that stuff I was getting and I was a second year so I got promoted to vice president in two years.  I made VP in two years and it's a four year track so I was on a real fast track.
Speaker 1: So let me ask can we conceptualize what is actually happening and why derivatives sort of start and these interest swaps start, and who else is doing this kind of work, can we--
Speaker 2: Well, they start because they, when people say derivatives it's a way to describe something that is, it's a tool that turns a security of some other type into something else.  You have a debt instrument that pays a fixed interest.  You don't want to pay fixed interest.  You want to pay floating interest.  I can get you there synthetically through matching it with somebody else who wants to pay fixed.  You guys swap payments.  I'll pay yours, you pay mine, and the Wall Street is driven, not by derivatives but a big part of Wall Street is driven by synthetic tools that create what you want, but not from what you don't have.  That's the power of it and at the same time, Credit Suisse [Credit Suisse Group AG] is not because I created it, but Credit Suisse is developed, is building itself into one of the premier derivative shops.  Credit Suisse, uh, First Boston--First Boston [First Boston Corporation, New York, New York].
Speaker 1: First Boston.
Speaker 2: First Boston was the firm Ray [HistoryMaker Raymond J. McGuire] joined.
Speaker 1: Right but it's--
Speaker 2: We had the great M and A department [mergers and acquisitions], we had the great mortgage department, we had the great derivatives, we were just an incredible firm and it was a time when, you know, Bill [HistoryMaker William M. Lewis, Jr.], Ray, myself, Bayo Ogunlesi [Adebayo Ogunlesi], we're all the same or similar vintages.
Speaker 1: Right, Bayo I knew him from law school [Harvard Law School, Cambridge, Massachusetts], sorry (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) This is the first, yeah. No, no. We are all, Bayo and I made partner the same year here.  We are all young guys in the business making our way, knowing each other a little bit; but, but we're the generation of guys who're all about the same vintage.
Story_ID: 645422
Speaker 1: But wait a minute, but you are here, let's see, Ron Gault [HistoryMaker Ronald T. Gault] joins--
Speaker 2: Ron's in eighty--is kind of '84 [1984], I think--
Speaker 1: Okay, and then Bayo [Adebayo Ogunlesi] is, you're saying Bayo--
Speaker 2: Bayo started here around the same time.
Speaker 1: I see.  And then, who's this?
Speaker 2: I was here, Bayo and I were probably the same vintage.  I mean, Bayo must have started around '83 [1983].
Speaker 1: So, who else is around the city [New York, New York] then--
Speaker 2: Nobody.  Well at, Bill, Bill, no, no, no, no.
Speaker 1: Bill Lewis [HistoryMaker William M. Lewis, Jr.] is at--
Speaker 2: Bill is at Morgan Stanley [Morgan Stanley Group, Inc.; Morgan Stanley Wealth Management].  He was an analyst.  Now, I wasn't an analyst, so Bill is early.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: He's already been an analyst at Morgan Stanley and is coming back so Bill is firmly entrenched in Morgan Stanley as a guy who did well as an analyst in college, comes back.  I'm coming in at the associate level, same for Ray [HistoryMaker Raymond J. McGuire].  Ray is coming in at the associate level.  He's coming in the M and A department [mergers and acquisitions].  When he's coming in, I'm doing the capital markets derivatives thing.  Ron is working in public finance, Bayo is somewhere, I'm forgetting where he is in here--
Speaker 1: I forget.
Speaker 2: I'm forgetting, but this is the first layer of guys, because we're all the same age basically.  I'm a little older.  We're all about within a year or two of each other.  This is the first group of business school guys who come to work on Wall Street who were doing well, [HistoryMaker] Don Cornwell is a predecessor.  He was at Goldman Sachs [Goldman Sachs Group, Inc.] before.  Milton Irvin's a predecessor.  Bill, at First Boston [First Boston Corporation, New York, New York] who helped me to get here, he's in public finance, Bill Hayden [William H. Hayden] is--because they were all part of a Black Enterprise article about blacks on Wall Street.  They were the four guys.  There were smatterings of people even before that; Janice Savin's dad [Patrick Savin] was on Wall Street.  There were people around, but not very many.  We were the first group of business school guys who were in positions working their way up and building a reputation.
Speaker 1: That's right, that's right.
Speaker 2: I would say the four or five of us--
Speaker 1: That's right.
Speaker 2: And we made partner back to back to back as well.  But Ron was a lateral, only thing I can say about Ron, he was a lateral hire from another career.  We were all from--
Speaker 1: Business school.
Speaker 2: Business school but also associates.  We were, we didn't come at it at a different level.  Ron came in at a VP or an MD [managing director] level or something, but he was the first senior lateral hire, but we were associates working our way up through the system, which gave us a little bit more standing inside the company over time.  I want to say by the way Ron was a very talented, influential guy but he was coming from being a senior guy in government, coming into investment banking.
Speaker 1: Which is different.  Well it's different--
Speaker 2: Yeah, it's different in any business.  It's different on track, it's different, everything, but working your way up through from associate partner is different than coming in at this level.  You just, it's just a different connection with the company.
Speaker 1: So, what happens, you say after two years?
Speaker 2: After two years, I work in this derivatives group, I get bored with that.
Speaker 1: With Roger [Roger Leaf].
Speaker 2: Roger, but, the guy that is the center and my best friend, Jonathan Plutzik, was the guy that I worked for in the summer in public finance when I came here from Yale [Yale School of Organization and Management; Yale School of Management, New Haven, Connecticut].  He became my friend.  I worked for him.  He helped me get hired and when I left public finance to go to this derivatives thing, we were close friends and he gets the idea and wants me to come help him join the mortgage finance department to focus on large scale securitizations for the federal government, and Jonathan is leaving public finance, I'm leaving my derivatives group that's connected to the public finance to join what was then Larry Fink's mortgage group, Larry Fink [Laurence D. Fink] of BlackRock [BlackRock, Inc.].
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: And so we go from that and we change our careers.  We go into mortgage finance, and mortgage finance is beginning to be a power house here.  Larry is not here very long.  He leaves to go start BlackRock, but Jonathan and I stay behind in mortgage finance; I become an expert around mortgage finance.
Story_ID: 645423
Speaker 1: So let's talk about the context of that within the saving and loans crisis that happens, and how the mortgage finance relates to this (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well I was, well very quickly, I went from working in mortgage finance to being transferred to financial institutions, which is covering banks and thrifts, and so on, and while I'm doing that for a guy named Dick Thornburgh [Richard E. Thornburgh], who is on the board here [Credit Suisse Group AG] now and another good friend, in 1991, in 1990, '91 [1991], the firm [First Boston Corporation, New York, New York] was having a bad time.  It's a bad time for the firm.  I'm probably in the wrong place, although I'm working in the financial institutions group covering banks, that group's contracting, I get a call from a guy working in mortgage financing, Craig Phillips, who I knew from an earlier time in mortgage financing, asking if I would come, if I would be interested in helping him develop a practice around the savings and loan crisis, and about what we didn't know about what the RTC was.  We just knew that the banks were going down and he thought there was a big opportunity and I asked the guy who was running the banking group, Dick Thornburgh, and Craig asked him could I be transferred, and my guy said okay, and I went and I took that business which would have been in corporate finance; I took it with me to mortgage financing and, as Dick would tell you, one of the great mistakes he's ever made because we printed money and that was where my career took off.
Speaker 1: So this is the RTC. Resolution Trust Corporation (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) (Unclear) the Resolution Trust Corporation was just a goldmine for Wall Street, just a goldmine.  A lot of very, a lot of people got very wealthy helping them bail out the banks and bail the government out, and I became, I already knew a lot about securitization and mortgages and banks, and I really began to spearhead that effort for the firm.  It gave me incredible visibility in the firm and we just, it was just a heyday.  There were a lot of firms, but we were probably one of the one or two best firms at it. And that I did for about five years and related stuff.  I became head of mortgage finance, I became head of another group; and all of a sudden I had a hundred people working for me.
Story_ID: 645424
Speaker 1: But what, I want to keep the chronology--
Speaker 2: Sure (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) because maybe I, because part of my outline, unfortunately had, you know we're skipping around--
Speaker 2: No, but I skipped around and--
Speaker 1: --but no but, so let's go back to you work for two years with, with, I'm sorry, and you get bored.  You work--
Speaker 2: Roger Leaf.
Speaker 1: For, for Roger Leaf.
Speaker 2: I worked for Roger Leaf whom I go to work for in 1986, I believe, '6 [1986] or '7 [1987].  I go to work in the mortgage finance department.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I help start something called the Federal Finance Group, where my friend, Jonathan [Jonathan Plutzik], and I, he transfers from public finance.  We both start thinking that there's an opportunity to do major transactions for the federal government that have been done before.  And, I ended up doing that with Jonathan from 1987 to 1989, almost '90 [1990].  I did those deals, the beginnings of doing big transactions, big privatizations for the federal government.
Speaker 1: So, can you describe some of those transactions?
Speaker 2: Well, the [U.S.] Department of Agriculture makes lots of loans to farmers and the Reagan administration [President Ronald Wilson Reagan] had decided that--or was that the Bush administration [President George Herbert Walker Bush]--the Reagan administration--
Speaker 1: It's Reagan.
Speaker 2: Had decided that a way to raise money for the government would be to sell those loans to the market, to sell those obligations to the market and we help structure them into big blocks of loans being sold into what was then the mortgage market.  So, this was, in many ways, the forerunner or RTC [Resolution Trust Corporation], because they were a very big hodgepodge of securities and you had to pull them together in a pretty sophisticated way to sell them to investors and so I became known for doing a lot of that work, Jonathan too, and we did a few major transactions for the Department of Agriculture, I forgot the other groups, but that was a claim to fame and we made good money on it and we, you know, were celebrated for doing good work and there had not been a federal finance group on the street [Wall Street] either, so it was a chance to do something different.  We, I end up going from that group, which was a subset of the mortgage finance area, to work for the banking group, which would have been the, this is where you are sitting in the banking group, which was, covers sort of Citigroup [Citigroup Inc.] and sort of what we think of as major financial institutions; and I worked there from '89 [1989] to '91 [1991].
Story_ID: 645425
Speaker 1: I want to provide a little conte- or help you, help--I want you (simultaneous)-
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, please.
Speaker 1: --to help me provide some context so, really, while you had decided not to go into public finance and in many ways the work that you are doing with the federal government relied on your, there are some interesting things because, you know, investment banking if I'm, you know the silk stocking, whatever, were really a lot of business and private transactions, but that sort of unlocked the public sector in terms of Wall Street, seeing that there is real money to be (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I think that's right.  I think that and the emergence of the mortgage market.  See, you're also seeing the emergence of a big, powerful mortgage market which we now know is incredibly powerful and--
Speaker 1: But why did it happen then and not before?
Speaker 2: I think it happened, well, Fannie Mae [Federal National Mortgage Association] and Freddie Mac [Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corporation] used bankers.  They were a big force because they were the major conduits for securitization.  They were buying loans and selling on loans and securities and First Boston [First Boston Corporation, New York, New York] was one of the major innovators; ourselves and Salomon [Salomon Brothers].  We were the two big firms, Lew Ranieri [Lewis Ranieri] and Larry Fink [Laurence D. Fink].  So we had that reputation as being the smart guys around the mortgage industry and Fannie and Freddie are sort of quasi-public, although they are publicly traded they really are sort of, you know, they're sort of neither fish or fowl, right?  They're sort of government entity but they trade like they have stock, right?  So, to be involved in that was sort of an intersection of public and private.  When you work on Fannie or Freddie Mac, you are in the public and private domain in many ways.  What, you know, I worked in interest rate swaps and remember I said about some things turn something new, don't have and want into something new, you now have, through the synthetic thing--I've been lucky in my career.  I've worked in two things like that.  Interest rate swaps do that, securitization does the same thing.  It turns a loan that does this into a loan that does different things and investors want, it's, so it's really a very sophisticated, very analytically driven business and with the RTC [Resolution Trust Corporation] you were taking all that technology and applying it to a public sector problem around private sector companies that have gotten in trouble, but now they're backed by the federal government, so the federal government's problem.
Speaker 1: But, how are you making money, because you said there was money to be made--
Speaker 2: We were making money because the federal government had taken over all these bad banks, bad S and Ls [savings and loan].  They now own the loans, so when a big S and L goes out of business in L.A. [Los Angeles, California] or in Chicago [Illinois], the government seizes and they close it down.  They own the loans.  They're on the government's balance sheet, but they don't want the loans.  They want the money so they have to sell the loans.
Speaker 1: So they sell the--
Speaker 2: Loans to.
Speaker 1: --back loans, but they sell them to whom?
Speaker 2: They sell it to private sector, private investors.
Speaker 1: And so, are you structuring a deal?
Speaker 2: I'm structuring those deals.
Speaker 1: Deals for the private sector.  So, what percentage do you make off those deals?
Speaker 2: Well, it depends on the deal and how complicated it is, but we make a spread between, you know, what we buy it for.  We first have to buy the loans and then we have to sell them.  We buy them for one dollar and we sell them for, you know, or I should say if the loans are worth a dollar we buy them for eighty cents.  We end up selling them for a dollar; you know, we make the spread between the two, and we're getting paid a fee.
Story_ID: 645426
Speaker 1: It is--
Speaker 2: Is the fee 10 percent?  I--I always heard these fees (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) You know, you know, you know it just depends on the deal.
Speaker 2: I see.
Speaker 1: I mean, a lot of it has to do with the power of the securitization thing.  I'm not trying to get too deep into it but, but you can take all these loans, no, you can take all these different loans and they all have people like me and you paying our interest payments and our principal payments every month, but if I gather up not just my loan and your loan, but I gather up ten thousand of them, I have all these payments and all these cash flows coming to me, and with all those payments coming to me, I can take a loan that looks one way here together with all kinds of other.  I have all these different cash flows that I can use to structure an investment that the guy wants on the other side that looks a certain way.  It has a certain maturity, it pays me interest at a certain time.  It does all kinds of things.  I can mess around with it to create synthetic leads through securitization, what you want as an investor versus what I own as an owner of the loan, and the bank stands in the middle and he gets paid a structuring fee for doing that.  It gets, it buys the loans, again, it buys the loans for less than they are worth.  If they are worth par, 100 percent, it's buying them for less.  It's selling them for par or more.  It's creating securities that are worth more than others.  You know, there are many ways inside of it to make money, and this is an active business on behalf even today, on behalf of banks and especially finance companies and all others who, they don't want to hold the loans.  They want the cash.  And, they have to sell the loans to get the cash and while that spread has changed over time, it's still a fairly lucrative business for a lot of firms like ours [Credit Suisse Group AG].
Speaker 2: Okay, so this, you're doing this, I want to get that.  You're doing this in nineteen eighty--
Speaker 1: I'm doing this from, basically I'm doing it from '87 [1987] to '89 [1989], I take a break and then I'm doing it again from '91 [1991] on.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Eighty-seven [1987] though, you had Black Monday.  So does that effect any of what you're talking about?
Speaker 1: Yeah.  My mother [Wilda Robertson Terrell] calls me and says, "Freddy [HistoryMaker Frederick Terrell], didn't something happen today?"  Anyway.  Funny story.  Yeah.  I mean, there was a real pandemonium around here.  People were worried.  They were losing their jobs.  I only remember it didn't impact me.  I can't remember what else was going on.  I just remember being worried for the first time that this career wouldn't be as stable as I thought it would be.  But I remember being assured pretty quickly that we were in a very good group and everything was going okay.  I don't think everybody was this lucky.  I can think about all the people who washed out of Wall Street over the years.  I just happened to be in the right place at the right time.
Speaker 2: Now, Frank Buchanan [sic. Peter T. Buchanan], do I have, I think I have the wrong name.
Speaker 1: Frank Raines [Franklin D. Raines]?
Speaker 2: No, no.  Who was CEO?
Speaker 1: Buchanan.
Speaker 2: I was gonna say Buchanan, but I had the wrong first--
Speaker 1: No, you're right, Buchanan.  He was CEO with another guy, he was co-CEO, or he was CEO and another guy was president, and I'm forgetting the other person right now at First Boston [First Boston Corporation, New York, New York].
Speaker 2: But that was the whole, when Ray [HistoryMaker Raymond J. McGuire] left with the group, that's--
Speaker 1: Oh.  Ray left with the Wasserstein and Perella [Wasserstein Perella and Company].
Speaker 2: But wasn't that around, no, no, that may be--
Speaker 1: No, it's not very far away.  It's because they wanted, Wasserstein [Bruce Wasserstein] wanted to run the firm, if that's what you mean.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  He wanted to run it and he felt that he was subsidizing.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  He felt that--well--
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: There were two groups that were making all the money.
Speaker 2: Now which groups, M and A [mergers and acquisitions]--
Speaker 1: Mortgage finance business and the M and A business.
Speaker 2: So, what happens around that, so, those two--
Speaker 1: They both end up leaving.  Larry Fink [Laurence D. Fink] ends up leaving and Wasserstein--
Speaker 2: But you stay.
Speaker 1: Well, I stayed because I wasn't in the mortgage business for that long.  I was never, when I see Larry and I see the people who work for him, I work with them all, but I had only been there for about a year when they were planning their leave.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: I just wasn't part of the inner circle.
Speaker 2: Oh, so you were, okay.  Yeah, because they, because the firm was like, at that, Buchanan's being looked at, you know, he's trying to assure people--
Speaker 1: That's exactly right.
Speaker 2: That we're okay.
Speaker 1: If I had gotten there two years earlier, I might have had a whole different career, or not, but I, but Jonathan [Jonathan Plutzik] and I, the person I mentioned, we were sort of newer in the group at that time.  Ray had worked.  Ray was hired by Wa- by Joe Perella [Joseph Perella], as I remember.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So Ray was a young guy coming up in the middle of it.
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: So that was it.  I--I was never part of that world, but, but your, the question is a good one about Larry, was probably a year away from being one of those guys that might have done that, you know.
Story_ID: 645427
Speaker 1: So, you, so the eight- eighty-si-, so eighty, '86 [1986] to '88 [1988], you're in the mortgage--
Speaker 2: Yeah, '86 [1986] to '88 [1988], I'm in the mortgage business and the mortgage finance business.
Speaker 1: And then--
Speaker 2: And then actually from '86 [1986] to '89 [1989], '89 [1989] to '91 [1991], I'm in the financial institutions group.
Speaker 1: Okay.  But the other thing I had read about was that, oh I think, okay, '80s [1980s], that, okay.  Well, anyway, so but Credit Suisse, don't they take controlling stake of First Boston in eight [First Boston Corporation, New York, New York]--
Speaker 2: They do, they start in 1990.  In 1990, we're undercapitalized.  Credit Suisse ends up taking a bigger and bigger chunk of what is First Boston, and the firm becomes CS First Boston [CS First Boston, Inc.].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: But that's, so lets--
Speaker 2: It's not a full owner, but it's getting, it has more and more influence.
Speaker 1: Right, right, right.  So, that's--okay.  But explain what the concern is here, because Credit Suisse is, you know First Boston is an American owned company.
Speaker 2: It's a U.S. based firm with roots going back to Glass-Steagall [Glass-Steagall Act of 1932].
Speaker 1: Right.  But here you have Credit Suisse, which is an--
Speaker 2: Well, George Shinn was one of the real visionaries, maybe not even a visionary here since then, but George Shinn's idea was Europe is going to be a really important thing to American firms for financing and for serving our clients.  He creates a partnership with Credit Suisse in 1977, and that was called Credit Suisse First Boston.  It was just a partnership, like a joint venture.  That was the beginning of our relationship and the beginning of what became Credit Suisse [Credit Suisse Group AG].  And over time, Credit Suisse had more capital that we needed, more and more capital and to bail First Boston out when they needed more capital.  In 1990, firms were undercapitalized and we, as we have dips and so on, we needed more and more of their capital and they took more and more ownership and now we're Credit Suisse.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So--
Speaker 2: It's an evolution over, actually an evolution from 1977 to the '90s [1990s], and, you know, when it culminated in being Credit Suisse.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, what about the, also the junk bond market crash and Gibbons and Green [Gibbons, Green, van Amerongen Ltd.]?
Speaker 2: Well, I wasn't involved in that so--
Speaker 1: You weren't so that doesn't relate.  Okay.
Speaker 2: I wasn't involved with it but it was, that was around the early '90s [1990s] and we were, as a firm, it's what did us in and caused Credit Suisse to be more important to us, because we had exposure in the junk bond market and had a lot of trades that had gone badly.
Speaker 1: But luckily you already had, because of Shinn, you had that relationship so you weren't--
Speaker 2: That's exactly right.
Speaker 1: So it wasn't like a crash and burn.  You know crash and burn situati-
Speaker 2: We were not looking, as Morgan Stanley [Morgan Stanley Group, Inc.; Morgan Stanley Wealth Management] was for Mitsubishi [Mitsubishi UFJ Financial Group] to bail it out.  We had a relationship already, and it's been a long one, so it, and it came in a ball very naturally, actually.  There are many people here who would rather be at First Boston today, but there are a lot of First Boston people here who I remember from the old days, but it's a Credit Suisse world.
Speaker 1: So what happens in the '90s [1990s] then?  You know, let's, let's sort of talk about that because is it so, we have Mayer [William E. Mayer] and then Henness-
Speaker 2: We have Mayer--
Speaker 1: Mayer, sorry.
Speaker 2: Mayer, Jack Hennessy [John M. Hennessy] is, I don't get promoted, Jack Hennessy is CEO.  I know Jack.  Jack is on my note there, when I started (unclear) Jack was, signed my notes.  He was a senior guy here for a long time.  He became a friend.  We were actually pretty friendly, but he ran the firm, I'm forgetting for how many years, I'm forgetting for what years he ran them.
Speaker 1: Okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) But he was a senior guy in investment banking and then became the CEO of the company.
Story_ID: 645428
Speaker 1: --And people have got to identify you not only as a smart guy, and a good guy--those are all, those are both important, but a commercial guy and a guy that could, you know, come in without something in his hand and leave with something in his hand.  I think of it as, I often tell people that I'm good in the room.  That's my way of saying that in that boardroom, in that room when you've got to be compelling on behalf of your company as a Credit Suisse [Credit Suisse Group AG] guy, you know, there's a point in your career where, when people look to you to sort of take on that kind of leadership based on your skill, your money making ability, and so on. And for me that happened in the early '90s [1990s] and that sort of lead to any success afterwards; you know, all of a sudden you gain a reputation of somebody that's doing the big transactions or, and remember there are very few African Americans on Wall Street, and very few MDs.  Very few partners, so, so I think that is sort of the culmination, "Hey I thought Freddy [HistoryMaker Frederick Terrell] was a smart guy.  Oh, he must be a smart guy or he must be a successful guy." And I think all of that stuff feeds on itself.  A lot of it can be people don't really know; you can get a reputation for lots of stuff that isn't even true about you if people all have a good glow about you.  They think you're a good guy, a smart guy.  I think that in the late '90s [1990s] I sort of got that.
Speaker 2: But how, how did you do it?  And that's one saying if it was easy then the numbers would be larger and there would be more--
Speaker 1: I worked hard.  I slept on couches like this, even as a young MD because I thought it was important to my team to know that I was with them.  I could convince clients to do things that they wanted to do but didn't have the confidence in the banker to do it.  I think I became a leader in my business and I think a lot of it is serendipity.  If you're not given, if the guy doesn't call me and ask me, Craig Phillips, he doesn't call me and say, "Would you be interested in coming to work with me to run this RTC [Resolution Trust Corporation] business?"  That was the first time, I had already made money in another capacity and I had already done fancy things.  When I was doing the interest rate swap things, those were, one was a deal of the year and social investor.  I had already gotten a claim, I had already, but that'll get you up the ladder so far, but as an MD, you're a money maker.  You're a guy that's driving revenue.
Speaker 2: An MD you mean manager director?
Speaker 1: Or partner.  They, that gave me a chance to demonstrate that I could drive revenue and major revenue.  You know, when I was doing that, the work RTC and beyond that, you know Jack Hennessey [John M. Hennessy] was coming down to the trading floor.  I was working on the trading floor.  That's where my group was housed in.  Sort of just chatting with me, you know, "Hey, what's going on?"  You know, he's not doing that unless you're making a lot of money for the firm [Credit Suisse First Boston].  He's just not using his time that way.
Speaker 2: So how much money were you making for the firm?
Speaker 1: Well, we were making you know, we were having 50, $100 million years and we were having huge years.
Speaker 2: That's huge.
Speaker 1: Huge.  We're driving the firm's revenue.  We were, we were doing so much business that the CEO of the company was coming down to see me.  I mean, that's basically, that's just not happening and asking, just hanging out, pat me on the back saying, "Great work." And I don't say it because I was such a superstar.  I was just sort of the, I was doing good work.  I was working very hard.  I had a big group.  They liked working for me and we were rocking and rolling. In a very rich environment to make money, we were making money.  Others were as well, but you wouldn't want to be the firm that was not doing well when there was a sea change on Wall Street and everybody else was making money.  So, I was allowing us to, we were doing, you know, billion dollar this and billion dollar, 400 million this, 500, you know, and making, you know, taking you know, $15 million out of the transaction.  You know, we were making a lot of, a lot of money and it was showing up and, and, and all the arrows were pointing, "Well that's Fred's area."
Story_ID: 645429
Speaker 1: Now you had, you had gotten, had you gotten married by this time?
Speaker 2: I got married in 1984.
Speaker 1: That's, okay.  So you're, so what else is also happening?  You know, are you getting invitations to certain clubs, private clubs, are you, I mean, you're let's--
Speaker 2: Fascinating.  Well, I got invited my, I got a head start for all that because I married a New York girl.  She's from Philadelphia [Pennsylvania].  But, her family, Ernesta Procope [HistoryMaker Ernesta G. Procope], John Procope, were already established, you know, really matriarch, patriarchs of the business community.  You know, they were of the earliest successful business entrepreneurs in New York City [New York, New York].
Speaker 1: Can you talk a little bit about them?
Speaker 2: Sure.  I didn't know who they were when I met 'em.  My friend, Dave Cunningham [HistoryMaker David S. Cunningham, Jr.], who [HistoryMaker] Maxine Waters worked for out in L.A. [Los Angeles, California] in city hall [Los Angeles City Hall], he was here when I was a first year associate.  I had just started dating Jonelle.  It was a blind date and he and I got together with a drink with a few other guys and this was just after we got engaged and he says, "So who's this woman you're seeing?"  And I said, "I'm seeing--her name was [HistoryMaker] Jonelle Procope."  He says, "Procope?"  Now, this is, I don't know and I'm not, Jonelle would be embarrassed for me saying this, I said, he said, "Procope Procope?"  I didn't have any idea what he was talking about.  But he said something to me like, "Wow, man, you're kidding."  Well for him, an L.A. guy who had only heard about Ernesta and whatever, she's on the board of this and the board of that.  She was really one of the early board members with Jewel LaFontant [HistoryMaker Jewel LaFontant-Mankarious], you know, in that ilk, John's mom and others meeting the president and all that other stuff.  So, I had that access to them, they had no respect for what I was doing (laughter) because for them the world was about being an entrepreneur.  And they're not too far wrong about that.  They thought I was a good smart guy, a good guy for Jonelle to marry, even as I was going up the ladder, even as I was an MD [managing director], it was always versus being an entrepreneur, and having been an entrepreneur, I get that.  I understand.  They think that that's above all and they viewed as the way forward for black people to have their own business, and not wrong.  But, I say that because John [John Procope] introduced me to the Boule [Sigma Pi Phi Fraternity] in 1986.  I was a young Boule member.  I wouldn't have been there, but for the brother-in-law introduced me, so all of a sudden I'm in the Boule.  What's the Boule?  I don't know.  What's the Komis Club [ph.]?  Various things over at their house.  I'm meeting Frank Williams and very prominent guys, not a lot but enough where they know I'm a new kid who's married to Jonelle.  Jonelle was, you know, an attractive young woman who was a lawyer, doing well in her own right, you know, John's sister, so I married into to a great family and I'm proud about that, so that was an edge, but I've never participated in it, which I'm happy about.  I've never needed it.  Bill [HistoryMaker William M. Lewis, Jr.] could say the same thing, you know, Lewis.  They say similar things.
Speaker 1: Very similar things.
Speaker 2: I know, really it's great but I'm happy to not need it.  It's nice to have them as relatives; not nice if you're relying on it and Jonelle was that way, too, so and very much my wife is the mirror image.  We would, we'd be best friends and we laugh at each other's jokes and we could finish, we just have always been that way since I met her, and in many ways it's because neither of us, I like to think, take that stuff too seriously and are dismissive in many cases.  We love it, but let's not get carried away with all that, and also I probably have--I, look, I didn't grow up as a part of the black bourgeoisie.
Story_ID: 645430
Speaker 1: --Anything from it.  I don't think my, my mother [Wilda Robertson Terrell], when she came and the few times she had--she never saw my old- youngest son [Evan Terrell], never met him but when he got married, I mean my mother coming here for a wedding was a big deal, my brother [Emmett Terrell, Jr.] too, but I remember her visiting us.  When I moved, I moved in Jonelle's [HistoryMaker Jonelle Procope] apartment because it was nicer than my own and, you know, my mother, she, I mean she sees a piece of cloth, she asked me, "Is this for my mouth?"  You know, think about that.  She's asking me quietly, like, "What am I doing here?"  In Coro [Coro Fellowship in Public Affairs], David Abel had arranged me one dinner to sit next to the mayor at the mayor's table, Mayor Bradley [Tom Bradley], and for me and my mom to come.  She wouldn't come.  Just, I took this woman, Karemu [Karemu Jackson (ph.)], who I mentioned.  She wouldn't come.  She just didn't see herself that way.  She was afraid she'd say the wrong thing.  Probably didn't feel educated enough or read the newspaper enough for that, you know?  So, when I see these institutions, whether it's Jack and Jill [Jack and Jill of America, Inc.], I get all of it and I see the importance of it, but I, I came to it with a fairly healthy disdain for it because it wasn't my life and a lot of people have been around I didn't like that much.  I now appreciate it.  I've matured about it.  But, you know, many of those people wouldn't have wanted to be in the same room with my parents?  We just, I just know that.
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: And they wouldn't have thought of that and they, and I also, I say this that I take great pride in my upbringing and in many ways I wear a badge of honor because it is more self-made.  I mean, I had great parents.  I didn't do it by myself, but by the same token, I didn't have many of the things that would have been great to have had along the way; whether it's this thing that gets you to a great college, or this thing that gets you to this or that, we were out of it, completely out of it.  And, so anyway, I'm just saying with institutions like that, I think that when I first saw that I saw it was kind of cool, but I wasn't sure.  You know, the notion of Sag Harbor [New York], the Vineyard [Martha's Vineyard, Massachusetts], what is?  I mean really.
Speaker 2: But.
Speaker 1: And I mean and people--you know black people on the West Coast are so out of it on that stuff (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right.
Story_ID: 645431
Speaker 1: But see, this is the culture of, of New York [New York], but I--so I'm trying to understand, so you get married in 1984.  Do you have a society wedding?
Speaker 2: No, not at all.  I mean, I think, I think, I think there was, there wasn't an ad in The New York Times or anything.  We had a very small wedding.  We invited, we had a wedding for probably about fifty people and we invited another hundred to a reception at a hall off 5th Avenue on 77th [Street]; 77th and 5th, but no, not at all.  And Jonelle [HistoryMaker Jonelle Procope] wouldn't have wanted it.  She just, you know, I love my wife, but she's just not that person.  No, I wouldn't have known what to do with it and I was, I was so unsophisticated about that, that I didn't even send invitations to my friends; my friend, Elbert Hudson [Elbert T. Hudson], never got an invitation from me.  I didn't even send invitations.  I mean, I, I really, I mean my (laughter) I just didn't know any of that stuff and I didn't know what to--what to do about any of it.
Story_ID: 645432
Speaker 1: What are you starting, so you got t- into the Boule [Sigma Pi Phi Fraternity].  That's exposure and then you mentioned the Komar?
Speaker 2: Oh, the Komis Club [ph.].  It's just one of those clubs that they have where people get together around Christmastime and--
Speaker 1: Is that a black club?
Speaker 2: It's a black club.
Speaker 1: Yeah, okay.
Speaker 2: It's a party club.
Speaker 1: Yeah, 'cause everybody, there are some clubs that are national, you know, like, I think they're the, I don't know if you have the Alligator [ph.], but I mean, and then there are clubs that are regional.
Speaker 2: My, Jonelle's mother [HistoryMaker Ernesta G. Procope] was Gay Northeasterners [Northeasterners, Inc.] was her club, but there's the Smart Set [National Smart Set] that they've been after Jonelle [HistoryMaker Jonelle Procope] because Ernesta is a Smart Set, Kathy Chenault's [Kathryn Chenault] a Smart Set.  I was meeting, I was meeting the up and coming intelligentsia, if you will; I mean, that was fun.  I mean, you know, we've known Ken [Kenneth Chenault] and Kathy for, they were one of the earliest couples we met.  I mean, we've been friends for a long time.  They knew Jonelle--
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: --they knew Jonelle, but I was kind of the new kid but there are lots of people like that, and I just mentioned [HistoryMaker] Don Cornwell and Saundra [Saundra Williams Cornwell], some of them where Jonelle had roots.  The advantage I had with Jonelle is I had a little bit of a built in network.  I didn't have to learn New York [New York].  I never had to learn New York in a way that anyone else in my position would have had to, so that gave me five years or ten of advantage.  That was really, really great and even though it wasn't all institutional like these clubs and things.  It did, it was made of people that she knew and even I didn't know where to go to dinner or to this, she knew that stuff; so, so that was a great advantage for somebody who had never lived in New York, and imagine, you know (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) That's right.
Story_ID: 645433
Speaker 1: But on--what about on the, that's on the black side.  What about the white corporate side?
Speaker 2: On the white corporate side, well I made friends at Yale [Yale School of Organization and Management; Yale School of Management, New Haven, Connecticut], I guess I was adopted by a few families or so--adopted--there were guys there who were just good guys.  I mean, there were no black people there.  There were three in my class, but my roommate, but I can think of a handful of other people who I just, became my good friends.
Speaker 1: So, who are they?
Speaker 2: One guy is David Daniel [David S. Daniel].  He runs Spencer Stuart, did, he ran for three terms for about ten years, a big search for him, and his dad [D. Ronald Daniel] ran McKinsey [McKinsey and Company]; Ron [HistoryMaker Ronald T. Gault].  He calls him a cheese.  But, I would come to New York [New York] while I was at Yale and visit with them.  It was pretty good stuff, you know, and became a person that they knew because David, in his not making a big deal about it, you know, just one of those Connecticut Yankee good guys, just liked me and he could easily see that I had never been anywhere.  My friend, Toby Yarmolinsky, who is Adam Yarmolinsky's son.  Adam Yarmolinsky was in the Kennedy [President John Fitzgerald Kennedy] administration, you know, in the best and brightest during the Cuban Missile Crisis, but, and a great advocate for civil rights and Adam Yarmolinsky, his dad was married to a woman [Jane Cox Vonnegut Yarmolinsky] who, after they divorced [sic.], ended up marrying Kurt Vonnegut.  So, I'm up in Barnstable [Massachusetts], from Yale, at Kurt Vonnegut's house.  Like, who knew?  That's just stuff that happens when you're around this Ivy League thing and people in the Northeast and those people, I stayed in touch with and led to other people I knew in the city.  There are a few cases of that, but I wasn't a member of a club or anything.  The Yale Club [Yale Club of New York City, New York, New York], I joined.  I wasn't playing golf then.  Golf, I didn't play 'til years and years--; 1995, I joined a club here, interestingly enough, a Jewish club, around the same time all black guys were joining golf clubs, all of us.  In 1991, the USGA [United States Golf Association] mandated, basically, if you want to be in good standing with us you're going to have to have a black member and that's when Ken [Kenneth Chenault] and Bill [HistoryMaker William M. Lewis, Jr.] and me, all of us joined clubs.  I joined Quaker Ridge [Quaker Ridge Golf Club].  My friend, Jonathan [Jonathan Plutzik], I mentioned before is a member and it is a Jewish club, I may even say German Jewish club out in Scarsdale [New York], where I belong today, and I was their first black member.  We were all the first black members, and over time, you know, you just develop pockets of people that are around the city that you know.  I don't know that it's done for me in a very organized, some people are very organized about it and very--
Speaker 1: Strategic--
Speaker 2: Strategic about it.  I wouldn't say, I don't think for me it's been that way.  I think it's, I've sort of fallen into it and it's worked out very well, but I haven't, I haven't pursued it the way others have, in many cases.  You know, but I don't, don't, not mad at them but I just (unclear) it a different way.
Story_ID: 645434
Speaker 1: Now, I want to go back before you became managing director or partner [at Credit Suisse First Boston] to when you didn't, when you thought you were going to become, and that didn't happen and what that, you know, if we could sort of just deal with that--
Speaker 2: Where did you get this?
Speaker 1: Okay, just, okay.  Is that true?
Speaker 2: Well, it is true.  I should have made it a year earlier.
Speaker 1: Okay, that's right.
Speaker 2: I was, the same time I was printing money and everybody in my group knew that I was going to get made partner, it would have been a little early but I knew it.  I made it a year later.  I didn't get made, and actually it didn't happen because the guy I was working for who had actually given me the opportunity, Craig Phillips, he was so sure I was going to be made managing director that he was kidding with me about the business cards.  I mean, who would do that unless they knew for sure?  You'd say, god, what are you going to do with your new business cards?  Everybody knew I was and, but in most organizations at that level, there has to be multiple, numbers of people but one guy in particular.  He was prepared to lay his body down like this, or I'm out of here, or I'm angry and I'm influential.  You don't want to make--people have to do that.  There may be lots of 'em doing it, but the guy that I worked for had never promoted anybody, and he didn't know how the system worked at all, and he didn't do anything.  He thought he had.  He thought it was just gonna happen, but he was not a guy that paid a lot of attention to details and all that stuff, and he thought it was done and when it didn't happen, he was, and he's a tough guy so he was in a panic because I was crazy.
Speaker 1: So, you went, you said, (laughter) the way I read the story you went home and put the covers over your head and just didn't want to--pretend like--
Speaker 2: Only Jonelle [Terrell's wife, HistoryMaker Jonelle Procope] knows that.  Well, because I was really, I ended up, I was really upset about it.  You know, I knew I had earned it and I knew that everybody else knew I had earned it and I remember running into a guy named Walid Shammas at the elevator, so angry and he spoke with a very heavy accent.  He's from--Lebanese.  He said, "Freddy [HistoryMaker Frederick Terrell], Freddy.  You should just go home." (Laughter) And I just knew I had made it and I knew I deserved it and everybody else knew I deserved it.  So, it was one of those things.  I made it the next year, but as Jonelle knows, that was one of those days it's like out, I'm out.
Speaker 1: But that, that was really your first disappointment, sort of, right?  Or had you had others?  You had others.
Speaker 2: Well, nothing like that.  I mean, I had, I don't remember anything.  I'm sure I had disappointments along the way, but I don't, I don't remember any disappointment that mirrored that one; that was like that one.  That was bad and yet, you know, in a few days I was okay about it and everybody was telling me, "God, you got ripped off."  You know, you get all that stuff.  But I was given some assurances for the next year and it happened to work.
Speaker 1: So you went, so who's the person you're talking about who was your boss, sort of, was--
Speaker 2: Craig Phillips.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Oh, it was Craig Phillips.  I see.  So you came in and you challenged him and asked questions and he got it together, or what?
Speaker 2: No, no.  He apologized profusely.  I know he did because he called my friend Jonathan [Jonathan Plutzik] and he said, "What do I do?  What do I do?"  And this is not a guy who's prone to ask--he's a pretty ballsy kind of take no prisoners kind of guy; not a guy who, sort of, you know every day he was a pleasant guy, but he was really upset about it and because he thought it was done.  He had been told, and I guess I had fallen off the list at the last minute.  He had sort of blinked and, the way it is, you know, if it's not, if you can follow through, you think you're, you follow baseball and you're in the eighth inning, you think it's all fine.  If you're not around for the ninth inning, there's some pushing and shoving, because somebody else is laying their body down for somebody else and they're only gonna let this many be done; so you've just gotta watch it all the way through.
Story_ID: 645435
Speaker 1: 'Cause Craig [Craig Phillips] was the one saying--are you printing--getting ready to print your (laughter) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh yeah, that's what--no, no, I'm saying--he knew it was done.
Speaker 1: I see.
Speaker 2: So I was, I was and I was just nuts.  You know I wasn't bawling, but I was like very angry about it.
Speaker 1: But how was that year, though?  Was it hard because, or are you okay with it?
Speaker 2: You mean the following year?
Speaker 1: The following year because sometimes--
Speaker 2: Oh, you're angry for a while.  You see the person in the hallway who made it and you didn't.  You know, it happens all the time around here.  Now I can be philosophical.  The time was very close to me and, you know, I was actually out with her [Terrell's wife, HistoryMaker Jonelle Procope], with two of our very good friends for dinner and I wasn't saying I was gonna make it, but I thought I felt good about it and when it didn't happen, I was really upset about it, more angry.  I got calls from other firms to come work for them.  I was a good property then on the street [Wall Street], but I wasn't gonna leave [Credit Suisse First Boston].  I mean, I had already invested so much.  I liked the place.  I liked my job, I liked what I was doing and the next year they made it happen.  In that ensuing year, they were making it pretty clear that it was a mistake.  I mean, whatever they say.  You know, what, they're working me then.  You know, they're just trying to keep me, keep my head in the game.
Story_ID: 645436
Speaker 1: So now, the fact that in ninety--so the next year is '94 [1994], right?
Speaker 2: (Nods head).
Speaker 1: And does the, the alliance, the strategic alliance with reinsur- that has nothing to do with you, okay. But it says that you pioneered an esoteric finance focus.  Has that happened?  See some of my chronology is--
Speaker 2: No, it's okay.  I did a couple of deals.  I did a tax lien deal for New Jersey.  I did some stuff in securitization, which was kind of interesting.  I did something pretty special for the RTC [Resolution Trust Corporation].  We did a lot of very esoteric, really brave new world stuff in securitization.  We really were innovators, doing stuff that had never been done before that became commonplace.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But it's, you know what, it's so in the weeds of, it's so technical that--
Speaker 1: But, can you explain just once during this interview, one technical thing that you--
Speaker 2: You really wanna hear--
Speaker 1: I do, because--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Let's say this is business school student, you know, an M.B.A. student, someone out of Yale [Yale School of Management, New Haven, Connecticut], or whatever, who was interested in the history of that, wouldn't that be of interest to them?
Speaker 2: Uh, well, I'll tell you one because it came up the other day when I was talking to the woman I did it for, because she was in a different position then and she was reminding me of it.  And I said, when the RTC was selling, you know when loans were originated around the country, if you borrow money, you can borrow with different indices; I mean, it can be a fixed rate loan, but it can also be a loan that floats around treasury bills, it can float around, revolve around LIBOR, London Interbank Offered Rate, it can be something called a cost of funds loan, which is around a district of the Federal Home Loan Bank [Federal Home Loan Bank System], but there are different ways of paying floating interest that adjusts.  Well, now the government owns all these loans and there are all these different indices.  This is really in the weeds, but you asked for it.  All these different indices and these loans that pay different ways, now I wanna take all those loans together and create a common security that they support.  But I can't, because they're all paying at different times.  So, we designed a mechanism that allowed the RTC to combine very disperse, very diverse pools of loans that have very different payment mechanisms into one package and sell them as one security to the market place around one index, and we did it by setting up a separate floating pool that would make up for the differences between the rate on the security and the rate on the collateral; you know, I mean it's that kind of stuff.  Now Saundra [Saundra Williams Cornwell], I was talking to today about it, she was telling me, remarking god, that that idea allowed the federal government to sell billions.  It was a breakthrough idea because once they did that, because the problem they had is that they were requiring bad S and Ls [savings and loan] from all over the country, who had loans for that region that they liked to do, some this index, some that index, now the government owns them all.  Now I want to sell them.  I can't sell them unless I have a common thing to sell them around.  I've got to turn them into something that's more homogenous.  We figured out a way to create more homogeneity around something that's completely heterogeneous, and that was pretty remarkable.  That was pretty good stuff.  Now, that's commonplace.  I was looking in the paper the other day about a deal that's come to market and they describe something called shifting interests, you know, which was a thing that we helped design around here around deals I worked on.  There was a lot of innovation then, and I wasn't the only guy, but I was leading a team that was coming up with it and explaining it at the highest levels in government, how these deals were working, so it was pretty hot stuff.  You know, at that time, you know, you know not unlike Ray [HistoryMaker Raymond J. McGuire] and the M and A [mergers and acquisitions] business or Bill [HistoryMaker William M. Lewis, Jr.] and the M and A, in the mortgage business, you know, I really had my act together and we were doing really big, the biggest transactions were and the most sophisticated ones.
Story_ID: 645437
Speaker 1: We're doing deals that when we're doing the deal, the whole firm is paying attention.  We're in the market with, you know, a billion four, or whatever the number.  We're in the market with a big deal.  It's the focus of the firm for that day, you know.  So, it's a big group.  My group, my group in total was about a hundred at the time and, you know, it's big, fancy stuff, you know (shrugs shoulders).
Speaker 2: So why do you leave?
Speaker 1: I leave because--
Speaker 2: And do you leave in '96 [1996], 'cause like once again, do you leave in 1996?  Yes, you leave in 1996.
Speaker 1: Uh-huh, uh-huh.
Speaker 2: So why do you leave?  If you're, are you bored?
Speaker 1: No.  I just don't know where else I go.  The, my guy, Craig Phillips, leaves, they hire in a guy to run the mortgage products group, which includes trading and everything.
Speaker 2: So, who do they hire in?
Speaker 1: They hire in Andy Stone [Andrew Stone].  I get along fine with him, but he's not my kind of guy.  He's not likely to see this, so I don't mind saying it.  He was nice enough to me, but he was big, hot shot mortgage guy, swing for the fences.  He ended up costing the firm like $2 billion after I left.  But, he wasn't, he wasn't a guy that was a First Boston [Credit Suisse First Boston] guy.  He didn't even like First Boston.  He recruited a team of very close friends, interestingly enough all Orthodox Jewish, got very close, four people, and they were always with him and the group really had been transformed.  They, the firm wanted to get into the very big lucrative real estate big principal place where we put our money in and they thought this guy, who had already been at (Unclear) and Daiwa [Daiwa Securities America Inc.; Daiwa Capital Markets America Inc.] and Salomon [Salomon Brothers] before that, big trader mentality, would be the guy who would lead them into that and he ended up using the firm's money and losing a ton of money, but he was also a guy, he was nice enough to me, and I was one of the few people he actually liked.  People didn't like him.  I used to run into him, so when I ran into him he was always friendly and everything, but it was, he almost ran a little group inside of a group that was us against the firm.  He was just not, he would have been a guy that would have resented the white shoe aspect of what First Boston was versus Salomon, if you know what I mean.  And, while they were, they were more, they had a higher gun mentality, and I was a firm guy and I was gonna be no more than a cog in the wheel.  I was a managing director, but I didn't see any future.  I had sort of had it, I wasn't gonna have anything special.  He had a team of three or four people around him and I wasn't one of them, and he had had those guys for years before he had come.  And so, I thought I'm forty-one or something.  I said I should start my own firm.  I thought, if I'm ever gonna do it--
Speaker 2: You were forty-four.
Speaker 1: Forty-four?  If I'm ever gonna do it, I should probably do it now, and Jonelle [Terrell's wife, HistoryMaker Jonelle Procope] was supportive.  I thought it was a shot to get into this new world of private equity.  I had enough reputation in the firm and the street [Wall Street] to raise money, I thought, and I thought the firm might back me doing it, and they did.  So, I, but I just thought it had run out here for me.  I wasn't that happy with it because it had become, it's just a culture. All I can, all I can tell you--it was a really, really different cultural shift.  It wasn't teamwork anymore.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: It was us against them, a lot of headaches.  Nobody was happy.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: A lot of people left.
Story_ID: 645438
Speaker 1: So, you went over and found, now Provender [Provender Capital Group LLC], how did you get the name, first of all?
Speaker 2: My partner, Pilar Esperon, who worked for me in my group at First Boston [Credit Suisse First Boston], it means food for cattle.  It's a biblical reference.  It's food.  Provender is, it's food.  But it's sort of an old English reference and her husband came up with it, and I thought it was kind of cool, nourishment for young companies, Provender.  It's a cool name. And I also didn't want to call it Fred Terrell [HistoryMaker Frederick Terrell].  I didn't want to call it John Utendahl, I didn't want to call it Ron Blaylock [Ronald E. Blaylock], I didn't want to call it Chris Williams [HistoryMaker Christopher Williams].  I didn't want to call it, I thought it would be hard to engage people as a team if they felt like it was always my name.  I do believe that.  I remember chatting with Ken [Kenneth Chenault] about it.  I remember saying, I said, "I'm, I think I'm better off calling it this."  I mean, listen.  It is what it is.  I mean, people do very well calling things, I just felt like a little bit who do you think you are kind of thing, and I thought it would be easier to get people under that flag than under a Fred Terrell flag.
Speaker 1: So really, this world of private equity is that you're basically, you raise capital to invest in businesses and hopefully those businesses grow and you know--
Speaker 2: And you get your capital back and more.
Speaker 1: And more.
Speaker 2: And your investors get their money back and more.
Speaker 1: So what are you deciding, because you mentioned, so mention what the landscape is.  You start mentioning that, so--
Speaker 2: Landscape is, the private equity business is there, been around for a while.  There's the venture capital business which focuses on early stage companies, the private equity business is a little stage companies.  There are big firms, KKR [KKR and Co. L.P.] and Blackstone [Blackstone Group] had been formed, but they're still, they're a fraction of what they are now.  They were still smaller, relatively speaking, you know for them to have a couple of billion dollars would have been a ton, and now they have, you know, hundreds, right?  No African Americans in the business at all.  Really, the first business conferences I went to around the area, I walk into a sea.  As much as we thought we had made some gains in investment banking, private equity is a whole different thing, because you have the ability to green light in investment.  You're not working as an intermediary, trying to get this person to get something or this person, you stand in the middle and make a fee.  In the private equity business, somebody says, "Here's the money.  Go do well, bring us back more." And in between it's up to you.  That's an amazing amount of influence, and that's why people love it.  I mean, it's an amazing amount of ability to green light, I'm using it like a movie, but green light an investment.  I walk in, I like the company, my partners like the money, the company, here's $10 million, that's amazing.
Speaker 1: So, what level, what were the annual revenues of companies that you were looking at?
Speaker 2: Interestingly, we were very, we were looking at companies that had, oh god, some 20, 30, $50 million, not big companies.  We were small cap, even micro-cap as an investor, so we were never into companies that needed a lot of data to borrow or structure or do LBOs [leveraged buyout] and that stuff.  We were companies that really pretty much needed straight equity as an investor.  They were growth, and we call it growth and expansion.  Not venture, but now the company's okay.  We're started now.  Now we need to grow.  If we need somebody to help us grow, they come to Provender or groups.  If they were, if they're much larger they go to somebody else, but there were a pocket of companies in that zone that we thought we could have an impact with.
Story_ID: 645439
Speaker 1: Now did you, you know, I have to ask this question: do you know Michelle Collins [HistoryMaker Michelle L. Collins]?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, not well, but I know who she is.
Speaker 1: Was she, was she in the venture or was she in--
Speaker 2: I think private equity.
Speaker 1: Oh, I thought it was private equity because she had, she had come out of William Blair [William Blair and Company, LLC] and then she joined--
Speaker 2: I think we were both bumping around at the same time.
Speaker 1: Right, right, right, right.  So what, 'cause, okay, so what are you deciding you're gonna focus on?  I mean are you looking at any industry focus besides--
Speaker 2: I start off thinking more financial services and more around securitization, and then that market dries up pretty dramatically.  So, I look at companies that are using securitization as a funding source, but the market around that business is not as plentiful by the time I raise the money.  Start the company '97 [1997], takes two years just to, and I had a good reputation, but I'm going to a new business.  It takes two years just to introduce yourself and it's not easy.  Raising money is very, very hard and in that ensuing two years, the market has just changed, and also I'm recruiting people that have a different experience in other industries and I think, well, if I can stay in the small cap space around a few industries, around expertise we have and that would work out well.  So, that's what I tried to do.  Now, you know, it's hard to do that but that was the idea.
Speaker 1: So, what were some of your investments?
Speaker 2: Well, we had, the first investment we made was a very successful one called Franchise Services Company.  I did that before the fund but I did it on our own.  As Provender [Provender Capital Group LLC] we did it.  We didn't do it as the fund Provender, but the same thing, and we took, you know, people who make pizzas in franchises, they don't know much about finance or accounting, so we decided to create a back office for them, a virtual back office, so we would do all of it.  So, for franchises you cook the pizza, we'll take care of your accounting, we'll take care of all that stuff.  We did that, successfully created a company and ended up selling it to KKR [KKR and Co. L.P.], made a lot of money on it actually for us, made a lot of money on it.
Speaker 1: How large was the deal?
Speaker 2: Well, the deal was we probably, I don't really want to be saying that, that's my right--
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, that's okay, no problem.
Speaker 2: But it was lucrative individually and for the firm.  We did another deal called Prestige Brands [Prestige Brands Holdings, Inc.], which was a combination of rollup of consumer brands, Prell shampoo, Chloraseptic mouthwash, Murine Clear Eyes, and a bunch of others.  We were not the biggest firm in it, we were early in it, and we ended up selling that to a firm called Golder, Thoma, Cressey, Rauner [GTCR Golder Rauner; GTCR, LLC], which is actually out of Chicago [Illinois], a big firm.  We were selling to another private equity firm.  We didn't sell, we didn't take it public.  Somebody else did that later.  We did--
Speaker 1: Gourmet Chef [Le Gourmet Chef, Inc.]?
Speaker 2: Gourmet Chef.  It was a break even sort of deal.  We had, we had several that were around the break even level; some that did very well, some that did okay, and a couple that did horribly, Vanguarde Media horribly, horribly, horribly.  That was the big learning experience for many reasons.
Speaker 1: Now what were the, the magazines that--
Speaker 2: Honey, Heart and Soul and Savoy.
Speaker 1: Oh, yes, oh.
Speaker 2: I think I had Savoy here--
Speaker 1: Oh, I remember, so that's [HistoryMaker] Roy Johnson.
Speaker 2: Roy Johnson, we hired to be the first editor of Savoy.
Speaker 1: That's right, okay.  I remember when all of those got started.  I even went to visit their offices, I think.
Speaker 2: Yeah, on, across the street, 315, [HistoryMaker] Keith Clinkscales' office.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.  That was all that time that--
Speaker 2: All that time and for, I would say the problems we had with a number of our companies is that they were internet related too soon.  We had too much money invested around internet in all the companies, Vanguarde; retail, the Gourmet Chef, Walking Company [The Walking Company, Inc.], and so on and so we pursued those.  I had a partner who had a lot of experience in that area, or so I thought, and retail was a hard business.  It can go either way, and, but Vanguarde, Vanguarde was the one that really blew up and had a lot of money in it, because we were chasing it.  We thought we could make it better, but we weren't, and we had difficult partners and difficult operators and difficult climate.  It was just all things pointing the wrong direction; and we just had too much money in it at the same time.
Story_ID: 645440
Speaker 1: Well, I mean even think, I mean, on hindsight too, that's just as the media landscape, I mean it even just got worse.
Speaker 2: It got worse.
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: Everything went, it was a perfect, everything got worse.  The media business went in the tank, we were in the Internet, and also we were a 9/11 [September 11, 2001], post 9/11 fund, stuff dried up and we were also--what's the other event--anyway, it was just a bad, just a bad time.  Some of it, and all funds in that era did poorly, but we were a first time fund and I think it was even harder for us because you don't have, you don't get a second chance as easily because it's hard to raise money if you don't perform well.  We had a lousy performance.
Speaker 1: So you did that for how long?
Speaker 2: I did it for thirteen years?  Yeah, I did it from, basically '97 [1997] until I came back.
Speaker 1: Until you came back.
Speaker 2: I mean, I was doing it up until, it was about a year gap when I was, I did it until I was trying to figure out whether I wanted to do it again, whether I wanted to join a big firm that did it.  I hadn't thought about Credit Suisse [Credit Suisse Group AG] at all.  I did it, there were a number of interesting things that I passed on along the way, but I didn't feel like starting a firm again.  I wasn't sure what I was looking for.  You know, I think that I was trying to find something like what I had, but I didn't want to start it again, you know?  And I didn't really want to go into a big place where I didn't know anybody, you know.  So, I was just trying to figure out, I did, I've always liked the entrepreneurial and working with entrepreneurs, and even here I do a lot of that work, but that was until 2009; and, and then I got a call from here.
Story_ID: 645441
Speaker 1: Now, a couple other things though.  Don't you join some corporate boards?
Speaker 2: I do (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Join, okay, so--
Speaker 2: I joined New York Life's board [New York Life Insurance Company] in 2005.
Speaker 1: What is your first corporate board?
Speaker 2: WellChoice [WellChoice, Inc.].
Speaker 1: WellChoice.
Speaker 2: Well, I joined, I become chairman of Carver Bank [Carver Bancorp, Inc., New York, New York] in 2000.
Speaker 1: So that's for, I think for [HistoryMaker] Deborah Wright, that would be a big, how long as she been in charge?
Speaker 2: Thirteen years.
Speaker 1: That would have been a big--
Speaker 2: I mean, I was very much in the middle of Debbie becoming CEO of Carver.  We're proud about that and worked very closely with her to make that happen and was an investor and then chairman for five years.  Was chairman from her first chairman, put the board together with her and, now, I was proud to do it.  We were turning the company around.  She deserves all the credit, but we, you know, we had her back.  I think I probably won a lot of admiration of women for that.  I mean, I will say my first partner [Pilar Esperon] was a woman at Provender [Provender Capital Group LLC].  I worked very closely with Debbie.  I'm a feminist.  I mean, I'm, I don't have an issue working with women or men.
Speaker 1: That's not always the case, and in the black community it's not always the case.
Speaker 2: No, I'm very cool with it, so I'm happy to have had that influence on Harlem [New York, New York], proud that Jonelle [Terrell's wife, HistoryMaker Jonelle Procope] has it now.  So we've been heavily involved in Harlem, I think.
Speaker 1: Very heavily involved, because there's the banking institution and the cultural institution--
Speaker 2: Yeah, and I would say those are two of the largest institutions in Harlem, between Carver and Apollo [Apollo Theater Foundation, New York, New York], and so I did that in 2000.  I was on the WellChoice board that was later sold to--
Speaker 1: Empire--
Speaker 2: Well, Empire Blue Cross Blue Shield [Empire Blue Cross Blue Shield of New York, New York, New York] sold to WellPoint [WellPoint, Inc.; Anthem, Inc.] and then I was recruited for New York Life in 2005, and I had been asked probably about twenty or thirty others that I just turned down because you can only do so much.  I thought I would always have time to do it.  I won't even mention the names but really big places, and just never did it, and then I had to get off of those when I came here [Credit Suisse Group AG] because I was conflicted out, because--
Speaker 1: So you even had to get off at New York Life.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I had to get off.  They're a client so you can't be a, can't be a banker and a client, banker of a client.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Or, I should say on the board of a client.
Speaker 1: Um-hum.  But at the time you came on New York Life, did Robert Baylis [Robert M. Baylis] have anything to do, wasn't he, no, okay.
Speaker 2: Not at all.  I mean, I worked for Robert, Bob Baylis when he was running the FIG group [financial institutions group] here a little bit, no I didn't, did I?  I never worked for him but I knew Bob when he was here, but Bob would have been surprised that I had come on that board.  I was recruited by the CEO.
Speaker 1: I see.
Speaker 2: Because I was recruited by the Guardian board, and the Guardian wanted me to get off another board and I told the CEO of New York Life about it, and he said why don't you come on my board, and that's what happened.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But I had, I had a good run and I had numerous opportunities to be on boards and it's funny, because everybody's asking me about boards these days, but numerous opportunities.  I've turned down many of them.  Once you're in the flow of it, and I would, I'll probably do that again, at some point.
Speaker 1: So, but that was a good time.  You wouldn't have had that experience.
Speaker 2: Wouldn't have had it.
Speaker 1: If you hadn't been, and you also got--
Speaker 2: If you weren't a C- If I wasn't a CEO, even of a small company, I wouldn't have had it.
Speaker 1: Right (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Because being CEO of Provender gave me license to be in the room; and I, you know, I'm actually proud of my boards.  I was a pretty good board member.
Story_ID: 645442
Speaker 1: How does it feel to be back then, when you came back because that's a long time to be gone and cultures change (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, I, I, I got a call from the CEO.
Speaker 1: And the CEO at this point--
Speaker 2: Well, the CEO at the investment bank was named Paul Calello.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: He called me and asked me and a board member here to ask me if I'd be interested in thinking about it, but I hadn't thought about it, and I came back and he started talking about some of the gaps that existed and how they wanted to fix them and the firm had changed, and we wanted to go back to more of what we used to be in terms of our brand and our coverage of corporate clients and our relationships with them and I said I was intrigued by it and then he, he came down with a serious illness.  It was in 2009.  We were having a conversation and then all of a sudden two days after I talked to him, he came down with a serious illness.  Nobody knew what it was and since he was the only person I had talked to, and he was recruiting me himself, then there was nothing going on with Credit Suisse [Credit Suisse Group AG].  So, it wasn't until, and then later I found out that he had been diagnosed with cancer, and then radio silence, I get a call from him in January 2010, saying you know, not saying it, but I knew he was in remission.  He called me and said, "Let's pick this back up again."  Next thing he says, "Love to have you come back if you would be interested in that, and come be a vice chairman.  Be vice chairman of the investment bank." And I said, "Well, I need to talk to Jonelle [Terrell's wife, HistoryMaker Jonelle Procope] about it."  I hadn't thought about coming back.  Ultimately, it sounded like a pretty neat thing.  I met with only a couple people.  I knew people because they were people I had known before.  Some cases, I had people I had recruited who had grown up to be senior people.  And I thought, well, if I'm gonna go back to a big firm, I may as well go back to some place where I have a reputation and history, and I've made money for them and, as opposed to going someplace where you have a number on your back and, so I thought, and it's, you know, it's a great firm and so that's what led me back.  The funny thing and, I've been back and it's been great, and I'm, you know, at my age and stage I get to be senior statesman.  And that's kind of nice.  I'm happy, at fifty-eight I'm happy to do that.  I'm not, I don't think I feel like I'm thirty-five anymore.  You know, I'm not sleeping on the couch anymore, waiting, but I have a lot, I really do like the clients I have and I like engaging with these kids.  I like having a role to play in a lot of the black kids' lives and helping keep their head in the game, and my clients like me and I'm doing some important stuff.  Interestingly enough, the guy that recruited me, Paul Calello, I remember seeing him when I came to work the first day, and he was standing by the elevator and he said to me, it is so sweet, he says, "God, Fred [HistoryMaker Frederick Terrell], I can't tell you how glad we all are to have you back."  And he died in June, died in November, died in November of that same year.  Isn't that amazing?  And that was such a sweet thing.  I had maybe a few conversations with him during the year, but he went back to having problems and he died.  A great guy, but he, you know, just the way it works out.  A very sweet guy.
Speaker 1: So--
Speaker 2: And actually, I took his place in the New York City partnership board [Partnership for New York City, New York, New York], which is our big sort of chamber of commerce, which has all the CEOs.  Ken [Kenneth Chenault] chaired it for a while.
Speaker 1: That's the one that's working with the schools, right, sort of, no?
Speaker 2: They do a lot of stuff.
Speaker 1: I think they, right, right, right. Yeah, I bet, right (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) They do a lot of stuff.  It's very powerful.  It's the organization in New York City [New York, New York] (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) That's what somebody was telling me.
Speaker 2: So, so anyway, I'm back.
Story_ID: 645443
Speaker 1: So, so what are you feeling about this point in your life?
Speaker 2: Oh, I'm feeling, I feel like I've been, been very fortunate to have a great wife [HistoryMaker Jonelle Procope] and, you know, a great family and a lot of very fortunate things happen to me.  I play golf so, as we say, I'm on the back nine.  I mean, I have fewer years ahead of me than I have behind me and, but--
Speaker 1: But you're still young, relatively.
Speaker 2: I'm young, but I'm fifty-eight.  I'm just saying, I'm not saying anything but I mean you're young, but I'm fifty-eight.
Speaker 1: No, no.  I'm your age still.
Speaker 2: But I'm just, but you know, I'm saying.  You know, we're not gonna live until we're, 116 or whatever the number is.
Speaker 1: But I know, but I'm just saying that we interview a lot of people in their eighties and nineties, so that's, you know--
Speaker 2: I know, but we're not living to 116.  (Laughter) So, so I, I'm very philosophical.  I get a chance to give very senior advice to people who know I'm not gonna give them a wrong answer.  I get to talk to clients who know it's not important enough to me to lead them into a bad decision.  I just don't care that much about it, the money.  I mean, I like it but I don't, I care about my reputation more.  I'm just nursing a reputation.  I tell friends, I said, "I want a big funeral."  (Laughter) I mean, I, I mean that to say I'm trying to, every once in a while get rid of some jagged edges that might be out there with people I had a disagreement with that is over nothing, try to get rid of that stuff.  I don't, I'm not a religious person per se, but in my own way, that's how I pursue it.  You know, I pursue being nice to people.  I like my reputation as I understand it.  I mean, there are probably people who don't like me, but I think, I think generally speaking people say, "He's a good guy."  I mean, that's all I'm saying.  I mean, not, not the best at this or that or the highest or the richest or any of that, but, "Is he a good guy?"  I think I'm a good guy.  And that's, that's probably, that's kind of what I want my tombstone to reflect.  The other stuff in between about the accomplishments and what I did or didn't do, it's fine.  It is the record, but I'm more interested in being a guy that my kids [Matthew Terrell and Evan Terrell] are proud of.  Like, he was a good guy, you know, or he helped a lot of people.  I'm happy about that.  I really tried my best.  Not unlike the people that you've talked to.  Bill's [HistoryMaker William M. Lewis, Jr.] a very close friend, Ray [HistoryMaker Raymond J. McGuire], I mean I do pride myself every day.  [HistoryMaker] Bruce Gordon said something to me when he was at Verizon [Verizon Communications, Inc.].  He helped me, Verizon, and was an investor at Provender [Provender Capital Group LLC] he says, "Every day I wake up trying to do some good for black people.  I try to think of something I can do in this position." And I started laughing.  I feel the same way.  You know, like there are only so many of us who are gonna have a shot at being in the room or, and I tried to do something.  I also am outspoken.  I don't have time.  It may get me blown out of here at some point but I don't have time not to tell you what I'm thinking about.  And, if I think it impacts me or a group of people, black or white, I'm completely focused on the fundamental fairness of life, I mean, like everybody getting the right shot, don't take advantage of people.  I mean, I'm black.  I'm very proud of that.  I'm happy to, I'm stopping to help the woman whose stuff has fallen out of the bag to pick the stuff up on the street.  I'm that too.  I figure that's the way I get to the religious thing.  I can't sit up in church all day.  I'm more cynical about all that.  Why are there so many black churches?  Why are they--?  All these guys.  I'm not saying they're all driving big cars, but they sure are sucking a lot of money out and I can't tell what's coming back, and the ones that are giving it back, now the ministers, even Floyd Flake [HistoryMaker Reverend Dr. Floyd Flake]--I shouldn't mention names--but even guys like that, there's a whole group of now major guys who have housing and whatever.  It's basically turned the ministry into the business.  What they really wanted to do was business, but they used it as a, not saying they're not serving the Lord, that's good, but you know if you wanted to be in business, do business, but you're back dooring into faith based lending, okay, whatever.  But, I'm, I don't think you have to do it that traditional way.  I'm not begrudging them.  I don't mean, I shouldn't have said that.  It sounds pejorative.  There are a lot of good people, including Floyd Flake, who do good stuff.  I'm just saying for, I don't, I'm not, never gonna quite have it like that, but I do feel like I wake up trying to figure out how to be good to people; and I can't imagine God wants any more from me than that.
Story_ID: 645444
Speaker 1: So I want you to talk about your family.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Because you've mentioned your children, but I'd like you to talk about them.
Speaker 2: Well, my, my--
Speaker 1: How many?
Speaker 2: I've--two boys, Evan [Evan Terrell] and Matthew [Matthew Terrell].  Evan is twenty-two, Matthew is twenty-six.  You know, they're our kids.  You know, we've always said, I certainly said that you should be able to judge me by my children.  I think that's fair.  It's not always beautiful.  It's not always what I hoped, but you know, they're good people and I think they have good friends and do I respect them and I think that's probably the most important thing.  I have no idea where their lives are going to lead them.  I have more of a sense with Matthew than with Evan, because he's older and it's getting clearer.  The light switch is turned on for him a little bit more.  But it didn't happen as early as we thought it would.  You know, all kids develop differently, but I, I don't pity them because they have more affluent parents, or parents with more access.  They have an incredible advantage that they should try to, you know, exploit but by the same token I didn't have the same set of expectations to deal with, you've heard this many times, I know.  And I think knowing how to deal with that as a kid is hard, you know.  Knowing how to manage your life to meet up to the expectations of your parents when your dad is a vice chairman of this bank [Credit Suisse Group AG] and your mom's [HistoryMaker Jonelle Procope] the Apollo [Apollo Theater Foundation, New York, New York] or, you know, kids at my son's business school, you know they're trying to talk to him so they can meet me.  You know, think about it, that's not, it happens a lot with lots of people we know.  But, I think that throws a whole different thing into it, right, that they have to manage and think about themselves, and where I am juxtaposed to where they are, et cetera.  I was much more independent at an early age.  I had jobs, I had to, I had a father [Emmett Terrell, Sr.] who died, I had a mother [Wilda Robertson Terrell] to help with, I had a brother who really, when I came to Yale [Yale School of Organization and Management; Yale School of Management, New Haven, Connecticut] I didn't talk about it, but without Emmett [Emmett Terrell, Jr.], she would have had no place to move into, and after a while I think he was bitter about that.  I had flown the coop to find fun and happiness in New York City [New York, New York], at Yale and stayed back here to do investment banking while my mother had moved into his home.  It is what it is, but I think, but, you know, my life is very different than what their life is going to be based on the opportunities that I had, but also based on the expectations that were out there for me, which were high given that they thought I was a smart kid, but not that high, not that high.  You know, finishing college or something maybe, but not even that for my community.  Nobody would have thought twice about it if I hadn't gotten past high school [La Puente High School, La Puente, California], because that was my neighborhood and I'd be working at a job because that's what my friends are doing now when I go back.  When I see them in many cases, they're not, they're not doing anything I am.  I just visited two members of the band I played with in San Francisco [California].  I met 'em after not seeing them for a long time.  I wanted my kids to meet them and we connected in San Francisco and the stories they were telling about me were no holds barred, just everything, like stuff that you wouldn't want your kids to know about you but they knew it all, and they just felt, "What are we gonna do?  Your--Fred's kids are just gonna talk."  They weren't trying to, but they were like, it's crazy (laughter) but, you know, they follow me on the Internet, they sort of know stuff I've done and I, you know, again, not unlike a Ray [HistoryMaker Raymond J. McGuire] or Bill [HistoryMaker William M. Lewis, Jr.], I mention those guys because they were in the same business, but you know, Bill where he grew up or Ray where he grew up, not very different, I suppose, and all the people would say, "Yeah, I knew that Ray would be somebody." Or some- and I think that's kind of what they say about Fred [HistoryMaker Frederick Terrell], in my neighborhood you know, so--
Speaker 1: So, so let me ask you. I mean--
Speaker 2: I--my point was, I'm sorry, but that's different for a kid growing up with parents like, you know, then all of a sudden like it's much more of a big- much bigger microscope.
Story_ID: 645445
Speaker 1: Well, then also they also have to find their space, and sometimes that that's very difficult.
Speaker 2: I think that's been a challenge for us to figure out how to, how much support, how much safety net versus how much this versus this.  We're doing a little bit more of this these days.
Speaker 1: But in the black community, too, it's very important that we have succession.  You know what I mean, that it goes generations of successes; extremely.  However people find their success, but it's very very important because I want to talk about, so you've been incredibly, incredibly successful.  In fact, in many ways the telling of your story seemed sort of, "I did this, I did that."  You know, I mean not that, but you've been incredibly successful and the fact of the matter is that not many people are there where you are, even today.  And so, I want to talk, and you're in an area that if you go back to the Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] and Yales [Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut], Princetons [Princeton University, Princeton, New Jersey], or whatever, there were a lot of young black kids, young white kids, black kids, Asian kids, who want to be in investment banking.  It is like the top.
Speaker 2: Or not.  Maybe they want to be in something in the investment business, but not necessarily.  I don't think investment banking is as hot today as it was.
Speaker 1: No, I think it's still, I mean the programs, the summer programs, I'm just telling you what I'm hearing.
Speaker 2: I'm telling you what I know from recruiting.  (Laughter) No, there were people who wanted to do private equity and be in a hedge fund and work in technology--
Speaker 1: Right, right.  I mean the technology piece is there, but there are a lot--
Speaker 2: It's still a good career.
Speaker 1: It's still a good career.  So, the question is, I mean, there are a lot of kids that want to be entrepreneurial and they want to work with Google [Google Inc.] and you know--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: But, my question is what do you see, I mean who's coming after you?
Speaker 2: Well, I'm, I'm--
Speaker 1: Who's coming after you? Because, you're coming around time, remember you said you heard Earl Graves [HistoryMaker Earl G. Graves, Sr.], Black Enterprise is there, there's a huge, there's huge excitement and there's huge, like, this is it.
Speaker 2: I think that, I think that, I do a lot of, as you can imagine, I do a lot of talking to, whether they're defined as mentees or not, I do a lot of that conversation, you know.  "God, Fred [HistoryMaker Frederick Terrell], can I come see--?" White and black, the firm has been on that couch, not just at the analyst's level or associate level, and not black and white, but just a lot, I'm just old enough and I've had, there wouldn't be very many people in this building who have been on boards of directors.  There wouldn't be, even at the highest level, they just have different and distinguishing experiences.  We've been entrepreneurial, we've raised money and a range of things, so I give out a lot of advice and I see a lot of black kids particularly, and I try to seek them out and I say, "Come see me."  You know, I saw a young woman who was one of a very few, god, I think she was the only black woman at this affair we had the other night where they were talking to all the new women associates and analysts and she was there and she was a black woman from Kenyon College [Gambier, Ohio].  Well, Kenyon College is not a core school for us.  It's not a Harvard or Princeton, and she had gone to Kenyon and when I said, "Oh, I think that's a great school."  She said, "You know it?"  I said, "Yeah, like of course.  I know Kenyon College.  It's a great school."  But I also say to her as I say to others, "Now come see me now." You know?  And, you know, there are people at all firms who do the same.  I hope they do.  They come see me and I don't know, I'm not, whether it's--I'm certainly not trying to say you should do investment banking; and when they're here and they want to do it, I'll tell them how to try to be to succe- how to work to be successful.
Story_ID: 645446
Speaker 1: But I'm, I'm much more interested in, like you say, finding your voice and your passion out there and pursuing it; and, and knowing enough about a range of topics where you don't get shut out of conversations.  I think to be, to be out of the, when I give these talks at Yale [Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut], because I spend a lot of time up there because the boards have been on up there, so I say, "Life is a big cocktail party.  You know, you walk around the room, you sort of see who you want to talk to and you stop in and basically a group talking about business and you stand there with two or three people and they start talking about something and you don't know what it is, and you're the guy not saying anything and pretty soon you're out of the conversation, and you go find someplace else that's more interesting and you keep poking around," and I said, "It's nice to sort of know as much as you can about all of those little pockets of conversation, even good for people that think that you're the center of it, but you know, you don't want to be locked out of conversations and have to go wandering to be engaged.  You want to know.  Women should know more about sports.  Men should know more about fashion.  I mean, why be out of any of it.  Why not be more interesting that way, you know."  Sometimes it's strategic.  I say with great pride that I read 'Lean In' ['Lean In: Women, Work, and the Will to Lead,' Sheryl Sandberg]. I read it.  My boys [Matthew Terrell and Evan Terrell] listened to it on the way to cross country.  Did I read it because I thought that she was telling me something I don't already know as a black man about lean in?  No, but I wanted to understand the language.  I wanted to be able to drop that I had, you know, I mean, I read it, I understand.  Let me tell you how I relate to it and whatever mix up.  I want to be in that conversation as well, and I try to tell these kids less about investment banking and who's coming behind me for this, but who's gonna be you.  Who's gonna be either of us.  Who's gonna sort of, who's gonna be out there challenging their children to be greater, you know.  Me, my parents [Wilda Robertson Terrell and Emmett Terrell, Sr.], me, my children, their children, you know that's my visibility.  That's what I have, you know, I may have access to those generations, and they should all progressively get better and more enlightened and hopefully be closer to something that's really valuable to them in life, and be good people and give back and care about their community, and value that in a way that's above all.  I mean I do think that outside of your family, I think we have to lift each other.  I'm really committed to it.  I'm, I'm not unlike all the people you talk to, but I'm, yeah, I, I sort of say, I'm, I'm a race man that way.
Story_ID: 645447
Speaker 1: And it's important to have people like that in positions like this I mean, but I wanna, I want to also ask you, since we're talking about race men and, and that that's why I think it's important that you and Ray [HistoryMaker Raymond J. McGuire] and Bill [HistoryMaker William M. Lewis, Jr.] are sitting down, you know, to tell your story.  It's a very small group and I think there's not enough understanding of what goes--
Speaker 2: Well, it's a, it is Ted Wells [HistoryMaker Theodore V. Wells, Jr.] (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) We did Ted Wells--oh, Ted is the same thing (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) You know, this is serious.  The difference, obviously, the big names, you know.  But it is different and I would say what's common about it, it's different to sort of walk into a room where you are and, I've done this hundreds of times, where you're the only black guy there, and the room is, sometimes the room is where I heard you on the phone and if you don't give yourself up, they don't know who you are.  You walk in the room and you're sitting at the front of the table, let's go.  Okay, now the meeting is starting, and I know for each of those guys, they've done that a million times, and be able to do that together.  And that, and I remember going and when I was in Provender [Provender Capital Group LLC], going out to a Midwest town some company we were looking at, and I walked in that room and I was the money that was going to be bailing that company out and I was the money.  It was a, that took race relations to a whole different place when you are the money.  They never thought about it that way.  They never thought about it.  Not just working for a guy, the guy owning the company.  That is a whole different thing, and I think we are, I think there's going to be a generation of kids who are gonna have that opportunity to do that more and more, not just because they can sort of have the shock value of doing it, but because I think that'll break down barriers in a way that was never done.  So, this has been an experience to actually pursue business at the highest level.  That I'm proud of.  I can say that I've honestly done that.  I've been in very big rooms and I've been leading, the guy running the meeting or that kind of stuff, and that's given me a real vantage point; and, and I hope that others have a chance to see that, to see how possible it is.
Story_ID: 645448
Speaker 1: So, let me, let me go, let me ask what are you (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I'm exhausted, I'm done.
Speaker 1: Okay, no, we're almost, I've just got two que- two or three more questions.
Speaker 2: I know you are, you are amazing.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) No, no, no.  I've just got two more--
Speaker 2: Amazing.
Speaker 1: No, no, no, stop, stop.  Okay, so what are your hopes and concerns for the black community?  Can I understand that from this vantage point, 2013?
Speaker 2: Well, I'm nervous about the, I'll talk about my concerns.  I'm nervous about the, I'm nervous about the bling, about how much we celebrate, the Jay-Zs and all that stuff.  I'm not taking anything from them but I'm nervous about it all.  I'm angry about, I'm not angry about but, the idea--there's a commercial on television about Ice Cube, who was a member of N.W.A.  N.W.A. is Niggers With an Attitude [sic. Niggaz Wit Attitudes], which is really one of the hard core rap groups of the '80s [1980s] and '90s [1990s], I would say, out of Compton [California].  Dr. Dre is a member of that, Snoop Dogg, he did a lot of work with him.  All these guys, who basically really exploited, I think, our culture, really exploited it with their anger and some which we related to, throwing around the N word, just telling you that they had to do it to keep it real, unlike any other race of people.  You don't find Chinese doing that with each other, you don't find Jews or Italians, not publicly.  No, when they sit around Thanksgiving table, they may call themselves all kinds of names in love, as I do, as I do.  I can sling it that way too, of course, comes a pronoun, but the public part of that just makes me crazy and for these guys to have exploited this anger which was real and this disenfranchisement and all that stuff, only to then see them in Disney movies and on commercials essentially getting it the other way.  Now Snoop Dogg is on the sideline of USC [University of Southern California, Los Angeles, California].  Now they're institutional.  Now they're keeping it real that way.  They just rode us the whole way.  They basically blew out the N word and everything and were talking about shoot cops and all that kind of stuff, when that was the thing to do.  Took the money out for that.  As they got older, as Jay-Z said, "I saw how beautiful my daughter was.  I knew I could never use bitch in a song again."  Are you out of your mind?  So, what would happen if you were riding with your kids in the back seat, as I've been taking my kids [Matthew Terrell and Evan Terrell] when they were much smaller in the back seat and the song comes on that has the N word and all the white kids know it, and they don't say it but they know it.  And, is that what you want?  I don't think they'd want their daughter in that setting either, you know?  And, I just think it's I think that we give them a pass, [HistoryMaker] Russell Simmons saying, anyway, we're just giving people a pass based on celebrity.  We're not holding their feet to the fire about their contribution.  And, there are a lot of good people among them, but I'm worried that we are so enamored of that, that group that it's distracting with respect to our achievement and what's important to us as a community.  It's just the bling of it.  That I'm concerned about and that has not subsided.  I'm, you know, I'm hoping for more education, more kids in school.  I was talking to [HistoryMaker] Sherrilyn Ifill about LDF [NAACP Legal Defense and Educational Fund, Inc.] and about these decisions and she was lamenting the affirmative action decision.  I said, "Yeah, I agree with you in every way." And I said, "But boy, that window was wide open for about three decades, man, and we just didn't get enough people through it and we didn't create enough for your parents who then created--." So I'm nervous about that.  That's a concern, but I want to have kids have more education, so when the programs like Posse [Posse Foundation, Inc., New York, New York] and Prep for Prep [New York, New York] and these are all great things.  More people in the pipeline getting a good education has got to be a good thing.  What they do for a living, I don't care as much about.  Well educated with options, also when I talk to a school I talk about something called, I just describe this as career optionality curve, which should always be positive.  You should always be doing things to create more options for you.  And I just want our kids to have more and more options, and I'm hopeful about that.
Story_ID: 645449
Speaker 1: Okay.  Two questions.  You talk about that, about more options.  I have a question and that is we know what our parents' legacy was and you've talked and spoken very powerfully about your parents [Wilda Robertson Terrell and Emmett Terrell, Sr.] and their role, but what is our legacy, this generation, that we're the beneficiaries of a lot of struggle and a lot of hopes and a lot of prayers and a lot of sacrifices.  What is our legacy?
Speaker 2: That's a good question. (Pause) I, well, I think that for the people that you're interviewing in their own way, for all the people young and old, they were people who have done something that sounds like, feels like a breakthrough of some sort.  And, our legacy is that, you know, obviously the greatest example in history is Barack Obama [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama], but you can't say that hasn't been done.  You can't say that we haven't risen to the level of the highest in the investment banking business or have the best CEO in the world in Ken Chenault [Kenneth Chenault], or have guys in every industry who are the best and brightest; so, our legacy is that we with the generation before us, and others before then, have helped make that clear.  So, you can do it.  I mean, it isn't a closed path.  Now, it doesn't mean it's not complicated and it doesn't require a level of education and achievement to get there, but it isn't gonna be because people aren't accustomed to sort of seeing somebody in that role if they're good.  And I think that's a big thing.  I, you know, I think that's right.  It doesn't mean that racism doesn't exist.  That's for sure.  I run into it, I see it, I speak out against it.  I'm very vocal around here, not about hard core racism.  It's much more nuanced, you know that.  Now something like this, you'll see it in different ways, you know, where people are invited and not, it was an assignment, it was that, it may not even be racism, just sort of friends versus non-friends, buddies, as my friend says, the world's a buddy system.  People are your buddies, you get stuff, (unclear) to be more buddies, right?  But I would say that our legacy is the door is open and the second half of what we're all doing is pulling more and more people through, but nobody should feel any more as if it's not doable or there are not as many firsts left.  There are not as many of that, and so they may, the next CEO may always be compared to Ken Chenault, but the fact is that we know that a guy can be successful in a company that had no background with an African American guy at that level, except Vernon [HistoryMaker Vernon E. Jordan, Jr.] being on the board [of the American Express Company] and he was very instrumental to Ken, obviously, but we've seen the guy be best and brightest in a company that has no particular sympathy for it.  So, I think that's a great legacy to have.  And I'd like it also to be that we are, that we are, that we continue to mine our community for greatness in unexpected ways, not just the, not just the thing that's what we're doing here today but the greatness in what you're doing, you know, that, the greatness in the things that add to the value of our existence and our lives that aren't as press worthy day to day, aren't as sexy to be mentioned on the news, but big things that we give light to that.  I think that's, that's happening more, whether it's in the arts, or, or in business, obviously, but in lots of different ways, so.
Story_ID: 645450
Speaker 1: And then, just the last.  You, I want you to think about the young f- I want you to think about youn- the Fred Terrells [HistoryMaker Frederick Terrell]  of today, the, the, the young kid who really didn't sort of have a clue but had you know others identify it as a gift; the one whose parents [Wilda Robertson Terrell and Emmett Terrell, Sr.] applauded, you know, came to hear his eighth grade speech, one who lost his father; I mean, all your, the one who didn't make partner, the managing director the first time [at Credit Suisse First Boston], and at the end of the day what do you want your legacy to be, or what do you want to be when you (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I, well, Malcolmn Pryor, you know, Malcolmn Pryor is a guy who ran Pryor Govan [Pryor, Govan, Counts and Co., Inc.], one of the early investment banks, predecessor to John Utendahl and all those guys, and Ron [HistoryMaker Ronald T. Gault] and to me and all this, and I included him in several deals.  I included him in a deal that was a billion dollar transaction, just reached out and grabbed him and said, "I'd like you to be a co-manager of this deal." So his name was in lights with ours.  He didn't make as much money, but I wrote him a million dollar check, which was, yeah, you know?  And he said to me several years ago, he said to me, I'll manage two ways.  Here's one example:  He said to me, "You know Fred, we always felt you were trying to help us." And I liked that.  I would love to be known as a guy that was not so consumed with what he was, or what he achieved, but you know, "Fred was always trying to help, always trying to help."  I liked that.  And, he said that to me and I thought it was very flattering from him.  He doesn't even know it was a big deal to me, but I said, "God, I really appreciate that."  He says, "I always thought you were really trying to help us and this was years after he was out of the business."  Didn't have to say it, whatever.  The other was my friend, Kerman Mattox, who I've mentioned before who was the other guy out at La Puente High School [La Puente, California] and was my campaign manager when I ran for sophomore class president, and now is very close to the Obamas and when they go to L.A. [Los Angeles, California], he's the guy.  He'd be an interesting guy, you should talk to, very talented.  He says to me and his partner, they both worked and was a good friend.  He says, you know, "Fred, you never changed."  He said, "I've got to be honest with you.  You never, you never changed." And I thought that was the nicest thing that could be said.  I don't feel, this all feels a little bit like, in some ways, I've already won in as much as I'm way farther along.  This is all gravy to me.  I mean, but I'm happy that people who know me and have known me my whole life would say, "You're just as goofy, crazy, funny, you know.  You're the same person." And so the idea that I could be the same person and remain the person that they knew for the ingredients that made who I am, I'm really happy about.  Those two things together that I really, I really do get off on helping my people and helping people generally, but helping my people is a special thing, and I'm, I think I'm the same person.  I don't think I've changed that much.  I don't think I, I hope it doesn't sound ever to you or anyone like I'm gloating about this thing.  I'd rather be a little bit more understated about it.  I've been very lucky about it and I'm talented, yeah, but I'd rather be viewed, "Yeah, that's a good guy."  And over the years, I've found people seek me out to tell me things that they don't want to tell other people.  I know everybody feels that way about something, they said because they think I'm gonna give them an honest answer.  I'm not in the street with their business.  I've had people, a lot of people recently and a lot of people come to me for just advice about personal stuff, because they don't think I'm gonna go anywhere with it and they think I have good judgment, and I'm you know that's it--that's sort of where I, where I wanna sit.
