Story_ID: 71805
Speaker 1: Okay, we're rolling.  My name is Larry Crowe.  I'm interviewer for The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Scott Stearns.  And sir, would you please state your name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: My name is Ernest Terrell, E-R-N-E-S-T T-E-R-R-E-L-L.
Speaker 1: And what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: I was born in Inverness, Mississippi, I-N-V-E-R-N-E-S-S, Mississippi, April 4th, 1939.
Speaker 1: All right, and what is today's date?
Speaker 2: Today's date is June 25th, 2002.
Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: We're in my home.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Um--?
Speaker 2: We're in my home at 11136 South Parnell in Chicago [Illinois].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Um-hmm.
Speaker 1: All right.  Now, I have a--oh, and what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: I own a janitorial company.  I own a janitorial--I own a janitorial company.  I have a contract with the [Chicago, Illinois] Board of Education to clean the schools in the Sixth Region.  I have a contract with the Police Department to clean their stations in the--Area Five.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And you were--and you are a former Heavy Weight Champion of the World.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I was Heavy Weight Champion of the World from 1965 until 1967, the WBA [World Boxing Association] Heavyweight Champion of the World for that long.  Ali [Muhammad Ali, born Cassius Marcellus Clay, Jr.] was the other champion during the same time so naturally they--he carried the most weight as far as championship were concerned.
Story_ID: 71806
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right, now I have five People Magazine type questions to ask you that just require a brief answer.  And the first one is what is your favorite food?
Speaker 2: My wife cooks the best succotash in the world.  My favorite food is succotash.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what is your favorite color?
Speaker 2: I wear dark colors.  The reason I wear dark colors is because I'm a big guy.  And if you're a big guy, you don't need to have on loud colors.  I remember one newspaper guy I was appearing downtown at a theater on Michigan [Avenue, Chicago, Illinois] and I had a white suit on and the guy wrote me up and say I looked like a snow covered mountain.  So ever since then I've been wearing dark clothes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  What is your favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: I like the summer time.  You know, I mean when it's the fall or when it's the spring you have too much weather like storms and rains and things like that.  When it's just, when it's summer you have to deal with the heat but very little else and now you get yourself under the air conditioning you just can, you can manage.  So I would say summer.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And do you have a favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: My favorite vacation destination?  I have--boy this is making us jump a little ahead of ourselves.  See, I had a band and we went all over the country.  And all the places that I went, I went to most places in--you know and I've traveled all over the world really.  So it's hard to pick out a favorite.  I mean if I had to pick out a favorite, I would say Las Vegas [Nevada].  That would be my favorite spot.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: My favorite phrase, I like to tease young children.  When you get a child let's say he's between four and six or seven, sometimes three, in between there, I always like to tease them about their age.  I would say, it's funny when you're that young you always want to be older.  You say, "how old are you?"  "I'm four and a half."  I don't know anybody that will tell me that they are fifty-four and a half.  But they always try to push it up as far as they can.  And I like to tease them about that and I'll try to tell them little jokes and you got to be very careful when you tell kids a joke because it just doesn't work.  You got to say something real stupid and just like I used to tell them, I said well--one of my jokes I would tell the kids, I'd say, "this guy told me that you told him something I told you not to tell him."  So they would be trying to straighten me out.  I would always tell them something that's well, funny like that and I get a kick out of that.  And that's--I like to talk to them then because they want to get your attention.  But the kids right now are much smarter than they are in my day.  So that don't work all the time.
Story_ID: 71807
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well let's talk your beginnings and could you give us the name of your mother and the name of your father and spell them for us?
Speaker 2: My mother's name was Annie.  Annie, A-N-N-I-E, and my father's name were Lovick, L-O-V-I-C-K.  My--I never knew my grandmother.  She passed away when--a long time when my mother was a child.  My [maternal] grandfather, his name were Jake Payne and his--my step-grandmother, her name were Annie Payne.  So technically, I guess my father--oh, and my grandfather, his name was Lovick Terrell too.  So--I mean Lovick Terrell.  His name was Lovick Terrell and my father's name were Lovick Terrell so he was a Junior [Jr.] even though he never said that.  But it's ironic I mean it looked like both my stepmother and my father was, you know they were named, well they were named after their parents, yeah.
Story_ID: 71808
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now that's in--were they both from Inverness, Mississippi or were they from someplace else?
Speaker 2: They all, they was from Inverness, Mississippi, that's where they were.  They was from Inverness, Mississippi until around I think--I mean I don't remember this because I was a baby.  They left Inverness I believe around 1941 and moved to Belzoni, Mississippi, my father bought a--bought some land.  The land that he bought he teamed with my grandfather on my mother's side and they both come up with twenty dollars apiece and they bought forty acres of land-
Speaker 1: With forty dollars?
Speaker 2: With forty--it was a dollar an acre.  If you saw the land you would understand it because I mean the land was a complete jungle.  I mean a thick jungle, you couldn't see through it.  And what they had to do, they had to go out there and cut down all those trees and blow up the stumps and move all the shrubbery and do all that stuff and make it into farm land, and they did.  They made it into farm land and they, they lived there and they worked there and it was their land.  They built houses on it and we had our own house and our own farm.  I mean it was small but the--during that time, it was good.  One--it took them a long time to get it right to where you can grow cotton but they finally did.  I remember I think the year were 1948, my dad you know he had made the land valuable then.  It was valuable then.  So one of the, one of the white men come by and asked to--and said, we can't find your deed in Jackson [Mississippi] or something like that he says.  He said, well I got my deed and he showed him the deed.  And he showed him the deed.  The deed had the governor's stamp on it, it had everything on there, everybody signed off on it but they just didn't recognize it.  They said no.  So what he did, he asked what, he asked some of the neighbors what to do and they couldn't tell him nothing so he went to Belzoni [Mississippi], that's where we stayed, Belzoni, Mississippi then.  That was not Inverness--Belzoni.  He went to Belzoni and got a lawyer.  So before the lawyer did anything he said I'll tell you what man (unclear)--boy, I'll take the money if you want me to go down there and do what you want me to do.  But you're going to have to pay for that land again and that's what he had to do.  He had to go and pay for his land all over again even though he had the deed to it.  And he had to pay much more at that time.  I forget what it was, something like (unclear)--it wasn't no dollar an acre, it was a lot of--he had to pay hundreds of dollars for his land to get it back, and he did.  And that's just one of the terrible things that stuck with--that stick with you as you grow up that happened.  So-
Story_ID: 71809
Speaker 1: So, you know what else?  Any other terrible things like that happen when you were coming up?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Some other surveyor came by some years later and they wanted to buy the rights to look for oil on the land.  They thought oil was on our land, was on our land and some of the neighbors' land.  So all of them--so they want to, they wanted to come down and ask would they sell them the land.  But they said, a lot of folks was getting ready to--they didn't want to buy the land, they wanted to buy the rights to the oil beneath the land, you understand?  So a lot of folks was going to sell.  Mostly all of them probably would have sold because they were afraid to say no to the white people at that time.  So what happened is the fellows went back and the white people saw a lawyer and they come back and (unclear).  Well, they only bought the top of the land.  They didn't buy the bottom of the land.  So they decided not to, not to buy it.  But they didn't drill on it because evidently I don't--I'm not sure was oil there.  I mean there wasn't no oil there because if it was they would, probably would go down there now and be trying to find some.  But that's just one thing that I remember happening that they said, we just bought the top of the land and somebody else--so how could the other people own the bottom.  It was a crazy situation to me.
Story_ID: 71810
Speaker 1: That is.  I--well can, do you have any family stories about--did your grandfather have any stories about slavery days or about the background of the family at all?
Speaker 2: No.  They didn't talk much about the family tree that way.  They would talk a lot but they would tell ghost stories and stuff like that, you know.  That's what I remember them talking about.  And--but we moved to Chicago [Illinois] in 1953, and so I wasn't there all that long to--I came up here in 1953 and-
Speaker 1: How old were you in Fifty-Three [1953]?
Speaker 2: I guess I would have been fourteen, I believe by then.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And, so when I got here, it was just, it was different.  I come from--the school that I was going to in the South, it wasn't a school, it was a church.  It was a church and you know it was a church during Sunday and then it was a school during school days.  And that's where--that's what I went--I went there for the first, 'til I got through fifth grade.  And then I went to a regular school that was in a place, you won't believe this--see, where we lived at in Mississippi was right between Midnight and Daybreak.  Now that's not the--I'm not talking about the weather, how the--I'm talking about the town.
Speaker 1: (Unclear).
Speaker 2: We lived between Midnight and Daybreak.  And the school, they built a school in Midnight that we went to for about a year and then we came to Chicago [Illinois]--I came to Chicago.  And I came to Chicago and I entered school up here which is so much different from school down South.  It just--it--you--it takes you a while to get used to it, you know.
Story_ID: 71811
Speaker 1: Can I ask you maybe to go back to when you were in grade school and I just want to ask you about what life was like growing up in Mississippi, even though you didn't stay there.  But what were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up in Mississippi?
Speaker 2: Well, let me tell--okay, let me tell you, I mean I remember we had to walk to school every day and the neighbors did.  So we got together with neighbors and we walked to school.  And there was a gravel road that we have to go to, to get to our school and the school was about maybe four or five miles that we had to go.  The white kids had a bus and what they would do every day is they would, as they passed by us, they would throw out of the--spit balls and all kind of other stuff out there to hit us as they passed by as we was walking to school.  So we told our parents and our parents suggested, said well ya'll get off the road so they can't throw us.  So what we did, we, when we see the bus coming, we walked down across the--we walked to the fields and started walking in the fields so they couldn't throw that far to hit us.  And so that worked for a time but then what happened, they start, when they planting--when they start, when planting time coming and the cotton or the corn or whatever they were planting would grow, they didn't want us walking into the fields.  So the white folks said you can't walk through these fields.  You got to walk along the road.  What are you doing walking in the fields?  Now the teacher had been complaining for years that they was throwing off.  So then we had to go and walk along the road again.  So as we walked along the road, one of my friends, I mean neighbor whose name was James Hine, he said I'm not going to go across the field no more.  He said they better not throw off the bus either.  So everybody decided they wasn't going out across the field no more so we stayed there.  And everybody grabbed a handful of rocks and when the white people threw off their bus this time, we just showed that bus with rocks.  So the guy pulled up and he went down a little piece and got out and looked and jumped back in his bus and pulled off.  And we went on to school.  And when we got to school the sheriff and his posse was there.  Well our teacher really stood up.  She told them she says, said what are these people throwing rocks at the bus.  They could have hurt somebody and she's all that kind of stuff.  She said, look, I've been telling ya'll that they was throwing off the bus for the last couple of years and you've done nothing about it.  He said, well we're going to tell them they better not throw off that bus no more and you better not throw on there no more.  She said that's all I wanted from the first--that's all I've been trying to get all the time.  And that's, that's the way that worked.  I mean we got over that hump.
Story_ID: 71812
Speaker 1: Now another thing that was so dangerous that happened to us after we got to school because we're talking about in the Forties [1940s] when they brought German prisoners of [World War II] war [POW camp, Belzoni, Mississippi] over there--over here.  And these prisoners of war was working, digging holes and acting like they was on military detail right close to the church or the school that we attended.  And they had these big dogs.  And as we walked to school they would sick the big dogs on--we would run and they would let the dogs get almost to our heel and they would whistle, he was there and they would come back.  He never would--they wouldn't let them--he wouldn't let them--they wouldn't let the dog bite us, they would just let them--but he couldn't stop the dog if the dog didn't get his whistle, his whistle message.  But that, that was a dangerous thing we had to endure all while we was there.  And we complained about that but they brought those--they were Germans, prisoners of war that was captured.  They would be on detail out there doing just like they was had they had an army base.
Speaker 2: Right and they-
Speaker 1: And they would send those dogs, big dogs would have killed each other.  They would kill you so easy, but the-
Speaker 2: And the German soldiers were in charge of those dogs out there?
Speaker 1: Well, that's what they told us.  I mean that's why--it was probably some--one of our people out there watching them but they would sic the dog on us and they let the dog get real close, then they'd blow the whistle.  He'd turn around and come back.  He's a very obedient dog--it was dogs.  I mean a lot of dogs.  But they, they never did let them get close enough to bite us.  Every time the dog there, we start running, we'd run, run.  When the dog got a few feet, they'd blow the whistle.  He'd turn around and go back.
Speaker 2: So these things sort of add up to an atmosphere of terror on some level, you know?
Speaker 1: It was.  It was and that was just--but being in the country you are familiar with dogs, you understand.  We thought about bringing our dogs to, to deal with the dog, but we know that our dog wasn't trained killers like them dogs.  They would just kill our dogs.  We were smart--some of the people were smart enough to know that.  And that's--you know, that--we never did bring any dogs to try to deal with their dogs, yeah.  But that's what--that's the way it happened.
Story_ID: 71813
Speaker 1: So what could you all do about something like that?  Could you do anything about it?
Speaker 2: We, we told the teacher.  The teacher would complain to the sheriff.  The sheriff would do nothing.  I would say--he would say that didn't come under their mind.  Some of the ways that they would hurt you down there was they would--like if we wanted to have a party or have a gathering or have somebody over, that was all right so long as you didn't sell nothing.  You know like if you were, let's say you had some sandwiches or something, what you'd have then probably be some baloney [bologna] sandwiches or some you know that kind of stuff that you would sell, hot dogs, Weiner sandwiches, something like that and you'd probably sell them for a quarter or fifteen cent or whatever the price was at the time, if you did that, the sheriff would come around and he would take all of the stuff.  And he would probably eat it all up, eat as much as he want himself and he would let you sell one or two and then he would close you down.  Now the reason why he would do that, now that I know (unclear), I'm an older guy, I know what he was doing.  They didn't want you to get an idea cause they wanted you working in the fields there.  They didn't want you to think that you can go and run a store and have all these black folks support it and stuff like that.  That, that--they--all of the black people there had a line of credit--wasn't (laughter).  It wasn't a line of credit.  I'm trying to figure out what do you call it.  They would call it rations.  The store would let them get so much in advance because they would--they got very little money down there.  The store would let you get the food.  Then when you ever got your money that summer you would pay them back if you owned your own land.  If you was a sharecropper, you would just get the stuff.  They would let you have it.  And some of the sharecroppers just got absolutely nothing.  They get --with absolutely nothing for their work, you know.  But we, because we owned our own farm you know we did--they was pretty--they were pretty fair with us really, you know.  But the, the other people if they was fair you could not--you could--if they, if they gave you some money you just took it and walked.  You didn't stand there and count it.  That happened, you know.  I remember that happening.  And some other things happened.  I mean one things happened down there.  I guess you, I don't know whether you heard of this guy.  A guy named Willie McGee or I think it was Willie McGee, that was right, Willie McGee, he was the reason why they brought the electric chair to Jackson [Mississippi] because this Willie McGee, he--that was during the war [World War II].  His, his--the man got drafted, a white man was drafted and went into the [U.S.] Army and while he was there his wife laid with this black man and she had children.  When he got back and he saw that, they took the children and they brought this electric chair there and that's the first newspaper I saw in my life with a picture of that electric chair being transported to Jackson [Mississippi] so they could electrocute this guy for his crime.  He went with this guy's wife while he would serve his country.  That's the way the story line ran.  And he then had his babies, I don't know what they did with the babies, but-
Speaker 1: And that was punishable by death in Mississippi at that time?
Speaker 2: That's what it was.  It was--they wanted this--I mean they imported the electric chair for him.  That's the first time I ever heard of an electric chair.  And that was one of the stories that went down.  The Emmett [Louis] Till thing happened in 1955, I believe.  I was here.  I was here then.  That was--but I understand that part of it too because those were, those were the days.  And so that was really my tenure in Mississippi (unclear) that much.
Story_ID: 71814
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well were there any things that you would do for--can you remember any things that you would do there that were fun or anything (unclear)?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  We would play baseball.  Well that's baseball.  We had to make that stuff and some of, some of them guys could.  They read the--what--you could buy a ball.  You could buy a ball that you can play baseball with and sometimes we'd play basket--base--we'd play baseball with a rubber ball.  You know just games that--to play.  But yeah, we played game--we enjoyed the church.  The people were so good.  I mean the neighbors were so close together.  But that, that's a fine thing because even though they were so close they eat--they would eat at each other's house.  Nobody closed their doors to nobody.  If I were doing bad somewhere, somebody was going to beat my tail no matter who it was and I was going to get another one when I got home because they just--I mean when they say a village raised the child, that is exactly what happened down there cause if you did something wrong down there and another black person saw you and you was a child, that's what he would do.  He would say man, who is your parents?  He wouldn't even know--wouldn't even know you.  But he would chastise you if you were doing something wrong or if you was messing with something that was going to hurt somebody you know because that's the way they was.  I mean it was, it was heavenly down there as far as black folks were concerned toward each other.  The only thing, they just had to walk the straight and narrow line.  It's like, when we would go to down it's like--let me tell you, you know what a--I think I was talking to my sister because her husband had to go, well he was having problems and he's in a nursing home now.  But her granddaughter lived with her and she was saying that if he got better they was going to get back together.  And she was telling her grandmother, her grandfather that, I'm going to tell my grandfather he got to straighten up.  He know what it took to get her and that he got to keep doing that.  I said wait, wait, wait, that won't work in this case.  I said he got her down south and what he got, what he--what they--the courtship down there was nothing.  I mean if he buy you a pop, they, that's what they call sodas.  If he bought you a pop or a--down there, that was a lot.  They had a piece of, it was a, it wasn't a cookie it was more like a, it was more like a cake.  It was called a stage plank.  If you got a stage plank and a coke, oh you was, you were on good terms with her girlfriend cause you done spent a quarter, fifteen cent or something.  And that's the way it was.  Then you could go out like if you worked all week and you went to a store, just went to a store, just a little mom and pop store and got pop and coke, that was your evening out.  Now if you went to town and saw a show, maybe Roy Rogers or Gene Autry [Orvon Grover Autry] or somebody, you--that was great.  You'd talk about that all week and you'd tell everybody about it, but that's just the way it was.  The show was segregated.  They, when they first started they had the blacks on the bottom and the whites up top.  And they had to change that because the, the whites was throwing things on the bottom so they switched it around.
Speaker 1: Okay, we got to change tape every half hour.
Story_ID: 71815
Speaker 1: And, well you said there was another incident in Mississippi you wanted to tell us about (unclear).
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Just like after you work and, you know when I'm fourteen years old and you're talking about work, I think I started working when I was seven, you know and never, you know--you worked when you was in Mississippi.  But at this time we went to Belzoni, Belzoni, Mississippi and they had a carnival there, you know where they would bring you--the small carnival that traveled and they went there.  So I went to the carnival and my mother was holding my hand and she was--and we're walking through there and we're trying to figure out where they had some rides that you can take and they had some animals there.  And this guy was selling tickets at, at a tent where he says, come on and see the "gonna-be".  The "gonna-be".  I said (unclear) says, what's a "gonna-be".  Nobody knew what a "gonna-be" was.  I didn't.  So a few of the people went in there and they come out and when they come we said, what is a "gonna-be"?  They wouldn't tell you.  (Laughter).  So finally I told my mother I said, I want to go and see the "gonna-be".  So I went in there and we get, we got a ticket.  I think it was a quarter.  I don't know what it was.  It was something like that, dime, I--and we went to see the "gonna-be".  And we got in there, you know what it was?  It was a little pig in a pen.  And I asked the man--now this was a white man.  And I, I was, I'm about six or seven now, I don't know (unclear).  I said, where is the "gonna-be" man?  There he is right there.  I said, that ain't no "gonna-be".   That's a pig.  He said he's a pig now but he's gonna be a hog someday.  I said, how do you know?  And when I said that, my mother snatched me and put her hand on my mouth and drug me out of there because you just don't do that.  And I mean we, we just got swindled.  I mean this is a pig now, but he's going to be a hog someday.  That's what he--that's what he was saying.  He was tricking them people in there, taking their money and they, when they went outside they was afraid to tell the other people not to go.  But one-
Speaker 1: Were these all black people?
Speaker 2: Yeah, he had got all of us black people and they--that, that was--(laughter).  Well I remember she's slapping me and she snatched me out of there and just, and--but the guy, he never, he, he didn't say anything.  He just stayed back there and kept yelling, come on see the "gonna-be".
Story_ID: 71816
Speaker 1: Well he, hmm--what kind of advice did your parents give you in Mississippi?
Speaker 2: Well, the advice that they were giving me, just like, just like when I was--I used to sit and think.  I would say, dog gone--they would ask us to do certain things, go to school and I said, well dog, wonder why am I going to school?  I already know how to rake cotton, stuff like that I would say, because you couldn't see no future down there really.  But the advice that they would give you, they would say go to church if they was--tell you to go to church and stuff like that (unclear).  Said maybe one day this guy gonna be a preacher.  That's about the best advice you heard because there, otherwise there's just none.  There was, there were some grown people that would play baseball, you know, was just family baseball, wasn't--but that was--they made a big evening out of that.  But it wasn't that much that you could do to, to do something.  I mean some of the guys what they would brag on is if they could work a little better than the other guy, he'd get a more favorable treatment from the man.  They might give him a dollar or two more or something like that.  It was nothing to do down there but you know just, you just talked to each other.  Everybody was almost like a family in the black community and it, it was good.  It was good.  But when they got mad with each other, it was cruel.  It was really--they would be so mad, I guess it's just like your wife, nobody can make you as mad as she can.  And that's the way you felt, like that.  I remember two old men, two men, these men were about, about fifty or sixty years old at the time.  And this--and they were Brother Jordan's--Brother Jordan and what was that, Mr. James, one of them--something like that.  So he were looking for this man.  He came by our house with his gun looking for this man and my father said well what in the world this man do?  I don't--I'll tell you that later, but he'd say I'm going to get him.  I want to see him.  I want to see him.  So finally one Sunday at--after church, everybody was, was together.  I mean now we was, we're at a gathering there on this man's porch.  And this guy showed up but he didn't have his gun, the man that was looking for him.  He said, hey, I've been looking for you.  He said what did you want with me?  And he named a bunch of the neighbors.  He said, "well I learned that Lovie McGee said that Preacher Jackson said that Henry Carter said that you said my wife won't work."  (Laughter).  I said, and I'm trying to figure out, you're going to shoot somebody for that?  Now I'm a kid now.  I'm trying to figure out--I just could not--he looked because this guy said his wife won't work.  How could that be something to shoot somebody for and it's--when it's his wife and he don't have--she doesn't have to work anyway?  I mean you know, if you don't want her to.  But things that simple, you know that's just touchy it was.  And if you were getting something like they was getting some gifts from something or something from the government, if one got a little bit more than the other one they'd brag on it and tell you about the smart deal that they won.  If one caught more fish than the other, oh man, I got a big fish dinner and--or honey, there was honey at that time, all that was just to--it was competitive.  And they would make all this right here into some sort of contest that they had because the only power that they had was over the children and what was anointed to them by the white folks.  If someone, if the white man made him a straw boss or something like that, say, well you take care of these people here.  And you better believe he gonna take care of you, man.  He would watch everything and it's going to be worse than the man watching you, and that's just the way it was.
Speaker 1: Well it sounds like there were a lot of frustrated people I guess maybe and-
Speaker 2: Well they were.  They were but the only good thing that happened to him was between each other.  They would cook and they would give you--you could go there and would eat.  I mean it was great that way.  And they would--if a guy caught a lot of fish, he'd give you some of it but you know, and--and so you know, it was a, really a trying time for somebody at my age that time because that was your most--those are your spark--when you come from childhood to fourteen years old or fifteen, whatever or thirteen, how many years I was down there, those are the--those are when you are molded really.  So I got there and I got to Chicago [Illinois]-
Story_ID: 71817
Speaker 1: Now why did your family move to Chicago [Illinois]?
Speaker 2: Well they moved to Chicago [Illinois] because most people who left there, who left Chicago at that time seemed to come here and were doing so much better.  A guy would come here and come back and say I make a dollar an hour and you don't know what that sounds like if you're down in Mississippi.  And they--well I only work eight hours a day and down in Mississippi from when the sun come up, from when it went down, you know sun up to sun down.  And we really wondered what did they do with the wasted hours that they had after work but we found out after we got here.  But there was other things too like they would--they had that--when they--when the person would come up here and come back down there, they would exaggerate and it wouldn't be exaggeration, it's the way they would put a thing.  He'd say, man, like we had to go outside and pump water.  We had outhouses down there.  And say, man I go in my--we go in the house and touch a button and I got light, I touch a button and I got ice, I touch another button, I got wind.  You know this was (laughter).  He's telling you the living conditions up here.  And you're down in that hot sun and he's saying all he got to do is touch a button and he got ice and we got to go catch the ice man and we got to pump water and all the other stuff.  And you know it was--looked like he--the people would come back that would leave there, come back in a new car and make Chicago [Illinois] sound like heaven, you know.  And when you get here you see just another big city and you see all these people you know.  And you--the, the bad thing about when you first get here to Chicago when you're just leaving Mississippi like that, you're still friendly.  As you walk the streets you're speaking to everybody and then people looking at you, do I know you?  What are you speaking to me for?  You know it's crazy.  It takes you a while to get over that because that's just the way you were brought up.  And you know, it's a drastic change and now--I went to a school over there, the school I went to was Barnard Grammar School [Chicago, Illinois], but that school was kind of crowded so I went to Cregier [Elementary School, Chicago, Illinois] which was a branch of Bernard that took in students.  So I went to Cregier, a branch of Barnard Grammar School until I was--till I graduated.  And then you know I went to Farragut High School [Farragut Career Academy, Chicago, Illinois].  But it's such a change when you get here because I'm sitting there, I'm sitting in the, I'm sitting in the classroom and I'm sitting next to white folks here and they've been throwing rocks at me when they pass me on the bus down in Mississippi and they're just ordinary people here, you know.  That's the way it was then and I'm trying to figure out, you know I'm just looking out.  This--just have to deal with it.  And you got them country expressions, them expressions that you have down there that you don't realize you have.  And I didn't realize it until one of the girls explained it to me one time.  (Laughter).  And she did it the same way, she said--and this is what people used down there.  Just like for example, she asked me did I want to go someplace with the thing.  I said, "nome" [no ma'am].  And everybody just-
Speaker 1: "Nome".
Speaker 2: "Nome".
Speaker 1: "Nome".
Speaker 2: "Nome".  And that's the way people talked down there sometime.  And when I said that, the whole class just busted out, wanted to laugh and fell on the floor and everything else.  I wanted to know what's wrong with them, you know.
Story_ID: 71818
Speaker 1: But I think what happened, Christmas came and we were supposed to get each other presents.  You know we picked names out of the box to buy the present for each other.  And I pulled a girl's name out of the box, you know.  I didn't know, don't know the girl but what I did was I went and bought her a set of lady things.  I mean I knew how to do that real good and it was the best one of all and she--they appreciated it so much because the rest of them created pencil and comb with the bubble gum.  But I gave this girl a beautiful set of stuff and didn't even know her.  They thought I--so, things started changing a little bit then, you know because I'm going to tell you, you may not believe this, when I got in school up here I was actually smarter than all those people in school cause I had did stuff that they didn't did--that they have never thought about doing.  I had been working, I had been hunting, I had been fishing.  I had--when I say hunting, I done shot rabbits and stuff like that and killed for you know, did (unclear).  And the rest of the animal that they hunt down there, I knew how to do that.  I could, this--I mean with a gun.  We did that in Mississippi at that, when we was that age.  I was ten years old I was hunting.  So--and we knew how to work.  And a lot of times what happen is you had to figure things out for yourself just like during that time, this is in the Fifties [1950s] you know and a lot of people had a coal stove that they used for heating.  So they would go around and holler coal man, coal man, coal man.  So me and my brother got lost one time.  Now this is how you figure out that.  We didn't know how to get back home so we--but we did know our address.  And so we went and told this coal man said, they want some coal and I gave him our address, 2026 West Hastings Street [Chicago, Illinois].  They guy said, "you 'right?"  Said, "yeah."  And then he took off trying to go there and we just followed him, followed him on home.  And then we went in the house to see if they needed some coal.  I guess they didn't really need any but they bought some.  And the guy was happy and you know everything worked out.  But you know he--at that time this, he was--he had a, he was driving a wagon you know with, with a horse that was pulling the coal at that time in Fifty-Five [1955] and yeah.
Speaker 2: So you had to follow him?
Speaker 1: I followed him on, followed him home.  I--because some guys, we would ask the guys how to get there and when they tell you, you didn't know because they were there just like, if you are not familiar with streets and we was not familiar with no streets.  And somebody would say well you got to, go across Roosevelt and then you'll get to Cermak [Chicago, Illinois] and then you're going to go this way, make a left turn.  And you've been down there in Mississippi where they got roads and routes and somebody telling you about these streets and you never heard of the streets before.  So you, you just, you know you're just not familiar with it.  And it was tough at the time but then we quickly got over that.
Story_ID: 71819
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now what was--how did you find high school life in--at Farragut [High School, Chicago, Illinois]?  Now what was Farragut like when you started going there?
Speaker 2: Well, before I got there I had a little taste of (unclear). Like I say I tried, I started boxing in grammar school, you know because that was--I started, I was--when I first saw a gym I said this is for me.  I started training and I was training when I was going to grammar school.  Before I graduated out of grammar school [Barnard Elementary School, Chicago, Illinois] I had won the Golden Glove that year.  And so-
Speaker 1: Well how did you get involved in Golden Gloves?  I mean who brought you into the Golden Gloves?
Speaker 2: Well my brother at the time he was working and they went to a place on Madison Street [sic, Avenue].  There was a--Madison and Hamlin [Chicago, Illinois].  Madison and Independence Boulevard, that's what it is.  It was a hotel there and the gym was on the fifth floor.  I went up there and I saw all these boxers boxing and usually--some of the guys I saw on television like Bobby Boyd [II] and [Ellsworth] "Spider" Webb at the time who were really fighting on television. So I started by boxing but I didn't have money to pay the dues.  So what I did, I subsidized--I subsidized my dues paying by running the elevator in lieu of dues and then I could train.  They let me train free because I was running the elevator. But after I won the Golden Glove, when you run--when they win the Golden Glove, the facility manager will give you a year's free training so I won the next six--the next three years I won it every time so I didn't have to pay anymore gym dues.  But that's how I got involved there but I went out and there was--they were boxing and the, the--and my parents didn't quite understand boxing because they didn't know what I was doing.  I really didn't either.  Now I'm fighting men.  I was you know fifteen, sixteen, but I was fighting grown men at the time and I was beating them all.  But he didn't know, what would happen on his job, here's the way he found out.  On the job one of the foremen or somebody like that asked him, "hey Terrell, who is this guy here you got in the--who is this guy Ernie here that you got?"  He says, here.  He looked--he's in the paper.  And he was shocked.  He had no idea.  So he--I don't--he couldn't answer the man's question.  So he come back to me and, "well what are you doing?"  I said, "I've got a Golden Glove."  "Golden Glove?  Well what are ya'll doing, boxing?  What, ya'll playing around or something?"  I said, "no."  This is going on.  So I won that year and the next year the same thing.  The next year all I know is that was a novice year.  The next year I was open.  I was able to win and give him a gold watch and I was able to win the next year and give my mother the Gold glove that I got for winning.  And then I turned pro after that third time, I turned pro and I started fighting pro.  I was a sophomore.  I was a, really--next--I was in my junior year.  I had two years to get out of high school.  So I finished up and I was a pro by the--I was, you know for a pro I was--done pretty good.  I was winning fights, you know and I, I'd done pretty good.  And then--Jesus Christ, I remember the other stuff better than this.  I was just trying to think of the line of events.  But I was really a child boxing men, you see.  My daddy and mama thought that it was children but I saw Rocky Marciano [born Rocco Francis Marchegiano] training in the same gym as I am, you know, while he were champion at the time.  I saw Sugar Ray Robinson [Walker Smith Jr.], Kid Gavilan [Gerardo Gonzalez], these people.  And I saw people like--all of them train--Jersey Joe Wolcott [born Arnold Raymond Cream].  He came here to train and fought [Rocky] Marciano.  And I'm looking at these people like I--and I'm doing the same thing.  And so that's what got me boxing.  I mean you had such role models to look at when--I hadn't been used to nothing and now all of a sudden this stuff here is thrown at me.
Story_ID: 71820
Speaker 1: Now you were pretty big for your age, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Yeah, I was.  If you-
Speaker 1: How big were you?  Can you tell us?
Speaker 2: Well I were tall.  I was about say, if you look at the pictures though you will see, of my Golden Glove, I'm very tall over all those people.  Even though I was young, I was very tall and I was 6'6" [six feet, six inches].  Now the Book of Records in the encyclopedia says that I'm the tallest heavy weight ever to be crowned champion so far.  The guy who fought Jack Johnson [John Arthur "Jack" Johnson], they say he wasn't quite 6'6".
Speaker 1: Oh, Jess Willard.
Speaker 2: Jess Willard.  You got, what's his name, Lenox Lewis was 6'5", but nobody has won it so far over 6'6".  I'm the tallest so far.  Now they got some mighty tall people there so that record will not last that long anymore.  It will fall pretty quick.  But I got the book upstairs that will show you that, that I'm the tallest heavy weight to win a championship.
Story_ID: 71821
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now what was your social life like in high school with all the boxing and so forth?  I mean did you have much time for social activities?
Speaker 2: Well you know, when you're talking about a guy coming from Mississippi, and then you're talking about social life once he get here, yeah.  I mean the stuff was, it's like that's how--I had--I was in the gym.  Just like what I would do each day, I would get up at four o'clock in the morning, go to Douglas Park on the West Side [Chicago, Illinois].  I would run about three to five miles, then go back home and have another half an hour's rest, eat breakfast and go to school.  Then I would go to the gym that was on Madison and Hamlin over there on the fifth floor and I would put in my elevator time.  That's the, at the beginning and I would train.  I would--could train that day you know.  And I would train.  I had a good trainer at the time, his name was Frank Nelson and he was a very nice trainer who trained me and my brother.  My brother did not make it as a boxer because he just, he just had a job.  He had to work.  He couldn't work and train at the same time.  He had--nothing to subsidize him for that.  But I was in school so I could still, I would still, could still train.  And then by being a pro when I, when I was a sophomore and graduating I was--had a couple of years of experience in boxing already.  So it was a--relatively easy.  Now what the--that's what I did.  And the other thing I did, I, I was a tall, awkward--when I say awkward, it was awkward for other people to fight me because I were tall.  And it was hard for me to get fights you know once people knew who I was.
Story_ID: 71822
Speaker 1: So what I did was bought a guitar just to entertain myself trying to learn how to play and all that stuff.  And I, and that's how I got into music.  I was playing the guitar and I--I was playing the guitar and my sister would sing and they all--my little brother would sing.  I learned how to play a few blues tunes, a few rock and roll tunes.  So they would sing and my father and cousin worked at a plant on Kedzie and Grand [Chicago, Illinois] and the lady with a night club across from there, she had entertainment and they didn't show up one day.  And she asked this--these people who worked for that company called Driscoll [Construction].  That's what it was called, Driscoll.  It was a plant where they--a tool and die plant where they died you know, put the die on tools or stuff like that.  That's the kind of plant it was and they would go up to this place to get their cash, their check cashed.  And the lady said, do any of you guys know a band that could play cause the band that was--didn't show up and she was made cause she couldn't entertain the people.  And my cousin name was Roscoe.  He said the only guy that I know that play a guitar is Ernie Terrell.  She said, well can you get him over here cause I need some help here.  Now (laughter) he told me to come over there.  So I says--I didn't even have no equipment.  I didn't have nothing.  So what I had to do, and I was boxing now so I had money.  So what I did, I went to Sears and Roebuck, bought a guitar.  They were selling them at the time.  That's how cheap the guitar was.  I bought an amplifier from Sears, the whole thing.  They wasn't--they were--that wasn't real professional equipment.  It was toy equipment but it was pretty good.  And we started playing.  We went over there, I took my sister and my brothers and we started playing over there and they, they really loved it because like, the girl started singing and we started singing, we did the show and it was a show that we put on.  And they just was absolutely--they--it was just, it was really intriguing because what she would sing, she'd come out there dressed good, she was nice, she were clean and we put her out front.  And the song she would sing "You can have my"--this was a top choice in the day [reciting the words to the song] "You can have my husband but please don't mess with my man."  And they would look at her--"And I'm telling all you women, I want you all to understand."  That's the way the song went.  And she would sing that and then she would sing other song that would be just about the same.  And we would do our little thing, our little show.  And we had--and we was all from one family so Jesus Christ, that fifteen hundred dollars that we got for that performance going to one hot family, that was a lot of money at the time.  So what happened is we were there so we was fine, you know.  We stayed there and we played and we played, we played and she just--the lady was so, so proud of us you understand, so proud of us.  Then what happened is, see like I say I was boxing.  I had to stop when I had a boxing bought on and just (unclear) to that, that's what I would do.  But one day a man named Bernard Glickman who were the manager of a fighter that was in the ranking named Bobby Boyd, he had a plant not far from there called Koolvent, Koolvent Awning.  You know that's what he was--the business he was in.  So he come there one day and they was turning his car--he was getting his car out.  He stepped in and he saw me and he knew me from the gym--
Story_ID: 71823
Speaker 1: Okay.  So we, well we were--where we left off is that you had started a singing career, a performing career.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And you're boxing too.  You're a Golden Gloves champion and you meet a guy named Bernard Glickman, right?
Speaker 2: I was a--no, not--the Golden Gloves is over now but Bernard Glickman, Bernard Glickman was the manager of a number of fighters that trained at the Midwest Gym [Chicago, Illinois].  That's what they called the gym on Hamlin.  And--but he wasn't my manager at the time.  This right here, what happened, he was coming to his--he was leaving his factory or coming to it, one or the other and it was raining outside so he came in out of the rain and he just saw me on stage.  And when he saw me on stage he says, "What are you doing here?"  I said "I'm singing."  He said, "oh yeah."  And he said, "Man that's great."  I said, "What you like it?"  He said, "No you were lousy but the idea is good.  (Laughter).  I said, what do you mean?  And then he stayed there for another set," and just sat there and listened.  And he said to me, he says, "This is a good idea you got there."  And he wanted to know, he says, "Why don't you let me see what I can do with this group?"  I said, "are you crazy?"  He said, "yeah, probably."  But he--I told him okay.  And so he said "well we got to get you some clothes and stuff like that."  You can't--so what he did was he took me to a place there on State Street.  I think he had some interest in that place, I'm not sure.  But he had a guy there and he took me there with him.  He says "who you got here tonight?"  He said some lady.  He says "how is she doing?"  He said "well she's stale."  He said "what do you got coming in?"  He said, "well there's a couple of guys I can get, want to get something that's pretty good."  He says "I got an idea."  He said "what?"  He says "why don't you put Ernie Terrell over here?"  He said, "Ernie Terrell, that's you?"  How you doing?  Yeah.  What does he do?  He sings.  No, he--no, that's out of step.  He said, he says "Ernie Terrell?"  He said, yeah.  He says, "okay, what does he do?"  He entertains.  Is that right?  Yeah.  He says, "what do I have to pay him?"  He said, "Ten Thousand Dollars."  (Laughter).  Oh boy, he said "Ten Thousand Dollars" he said.  Must I say what he said?
Speaker 1: What did he say?
Speaker 2: Huh?  He said, "well what does he do shit gold bricks or what?"  He said, no he sings.  He says well oh, that's what he does.  I--well they got to do something if we're going to pay him ten grand.  So what happened?  That was the wrong spot for me but I didn't start there.  But what he did, they worked it out to where I was going to start at the Whiskey A Go-Go, which was right on Rush Street down from State [Street, Chicago, Illinois].  You know where that's--Rush Street is right?
Speaker 1: (Unclear).
Speaker 2: So I was working at the Whiskey A Go-Go and they put my name up there and I took my act and my sisters there and they, they were signing and they--it, it went too well for the kind of place that it was, you know.  They--reason I'm saying that is because I understand now.  See, that place was used to people coming in and going out and they get a turnover, a turnover, a turnover.  But when they see an act they like, the folks won't leave.  They just sit there all night so you got the same people all night.  And they don't dry--they don't buy as many drinks as when you're getting the turnover.  So that--but they--what we--but we--what we did, we brought new people down there to Rush Street that wasn't there before.  And we stayed there--and even when we, even--I stayed there for a long time.  And even when we wasn't there they wouldn't take our name down.  They just kept it up there all the time.  And I was singing with Jean [Terrell] and Rosie at that time and we were doing good.  Everybody was crazy about the show.
Story_ID: 71824
Speaker 1: Then I would get fight on, have to leave it and they'd leave my name up there.  And that's what--that's how I was working.  So you know I, I started to move up in boxing.  I start, I was you know--this was--I started to move up in boxing.  Now my sister and my brother Lenny--Lenny is, I'm ten years older than him.  He--they were still in school.  They were still in school so we--it was very hard to go on the road you understand because--well we did go on the road.  Jean [Terrell] graduated--when she graduated.  Lenny was still in school so he would--sometime we had to fly him back with some folk--we was working in New Jersey and we had to fly him back with some folks, make him go to school every day and--while we worked.  And that's the way it went down.  And we were doing great.  I mean started--it was going good.  And as I progressed in boxing, I appeared on all of the shows like Merv Griffin and Johnny Carson and Hollywood Palace.  And if you'll see it back there, this--Ed Sullivan.  I just appeared on there by myself and Ed Sullivan took and he just introduced me on there.  But we worked the Hollywood Palace, these are the kind of places that we worked and-
Speaker 2: Now you all really took off quick, I mean I guess, right?  You started, you-
Speaker 1: Well it was--it was relative--it was kind of quick once this guy, guy come--well what we had done before we did all that, we made a tour of Canada.  We worked in, all--and like, like we--but see, I had become champion, I had fought--see, this was going simultaneously with boxing.  Now I had become champion when we toured Canada.  I had beat Eddie Machen and we, we had--I had fought George Chuvalo in Canada and I toured Canada.  I went from, oh let's see, like from Montreal to Toronto to, I mean--where did we go?  We went to Saskatchewan.  That's a providence right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, a providence [sic, province], right.
Speaker 1: We--and I forget all of the providences [provinces] in Canada.  But we worked them all.  We worked them--we worked from, we started in--where did we start?  Toronto, we worked Montreal, then we worked Alberto [sic, Alberta], is that a, is that a Providence, Alberto?  All of the towns in Canada that we worked, we worked them just about all.
Story_ID: 71825
Speaker 1: And Mr. Terrell, what was your act like?  I mean what were you--what were the songs, the kind, the songs you would sing?
Speaker 2: Well the song-
Speaker 1: The blues or rhythm and blues?
Speaker 2: No, we had to do everything.  I mean when you grew up like we had well you could not just do blues.  That, see the blues were for a certain segment that you can do.  We would do blues if necessary. But we did songs like--from show tunes like 'Sunrise Sunset', if you would list them she'd do them.  Jean [Terrell] would sing almost anything.  She could sing almost anything.  And we got that stuff here, we got a --I was looking at the family reunion, we normally do it at the family reunion but we haven't did it in so long and we don't have all the people there so the music is pretty bad.   But you could see that.  I mean I got it here if you want to look at that.  But the thing about it is she would do that stuff.  She would do stuff like (starts singing) "More than the greatest love, the world has" --and that stuff.  And she would have a repertoire of music of that.  You would do classic--it depended on where we were.  If we were working a black club, we'd do Wilson Pickett, Jackie Wilson and people like that.  And if we were working--some of the places we did country and western, you know we did that.  We did it all.  You just have to do it all.  We, we--once you know--once you learn how to play, you can play it all.  So if you got any talent you should be able to do it all and we did.  We did it all.
Speaker 1: And did you--how good were you on the guitar?  Did you get real good?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I was able to play but what happened is after I played so long my little brother he played base behind me.  But then what happened is he wanted to play guitar so he wanted me out front.  So I stopped playing and my two, my brother's played the base and my brother played the guitar and we added a piano and I, you know--so we just went on that way, you know.  But we had a good, good entertaining show at the same places for a long time.  We had a circuit that we worked.  We--that went on.
Story_ID: 71826
Speaker 1: But you're singing here in Chicago [Illinois].  You're also boxing in Chicago?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  And I--well I was singing in Chicago [Illinois] but then, then we had to--we went on the road.  We went on the road and we'd done stuff in--what we were doing, I think one of our first road trip, we went to Rockford, Illinois.  And we met--it's funny.  We were playing, played in a supper club there and we drew a lot of people to the supper club during the weeknights when they just, when they claimed they didn't go out.  So we drew these people and this guy came over--I mean a lady was there.  She was so elated and she said, "I'm going to get my uncle to talk to you all."  And she says, okay.  So she went to get him.  And that was one day so the next day she brought him in.  So she says--I said, "who is your uncle?"  She said, "Ralph."  Oh, so I--so she went and she brought Ralph in and now this is in the Fifties [1950s], you understand.  I mean these--was it '50 [1950]?  No, it was in the--must, must have--wait, just--close to, around '60 [1960].  It was that time. I mean I was out of school so it had to be '60 [1960], '61 [1961], '62 [1962] or something like that.  And so he come and he looked at the show and he talked to me.  He says, "I'll tell you what, okay we can get you in this place in Wyoming."  You work this place in [Las] Vegas [Nevada].  And he asked me who was my, who was my agent first and I told him who it was.  But he said, if he was my agent I'm going to work here and we'll work there and work there.  I said, I said "look, I'm trying to figure out, I'm trying to keep up with him, you know."  And I said, "what is your name?"  He said "Ralph."  Ralph what?  "Ralph Capone."  So when he said that, he saw me kind of swing up.  He said, "look, if you don't want this now just say so and you know we'll just drop it."  So I said I didn't want it and he dropped it.  So--anyway, that--we got out of that part but we left Rockford [Illinois] and went to Nashville, Tennessee and we worked at a place that's called Printer's Alley where they have a lot of clubs so we worked there during that time.  We don't--we--I'm just saying we worked every place that you can just about name.  We went all over the United States.  But it's hard to remember all these places that we went, but-
Speaker 1: We don't need for you to tell us all the places but you all worked a lot of places and you got good reviews too, right?
Speaker 2: We got a good review.  Well everybody wouldn't--they weren't--the place they reviewed us at was New Orleans [Louisiana].  Some of them would not--they would not review and we lost some of the reviews.  And like I said some of the (unclear) come over and took some of them.  We got reviewed in a number of places.  We got good reviews in Canada.  We got good reviews every place--all of the reviews were good except for that one guy I told you who made the crack about I looked like a snow covered mountain.  (Laughter).  I don't--guess that's not bad if that's the way he thought.
Story_ID: 71827
Speaker 1: But anyway, we got good reviews cause we did have a--we had a good show.  Jean [Terrell] was a good singer.  The only--I'm just trying to figure out how to tell this because you know we worked and we worked.  Like I said we worked through Canada and we worked all over the states that we can work, New York (unclear) you know even worked there.  And then what happened we was working at the Fountainebleau in Miami Beach [Florida], was working there in Miami Beach.  Now this was around 1964 and Berry Gordy had an act at the Eden Roc down the street from there.  We did three shows.  He would come over and sit and catch our show cause we did three.  He only did two.  I mean his act only did two.  And he come over and he saw my sister and that's when he selected Jean [Terrell] to replace Diana Ross as the lead singer to the Supremes [1970].  And he come there and he talked to us and he--we didn't want to hold her back if she can go with the Supremes so we--you know I mean it wasn't like she was taken from--we were glad that she were going to do it.  And, so she went there and she left the group and we had to replace her with some people and we did.  We--after we left Jean [Terrell], after Jean left, we had a number of girls that we had to deal with because the girls, the girls would come and say-
Story_ID: 71828
Speaker 1: When you get new--other girls and you put a good show behind them, you got folks out in the audience who talk to them and try to steal them away and go do something on their own.  They think they can do something just because--see, my thing was, you put it together in a show.  The show is going to get over you know because you got good talent, you got all that stuff there.  But they think they can take once piece of it and go put that someplace else and make it work.  And most of the time it just don't.  So then we had a number of girls.  Some of them left because they got--to get married.  Some of them left because their boyfriend didn't want them on the road.  All kind of reasons why you got to get new singers.  And all the new singers bring new adventures.
Story_ID: 71829
Speaker 1: But during this time, see other things happened too.  Like I told you about this guy Bernard Glickman, Bernard Glickman was the, I guess you call manager for my singing group.  That's what he did.  Now when we went to Canada and fought--I fought George Chuvalo, Bernard Glickman worked in my corner like he was the fight--they thought he was the fight manager but he wasn't, he was just there.  And I didn't know whether he had mob ties but they--that's what come out.  It come out that this guy Bernard Glickman had mob ties and I was, I was out one night and I was driving and the cop cited me for something.  And when they found who I was, they says oh man, I know your mind ain't together.  You go ahead, go home and get out of the car.  I'm wondering what was wrong.  So I got--I looked at the headline and it said, the headline in the [Chicago] Sun-Times was "Threats to Kill Terrell".  But when you read, when you read it-
Speaker 2: Do you know anything about them at all?
Speaker 1: I just hadn't--I hadn't saw the paper then.  But when you read it, it wasn't no threat to kill Terrell.  It's just that this guy was saying they asked Bernard [Glickman] questions because they asked him was he--he claimed he wasn't with no mob and I don't believe he was.  But he claimed he put an awning on a mob's house one time and once you do that I guess you--they say you're tied with the mob.  But he said he wasn't.  That's what he told me.  But I got rid of him from that day on and (unclear) work no more.  And he--then we went on and we went, kept working.  I--my training camp was in New Jersey and I--well I worked there a lot of time at the--Atlantic City [New Jersey].  Atlantic City was a good working place at the time.  So I worked out there a lot with the band.  But I, but I lived in my training camp because that was, that was the thing to boxing.  Now that is how my career got started as far as the singing was concerned.  And then as things went along with the boxing that's like for example we went on a Hollywood Palace before the fight with Ali and things like that. We, we did that with, what's the guy name who appeared with Rochester [Eddie "Rochester" Anderson]?
Speaker 2: Jack Benny.
Speaker 1: Jack Benny.  Jack Benny was the host of that.  So you know it was--then we got paid good for that and everything.  It was--that was just what--the entertainment was good and the other thing was good.  They had a club here [Chicago, Illinois] called The Regal, we appeared at that twice.  So we worked, I mean we worked the finest clubs.  We used to work one month, like it was one month a year out of Las Vegas [Nevada] for a couple of years we did that.  And you know it was--it went great.
Story_ID: 71830
Speaker 1: Now, so did you really enjoy performing and--?
Speaker 2: I enjoyed performing and I enjoyed the challenge to boxing but just like I say, what drove me to entertaining is I was the--I was, I thought my fights came slow but they was not really.  I had a total--I think I had a total of fifty-six fights and-fifty-six.  I think I had nine losses and you know that's a good record.  And I have won the, won a lot of fights.  But I mean not many people had more fights than that.  Joe Louis had sixty-three.  [Muhammad] Ali had sixty something.  But I guess that, well I was, I was in the ballpark with the number of fights I had.
Speaker 1: Okay.  But I know by 1963 your boxing career is going pretty good.  In Sixty-Three [1963] you are the number three ranked heavy weight in the country behind [Charles] Sonny Liston, Cassius Clay or Muhammad Ali, Doug, and Doug Jones.  You're number three.  You know, so I mean did you--how did you--tell us about your boxing style.  How would you box, cause you had--you were tall?
Speaker 2: I were tall.  I, I think I was not--I was--I did not have a classic style you know like, like they (unclear) my style was a jabber, a jabber and a--and I would, I wouldn't let guy, you know I would, I wouldn't let guys fight on the inside cause that's where they would hurt you at.  I would tie them up and then I would be inside.  So a lot of folks don't like that and a lot--like when you look at boxing and you call it a science.  So what is the science of it?  The science is if I hit you and make you miss me, you don't hit me.  Isn't that what it should be?  Then nobody liked that kind of a fighter.  I mean you go to a fight and they see somebody miss the other guy, no, you--that's why, that's why they called the "Thriller in Manila" [Philippines, 1975] between [Muhammad] Ali and [Joe] Frazier such a great fight.  When you think of that fight you don't even think about who won.  You just--they just put it all on the table and neither one of them had nothing when they left the ring cause it was all gone.  And [Muhammad] Ali just happened to be the one they, that they managed to get his hand held up.  But they, that was a fight then.  Those are the classics but a good fight is when you beat the other guy and don't let him do much to you.  Isn't that the kind of fighter you'd want to be?
Speaker 1: Yeah.  I-
Speaker 2: That ain't what they like to pay for.  They like to pay for dumb fighters where one hit the other one, other one hit him back and they just keep (laughter).  I, I, you know--so I guess I wasn't that much of a classy fighter to that, as far as that goes cause I didn't want nobody hitting me that much, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, so, no a tall man has got to be careful for a little guy getting inside and punching him, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: Because your arms are long and they're good at, at a distance but if the guy gets in close it's (unclear).
Speaker 2: If he--when he gets in close you're at a defect because he's short and he can maul and he can hit you with his head and all the other stuff he can do.  But when he's outside he got to get to you before he can do anything.  And if--you saw a perfect example of that with Mike Tyson because he just, he just was outclassed in every way that you can think of, really.
Speaker 1: [Mike] Tyson and Lennox Lewis you mean?
Speaker 2: Yes, [Mike] Tyson and Lennox Lewis, yes, um-hmm.
Speaker 1: Lennox Lewis is 6'5" [six feet, five inches] and-
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --Tyson's about six feet.
Speaker 2: Six--no, not quite.
Speaker 1: (Unclear) 5'11" [five feet eleven inches].
Speaker 2: 5'11" [five feet, eleven inches], something like that.  So that's, that's a big difference.
Story_ID: 71831
Speaker 1: Okay.  So-
Speaker 2: Now the fights if we can deal with them, the first fight I had against a contender I got stopped by Cleveland Williams [1962].  Cleveland Williams was a fighter that nobody wanted to fight and they got--they called me on short notice.  I didn't even have enough time to get ready for him.  But I fought him again and, and beat him [1963].  When I beat him, I beat a rank fighter which put me in--wasn't nobody--he and I was the same.  Nobody wanted to fight the two of us.  But once I beat him I was in the ratings and then I fought Eddie Machen--not Eddie Machen, I fought Zora Folley [1963].  That was a highly ranked fighter.  Beat Zora Folley.  And I don't know who I beat up then.  I beat some other fighters after that probably that wasn't ranked.  But then I beat Eddie Machen [1965] for the title and I beat Doug Jones [1965] and George Chuvalo [1966] and then I fought [Muhammad] Ali [1967].  Now-
Speaker 1: Now you were champion in 1965, right or was it '66 [1966]?
Speaker 2: Six [1966].  Well, I won in 1965.  Think I won it in '65 [1965].
Speaker 1: Yeah, '65 [1965] I guess, right.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I won it in '65 [1965].  It wasn't until Nineteen, I thought, Seven.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Almost two years.
Speaker 1: And there was a split right in the-[Muhammad] Ali was--was this before Ali was--?
Speaker 2: No.  What this was though it wasn't, it was--what brought this about if you remember Floyd Patterson and Ingemar Johansson, they fought each other for three years.  Nobody got a shot at the title.  All of us like Sonny Liston and myself and [Eddie] Machen and [Zora] Folley and [Cleveland] Williams and all these people got a--and [Muhammad] Ali at the time standing around waiting on this guy and they're fighting each other three years for anybody got a break.  So the WBA [World Boxing Association] was formed and to, to change that so one guy can't just fight one soft guy all the time and hold the title in hostage.  So I was the very first WBA Champion [1965].  They had--when--it's like I was, I fought--got in a tournament with, it was supposed to be Floyd Patterson, Floyd Patterson and Doug Jones I believe and myself and Eddie Machen.  No, no, it was Eddie Machen--no, no, Eddie Machen--it was Cleveland Williams.  That was the four people that were supposed to--Patterson was supposed to fight Cleveland Williams and I think I was supposed to fight Doug Jones.  That was before I fought Doug Jones.  That was the--and the winner of that--those fights was supposed to be the WBA [World Boxing Association] Champions.
Speaker 1: Okay, let's change tape right here.  That's a good spot to have a change.
Story_ID: 71832
Speaker 1: --Muhammad Ali.  The number one contender was Ken Norton.  And Ken Norton had fought Jimmy Young a few months back and that's what made him number one.  And so then the champion-[Michael] Spinks was still the champion.  He didn't lose the championship until he signed to fight Clay--I mean [Muhammad] Ali because there was more money in fighting [Muhammad] Ali than it would have been fighting Norton so he signed to fight Norton.  They stripped him of the WBC [World Boxing Council] Champion and gave it to [Ken] Norton.  But--and [Ken] Norton, it was the fight that happened with him and Jimmy Young six months earlier.  So he did beat Jimmy Young but when he beat Jimmy Young that was no championship fight.  It was a championship fight after they took it away from Spinks and back dated it to then, you know.  So he was the only guy I know that was heavyweight champion of the world but never won a championship fight.  But he never, he never did win one.
Story_ID: 71833
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now back to your rise, you're in 1960--was it--now when did you beat Eddie Machen and what was that, I mean what had happened then?
Speaker 2: Just like I say, Eddie Machen, the way it--they got a--four of us were supposed to fight, do a fight off for the championship.  That was my--I was supposed to fight Doug Jones and Floyd Patterson was supposed to fight Cleveland Williams.  [Floyd] Patterson wouldn't fight Williams.  [Doug] Jones would not fight me.
Speaker 1: Now why?  Why not?
Speaker 2: For whatever reason.  I mean I can understand--there would have been no way that [Floyd] Patterson could beat a [Cleveland] Williams.  Williams was a big guy who hits harder than anybody at the time.
Speaker 1: They called him "Big Cat" right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.  So anyway he would have destroyed [Floyd] Patterson.  So Patterson wouldn't fight nothing like that.  Now [Doug] Jones didn't fight me then but--so something happened to [Zora] Folley and I was--and I had to go to the next guy which was [Eddie] Machen so they just made me and Machen for the WBA [World Boxing Association] heavy weight championship and we fought that fifteen rounds here in the Chicago Amphitheater [Illinois] and I won a fifteen round decision.  That's how I got to be champion.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 71834
Speaker 1: It was a--I had Joe Louis in my corner.  I was very proud of that and Ezzard [Mack] Charles.  I didn't have--I don't have a--I don't have that picture of me and Ezzard Charles.  But I had Joe Louis working my corner and he was telling me what to do and-
Speaker 2: Did you have a good relationship with Joe Louis?
Speaker 1: Yes I did.
Speaker 2: And when did you meet Joe Louis?
Speaker 1: Well you know I don't--I met Joe Louis a lot of times because he, he would always be around fights so I've had--just come out and shook his hand.  But Joe Louis is one of the strangest man, you know he was a well--he was the most well known in America at the time.  And he was so smart, he would not let you catch his eye because the minute somebody catch his eye they'll walk to him and he didn't want that.  And he would--he was just a good guy and he would just tell me, give me encouraging words.  And he couldn't--you couldn't hardly get a story finished with him because every time he get you sitting down to tell you something, somebody would walk up and interrupt, hey Joe, hi Joe, that's Joe Louis, that's Joe Louis.  So it was just annoying for him cause he couldn't have been a trainer or nothing like that.  They wouldn't (unclear) went down.  They wouldn't allow him to do it.  They would just--he was too big of a celebrity.  So that's the way he was.  It's one guy come up to me and asked me for an autograph.  He didn't see Joe when he comes up and he come up there and asked me for the autograph and I gave him the autograph.  And then he said you're Joe Louis.  Yeah, yeah, yeah.  He said, "Joe Louis, you know I was in the army with you in Nineteen Forty Something, whatever it was."  He said "and you signed a picture to my, my daughter.  You said to her, Best Wishes Sweetie to my daughter, you remember that?"  Joe said, "yeah, yeah I remember that."  He said, "Jesus, I won't tell them I saw you."  He said, "okay."  And then we got on back.  I said "Joe?"  "Yeah?"  I said "you know you didn't remember that."  He said "he gone ain't he?"  (Laughter).  So, I'm trying--so I got the message real quick.  He just said yeah, yeah I remember.  There's no way he could remember that, you know.  But he said, he gone.  I--and that's, that's the way he was.  And he was a very direct, serious people person speaking to you, you know, and wouldn't bite his tongue.  You know he was, he was sharp with it sometime.  But you couldn't find a better guy nowhere, nowhere than Joe Louis.
Speaker 2: Do you remember hearing his fights on the radio when you were a kid?
Speaker 1: Yeah, I did.  I, I remember that.  I remember hearing some fights on the radio.  This was--and the whole world would stop until Joe's fight was over.  And I just, you know I couldn't understand nobody having that kind of an impact on the world, but that's what it was.  I mean everything would just stop, I mean just like--things would just slow down to a--and that's the way it was.
Speaker 2: Now what about Ezzard [Mack] Charles, what kind of a guy was he?
Speaker 1: Ezzard [Mack] Charles was a good family man.  He was a good, he was good guy.  He--it was hard for him to shine as long as Joe Louis was alive even though he beat Joe Louis.  He was a good fighter.  Ezzard Charles was probably one of the best technical fighters that you can see, that you will ever see.  He and Archie Moore [Archibald Lee Wright] were just tremendous technical fighters.  He kind of lived in the shadows of Joe Louis all the time because you know, yeah, Ezzard Charles, okay fine.  But Joe Louis was the man.  And--but he was a top guy.  He lived in Chicago [Illinois].  I mean his son is still here.  I saw him not too long ago.  And he just was a great guy.
Story_ID: 71835
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now the--you beat Eddie Machen in your next fight in defense of your title was against George Chuvalo, right?
Speaker 2: I think it was George Chuvalo or Doug Jones.  Which one they got down there first?
Speaker 1: Oh it might have been Doug.  Well, which one do you think (unclear)?
Speaker 2: I thought it was Doug Jones [sic, George Chuvalo].
Speaker 1: Doug Jones?  Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Well what happened when you fought Doug Jones?
Speaker 2: Well, what happened, see what happened--no, that's not the way it happened.  We, [Muhammad] Ali and myself, Ali called me on the phone one day and he told me, he said "I want you to meet me in my office.  They said we're supposed to fight."  I says okay.  So the office that he had was in a night club on 71st and, 71st and--a street there?  And it was a little office in that nightclub that he was in then.  So I went in and we talked to him.  He said, "now look, they want me to fight you.  We got to figure out a way to get this money."  I said, okay.  He said, "don't make no mistake no mistake now.  When I get you in the ring, I'm going to knock your head off."  I said, "that's what I'm going to do to you."  "But let's get the money.  I got to figure out a name for you.  [Sonny] Liston was the bear and Floyd Patterson was the rabbit.  I don't know what I'm going to call you."  I said, okay, it was all right.  So anyway, he said, "let's get this money straight."  I said "all right."  "I got to have fifty percent.  Now what you want?"  I said, "fifty percent."  How you going to get fifty percent and I get it?  That don't leave nothing for nobody else.  I said well look, I said I'm a champion, that's what he said.  I said I'm the champion.  He said man, you're crazy.  White folks wrote WBA on a piece a paper and told you you was champion.  You can't get no championship that way.  But that's the way he said it.  And I said look man, I am the champion.  I'm defending my championship and I said that's the way it goes.  I said let's get together on this.  So he said okay, he said okay, we'll work, we'll work that out.  But he said we're going to fight.  And what happened he was saying well you know I got to get fifty percent and Main Bout [Main Bout, Inc., a corporation formed by Muhammad Ali] got to do--whatever he said that other-
Speaker 1: Ten o'clock (unclear)?
Speaker 2: No, it wasn't talking about--he said something like Main Bout got--I said Main Bout is you.  That's your company.  That means you want to get it all.  But anyway, we agreed on something to where I had about twenty something percent and then we come--we got together on it and what was going to happen the promoters here were called Irving Schoenwald and Ben Bentley was the match maker.  We were just going to pay them a fee just to put the fight on and then we were going to have the fight here in Chicago [Illinois].  So I was happy.  So I went and got myself together and I was trying to get my training expenses which I got a check and went to camp and started training.
Story_ID: 71836
Speaker 1: About--we had to sign for the fight first.  I don't want to forget that part.  We had to sign for the fight so we got together up at the boxing commission's office and we signed for the fight and this is where me and Clay [Muhammad Ali] got the first stuff going and he started it.  What happened is, Irving Schoenwald said, "Now look, when you guys go to your training camp I want you all to get prepared to come here to Chicago [Illinois] and do your last two weeks of training here in Chicago to help promote this fight."  He said "is that all right with you Ernie?"  I said "well if it's all right with Clay it's all right with me."  And he says, it's all right with you?  He said--he told me he said, Muhammad.  I said oh, Muhammad.  He said "why you call me Clay and everybody else call me Muhammad my--by my true name and you call me by the white folks' name?"  I said well, I said when I met you, I've been knowing you all this time you told me your name was Clay so that's what I call you.  I don't know all these here names you picking up."  He said "you're not--you're just an old 'Uncle Tom'" and he pushed me.  And then somebody grabbed me and we started wresting and struggling and my suit got torn up and all that stuff.  And that's what started that "what's my name" stuff, you know?  And so I didn't think--after he told me that we're going to do this stuff to boast the fight so everything was fine, you know.  So it was all right.  So what happened is I went on to training camp and started training then all of a sudden I get a letter that the government was going to throw the fight out of Chicago [Illinois] because Ali was making unpatriotic statements, you understand.  So I called--wasn't nothing I could--I'm just sitting there waiting to see what happened.  They're looking around for someplace to take the fight and every time they get someplace they would--the political thing would get heated and then to go from there.  This was when he said them Japanese--no, what did he--them Vietnamese haven't done nothing to me, or something like that he was saying. Anyway, they--I had a two hundred fifty thousand dollar guarantee so that was supposed to be my guarantee, plus a percentage.  They called me and said we can't give you no guarantee now.  We just got to do what we can do.  I said look man, no we can't do that.  So they kept--they didn't have no site for the fight and all that stuff so I had to pull out of the fight.  I had to pull out and that was what they wanted me to do because they wanted to--they had found a spot which was Canada and it was better for him to fight George Chuvalo in Canada than fight me up there, you know cause that was his home town.  So he--I pulled out of the fight and he fought George Chuvalo and that's when I fought Doug Jones, I think.  No, I had already beat Chuvalo.  I had already--did I?  Yeah, I had already beat Chuvalo.  I'm thinking.  And, but anyway he fought Chuvalo then.  And then after he fought Chuvalo, he went overseas and fought Cooper [Sir Henry Cooper] and Brian London and some other folks.  Then I fought Doug Jones I'm thinking.  And--before we got together on the fight between me and [Muhammad] Ali, you know.
Story_ID: 71837
Speaker 1: But what happened on those fights, we--he was crazy.  He had a lot of guys with him and these guys would do anything he'd tell them to do.  And they--so I just wanted to stay away from him until we had the fight on and that's what I tried to do because what he did once we got the fight on after he went on--like when he went to London and fought those bouts and I fought George Chuvalo.  When we finally settled and signed for the bout to be in Texas.  Now I'm--I know about all of his antics and stuff like that.  I know about that so I was going to try my best to just stay cool, let him do his thing and I do what I'm going to do.  But one thing he did, this was the day before the fight.  It was an emergency call come in and to my trainer and all of them rushed out of the room and left me there by myself.  And when they left me there by myself, about thirty girls, I mean they knocked on the door and I opened the door they just pushed themselves in.  And they come in there and looking, turning over things and messing with stuff.  And says oh man, this is a nice room and just doing all this kind of stuff.  Until I saw what they was doing I said "hey, you better get out of here.  I'm going to hurt one of ya'll."  I mean--so finally I got, I was going to call security and they all left.  But now when they left, they had dumped some of my stuff on the bed and put my mouthpiece out and it was laying on the dresser.  So I thought maybe they had shot something in my mouthpiece and I--there wasn't enough time to change that.  So my trainer he just washed it all night long and make sure that--cause it's rubber, you know, that thing is rubber and you can shoot stuff in it.  But that was on my mind all during the fight.  But evidently nothing happened because I can't--nothing happened that I could blame on the mouthpiece, you know.  But that's just the only thing that he did to get next to me, to have all those girls coming through my room like that and go in there and messing with stuff.  That, that's a lot of nerve.
Speaker 2: So that's like--he uses like a psychological warfare maybe (unclear)?
Speaker 1: Yeah.  Yeah it was.  I mean I know about all of his antics.  That didn't bother me.  Now he'll (unclear)--unless if--if these girls come in there messing with your mouthpiece or something that you got to use you know, anything else would have been all right.  But that's what they did and that's the only thing that got next to me.  So you--we had the fight in Texas and he won a fifteen round decision.  And all the rest of it you know.
Speaker 2: Yeah, it was a lot of build up to that fight as I remember.
Speaker 1: It was so much build up of the fight.  See, all of the bad stuff that Ali did that--all of the stuff was perceived as bad that he did worked for him.  That stuff worked for him.  He did things like, like when he said that stuff about the Chinese and all that stuff, like it turned out right that he did not, you know he had that--he didn't go over there to fight.  And turned out he was right and the government was wrong the way things went down.  And then he was able to go and get people that the government couldn't get themselves which is commendable to anybody.  So [Muhammad] Ali done a lot of things you know, he done a lot of things.  I don't know it just worked out.  It's just worked out.  And what--the way he was--the reason why he was able to draw so many people.  Didn't matter whether you loved him or hate him, you wanted to see because you was interested so you paid that--you bought the ticket and that's the bottom line.
Story_ID: 71838
Speaker 1: Now did you ever get a chance to fight for the title again?
Speaker 2: No, I never did get a chance to fight for the title again.  That was the, that was the only time I ever--I--he made a--there was a--I, I was just kind of--I started working with my group then and I went to some weird places.  I went to Thule [U.S. Air Base], Greenland.  That's at the top of the world where it's twenty-four--right--this is when I, right after I fought [Muhammad] Ali that's where I went with my group.  And that's at, up there at the top of the world at the North Pole.  This--during the summer it's twenty-four hours daylight.  During the winter it's twenty-four hours dark.  And I played there and it was just kind of a depressing place because it was all male and they was, all of them kind of be a little crazy.  I mean it's, that's just--when me and my sister [Jean Terrell] landed, I mean when my band landed, half of the people, when I say half of the people, all the people that wasn't working come out to meet the plane, not to see me, they just wanted to see my sister because she was a woman.  And when she got off they say the population the women population on this land, on this island has just doubled.  The only other woman on there was an old doctor's assistant.  My sister, she had to--her room was a vault, you know.  I mean you had to just lock her up every night and she, she could get out but she--and she'd only come out of there when want to eat together and stuff like that.  But that was a--it was a weird situation and these guys just wanted to--they had, they--see, the way it was when you go there they sign up for a term.  You got to sign up for a year and you cannot leave cause if you leave you lose all your benefits for being there.  You might get--you get paid just what you get.  But if you stay there the whole year you get, you don't pay no taxes.  You get all the other benefits that they give you and you come home with a lot of money, you understand.  So a lot of them have to stay there a year before they can leave and that's a strain on the men being away from women for that long you know.  But that's the way it was.
Story_ID: 71839
Speaker 1: Now did you continue to perform in--now you boxed some more, right, but you really didn't-
Speaker 2: Yeah, I boxed some more.  What I did was I did all the performing then but I didn't box until [Muhammad] Ali came back.  And then when he came back I started jockeying for another shot of him.  If you look at the rating, I fought my way back to number four before I was robbed of a decision with a guy called (unclear) call him The Bleeder.  What's his name?  It's on the, on the-
Speaker 1: Oh the Texas, the guy from Texas?
Speaker 2: Not Texas, he's from New Jersey.
Speaker 1: Not Wepner [Charles "Chuck" Wepner]?
Speaker 2: Wepner, that's him.
Speaker 1: Chuck Wepner.
Speaker 2: Chuck Wepner.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: See, Chuck Wepner, I mean he (unclear) fought with him and I--that's a fight I knew that I could beat that guy easy which I did, and beat him bad.  He was beaten so bad.  He was not even trying to win.  He was just trying to last.  He didn't throw no punch.  He was just holding and grabbing and all that stuff and I was just beating him and beating him.  It was just the worst decision in history but--and when the fight was over the referee was the only judge.  The referee walked over to the corner of the other guy and called the promoter up there and says, how can I give this fight to [Chuck] Wepner?  So what the promoter started doing, took his score card and starts scratching off rounds for me, adding them on for [Chuck] Wepner (unclear).  My trainer went there, he looked and saw what was happening, balled up his fist and hit the man, punched him right and knocked him down off the ring.  And it's just a whole bedlam broke out.  There was fights everywhere that was in the--that was going on at the time.  So the fight started that the, they just--so finally they, they--I'm trying to figure out did they announce the decision that night.  But they, they announced the decision that night but that commissioner was so mad he said you got to--he called a hearing.  And they called a hearing, I went back for the hearing.  He said, well the official referee which is our official gave the fight to [Chuck] Wepner.  We have to honor that because he was the official.  He says but I don't know, it's nothing else we can do.  And [Chuck] Wepner got the shot at [Muhammad] Ali, you know.
Speaker 1: Did you have, ever have the feeling that the fight game was fixed or--on some level or--?
Speaker 2: That fight, you know like they got to the referee on this fight--that fight there.  And it was easy to do because he's the only one there.  He was the only one there.  Only one guy you got to fix.  You can easily get to him.  This guy didn't know how to do it cause when you walk over and talk to a promoter before you give a decision, that's why they had to had the hearing because he talked to the promoter before he rendered a decision, got permission from the commissioner there.  He says, how can I give this fight to [Chuck] Wepner?  And who--the promoter took this pencil and starts changing the score card.  And I--so I--we brought that up, we said well look what about the promoter changing the card for this guy?  He said well--he says the--they said they didn't change it.  I said we're looking at them change it.  We were looking at him.  How do we think--we went over to see what it was before he hit him.  He said well we understand that but they said there was no changes made.  Then when we looked at the card, they got the card doctored up good now, you understand.  Because the man, it would have been a huge scandal if he had done what he really was supposed to do.  So he really, they really had to get another card and fix it up the way it was supposed to be because that guy was scratching out rounds for me and adding them on.  So--and--but you let the commission have two week, two weeks to--think it was two or three weeks to correct something when they had to hear it after the fight, well he's going to make himself look good or he--cause he's a political appointed guy anyway.  So that way--that's the way that went down.
Story_ID: 71840
Speaker 1: So after this, did you retire from boxing at this point or--?
Speaker 2: Let me see, I think I had one more fight, one more fight.   I was just out of it.  And I had no desire to fight no more after that because I knew that the Ali thing was gone when you lose to a bum like [Chuck] Wepner.  So I think I had one more fight after that I believe that didn't--that was stopped early cause I wasn't punching back.  And I just didn't fight anymore after that.  I believe, I think that's the way it went down, yeah.
Speaker 1: How do you feel about boxing (unclear)?
Speaker 2: Well boxing were good to me.  It was good to me.  It--we traveled all over the country through boxing.  Boxing was what really made the entertainment that quick.  There's no way nobody could have got on Ed Sullivan and Hollywood Palace and Johnny Carson and all them shows like that if we had to go through the other route you know by--to get there, you know.  So it aided that and we, we worked in the best night clubs in the world, Las Vegas [Nebvada], the Fountainebleue, [Florida].  We worked in the Bahamas at the Casino there and we worked all over Canada at the best hotel there was.  So it was, it was exciting.  We met a lot of interesting people you know, and we, we just learned a lot of things doing so.  So--but what happened, reason why--people say, well why did I stop entertaining?  I was in Saskatoon, Saskatchewan [Canada] and during that time the, the Watergate Hearing was going on over here and I'm trying to figure out--I was trying to get the news over there to hear what was happening.  I was so interested in what's happening.  And what happened is the news over there in Saskatchewan was the Four Leaf Clover Bull.  They say new--here come our news.  This--our news for the day is they showed this young man and this young lady who won the Four Leaf Clover for this--the bull that they--was the big-
Speaker 1: That they raised as a-
Speaker 2: --Raised (laughter).  And I was comparing that, I said so we couldn't get the news from the United States and that's--that was, that was the news.  I said Jesus Christ, I said I can do something better than this.  I just, you know I just didn't want to--I didn't know--I got tired of the, going to the big city was all right.  But going to Waterloo, Iowa and going to Des Moines and all them other Iowa cities that we worked in and all the little cities that we--you know a year is a long time.  See, I could make it but the band couldn't and you know when you got to go to all these little cities and put on a show, I just got tired of that.  I just--and after my sister was gone with my little brother, you can see he started putting on a--he even went off and started putting his show on himself.  And I was just with these here new musicians who was not, who wasn't used to anything, wasn't used to anything.  And it was so hard keeping up with these guys.  I just said I can do better than this so I stopped--I stopped entertaining and started promoting boxing.
Speaker 1: Yeah, stop right there and let--
Story_ID: 71841
Speaker 1: Okay.  We're rolling again.  I just wanted to ask you, after you stopped performing, what did you do?  I know you were involved in several business ventures and that sort of thing.  You ran for Alderman once too.
Speaker 2: I ran for Alderman [34th Ward, City of Chicago, Illinois, 1987] and I ran for County Commissioner.  I think I ran for Alderman twice.  So, I just was not astute enough in Chicago [Illinois] politics to do good and I probably listened to the wrong people anyway.  But after I got through boxing, what I did, I started promoting.  After I got through-
Speaker 1: Performing.
Speaker 2: --performing, I started promoting boxing.  And I started here about, in Nineteen I would say Seventy-Seven [1977] or something like that, Seventy.  I quit boxing in 1973, and I was--then I started promoting boxing, yeah.  And I'd done some--done pretty well.  I promoted the--I was the--instrumental in getting a couple of champions here, Alfonso Ratliff was a cruiserweight champion.  Leroy Murphy was a cruiserweight champion.  And I promoted Pipino Cuevas [Jose Isidro "Pipino" Cuevas Gonzalez] and Randy Shields, that was a championship bout, a welterweight championship bout.  And I was--promoted James "Quick" Tillis and Mike Weaver heavyweight championship bout here.  On that same card was Marvin Hagler and Hamsho [Mustafa Hamsho].  So I was, I was quite successful with--and I'd done pretty good.  I'd done real good with what I was doing.  It's--the promoting industry just have a lot of guys who tries to block you and it's hard to fight, it's hard to fight that.  So I promoted for about twenty years and I'd done pretty good.  I built some pretty good fighters up I think in that time.  And I still might do a few more shows.  I haven't promoted for a year or so now but I still might run a few more shows.  And I--but I--but promoting is a very hard job, very, very hard job because you're bringing, you're bringing people from one side of the country and trying to match them evenly with somebody that you don't really have here or somebody you're bringing from someplace else.  And that's, that's kind of hard to do.  A matchmaker's job is very hard for making good matches.  That's one, that's one where--one reason boxing suffers now compared to my day because in my day we fought all of the guys.  We fought the tough guys.  I was in the ring with Sonny Liston, with Cleveland Williams, Eddie Machen and Zora Folley.  Everybody that was somebody, I was in the ring with them.  Today they don't do that.  They give a guy and he get a lot of wins over some soft guys and he doesn't last very long because he does--he really doesn't--really hasn't been exposed to the tough guys.  So the matchmaking had been bad late, lately and--but--except for--they've done a little better when they got [Oscar] De La Hoya, they had him fight a few good guys that was very competitive.  And I saw the, the middleweight division really fought some good people.  They had some good men lately but that's too far apart and in between.  But if you make good matches, boxing just seems to draw better than anything else that I know.  They just want to see a good fight and if you're going to put it together and, and if it's a good fight you know.  They don't like to see, they--some people, if, unless it's your relative or something they, they don't mind seeing a one-sided fight.  But people want to see each other really fight and the matchmaking has been poor lately.  I mean they, you know they just don't make good matches now.
Speaker 1: Hmm.
Story_ID: 71842
Speaker 1: So what, what's the key to doing it right?  You have to really know boxing well or do (unclear)?
Speaker 2: Well, what you got to do, just like I said, you got to make the good matches.  Just like your--whoever, just like the number one and number two guy should fight, number three. I mean if you got some guys in the top ten, if you let them guys fight like they did in the Thirties [1930s], Forties [1940s] and Fifties [1950s] and Sixties [1960s], you would get good fights.  But if you have the ten--you got the top ten ranking guys and they're fighting guys rated number thirty and forty, those are not good matches.  I mean there's--they can't compete at that level.  But if, you know if you saw [Sugar] Ray Robinson, you saw him fighting the top people when he was out there, he fought the Gene Fullmer's, the Carmine Basilio, all of the, all of the ranking top guys, you understand.  But now you'll see a guy fighting somebody that you never heard of and they're just not good matches.  And that, that's the problem with it now.
Story_ID: 71843
Speaker 1: Well who do you consider the better fighters out here now?
Speaker 2: The better fighters out here now, you got Lennox Lewis who is the champ.  I think that Mike Tyson should be in the top ten somewhere.  You got David Tua.  That's a guy who is a good, hard punching fighter.  They got Chris Byrd from Michigan who is a very--he's not a good looking--he don't look great fighting but he wins all of his fights.  He's a good fighter.  They got two Russians now, Vladimir Klitschko that's a very good fighter that should be ranked high up there now.  They got two of them now, think they're twins.  And they got-[Evander] Holyfield is still trying to fight.  Now that's, that's a shame.  I don't believe--Holyfield probably made more money than any fighter I know.  I don't know why he's still fighting.  He's near forty years old and he still wants to fight.  I don't, I don't--he don't need to fight anymore. I think that this--it's unfortunate that, that he is because that really give the young people the wrong message.  I mean he just cannot fight all-'til you're an old man.  Even I saw Larry Holmes, Larry Holmes is fifty-three years old and he got a fight on.  I don't--he's fighting a guy named Butter Beans.  He'll probably win that one.  But I'm trying to see with the good fighters it's not all that many of them.  But the problem is that the good fighters won't fight the good fighters.  Now if [Mike] Tyson would go out there and fight David Tua and you know [Evander] Holyfield will go fight somebody that's with his ranking, that would make sense you know.  But it--the--it just don't work that way.  I mean they got--and that's why it's a lack of interest, a lack of interest in a lot of fights.  And when you get a good one you just cannot find a place big enough to hold it sometime.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  Do you think the interest in boxing is rising or waning or staying about the same?
Speaker 2: Changing.  It's changing because they're making more money than ever.  But the fighters just don't train as hard and that's the only difference.  If you train hard and get your body in good shape, you will put on a good fight.  I've seen some of the Ray Robinson's fight and like I say, Archie Moore and Ezzard Charles, these guys were good technician.  Willie Pep [Guglielmo Papaleo] was another one, a good tech, a good--knew all the tricks and knew all the trade.  But they fought guys who wasn't all that good just like you would think Gene Fullmer.  Gene Fullmer was a good fighter.  I don't say he was as good a boxer as, as Sugar Ray Robinson was, but he beat him.  And Carmen Basilio, he was a good, good fighter.  Good fighter.  And he, his technician--his technique was good.  He knew how to fight.  But what I'm trying to say is they don't--we saw those guys fight each other.  Then when you see an A class fighter come over here and fight a C class fighter, you're not going to see much of a fight.  And that's, that's what's happening in today's fight market.
Story_ID: 71844
Speaker 1: Okay.  I want to ask you a question, another kind of reflective question.  What are your hopes and concerns for the black community in general now?  Coming from Mississippi to Chicago [Illinois] and you know experiencing all the things that you, that you've experienced, what are your hopes and concerns for us?
Speaker 2: I'm going to give you a book when you leave here that my brother wrote.  What it needs now, see black folks, the way they live and the way that they, their habits are is a profit margin for all the other races.  Everybody manufactures and everybody has manufacturing capability and factories and stuff except the black folks.  The one that are doing pretty good, has a job or they're in sports, but they are not manufacturing and they are not capturing what they manufacture.  Black folks has to keep their money in their community, you understand.  If you--they got to give each other jobs.  They can't go and expect people to always give them jobs.  You got to make a job for yourself.  It take you--like I have a--I'm trying to do that.  I got a janitorial company right now and I hired about four hundred fifty people that works for me.  I have had as many as a thousand working for me.  The--that is the, that is the avenue out of--that's, that's what, that's what's going to make you.  That's what's going to make you.  But if you--everybody seems to know what the problem is.  But nobody want to deal with the answer or the solution, you know.  The solution to the problem is that everybody has to work for a living no matter who you are.  And you got to have job for your people.  You wants--you are supposed to produce a job for your people and that's one of the thing that we don't have the factories, we don't have the, all the other companies like the other companies--go to work for somebody else all the time and that's got to stop.  And I'd like to see--we got to start somewhere and just stop it.  I mean in certain places here we look so bad.  Let me give you just a couple of examples.  Let's take Gary [Indiana].  Gary is ninety what percent black, it is.
Speaker 1: About eighty percent at least.
Speaker 2: Okay.  They have a white mayor.  Harvey [Illinois], same thing wouldn't you say?  So I mean that, that's not, that's not good for our children to see that you got all these people, got all these voters there and they choose somebody like that to run the town because you can't do it yourself.  That doesn't send a good message.  And I'm not being racial now I'm just being--it's common sense, isn't that right?  So that's, that's what I'm trying to--I--we--everybody say getting together, Jesus Christ, we got to do it a different way than the way we're doing.  And we, we got to do it by providing jobs for ourselves.  And the whole thing start with the education.  We got to get better educated so we can do the sophisticated thing and handle the technology that they have today.  That is what we have to do.  And just like I, I--most of our children that we have in my family, they will have it a little better than we had it because (unclear) most of them went to college and they got a degree so they, they're educated.  We don't have no factory to hire them once they're educated to keep, to keep the community sound, you understand.  But I do--it's like--but my mother just--they didn't, they--the way it was in Mississippi when you heard me talk about that, it was hard for them down there to figure out you know their children doing anything except what they was doing themselves.
Story_ID: 71845
Speaker 1: Are your parents still alive?
Speaker 2: No.  No, my parents' deceased.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Do you have children of your own now?
Speaker 2: I have two children.  My wife [Maxine] have two children and my daughter is--got her own house.  She got it herself.  She, she live there by herself.  It's out in Sauk Village [Illinois] and she works as a--she is a accountant for the stock market.  She, she said everything balances before she leaves and she, she's good at it.  The--my wife works there too.  She's a--supervises the keypunch things and she's a boss.  So everybody is doing good.  We're happy with the way things are going. I got a son.  He works but he is not as sharp.  He's not--he's not doing as well as our daughter.  He's married, has two children here and one stepson.  And you know he got a nice wife, they live in the suburbs.  He's doing well, not well as my daughter, yeah.  But--so everything is real good so far.
Story_ID: 71846
Speaker 1: So how would you like to be remembered?  I mean I know you're still young (unclear)-
Speaker 2: (Laughter).  How would I like to be remembered?  I would like to be remembered as a guy who made an impact on something.  If we can make an impact--I belong to a business club that we are trying to, we're trying to channel these people, get them to shop with each other.  We're trying to get them to buy from each other.  It's very hard because they don't have access to money like other people do and if theirs is more expensive then you can get it someplace else.  So it's a real tough thing to do.  Everybody like to have the good life and live but they don't--not enough of us feel that we should give back to the community to where they could bail themselves out of the--you know just like I said the nice words about my wife.  My wife [Maxine] will go shopping, she'll go to Milwaukee [Wisconsin] to shop or go to California to shop or something like that.  She is a shopping junkie, jockey, junkie.  And so she don't support that--the--she said that these people will not do.  She's tried to deal with--we get somebody who's, if they're not clever, they're not good business people, they will mess up and turn you off from getting it.  I drive a Lexus.  I was determined that I was going to buy this from a black man and I did.  I had my house redone.  I was determined I was going to do it and get a black person to do that and I did.  And I had all this stuff renovated.  Every (unclear) I just do that.  I try to spend money with my people as much as I can but that's what everybody have to do.  It's what we teaches in the business club that we go to.  We meet every week and we try to perpetuate that.  We found out that there's another club that's parallel this called "My Tie" (ph.).  Ours is called The Roundtable but we were so glad that we found some--we're trying to team up with these guys but these guys are so busy and they don't want to sit still for it.  But we're trying to team up and get this stuff together so--they have a funny--with the way that they are trying to do it, they need money and they're doing it the only way that they can do it which has got this pyramid thing going so to speak.  And they adds a little bit more to it to make it a pyramid where you can excel beyond what they are talking about.  But it's still, it's still that kind of marketing thing that they have going for them, you know.  So I just want to be remembered as a guy who tried to make a difference.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 71847
Speaker 1: Now did your parents get a chance to see you become successful as a boxer and entertainer?
Speaker 2: Yes (unclear)-
Speaker 1: What did they think?
Speaker 2: Well tell you the truth what I did like this house here, I bought this house in 1970 and my parents lived here.  They lived here till 1980, then they moved to California and they passed away out there.  But I used to practice here and get the--put the show together here.  My dad used to sit there and look at it, look at me and do that and he just were so amazed that he just didn't know what to think of me.  My mother was very helpful.  I mean when we opened, we opened at the Regal [Chicago, Illinois], we was there.  We were playing at the Regal and what they did they brought a whole tub full of chicken for my band to eat.  But when--you know you have all those acts on.  You had the Temptations and the Chi-Lites and Dells and all these people like that.  When they saw that chicken come in there they just ran, they just ran and like they was bringing it for everybody and I barely got a piece of it, you know what I'm saying.  They--cause they--she brought a whole tub full of chicken cause she thought that we'd be hungry and then she bought that for my band really.  And boy, Jackie Wilson was the, was the guy on the top of the show at the time.  And they, man they lit into that chicken man.  And I--so, so that's what my mother did, she was trying to help us then, but she wasn't supposed to bring no chicken.  I mean that was a little Mississippi stuff that you're doing.  We got all kind of eating places around the Regal and they got all kind of eating places in there so they didn't have to bring that (unclear).  That's--you know, but she did.  One of the funniest thing, I'm--what it was, when Jean [Terrell] opened with his Supremes, they, they opened I believe in Texas at the Fairmont or Fremont or something Hotel like that.  And my mother went to see them and then they, I think they left there and went to the Waldorf Astoria in New York and they opened there.  And man, my mother said she was hungry.  I said, okay we'll get you whatever you want.  And she was trying to think of something cheap I'm thinking so she asked for a hamburger.  I said okay.  And (laughter) when they brought the hamburger in the Waldorf Astoria, I think it was I don't know, twenty something dollars or whatever it was, she, she couldn't hardly stand it.  She just didn't, she just didn't understand how a hamburger was like that.  And I don't know, she just, she wanted--I mean we paid for it.  It was all paid for, I mean you know and Berry Gordy took--I mean Jean [Terrell] took care of it.  But it just was--and, and when she--it hurt her feelings so bad that she had got--I don't know, probably thirty dollars when he got through paying for that hamburger.  But she--you know what she did, she cut her visit short and come home.  She just couldn't see nobody doing this right here.  She just wasn't ready for that.  But she got better but, but we--she got better as time went on and come to terms with things.  But she just was not used to playing--paying no, that kind of money for no--I don't know what the hamburger cost.  It could have been fifty dollars.  I mean I don't know.  I mean you know but what it was, it was--she just couldn't stand it, just couldn't stand it.
Speaker 1: It's such a big difference from what it cost in Mississippi when she was coming up and what it might-
Speaker 2: Yeah, or what it would cost around here you know just with a regular hamburger stand, you know what it cost a dollar and a half or--at that time, see.  (Simultaneous)--
Story_ID: 71848
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--But you all had moved into almost a different world-
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --basically.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Yeah, we moved to a different world.  So really all those girls there, the Supremes understood it and you know knew what she was going through.  Just like she went to Toronto [Canada] to the fight but she didn't go.  She went to Texas to see me fight [Muhammad] Ali, she wouldn't go to the fight, she just went--she just was there.  And she stayed in the hotel when all that stuff went on.  She, she watched me fight some people but she just couldn't hardly handle it, you know.  She, she was a remarkable--you know if I could do what she could with a dollar, Jesus Christ, I would be so rich.  That woman could stretch a dollar, Jesus Christ, I just don't--you don't, don't know.  She had ten children.  I have six brothers and three sisters, that we all, that we--that she raised us all her and my dad.  And we always got along, no trouble or nothing.  We, we was never in trouble you know.  Nobody went to jail, that kind of stuff.  They--now my dad he, he was--his mother they had thirteen brother--he had thirteen brothers and sisters.  He had more than that but I think she--my grandmother had triplets and twins that passed away so if you count those five onto thirteen, I believe that's eighteen, isn't it, that she would have had if all of her children had lived.  But I think a couple of them, that--those five, they didn't last long after childbirth.  Some of them died in child birth.  But we're always used to a big family.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well thank you Mr. Terrell.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: That's the end of this tape too I think.
Story_ID: 71849
VIDEOGRAPHER:  We're rolling.  Ready?  Go ahead.
Speaker 2: Okay, go ahead.
Speaker 1: Well that's my grandfather right there.  His name is Lovick Terrell and it's his wife, her name is Ellen Terrell.
Speaker 2: How do you spell Lovick?
Speaker 1: L-O-V-I-C-K.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Ellen is E-L-L-E-N, I believe that's the way she spelled her name.  That's my grandfather on my mother's side.  His name is Jake Payne, P-A-Y-N-E.  Jake is his first name.  And that was his--that's, that's my step-grandmother, her name was Annie Payne.  My grandmother, she died early when my mother was just a small child.  Her name was Mary I believe and that's my step-grandmother there with my grandfather.
Speaker 2: Okay, great.
VIDEOGRAPHER:  That's next.  Go ahead.
Speaker 2: That is the way I looked fresh out of Mississippi.  I was a country, country boy there.  And that was me when I was--came to Chicago [Illinois] to enter grammar school.
Speaker 1: You're about thirteen?
Speaker 2: About thirteen, yes.  Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Oh that's right there, that's me--you wouldn't think so, that's when I graduated high school.  That was--got on my daddy's suit there.  But that was--that's me when I graduated and the, the picture next to that one, that's when I fought, that's, that's when I first started entertaining then.  That was when I got my first group of clothing and I'm standing up there, that's when I started entertaining.  Now that's, that's me a few years ago, maybe a year or so, 1999, may--three years ago, that's me.  And that's when I'm right now in business and scratching my head, hair out trying to make it work.  So everything is going pretty good now.
Speaker 1: Okay.
VIDEOGRAPHER:  (Unclear).  Go ahead.
Speaker 1: Okay.  That is, that's when I won the championship from Eddie Machen.  Joe Louis is whispering instructions in my ear during the corner and we are getting ready to get--go out there and start the fight.  And that's when I won the championship right there.
VIDEOGRAPHER:  Okay.  And what year was that sir?
Speaker 1: That's 1965.  Nineteen Sixty-Five, that's when that's in.
VIDEOGRAPHER:  Okay, great.
Story_ID: 71850
VIDEOGRAPHER:  Okay, we're back in action.  Go ahead and describe this one.
Speaker 2: This, this fellow here is a sparring partner.  You know you try to get guys--if you at it, we're about the same size.  That must have been when I was training for, I must have hired him when I was going to fight Cleveland Williams because you get a tall guy to work with him when you're going to fight a tall guy and that's what I was trying to do here.  His name escapes me right now.
VIDEOGRAPHER:  So this would have been in the very early Sixties [1960s]?
Speaker 2: Yeah, it would have been early Sixties [1960s], yeah.
VIDEOGRAPHER:  Okay, go ahead.
Speaker 2: When you fought Cleveland Williams, yeah it was Sixties [1960s] [1962], right.
VIDEOGRAPHER:  Okay, next.  Okay, go ahead.
Speaker 2: Now that is when--if you notice, this is my sister Jean [Terrell]-
Speaker 1: (Unclear).
Speaker 2: --right, that's [HM] Mary [Wilson].  That's Mary.  That's Jean [Terrell] right there and that's Cindy Birdsong right next to her.
Speaker 1: And that's [HM] Mary Wilson.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  And that's when I just went there and we made a picture together with each other.  And-
Speaker 1: (Unclear).
Speaker 2: That was the Supremes after she done well, um-hmm.
VIDEOGRAPHER:  And what year?  Do you remember what year this would have been?
Speaker 2: That was close to '65 [1965] or--it was in the middle to late 60s [1960s].  [Sic, 1970] I know she was with them-
Speaker 1: I think in the 70s [1970s] because Diana Ross and the Supremes were at their height in the mid-60s [1960s] so you're probably talking about the early 70s [1970s].
Speaker 2: Well it could be.  I know--I would say maybe '60 [1960]--was it--it could have been.  It must have been the 70s [1970s], yeah, it had to be [sic, 1970].
Speaker 1: Yeah, '71 [1971], '72 [1972], something like that [sic, 1970].
Speaker 2: Yeah, something like that because I mean I was--it's hard for me to remember the time 'cause I was switching backwards and forth from boxing to singing.
Speaker 1: Right.
VIDEOGRAPHER:  Okay, well that's good.  Next photo please.
Speaker 1: All right.
VIDEOGRAPHER:  And (unclear).
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That's a photo that I made when I was getting--starting to train for, for another fight and you know, I was trying to get myself together then to make a comeback which I did.
VIDEOGRAPHER:  Okay.  Year?
Speaker 2: That must have been about, I would say '68 [1968] and--or there about.
VIDEOGRAPHER:  Okay, next please.
Speaker 2: That's Jean [Terrell] and I, we're doing a duet.  We sing a lot.  That was in New Orleans [Louisiana] in the--way down there in the heart where everything jumps at.  We was on stage doing a note there--doing a number there and they made this picture.
VIDEOGRAPHER:  Okay, next.  Okay, go ahead, next.
Speaker 2: Right here, this was when I won the championship [1965].  I was champion when this here was.  And I was very happy and everything was, looked great.  We had a lot of-a lot to look forward to.  And the championship did a lot of good for me as far as entertaining and being a champion.  Okay.
VIDEOGRAPHER:  Okay, next.
Speaker 2: We made records.  I have a couple of records that we made.  We got this one--this was the one that we got ready for Chess Recording [Chess Records].  And if you would look at the picture, this was when we were very young.  We--I just, I just had graduated out of high school then.  This girl here, she was a classmate of mine.  My sister was behind me and we made this picture when we got ready to go out, we was going to make a record called 'Dear Abby', and we did make the record, the record done well.  That's what we--that's the record that we performed when we went to the Regal Theater [Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 1: Okay.
VIDEOGRAPHER:  Okay, next.
Speaker 1: Well this, this, this picture here, this is--this was the Heavyweights after my sister had replaced Diana Ross with the Supremes.  I had to put another show together and these are the guys that I put together and this is the girl that I put together.  And we had a few years of really good working together and it was a very--we--they were very good talented.  They wasn't used to as much as my family was so they didn't know how to take care of business right.  But they were good entertainers.  The girl was a very petite, beautiful singer and when--we had a lot of, lot of fun with her.
VIDEOGRAPHER:  Okay.  Next photo please.
Speaker 1: Yeah well that--that was a--that right there was when I was entertaining and that's what I just--that--those are the clothes that I would wear stuff like that when I was, when I was just hanging out with somebody.  And then somebody caught that picture and that's what it is right there.
VIDEOGRAPHER:  Any idea what year that might have been shot?
Speaker 1: That's about in the 70s [1970s] there someplace.  It's about '70 [1970], '73 [1973], maybe not that-
VIDEOGRAPHER:  (Unclear).
Speaker 1: Yeah.
VIDEOGRAPHER:  Okay.  Next photo please.
Speaker 1: Well that is Jean [Terrell] and I.  That's what we would turn over to our agency and they sent that all to--all across the, the country to different places that we would sing.  And we went all over the world and we'd sing everyplace and that was just a photo that we gave them for publicity building.
VIDEOGRAPHER:  Hold on please.  Okay.
Story_ID: 71851
Speaker 1: (Laughter).  That is the greatest fighter ever, Sugar Ray Robinson.  Sugar Ray Robinson--that's my trainer on his right there and that's his trainer on my left.  And we met--that's George Gainford, that was the guy who handled Sugar Ray [Robinson].  Sugar Ray is telling me, man, always keep that championship.  Don't let nothing happen to it.  I remember that very well.  And so that's, that's what that is.
VIDEOGRAPHER:  Okay.  Year?
Speaker 1: The year, that's about 1965.  That's what-
VIDEOGRAPHER:  (Unclear).
Speaker 1: Uh-huh.
VIDEOGRAPHER:  Go ahead when you're ready.
Speaker 1: Well that right here I'm getting ready I believe for, I'm getting ready for Muhammad Ali there and I was training.  I'm in very good shape and trying to get myself together so, so we can have this fight.  And I was working on a speed bag and I'm walking away from it there.
VIDEOGRAPHER:  Okay (unclear).  Okay, next.
Speaker 1: This right here I'm in my training camp and I'm looking at a book there.  It must be something in there about me cause I'm probably some story.  I think I had, I had went to one of the clubs there in Atlantic City, New Jersey and I put on a, a lot of clothes and, in order to fool the people so they wouldn't know who I was.  And they did not know I was--it was some sort of game they got that we won a prize for and that's the way it went down.
VIDEOGRAPHER:  (Unclear) next.
Speaker 1: (BRIEF PAUSE)
VIDEOGRAPHER: Okay, go ahead when you're ready with this one.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.
VIDEOGRAPHER:  (Unclear).
Speaker 1: Okay.  This right here was when I was getting ready for Muhammad Ali.  I seem to be feeding one of my hamsters there.  I got Clay Ali [Muhammad Ali] there.  I guess I hadn't decided on which one I was going to call him, "Clay" or "Ali" at the time but I settled on "Clay".
VIDEOGRAPHER:  All right, next photo.  And go ahead any time.
Speaker 1: Well that right there, that is E. Rodney Jones.  E. Rodney Jones at the time was with WVON.  He and his partner, [HM] Pervis Spann ran shows at the Regal and that right there is, he's just talking to me before I go back stage and get dressed to do one of my shows.  He got me on radio there telling the folks that we're going to be at the Regal Theater.
VIDEOGRAPHER:  Okay.  Next please.
Speaker 1: Well, that show [shirt] there have the CYO [gym] on it I see.  That's when I'm getting ready for Eddie Machen and the championship.  I'm punching the speed bag and but Joe Louis and Ezzard Charles was both there trying to give me pointers on how to fight.  And it was a great--it was successful.  We won that fight from Eddie Machen.
VIDEOGRAPHER:  Okay.  Next photo please.
Speaker 1: Well that right there is the, the fight with Eddie Machen.  You can see that he's having trouble trying to get around my jab and I jabbed him on the shoulder over there that he's trying to knock it down. But he's in dangerous territory there though we had that fight that you can see how it looked then cause I--he's really set up for a good right hand.  But I won the fight by unanimous decision.
VIDEOGRAPHER:  Hold that one moment please.
Speaker 1: Is Lenny still playing?
VIDEOGRAPHER:  Okay, next please.
Story_ID: 71852
Speaker 1: Yeah.  Now that right there, that's when I, I fought Doug Jones defending my title there and these people met me at the airport then for a musical welcome.  And I'm just playing the guitar a little bit as they make music as we walk down the street there before I fought Doug Jones in Houston, Texas.
VIDEOGRAPHER:  Okay, next please.
Speaker 1: Right here, this is--that's me in the middle there and I'm with a lot of fellows that are out there in Maywood, Illinois.  They were putting up a boys' club and they asked me to help them get it off and get started where we can give a little something back to the community.  And I'm for that so I was out there with them to help them get their boys' club started in, in Maywood.
VIDEOGRAPHER:  Okay, next.
Speaker 1: (Laughter).  Oh boy, I'm a candidate for the Boxing Hall of Fame.  I'm not in yet but they consider me every year.  And this here is where I was signing on an autograph session and that's my good friend Too Tall Jones [Ed Lee Jones] who was there.  And I'm 6'6" so you can see he's taller than I am.  So we had a lot of fun and we signed a lot of autographs.
VIDEOGRAPHER:  Okay, next please.
Speaker 1: Okay, now this is a little one and we got two great big ones.
VIDEOGRAPHER:  Okay, go ahead.
Speaker 1: Okay, that picture there, that's a picture of me and that's my trainer and those are the--and the other fellow which is Arthur Norris, that's another guy he trained.  In that picture there, I may look older but I'm about sixteen years old there.  I hadn't turned pro yet.  And that was, that guy, he was the guy who got me started and that was my trainer and that was taken at the, the Midwest Gym on Madison Avenue in Chicago [Illinois]here.
VIDEOGRAPHER:  Okay, next.
Speaker 1: Okay, it's a great big one here.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Well like I say, this here was a, this was the fight, the championship where I defended against Doug Jones.  This here was the, there--it was tele--it was closed circuit television that this right here was that where it went to Florida.  That's Chris Dundee who was the promoter in Florida.  He promoted the fight down there.  That's where that you look at it on closed circuit.  And that's where I fought Doug Jones and I won that fight, a fifty round decision over Doug Jones.  And that's, that's a supporting bout on the, on the bottom there with Cleveland Williams and Tod Herring.
VIDEOGRAPHER:  Hold on one moment please.
Speaker 2: Where was Cleveland Williams from?
VIDEOGRAPHER:  Okay, next please.
Speaker 2: Houston, Texas.
Speaker 1: Houston.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Now this right here is the same thing.  This is for the--they call it the battle of champion because [Muhammad] Ali were the--known as the world champion.  I was the WBA [World Boxing Association] champion (unclear).  There was--that's when we fought to, to settle the claim of who was champion and he won a fifteen round decision that night and a whole lot of other stuff that went along--went on.  The jabbing of "What's my name" and all the other stuff.  He-[Muhammad] Ali fought a dirty fight that night.  He don't usually--he wasn't known for doing that but he poked his finger in my eye and some other stuff that he did was kind of bad.  I don't, I don't know where this outlet here was.  That was another, another tele, televised, closed circuit thing that was piped somewhere.  But that's the fight that we had right there.
Speaker 1: Okay.
VIDEOGRAPHER:  Hold on one moment.  Okay, next please.
Speaker 1: Okay now is that your next--is this your mother and father on the wall right here?  This one?
Speaker 2: No, no, no, no.
Speaker 1: It's not?
Speaker 2: No.
VIDEOGRAPHER:  Okay, go ahead.
Speaker 2: That was the official fight program when I fought [George] Chuvalo at the Maple Leaf Gardens [Toronto, Canada] on November 1st, 1965.
Speaker 1: George Chuvalo.
Speaker 2: George Chuvalo.  And, so--and won a fifteen round decision over him.  And that was the one that kind of took all the pressure off of me.  I was--I felt like I was a boxer in good standing then.
VIDEOGRAPHER:  Okay.
