Story_ID: 648098
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe, I'm interviewer today with The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Matthew Hickey.  Ma'am, can you please state your full name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: My name is [HistoryMaker] Lalita Tademy, L-A-L-I-T-A, Tademy, T-A-D-E-M-Y.
Speaker 1: Now do you have a middle name or?
Speaker 2: I do.  It's Liane, L-I-A-N-E.
Speaker 1: And is there a story behind the name Tademy?
Speaker 2: There's a major story around the name Tademy.  The name didn't exist until my great-great-grandfather [Sam Tademy] made it up, and that was in what I presume to be the 1870s, the first time black folks were actually considered people enough to be on the census with names.  And the story has it that he refused his prior slave owner's last name, which was a common practice, and he made up--he didn't make up--he remembered a name that he had heard from stories when he was small about his African name, Tateme [ph.].  And when he registered for the census, it became Tademy.  And it's really interesting, when I used to travel quite a lot around the United States for work, I would go into phonebooks and--back when there were phonebooks, and you didn't do it all online--and I would look up Tademy, and I would call people randomly, and could always be guaranteed that they were related by blood or marriage.  So, all of the Tademy descendants came from this made up name from the 1800s.
Speaker 1: Now is it--is there--does your family have any idea where in Africa the name come from?
Speaker 2: I have no idea, and I actually tried to trace it.  I tried to trach it--trace it--phonetically and tried to have a linguist figure out what area of Africa.  And I didn't pursue it as hard as I could have, but it wasn't easily discoverable and so I never have been able to jump the pond.  I've just never been able to get all the way back to Africa or a specific region in Africa in all the researching that I did in order to write two books.
Speaker 1: Okay, are there other various spellings of Tademy in the--amongst the other descendants?
Speaker 2: The Tademy name is always T-A-D-E-M-Y.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Always the same.
Speaker 1: All right, and ma'am, what, what is your birth of--date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: So I was born in California, in Berkeley, in 1948.
Speaker 1: All right, and what is your title and occupation?
Speaker 2: My title--I'm not sure I actually have a title (laughter). I'm an author, so what I had done with the second career of my life is to write historical fiction.  And my first two books--my first two published books--were actually based on my own family, but they were a blend of fact and fiction.  But historical novels are what I write.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, and you did have a career in business too, right?
Speaker 2: I did.  I had a, a long career in business, and I assumed that that's what I would do for--until I retired, but after about twenty years I decided to do something else.  But I last worked for Sun Microsystems [Sun Microsystems, Inc.] as vice president and general manager in high technology in Silicon Valley.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, what is today's date?
Speaker 2: Today is historic.  It is the day after the election of the second term of Barack Obama [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama], so it is November the 8th, 2012 [sic. November 7, 2012].
Speaker 1: All right, okay, and where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: And we are in my home in Menlo Park, California.
Story_ID: 648099
Speaker 1: Now before we go into depth, there are five lightweight questions we ask as sort of a warm up, and they only require a short answer.  First one is do you have a favorite food?
Speaker 2: I love sweet potato pie, so I'm just gonna call that my favorite food.
Speaker 1: Okay, do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: I don't have a favorite color, but if I had to pick, I'd say green 'cause it was my mother's [Willie Billes Tademy] favorite color.
Speaker 1: Okay, do you have a favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Absolutely, summer, no question--sun.
Speaker 1: Okay, a favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: I--any place where it's warm, and there's beach, and there's water.
Speaker 1: Okay and the last one is do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: It is what it is.
Story_ID: 648100
Speaker 1: All right. Now I'm gonna ask about your family history.  I'm gonna start with your, your mother's side, and then we'll do your father's [Nathan Tademy, Jr.] side--
Speaker 2: All right (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) so we don't get 'em mixed up.  Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: My mother's name was Willie Dee Billes [Willie Billes Tademy], W-I-L-L-I-E, Billes, B-I-L-L-E-S.
Speaker 1: Okay and what is her date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: She was born December 26th, 1921, and she was born in Colfax, Louisiana--actually she was born in Aloha, Louisiana.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Even smaller than Colfax.
Speaker 1: Okay, A-L-O-A?
Speaker 2: A-L-O-H-A.
Speaker 1: H-A, okay.  Like aloha like in Hawaii.
Speaker 2: Um-hm, like Hawaii.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But not related at all.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Now is there a story behind your mother--your mother's name?  It sounds French.
Speaker 2: It is French.  So, her, her grandfather was--came, came over in the 1880s from southern France, and he immigrated to the U.S., and he immigrated to Louisiana.  And that's part and parcel of what I write about in one of my books ['Cane River' Lalita Tademy].  But, he came from a very small village there that was dominated by--I would say Billeses, but that's the American pronunciation--but, but there are a lot of the--when I went back to visit, the current mayor was a--was a Billes.  Most of the town were Billeses of one kind or another.  But it's--it is a French name.
Speaker 1: Okay, now how far back can you trace your mother's side of the family?
Speaker 2: I can go back--I can go back to the 1400s, and that is through the French--the French side.
Speaker 1: Okay, now what were your ancestors doing?
Speaker 2: Which ancestors?  Where?
Speaker 1: Well, the, the French ones or the African ones, wherever they--
Speaker 2: What were they doing?
Speaker 1: Yes, what kind of occupations and what kind of moves did they make and you know.
Speaker 2: So they--Joseph Billes did timber.  And he came over to the U.S.  He stopped briefly in New Orleans [Louisiana].  He went up into central Louisiana, and there was money to be made there in, in timber, and that's what he did.
Story_ID: 648101
Speaker 1: He [Tademy's maternal great-grandfather, Joseph Billes] had--not a marriage, because marriage was illegal--but the mother of--the mother of my ancestors--he had five children by a woman who was born a slave, but raised the children in effect.  And he actually brought these children into his home for them to be raised.
Speaker 2: Okay, so your--so your grandmother had--
Speaker 1: Great.
Speaker 2: --had--great-grandmother, okay.  So is he your great-grandfa- your--yeah, yeah, so he would be your great-grandfather and your--and the--
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Okay, so what was your great-grandmother's name?
Speaker 1: She was Emily Fredieu [Emily Fredieu Billes].
Speaker 2: Okay and how do you spell Fredieu?
Speaker 1: F-R-E-D-I-E-U.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Now she's the, one of the principal figures in the book 'Cane River' [Lalita Tademy].
Speaker 1: She is.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: She is.
Speaker 2: And so what are some stories about her that you can tell us?
Speaker 1: There are so many--
Speaker 2: It's a book (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) so many stories about her, it's, it's really tough, but she--the amazing thing to me is that I grew up hearing stories about her.  She died before--she died in the 1930s.  She died before I was born, and so I never had a chance to form my own opinion.  But just based on the pure reverence from my mother [Willie Billes Tademy], from my uncles, from anybody who ever knew her, she was just so loved, and she was just so elegant, and she was just so--such an amazing woman.  And that's what I heard time and time again.  The more I did research, the more I figured out that some of these stories were a little bit at odds with what I had been hearing.  So one of the stories that my mother would tell is how when she would go and visit--she would go and visit Emily Fredieu, she, as a little girl, would have to drink Muscadine wine.  Because anybody that crossed her threshold that was not a baby had to have a little taste.  So she was a little buzzed all the time.  She lived in the middle of the Piney Woods in Louisiana. This is backwoods Louisiana. Nobody ever talked about the fact that she was born a slave.  They were just always talking about how elegant she was.  But she dipped snuff, which was a common practice then, but I don't equate that with elegance.  And she was full of life.  She had a Victrola, and when people would come and visit, she would twirl around in this--in the middle of the floor dancing by herself.  Nobody else got to dance.  It was her and everybody appreciating.  And she would dance until the Victrola wound down, and everyone would clap.  And, and she was--she just loved for people to be happy and to be--to be comfortable.  So she was a woman that intrigued me because she did not really fit everything that I had heard.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I think--I guess the opening chapter of the book sort of deals with the contradictions and trying to make sense of that.
Speaker 1: And she also--one of the--one of the major things to me is that she was very clearly color struck.  It was--it was very clear that she valued lighter skinned people more than darker skinned people.  And, and, and I had a hard time reconciling myself to that, and reconciling this glowingly always positive portrayal of her, if she could harbor those kind of attitudes.  I came around to really appreciate her, but it--I didn't start out that way.
Speaker 2: Okay, so you, you had to really examine what people were thinking and some of the political and social pressures on folks in those days that would make someone color struck or would make it natural to be color struck.
Speaker 1: You know, it's really funny.  People come to writing for different reasons and different purposes.  And one of the reasons that I write is to figure out my life and other people's lives, and figure out what it is I want to say.  And in trying to do research on her and then write about her, I had to stop judging her and judging her by looking at her from today's point of view; I had to look at her from the point of view of the time in which she lived, which was in the last half of the 1800s and the first thirty years of the 1900s.  And those were very different times with very different attitudes.  And so yes, I came to appreciate her for the time in which she lived.
Story_ID: 648102
Speaker 1: What did you discover I guess about how color affects I guess access to power and resources and that sort of thing in those days?  Was that a--?
Speaker 2: It was a real phenomenon.  The, the truth is that the lighter you were, the more opportunity you had.  That was just a fact.  And the--she had children, all of whom could have passed, but didn't, but yet they were given more opportunity.  They had straight hair.  They had very light skin.  And if it came time for--to try to get a job, it was easier to get a job.  If you had those--if you had those physical attributes, you had more opportunity in education; you had more opportunity across the board.  And it's, it's one of the things that I believe that she consciously wanted for her children, was that opportunity, and she considered that a part of, of what she had given them.
Speaker 1: Okay, now considering that your, your great-grandfather [Joseph Billes] was French, would she have passed for a white woman had, had they not lived in an area where everybody was familiar with her back then?
Speaker 2: That's not clear to me.  I--that's not at all clear to me.  Whether she would have passed or not, that was not an option.  It absolutely was not an option.  I, I tend to think that she would not, only because my mother [Willie Billes Tademy] could have passed, and she did not.  My mother every once in a great while would be white for a moment, if she needed to get somebody into a hospital or if she needed--if there was some emergency, something that needed to be done, then she would cross that line.  But she never went to bed white.  She always went to bed black.  And if, if there was something that she needed, then she would for a matter of an hour--two hours--not state that she was black.  But because that was her way of being, even though physically she looked--she could have passed, then I tend to think that perhaps Emily [Tademy's maternal great-grandmother, Emily Fredieu Billes] would not have, but I'm not--I'm, I'm not sure.
Speaker 1: Okay, so, but do you think could she have if she--so she--
Speaker 2: She could have.
Speaker 1: --she could have if she wanted to.
Speaker 2: She could have if she lived someplace else.
Speaker 1: Right, okay.  That was--
Speaker 2: If she lived in some other place and took on another persona, yes I believe that she could have passed.
Speaker 1: Yeah, 'cause I, I think it's clear that she did not do it, but--you know, but she could have, right, if she--
Speaker 2: She--but she--there--she couldn't have done it--I don't believe she could have done it in Louisiana.  Not only not in that town.  I don't think she could have in Louisiana because there are a lot of very fair black folks in Louisiana, and there's a look.  So, I think she would have been found out, number one; and I think that she was comfortable enough with who she was.
Story_ID: 648103
Speaker 1: Now were there any consequences for your grandfather and your grand- your, your [maternal] great-grandfather and great-grandmother for being together, you know, which was I guess against the state laws of Louisiana, right?  I mean--
Speaker 2: Yeah, it was against the law, and it certainly was against common custom in a major way. Such a major way that my great-grandfather, Joseph Billes, was killed.  He was--he was warned against living with her, and he ignored that warning for years and years.  And finally at some point he moved out, and he got married to a white woman, which was the convention. But he ended up--he ended up being killed.  Now they said that it was a suicide, but his throat was cut, he was shot in the head and the back with (laughter) different guns, so it's kind of hard to believe that this was a suicide, impossible as a matter of fact.  And I even got a record of the doctor's--the doctor that initially came on the scene wrote out a little handwritten report, which I have, which very clearly said that it was not a suicide.  But by the time it hit the newspapers, it was totally cleaned up, and that's what it was.  But he was definitely go- he was flouting convention and, and he was definitely going against the wishes of the society in which he moved--in which he wished to move.
Speaker 1: Okay, so this, this I'm sure presented not only a personal tragedy but an economic challenge for the family when the breadwinner is, is killed.
Speaker 2: It did, however, the--Emily [Emily Fredieu Billes] had money of her own and she was very thrifty, and she lived off the land, and she did not live in a terribly extravagant way.  And when she died, she had money--cash money.  This is--this is very shortly after the Depression [Great Depression].  She had cash money that was, you know, under her mattress, so she was able to take care of herself.
Speaker 1: Okay, so their life together I guess would span with the mid-1880s through the--
Speaker 2: Through the early 1900s.
Speaker 1: Okay, and then he, he left the family I guess to--
Speaker 2: And he left the family.
Speaker 1: Yeah, right.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: But somehow, you know, some sort of vengeance caught up with him, you know.
Speaker 2: And he had quite--he, he had--he didn't have a huge fortune, but he had a fair amount of money himself, and he left the money--he left the money in charge of a favored friend to distribute to his children, and the friend did not.  The friend kept the money, and there is some question of whether it was the friend who actually--who, who actually killed him.  Nobody knows exactly who did the deed.  But the money did not end up going to the children.  But they already--he had, he had left a bit of land and a house; so Emily was--Emily and the children were somewhat taken care of.
Story_ID: 648104
Speaker 1: Now this raise- here's a question that's raised, and it's brought up in a lot of our interviews, wha- the--and the question I have for you is, what is a Creole?
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: There are so many people that I interview who say they are of Creole ancestry, and then some don't know, and then it's become--now what is a Creole?
Speaker 2: I don't have--I actually don't have a good answer for that because Creole means different things to different people.  And for some it means just a mixture.  It's a mixture of French, Spanish.  Creole can be white Creole, which has nothing to do with black folks at all.  It can include black folks in that mixture.  And my definition of Creole always includes whether you self-identify as a Creole or not.  I don't consider myself Creole because it's not the way that I was raised.  That's not the community in which I was raised.  And so regardless of any blood count or percentages, that doesn't matter.  I don't consider myself Creole.  And the definition is so mushy anyway that I wouldn't presume to claim it.
Speaker 1: Okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So I'm not giving you a good answer because I don't have one.  People are very, very wed to their definitions of Creole, but they contradict one another.
Speaker 1: Okay
Speaker 2: So I don't know what it is exactly.
Speaker 1: I think initially it was--it meant the whites from the ca- the ho- the mother country who were actually born in the--
Speaker 2: Correct.
Speaker 1: --in the colony.
Speaker 2: Correct, but that--
Speaker 1: But--
Speaker 2: --played out a long time ago and the--and the term still lives on.
Speaker 1: Yeah, 'cause I know in, in some parts of West Africa there's Krio, which is--actually means the same thing but it's K-R-I-O, and it means a West Indian who actually was born in Africa after being transported, so.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I--so I can't--I, I can't help you here (laughter).  I just can't help you here 'cause I, I don't know exactly what it is.  But I just took a trip to Louisiana a few weeks ago, and there are people there who say I'm Creole.  And that's--it, it--it's a community.  I mean, it's a food; it's a community; it's a way of looking at things.  I don't know.
Story_ID: 648105
Speaker 1: Now tell us about your grandparents on, on your mother's [Willie Billes Tademy] side.
Speaker 2: My grandparents on my mother's side.  My, my grandfather was Emily's [Emily Fredieu Billes] son.  And Teo Billes--Theo- Theodore Billes was his name--grew up in Colfax, Louisiana.  And he grew up--by the time that I knew him, he was a pretty broken man.  He--I think that he was broken by the tragedy that befell the family, which is his father went off, married a white woman, got killed.  He fought to try to--he, he fought to try to keep some of the land that Joseph Billes wanted to go to his children.  He lost that fight through the courts.  I don't think that he had a lot of success or positive reinforcement.  And I think that he had just some major issues.  And by the time I knew him, he was--I think he was very depressed and very broken.  My grandmother, Eva Billes, Eva Brew Billes--maiden name Brew--
Speaker 1: B-R--
Speaker 2: B-R-E-W.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --was amazing.  And Teo, who could have passed very clearly, he picked her out.  She was brown skin, and she was competent.  She was beyond competent.  She was what you--open up the dictionary under grandmother, and that's, that's what you'd come out with.  She was in charge; she understood the ways of the South; she was a fabulous cook; she was--her kids went out of the house, they were always totally cleaned and ironed and pressed; and she was just an amazing, amazing woman in charge.  And she was in charge of herself, she was in charge of her family; and she was a major contributor to the community there in Louisiana.
Story_ID: 648106
Speaker 1: So your mother [Willie Billes Tademy] came out of this couple, you know, Theo [Theodore Billes] and Eva [Eva Brew Billes] I guess, right (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Um-hm. Um-hm.
Speaker 1: And what did your mother say about growing up?
Speaker 2: My mother had a happy childhood.  She was the only girl of five children.  She--so she understood how to deal with brothers.  She understood how to deal with all of that male energy.  She was very athletic.  She was very feisty.  And she wanted nothing more as she grew up--she wanted a family.  That was her big desire.  She wanted a family--a husband and children.  That was--that was all she ever wanted.  But she grew up without--they didn't have a lot, but they had enough in Louisiana.  And they were still in this very small town in Colfax, Louisiana.  She learned homemaking skills from her mother.  She learned organizational skills from her mother.  She got a lot of her determination and drive from her mother, and she carried that forward.
Speaker 1: Okay, now did she have a chance to go to college?
Speaker 2: She did not.  She went--she actually went for--I think she went for one year.  She might have gone for one year.  She did not finish.
Speaker 1: Do, do, do you know where she went?
Speaker 2: And I--it's just not coming to me, which is why I'm not convinced that she went.  But that wasn't--but that--but that wasn't baked into the path that the family had, that she would go to school necessarily.
Speaker 1: Okay, so, so she grew up in Colfax.  And does she have any stories that she passes down about life in Colfax as she was growing up?
Speaker 2: They are not specific to--she grew up in Aloha [Louisiana] and Colfax.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And most of her stories start off in the time of meeting my father [Nathan Tademy, Jr.].  But there are stories that have come tumbling out way--very, very late--that she never--that she never shared.  For example, going and seeing Duke Ellington in Louisiana when he was on a tour there.  And she couldn't actually go in to see him because black folks couldn't go, but they could stand out and they could listen to the performance.  But her growing up in Colfax was usually--her stories were usually centered around when my father came into the school; and, and they met, and then he pursued her with a vengeance.
Story_ID: 648107
Speaker 1: This is a good time to go to your father's side of the family now.  And can you give us your father's name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: My father's name (clears throat) is Nathan, N-A-T-H-A-N, Green, like the color, Tademy, T-A-D-E-M-Y [Nathan Tademy, Jr.].
Speaker 1: And what is his date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: And he was born January 6th, 1919, in Pineville [Louisiana].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Louisiana.
Speaker 1: Is Pineville near Colfax [Louisiana]?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: They're all very close.
Speaker 1: Okay, now what do you--what can you tell us about your father's side of the family?  How, how far back can you trace them, and what were they doing?
Speaker 2: I can't trace them nearly as far back because that--because I come up--upon the African problem.  I not only can't go across the water to get back to Africa, but on my father's side of the family, it pretty much starts in Louisiana.
Speaker 1: Okay, but it's interesting and I, I think I just might wanna take note here that so very few of the people that we interview have any--
Speaker 2: Correct.
Speaker 1: --vestige of an African memory that they can pass on.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: That this name is really something.
Speaker 2: It's amazing.
Speaker 1: That it came down, you know.
Speaker 2: It's amazing.
Speaker 1: You know, it may not be exactly the name, but it came down.
Speaker 2: I'm, I'm sure that it is not the name, as a matter of fact.  I'm, I'm sure that that's not the exact name, and I'm sure that it got bastardized over time and especially if census folks got hold of it.  They changed everything.  But it came down to that, and then that became what it was.  And I think that it--when I wrote about it, I actually had the name being Tateme [ph.] because one of the linguists that I talked to said that that was the most probable, that Tademy didn't really sound like it came from anyplace they could think of, that it was most likely Tateme.  But whatever it was it very quickly became codified and became Tademy.  But the fact that there is--there story is amazing.  And the fact that there is also a story that I can't corroborate, but I got it from a great uncle who's living in the--in the backwoods, in the Piney Woods, still in Pineville.  And he was not a man that traveled very much at all.  And I interviewed him, and he said, "Do you have a piece of paper and a pencil?"  And I said (shakes head), "Okay, well, get one."  And I got a piece of paper and a pencil.  And he traced what he said came from his family stories.  And he said, "This is where we come from.  We come from the Nile Delta."  And I thought, well, this is very fanciful and it makes a nice story, but really?  I went to the map and that's exactly what it looked like.  And so the story was that we had actually come from Egypt and that an ancestor had come over--had worked on a ship to come over to this country and then was enslaved.
Speaker 1: Yeah, now this is interesting and, and it does, on the surface, you'd say oh, well, that's--how likely is that?  But, but that is something that could actually have taken place in the 19th century.  There, there are stories we've had--there's about five or six stories of people in Louisiana and Arkansas who have ancestors from Madagascar they claim.  And when I first heard it I was like, yeah, right, you know, but then after I heard it the fifth, sixth time, I said wait a minute.  Now for some reason, people--families that don't know each other are saying this.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: You know.  So this story about Nile Delta--because the--New Orleans [Louisiana] was a busy port, and people were coming (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Absolutely.
Speaker 1: --from everywhere.
Speaker 2: Absolutely.
Speaker 1: And there's a case [Sally Miller v. Louis Belmonti and John F. Miller, 1845]--a famous case in the 19th century of a German girl who has a book about it who was--there's contention about whether she wa- could be sold as a slave or not.  And she claimed she was born in Germany, and the other people were saying no, she's from Louisiana.  She's just a light skin black per- person.  And it went to court, and had, had a case.  And I can't remember how it was resolved, but--you know, it can even get that strange, you know, so.
Speaker 2: Yeah, and it's not--
Speaker 1: It's, it's--
Speaker 2: --and if, if that sto- it's not something that I would have ever made up to put in a book, because I think it's so challengeable, and it might be possible, but it is so very unlikely.  But the fact that this is this man in his nineties telling me this, and with a shaky hand actually drawing out where the rivers meet, and saying this is where--this is where I was told we're from, I don't think that he made that up out of whole cloth.
Speaker 1: Yeah, it does seems interesting that--yeah.
Story_ID: 648108
Speaker 1: So, with this--now from what I read, you actually went to Egypt and--on a trip--and, and sort of a--did, did you go with the intent of trying to follow up on this story at all, or?
Speaker 2: I went to Egypt because I wanted to go to Egypt.  I went to Egypt and I did a very minor search.  I wasn't prepared.  I hadn't--I had not contacted people ahead of time to try to triangulate and do what you need to do if you're going on a true research trip.  But I did go by libraries, and I did go by--I did make an effort to try to see if this was even feasible, if it was possible.  I went to Alexandria [Egypt], because that's most likely where a boat would have left, to, to try to, to figure it out, and I couldn't.  I just couldn't make sense of it.
Speaker 1: But you--but did you see people that looked like African Americans here that would--
Speaker 2: I did.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: I did.  So--I mean, it's possible to--in, in my--in my mind it is possible. And I actually believe it.  Because, again, in, in, in a lot of the research that I've done, what I find is almost without exception, the stories, no matter how engrained they are, no matter how many times they've been told in exactly the same way, there's usually something wrong with them, and there's usually something right with them.  They're never right on.  They're never spot on.  There's usually something that is very off, and then there's something that's very on.  So I don't discount.  If I hear a story, there's a reason that story is there.  I don't believe it 100 percent, but I absolutely believe it 60 percent.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: And, and that was sort of my mantra going forward, is there's something here.  There's--some of--some of this may not make sense.  In a--in a lot of cases I would come up with something plausible or something that I had heard, and I would disprove it, but I could never disprove it 100 percent.  There was always some grain of truth there, and that was my job to sift it out and see what remained, so that, that applied in both directions.
Speaker 1: This, this affects--I mean, what you're talking about here is a--it makes me think about the philosophy of history classes that you have in, in college when you're--in your--when you're a history major, which I was.  They talked about history as being both art and science.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: In the sense--
Speaker 2: Absolutely.
Speaker 1: --that--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --you know, who can really be--you know, when oral history first was ruled out, they, they wanna say, can you really be sure that someone's telling you the truth?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Or can you be really sure that a record is true?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: It's written.
Speaker 2: Right.  And, and most of the records--not most; that's not true--many of the records are erroneous--many.  I mean, it's, it's--it--it's actually really surprising how much is wrong with the records. Sometimes just a very inconsequential thing, the spelling of a name, a wrong occupation, a wrong race, sometimes a wrong gender.  I mean, it's, it's, it's just really surprising when that happens, because you take it to mean that anything that's written down must be absolutely, positively true. Not so at all.
Speaker 1: Right and you were--you had mentioned that the census records and that--the fallibility of those a little while ago.
Speaker 2: Or even newspapers.  You know, I read just so many newspapers--old, old newspapers. And newspapers had agendas, and they were gonna promote whatever that agenda was, and they were going to fit--in some cases, they were gonna fit fact to whatever that agenda was.  And so the fact that it was in a newspaper doesn't, again, mean that it was true.  It just means that it was and it--you need to--there needed to be more investigation.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  So historical facts--well I hear you say they need to be surrounded by oth- by--
Speaker 2: Absolutely (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) information.
Speaker 2: Absolutely.
Story_ID: 648109
Speaker 1: So can you go back to your father's--can you go back further than your father's grandp- I mean your father's parents?
Speaker 2: So my--(clears throat) I can go back several generations, so my, my father--I'm doing this the opposite way, but it's helpful for me (laughter) so, so Nathan Green Tademy [Nathan Tademy, Jr.] is my father, and then Nathan Tademy [Nathan Tademy, Sr.] was his father, and Jackson Tademy was his father, and Sam Tademy was Jackson's father.
Speaker 1: And so your great--
Speaker 2: And Sam is the one who made up the name.
Speaker 1: Okay, so your great-great-grandfather is Sam Tademy.  And now he is the one--he's one of the central characters in 'Red River' [Lalita Tademy].
Speaker 2: He is.
Speaker 1: And he played a role--he, he was a major actor in, what they call the Colfax massacre and subsequently the building of a school [Grant Parish Training School, Colfax, Louisiana], right in--
Speaker 2: Correct.
Speaker 1: Colfax?
Speaker 2: Correct.  So Sam Tademy was a man to be admired, who had just a deep and abiding belief in education.  And Sam Tademy is the one who refused the slave owner's name and created the name Tademy.  He also was in the--what they called the Colfax riot, and this is a--this is a--an instance of history being rewritten by the victor.  So this Colfax riot in 1873 during Reconstruction happened because in the town of Colfax [Louisiana], they had voted in a slate of Republican candidates.  And the black people in the town--in Colfax--were ecstatic that they had won the election, and that things were going to change, and that there would be an expansion of opportunity for them, but the white Democrats refused to cede power.  And the black folks in the town took the courthouse to protect it, and so that--so that the candidates could get sworn in and that there could be an orderly transition of power.  And ultimately what happened over a series of weeks is that the white people of the town put out a call to eight neighboring parishes in Louisiana.  And the white league--the forerunners of the KKK [Ku Klux Klan], White Camellias [Knights of the White Camellia], all came pouring into the town, surrounded the courthouse, set fire to it, and there're like a hundred black men in this courthouse.  And as they streamed out, they shot them while the building was burning.  In the remix of that incident, they called it a riot--that the black people had been rioting, and they were just--the white people were just restoring order.  There--the--it's, it's very fuzzy as to how many people were actually killed, but very clear--because there had been monuments erected in the town that still stand.  There were three white people--three white men who were killed, one of whom who was shot in the back--friendly fire, but there were three white people who were killed.  And there were anywhere from 80 to 140 black men that were killed that day.  And it--and it was a rampage, and it was a massacre. I had several of my ancestors in that courthouse--some got out; some didn't.  And that was the family story that came to me from my aunt, which I had just very, very little to work with.  And all she knew is that there was this uprising in Colfax, and nobody talks about it.  It's--it is--it was so horrific that no one would talk about it.  No black person would even talk about it for years--for decades actually.
Story_ID: 648110
Speaker 1: Did the black community itself like lose a sense of the history of what happened there, themselves?
Speaker 2: Yes, a little.  There--
Speaker 1: I mean in terms of (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) there was--
Speaker 1: --I know the horror--
Speaker 2: --it--it was--
Speaker 1: --of relaying--
Speaker 2: --whispered.
Speaker 1: --a horrible thing but--
Speaker 2: It was horrible, but it, it--there, there--details were not discussed.
Speaker 1: Was the--were, were, were the political details lost is what I'm asking I guess, in terms of the why (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Some of the political--some of the political details were lost, but mostly there was just such fear.  There was such fear to bring it up within, you know, years of it happening.  And then it just got more and more fuzzy as time went on to try to recreate it.  And, and again, this is one of the reasons I was so determined.  This is not a book that my publisher wanted me to write, but I was so incredibly determined to tell this story in great detail to the--to the lead up day by day by day to what happened to those men in the courthouse [in Colfax, Louisiana] and what the political situation was surrounding them going in.  And it's--and it is a little complicated.  It is a little complicated.  It was a contested election.  But it was something that by the time--by the time my aunt told me about it, all she said was our people were in there.  Some got out.  Some did not.  And she didn't really know very much about it herself.  She just knew that there had been some--something egregious had happened.  Something terrifying had happened, and in order to keep living, people just never whispered a word of it, not even to each other most of the time.  And since that's 1873, that's a hundred--you know.  By the time she told me about it, it was over a hundred years prior (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now--
Story_ID: 648111
Speaker 1: What was Sam Tademy's story, in terms of that event?
Speaker 2: So Sam Tademy was in the courthouse, but actually when the--when the courthouse was first captured and before--when there was a showdown, and there were people on the outside and people on the inside, and they were digging all the trenches and trying to protect--they were--they were trying to protect the courthouse.  There were actually some children in there.  There were some women and children in there.  And Sam--they allowed him to take them out.  So he actually escaped before all of the shooting.  And by then most of the people in the town [Colfax, Louisiana]--the--there were so many white people that had poured into the town who were with guns and drinking and you know, they just--it was terrifying.  By then most of them were already hiding in the woods.
Speaker 1: Now, now there was a, a group called the Hadnots under leadership of a guy named Hadnot [James West Hadnot] from Montgomery, Louisiana, I guess that--
Speaker 2: Right, right.
Speaker 1: --had had a big group there in the--
Speaker 2: Right, and they were--they were powerful in the town.  And you know, he's one of the ones that put out the call and people came.  And the, the--there were just, just a lot of people who died either from the fire or being shot.
Speaker 1: And probably worse.
Speaker 2: And probably worse.
Speaker 1: Now so your ancestor, Sam Tademy, took the women and children deep into the woods.
Story_ID: 648112
Speaker 1: The repercussions--I mean the violent repercussions of this went on for days, right?  It didn't, didn't just happen in one day.  It was like--
Speaker 2: Well, it was the buildup.  Once, once there was all of the--they were waiting for the federal--they were waiting for the fed- feds to come, and they never made it.  They never came, and that's was pol- that was a political thing, so they were really let down by the government as well.  The government refused to send troops.  Actually, they didn't refuse to send troops.  They just didn't send troops, even though all of these appeals were coming, and it was very clear that more and more people were gathering, and there, there was gonna be a bad end to all of this.  And once all of the--once all of these men were killed, it--there wasn't a lot of violence.  It was over.  It was pretty much over, and then the [U.S.] military showed up.  And then the--and then the government showed up.  But it was there only that allowed them to bury some of--some of the men.  So the buildup was before, not after.  That pretty much did it. The most interesting part of this to me--and I didn't really write about this because it was, it was too complicated to capture--is that this is a case that was instrumental in the collapse of Reconstruction.  So they tried to bring nine of the men to justice who had massacred all of these--nine of the white men to justice who had massacred all of these black men.  And they kept in the, the court systems the local courts would let them go and then it would be appealed, and it would go up to the next level.  And it went all the way up to the Supreme Court of the United States, not the supreme court of Louisiana [Louisiana Supreme Court].  It went all the way up to the Supreme Court of the United States.  Now, of course, this took years.  But it was--one by one, they let these men off, whether it was a technicality or whatever it was, until there was--there were only three of them left.  And the Supreme Court when they finally passed their, their final, final decision--meanwhile, the folks in Colfax [Louisiana] were living in terror.  The black folks were just totally living in terror of what these white people could and would do.  So everyone was just trying to go on with their lives and not be in anyone's line of sight, in effect.  So the case finally gets to the Supreme Court, and the Supreme Court decides that they cannot intercede because it is the state's right to do whatever they need to do.  That was the end of Reconstruction.  That was the unleashing of violence as the method of control in the South from then on.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It was the Supreme Court case, Cruikshank [United States v. Cruikshank, 1875], yeah.  So I mean, this, this was a really significant and very, very little known case.  But after that, there--everyone knew there would be no repercussions.
Speaker 1: And the, the call they--the claim of states' rights, you know--
Speaker 2: That states' rights would--
Speaker 1: --you know, reverberating (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) always--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: -- states' rights would always prevail and therefore violence really--I mean, after that the violence was really unleashed; and the red--the whole Red River region became real- known for its violence.
Story_ID: 648113
Speaker 1: So, but your ancestor, Sam Tademy, created a school, right?
Speaker 2: He did (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Can you tell us about it?
Speaker 2: He so much believed in education as the way out.  And Sam was a moderate.  He, he believed in getting along with everyone, if possible.  And he would take up arms, but he was--he was not a revolutionary.  And he created a school, and the school was burned down, and he rebuilt the school.  No matter what they did in the town to discourage the education of black children, Sam Tademy was not having it. And he continued to both sponsor and build a school there.  And I'm very proud of him for that.  I mean, it, it's that kind of courage in the face of total opposition and total physical threat and threat for livelihood that--and it didn't matter.  He was just determined that that's what he was gonna do and he did.
Speaker 1: Okay.  I guess his choices would have been to leave, which may not have been possible with all his family members.  I don't know (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right.
Speaker 1: Or, or just succumb and don't do anything.
Speaker 2: Right.  And you know, it's--one of the things that I had to come to grips with, again, looking at things from current day instead of looking at them the way that they were at the time, I continually ask myself, why didn't these folks just leave?  Why didn't they just move someplace else?  And that just was not something you did lightly.  You know, there was the Great Migration that came considerably later.  There were people that left, but for the most part, you made the best of what you had.  Your family was there; your roots were there; your family probably went back generations there; and that's--he wanted to make Colfax [Louisiana] a better place and he stayed.
Speaker 1: Okay, wa- wa- what were the name--what, what was the name of this school?
Speaker 2: I have to look it up because I cannot remember.  It's in the book ['Red River,' Lalita Tademy].  It's something preparatory [Grant Parish Training School, Colfax, Louisiana]--I cannot remember.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I can't remember.  It's one of the--I can't remember.
Speaker 1: Okay, but it's in the book?
Speaker 2: It is.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Story_ID: 648114
Speaker 1: So this is your, your [paternal] great-great-grandfather?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: And now what about your great-grandfather?
Speaker 2: And then Jackson Tademy was not the eldest son.  He was the second son, but he was the one who emerged that kept up the tradition of education for Tademys.
Speaker 1: Now was he at--was he--did he become a schoolteacher?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And I suppose I didn't ask this, did, did Sam Tademy ever teach in the school [Grant Parish Training School, Colfax, Louisiana] or did he just--
Speaker 2: I don't think that he taught (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) he, he just--
Speaker 2: I'm pretty sure he did not teach because that's not what he--that he believed in education, but I don't believe that that's where he came from.  And he made sure that his kids were educated.  And Jackson's--the oldest son was, was the hope of the family.  His name was Green [Green Tademy].  That's my father's middle name.  But Green was, was smart, and he was smart, and determined, and charismatic, and--but he died.  And so Jackson had to step into those shoes, and he did.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, so--and so I imagine he, he earned his living in agriculture I guess?
Speaker 2: Exactly, yes.  Everybody--so you'd both--you were a farmer and you taught.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That's just sort of--especially in that town that's all there was.  It's the reason that my father moved away.  That's all there was.
Speaker 1: Okay, so Jackson Tademy would have been his--you know, the--I guess the core of his life would have been in the 1880s through the turn of the century?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And then your, your grandfather, Nathan Tademy [Nathan Tademy, Sr.]?
Speaker 2: And he was also a teacher.  I believe that this happens in some families.  Actually, I think it happens in most families.  All of that drive and that ambition sort of skipped a generation, and Nathan Ta- my, my grandfather did not have that same--he taught, but he didn't have that same I'm going to change the world attitude.  He didn't have that same get up and go.
Speaker 1: Do you think it was because of the lack of progress that he witnessed, I guess, growing up in (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I think so.  I think so.  I think he saw--I think he saw the lack of movement, and I just don't think he had it in him to--he--and he was more farmer.  He actually was more farmer than he was teacher.  He taught, but he taught because that's kind of what you did.  My father [Nathan Tademy, Jr.] did not want to teach, and he went to Grambling [Louisiana Negro Normal and Industrial Institute; Grambling State University, Grambling, Louisiana] for a year.  He--but he then hopped a train and came to California.  He wanted a different life, and he saw the life that he would have in Louisiana as being very, very narrow.
Story_ID: 648115
Speaker 1: So he [Tademy's father, Nathan Tademy, Jr.] did--he went to Grambling State University [Louisiana Negro Normal and Industrial Institute; Grambling State University, Grambling, Louisiana] for a year, but now somewhere in here he meets your mother [Willie Billes Tademy], right?
Speaker 2: He meet--
Speaker 1: So--
Speaker 2: --he, he actually met my mother in school, in--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And he was two years older.  And he came down from the Piney Woods.  And if you could ever see this little town in Louisiana--if you could ever see Colfax [Louisiana]--it's a little rural--it's very rural; it's very--no one would confuse it with, with the big city.  And it was very traditional, where there was a railroad track that went down the middle of town, and the white people lived on, you know, one side, and the black people lived on the low side that got flooded.  And it, it--but it was very, very country, very country.  So my father comes down from Pineville [Louisiana].  He comes down from where he's staying to the school, and he doesn't even have shoes.  And my mother takes one look and says, (makes sound) that guy is country.  And--which is hysterical to me 'cause--like she wasn't (laughter).  I mean, it was just so funny.  But he took one look at her and said, that's what I want, and it took him actually quite a long time.  This must have been--this must have been seventh grade maybe.  But it took--it took him awhile, but he was very persistent.  And my grandmother [Eva Brew Billes], my mother's mother, really liked him because he was, he was responsible, and my mother really went for the less responsible, sort of wilder guys.  My father was very quiet, but you know he had a plan and it was step by step, and my grandmother really liked that.  She wanted that for her--for her daughter.  And my mother was not buying it; but over time, he wore away at her and eventually they got married.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Eventually--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --they got married.
Story_ID: 648116
Speaker 1: Did your father [Nathan Tademy, Jr.] serve in the war [World War II, WWII] at all?
Speaker 2: He did.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: He did.
Speaker 1: And did he go overseas?
Speaker 2: He (pause)--you know, I'm totally foggy.  He was in the [U.S.] Navy.  He was in the Navy, and I don't think he did go overseas, and he was a cook.
Speaker 1: That's the--
Speaker 2: And I don't know why that would be, but he did not.
Speaker 1: Yeah, that's typical that all the blacks in--
Speaker 2: Were cooks (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) were cooks, yeah.
Speaker 2: That I--that--I mean, that I do remember him being a cook, and I do remember him--the stories of him I don't personally remember, but I remember the stories of him being away for an extended period.  But I don- I don't think that he--I don't think that he went to Europe; I don't think so.
Speaker 1: So did they move to California before the war or?
Speaker 2: They moved after.  And--I'm sorry.  They moved before, and--they moved before, and he moved first.  So he went for maybe eight months at--to try to establish himself there.  And my mother [Willie Billes Tademy] had two kids [Theodorsia Tademy and Joan Tademy Lothery] already by then, and they stayed in Louisiana, and then he sent for them.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And they came over and lived in San Francisco [California]; and then in Berkeley [California], and that's where I was born.
Story_ID: 648117
Speaker 1: When you think about your parents' personalities, their dispositions, their, their interests, hobbies, how they walk, talk, looked, who do you think you take after the most?
Speaker 2: I, I have traits of each, so it isn't--it isn't definitive.  I have--I have my father's [Nathan Tademy, Jr.] stubbornness.  I have my mother's [Willie Billes Tademy] determination, organization.  I have some of my father's dreams.  I have my mother's practicality.  So it's, it's not--sometimes you--you're your mother's child, and sometimes you're your father's child.  I, I actually have some of the good and bad of both of them.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: And they were very different.  They were very, very different people.  You know, my father was a--my father was a visionary.  My mother was a--make it happen; here's what we have; it's only what we see that's important.  And so they were--they were--my father was very quiet.  My mother was social.  My father was very introspective.  My mother was--liked to be out and deal with people and just really well liked.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  Now can you name your siblings for us and put yourself in the correct order I guess?
Speaker 2: Okay, from oldest to youngest: my oldest sister is Theodorsia [Theodorsia Tademy], like Theo [Tademy's maternal grandfather, Theodore Billes]--make it a girl's name; my next oldest sister is Joan Lothery--Joan Tademy Lothery; my brother is Lee [Lee Tademy]; and then I'm the youngest.
Story_ID: 648118
Speaker 1: You're born in 1948, and you're born in Berkeley [California], right now?
Speaker 2: I was.
Speaker 1: Okay, now can you describe--now you didn't live there long, right?  You didn't live in Berkeley for very long, from what I understand?
Speaker 2: Well, it actually--from when my memories start, it wasn't long, but it was long enough.  I mean, it was--we did not move to Castro Valley [California] until, until I was nine.
Speaker 1: Okay, well, do you have an earliest childhood memory?
Speaker 2: My earliest childhood memory is really pretty late.  My earliest childhood memory is sitting at the house in Berkeley with my--with my sisters [Theodorsia Tademy and Joan Tademy Lothery] and brother [Lee Tademy], and them talking about Santa Claus, and me thinking I have to fake it that I don't know that that's not real.  This happened so early it was ridiculous (laughter), because they'll be so disappointed.  I just remember that.  And so I remember going through a lot of Christmases pretending that I still believed in the East- you know, I pretended I still believed in the Easter Bunny, and I believed in Santa Claus, and I believed in all that stuff, but very early on I did not.  I mean, I just knew that that (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) How--
Speaker 2: --was bogus.  I don't know.  I have no idea.  I just knew that it wasn't real.
Speaker 1: How old were you when you knew it wasn't real?
Speaker 2: Well, that's what I'm saying it--that was late, but it was like four.  I think it was like four.
Story_ID: 648119
Speaker 1: Was religion a big part of growing up?  Did, did your parents--?
Speaker 2: So we lived right down the street from McGee Avenue Baptist Street.  We--McGee Avenue Baptist Church [Berkeley, California], which was right on the corner of Stuart [Street] and McGee [Avenue], which is where we lived.  That was three houses down.  And that was every Sunday. We would go to church and it was a--we would go to Sunday school, and then we'd go to church, and it was a very long church service as I recall.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And when we moved, that was--we moved to an all white area, and it was--that was our reconnection back.  We would drive all the way from Castro Valley [California] where we now lived.  We would drive for--I don't know.  It must have taken forty minutes, something like that.  We would, we would drive--maybe longer.  We would drive back to Berkeley [California] to go to church and get our dose of black, get our dose of religion.
Story_ID: 648120
Speaker 1: Can you describe where you grew up I guess in Berkeley [California], I guess, and I guess in Castro Valley [California]?  And can, can you describe some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up?
Speaker 2: The--in Berkeley, I just remember the street.  I remember the street and there were kids playing all the time, and so there was a lot of ball bouncing.  Kids were out and they were playing hopscotch.  What do you--what do you call the--where you draw out the--oh, I can't re- is that hopscotch?
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, on, on the sidewalk with chalk?
Speaker 2: Yeah, with chalk and you do this and then your feet go out and your--yeah, all right.  So I, I remember that.  I remember balls bouncing against the wall.  I remember--I just--I remember kids' voices.  I ju- it, it was just, it was a neighborhood that had a lot of kids in it.  And so that's really what I remember about Berkeley.  The sights and sounds I--my mother [Willie Billes Tademy] would pack me up everywhere and take me with her.  I was the youngest, and I was separated by a number of years from everybody else--from my other siblings [Theodorsia Tademy, Joan Tademy Lothery and Lee Tademy].  And so--and she didn't believe in babysitters, so she would just pack me up and take me wherever she went.  And I just remember I always had a coloring book and something where I could take words and make other words out of them.  So she would put me down in a corner someplace wherever she was: a PTA [Parent Teacher Association] meeting; or a store--where- wherever it was.  And I just remember things passing by me, and I knew she'd come back and get me (shrugs shoulders) wherever that was.
Story_ID: 648121
Speaker 1: In Castro Valley [California], those memories are not so fond.  That, that was a very tough, that was a very tough environment, very, very, very tough environment.  So the--it was--and it was an environment where I was pretty paranoid because we were the only black family, and I was convinced from the time that we moved there--and we got death threats all the time.  And I was always taking the phone calls saying, "We're gonna burn you out; we're gonna--we're--you know, we're, we're gonna shoot you;" we're gonna do this; we're gonna do that."
Speaker 2: So this is 1957 I guess?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Yep.
Speaker 2: Over there.
Speaker 1: Yep, yep.  And so I was convinced that I was not gonna make it out of there alive.  I--and carried that with me until I was in high school [Castro Valley High School, Castro Valley, California].  So, I don't know.  I wasn't--I don't think I was very--I think I was observant for danger.  I think I was observant for someone who was gonna turn on me and shoot me or beat me up or do, do some physical damage.
Story_ID: 648122
Speaker 1: Now did you--your father [Nathan Tademy, Jr.] now was a, he was a contractor, right?
Speaker 2: He was a contractor.
Speaker 1: And he was independent, had his own business?
Speaker 2: Absolutely.
Speaker 1: And did--was he a member of the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] or any of the black groups?
Speaker 2: He, he was, but--he was, but he was mostly--he, he was not a big player in any of that.  Mostly what he did, he worked a lot, and he hustled a lot.  And what he really wanted--all he wanted to do was to be a supervisor of a construction company.  All he wanted to do was supervise jobs.  That's--that was--he would have been so ha- such a happy man, if he could have just had that.  But he couldn't supervise white workers, so he couldn't do it.  And there were no black construction companies at that time, and so that's why he went out on his own and became one of the first black independent contractors in the Bay Area [San Francisco Bay Area, California].  So he was--he was out there; and yes, he was affiliated with these groups, but he was not up--he was--he was an apolitical man, but he was also not a huge proponent of groups.  So he belonged to some groups, but he didn't play a--he didn't play an active role.
Speaker 1: So he wasn't involved in community organizing or any of that kind of thing.
Speaker 2: Not really.
Speaker 1: In--
Speaker 2: Not really.  He was in a network of people.  He, he was in a network of other independent black men who were trying to make it, who were his colleagues and friends, but not as a community organizer.
Speaker 1: Okay, now was the group an official group?  I mean, did they have a name?  Or was it (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No.
Speaker 1: --just, just a loose association of people that were, kind of?
Speaker 2: No, it was a loose association. It was a loose association.
Speaker 1: Mostly businesspeople?
Speaker 2: Mostly businesspeople.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Absolutely, absolutely businesspeople.
Story_ID: 648123
Speaker 1: So when he made the move out to Castro Valley [California], I mean, this is--now I've heard about, you know, people doing that.  They usually have like, maybe some tangential relationship to the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] or some--you know, some rights group.  But he, he, he really just struck--
Speaker 2: He was--
Speaker 1: --out on his own.
Speaker 2: Well, and it wa- he couldn't do it on his own. So what--there were five families.  There were five black families, and they bought acres of land.  They bought this huge, huge land in, in Castro Valley that was undeveloped.  And the neighbors found out and you know, a la 'Raisin in the Sun' ['A Raisin in the Sun,' Lorraine Hansberry] came and said, you know, "If you just don't move then we will give you a profit.  We'll buy this back from you at a profit.  Just, please, don't come to our town."  And my father [Nathan Tademy, Jr.] was not having it.  And the, the plan was, it was these--it was five black families that got together with a white front buyer, and the white front buyer is the one that bought the property and then turned it over to all these folks.  And my father didn't--he was just determined that he was--that he had a right to do this and he was going to do it.  And we were sort of constricted in Berkeley [California].  We were redlined.  There were so many places we couldn't move to.  And they wanted to move out of the house where we were.  They saw some of the kids in the neighborhood going bad, and they didn't want that for us so they struck on this plan.  Several of the families opted out.  They, they didn't sell back, but they didn't move in.  So we--my--the plan was for my father to build each of the houses and then we would sort of have some critical mass, but it turned out where we were just sort of stuck there for a while, just ourselves.  But then two other families did move in. They did build their houses; they did move in; and so there were three families.
Speaker 1: Now that, that's quite a plan actually.  That--I've--you know, that's one of the most intricate plans I've heard of, you know, in terms of moving to a new neighborhood to create your own neighborhood by buying the land and building your own houses and all that.  Similar--I heard a similar story yesterday around--what--it, it was called Dynamite Hill in Bal- in Birmingham [Alabama] where--
Speaker 2: Yes (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) I think they started--they did the same, pur- purchasing land and started constructing homes.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Story_ID: 648124
Speaker 1: And it was--you know, I mean it was--I don't think that they realized how tough that was going to be for--I don't think they realized how tough that was gonna be for their kids, how tough it was gonna be on them, because they, you know, were in a constant state of having to protect the physical property [in Castro Valley, California], the constant state of, of, of neighbors that really did not want us there.  It, it was the--that was a lot of hard years.
Speaker 2: And the neighbors weren't really--they weren't really close neighbors were they?  They were--the neighbors that--the people that lived in the area, right?
Speaker 1: No, they were close neighbors.  They were--
Speaker 2: They were close neighbors (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) They were right across the street.  This was--this was undeveloped, but it was the--it was an undeveloped piece of property, but right across the street was very developed.  And, and it was a road that went--I mean, I can remember that.  It was a road that went up, and the houses were fairly close together.  And for years I could not pass in front of a window without thinking that somebody was--had a rifle and was gonna shoot me (laughter). I mean, really.  I mean, this is the--it, it sounds really stupid now, but we had a--you know, where we lived, that hill was in front and up, and they could look down, and with a, you know, high powered telescope rifle--I just always envisioned that I was gonna get shot.
Speaker 2: Now, now--
Speaker 1: So--
Speaker 2: --your fears (unclear) largely from phone calls if you (unclear) it right in the--and then doesn't--I guess from--
Speaker 1: Well, it was phone calls--
Speaker 2: Did--
Speaker 1: --and--everyday going to school.  There was this old southern transplant guy down the block who--this is an old guy and I'm young--I mean, young.  He would come out of his house every single morning to come and try to spit on me.  (Laughter) It was just--it was--it was like, so incredibly ridiculous.  It was just silly.  It was just silliness.  And, and what he wanted to do was show his displeasure that, that we were there but, I mean, this went on for years.
Speaker 2: So he would come out of his house--
Speaker 1: He would (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) and actually--
Speaker 1: --come out of--
Speaker 2: --try to--
Speaker 1: This was part of his morning routine.
Speaker 2: --try to get close enough to you and--
Speaker 1: Correct.
Speaker 2: --just spit on you?
Speaker 1: Correct.  And it was--it was just stupid.
Speaker 2: So what, did you run or what?  What were you--
Speaker 1: Well, after a while, there was no need running because--I could run if I needed to, but I just--you know--
Speaker 2: And he would (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I'd cross over on the other side.  And then after a while, it wasn't--he wasn't chasing me.  He wasn't doing anything.  He was just spitting.  He was just spitting as long distance as he could make it go, which was easy to dodge, but it was just foolish.  It was just stupid.
Story_ID: 648125
Speaker 1: I was asking you about sights, sounds, and smells of growing up.  Now did you know anything--I mean, in terms, terms of this movement, did you know anything about that history of Colfax, Louisiana, the massacre or anything of that kind of history?
Speaker 2: I knew--before I wrote the book ['Cane River,' Lalita Tademy] you mean?
Speaker 1: No, before you moved--you were in that neighborhood in, in Ca- Castro Valley [California]?
Speaker 2: No, not really.  I--no, I didn't.  I learned about it while I was in Castro Valley.  We went back to Louisiana every year--every summer.  And in Colfax they have a plaque there commemorating the Colfax riot, and I had seen the plaque.  I didn't understand what it as or what it meant or, or of that.  On successive trips there, as I got older, the--then I started to try to piece together what the Colfax riot really was.  But I didn't piece it together for years.  So no, I didn't--I didn't have the story of what happened there at my fingertips, and I certainly didn't understand how perverted the story was.  I just knew it was perverted and I couldn't get anybody to talk about it.  I couldn't get--and by anybody, I mean anybody.  I couldn't get white people to talk about it.  I couldn't get relatives to talk about it.  I couldn't get librarians to talk about it.  I couldn't get anybody to talk about it.  So, I, I came very late to an understanding of what the incident really was.  And even when I was trying to write the book, it was--which, which was decades later, I--it still was very tough to get fact, because everything that had been written--everything--from, from people doing a thesis, to books that had been written on it, they were incorrect.  They were all--they were all about how to put down a riot.  So it--I did not have that awareness when I was growing up.  I just didn't have it.
Speaker 1: Okay. I just mentioned 'cause I was thinking about you being--your family being in that situation, being threatened and you know.  I mean, it's very much like what happened in Colfax, Louisiana in 1873, but it's--
Speaker 2: But it was very much like being a black person anyplace in the '50s [1950s]--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --in truth.  You know, I mean it--you didn't have to go all the way to Colfax to find--to find this kind of behavior, and it--I, I just--I just assumed that there were other places in the country where you could live where you didn't think you were gonna get killed.  And I didn't know where that was, because I under- I understood how you could think that way living in the South, but I was living in California and I was thinking that I would never--I was thinking I would never make it to--I didn't start to--I didn't start to really put--to put my shoulder in it for college until my sophomore year [at Castro Valley High School, Castro Valley, California] 'cause I never believed that I would live to see it.
Story_ID: 648126
Speaker 1: Let's kind of go back and recapitulate your, your school life.  Now where did you start school?
Speaker 2: I started school in Berkeley [California]. And I went to Longfellow Elementary School.  And then we moved to Castro Valley [California], and I went to Parsons Elementary School.
Speaker 1: Okay, in terms of Longfellow School--now I take it you liked school?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Yeah, you seem like a person that would like school and--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And so you--and did you have a favorite subject?
Speaker 2: Oh, I, I liked English the best.  I liked English, and I loved doing book reports or something where you had to read and try to interpret or figure out what it meant.
Speaker 1: Okay, did you have a favorite teacher?
Speaker 2: Mr. Leaf [ph.].  Yes I did.
Speaker 1: Okay, so he was the English teacher or an, an English teacher?
Speaker 2: He was an English teacher.  But I didn't--I--you know, he might not have even been an English teacher.  He might have even been a social studies teacher.  He was a so- he was not an English teacher.  He was a social studies teacher.  I just liked him because he was thoughtful and would throw out--he would just throw out concepts to think about, and he would play devil's advocate, which would make you defend your position.  And up until then it was about memorization, and he was just a little more freewheeling, and it, it was interesting.  He--I just found him very interesting.
Speaker 1: So was he in the like, fourth grade or something or?
Speaker 2: No, he was later.  He was high school.  He was all the way--
Speaker 1: It was high school.
Speaker 2: --in high school.
Speaker 1: Okay, he's in Castro Valley.
Speaker 2: He's in Castro Valley.
Speaker 1: Oh, okay, (unclear)--
Speaker 2: Well--
Speaker 1: --I was--I was (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Castro Valley was elementary school too.
Speaker 1: Oh, okay.  Oh, that's right, 'cause you moved there--
Speaker 2: I--
Speaker 1: --in the fourth grade.
Speaker 2: --moved there early.
Speaker 1: Right, right, okay.  So he was at--what, what was the school in Castro Valley?
Speaker 2: Par--so there was Parsons Elementary, A.B. Morris Middle--A.B. Morris Junior High [A.B. Morris Junior High School, Castro Valley, California] and then Castro Valley High School [Castro Valley, California].
Speaker 1: So he'd been like the sixth grade or something?
Speaker 2: No, Mr. Leaf must have been ninth.
Speaker 1: Okay. Okay, so that would've been middle school, right? The--
Speaker 2: A.B. Morris--I don't really even remember that very--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --much.
Story_ID: 648127
Speaker 1: In elementary school, I was in honors, so we did a lot of special--they would gather up all the honor students from all the schools around in a bus, and once a week we would go off on our own and do experiments.  We'd do science experiments, or we would do fieldtrips, or we would do whatever.  And that was--that was sort of fun.  When--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: When I--when I--when we moved to Castro Valley [California], they gave me an IQ test.  I think it was an IQ test.  It was either an IQ test or--they gave me some sort of test.  And they came back and they said that they were gonna have to test me again because I had tested too high.  And, and my (laughter), my father [Nathan Tademy, Jr.]--my mother [Willie Billes Tademy] had this hat that she'd put on, and it was this little black hat that was fit really close to the head, and it had this feather that came across like this.  And I knew whenever she'd put on that hat she was going to PTA [Parent Teacher Association].  And we had just moved to Castro Valley, and she got out that hat and she pinned it on her head, said she wasn't going to PTA, and she marched me down to that school, and she said, "Would you retest any other student if they had gotten this score?  Why are you saying that you're gonna retest my daughter," blah, blah, blah, blah--and she just lit into them and refused that I would be rested.  And so they had to let me into this honors program on the (laughter) basis of that.  But that's--I had never seen her so focused.
Speaker 2: Okay, so, so what grade was it that you went into the honors program?
Speaker 1: I was in fourth grade. That was as soon as I got there.
Speaker 2: Okay, so this is--
Speaker 1: That's as soon as I got there, and so they had to recalibrate me and try to figure out what to--you know, where I should be is the point.  So I was coming from Berkeley [California] and that school [Longfellow School] to Castro Valley and that school [Parsons Elementary School], and they were trying to figure out where they were gonna put me, not only in what grade but in what--sort of what capacity.  And when I--and it's not even that I tested that high, but it's that they just didn't believe it.  They didn't believe a little black kid could come into their school and be able to hang.  So, they got over it.
Story_ID: 648128
Speaker 1: So were, how were you treated in Castro Valley [California] and in the school [Parsons Elementary School] itself?
Speaker 2: So the--it's, it's really odd.  I, I had sort of three lives.  I had my inside my house life, which was very, very normal kid growing up, two parents [Willie Billes Tademy and Nathan Tademy, Jr.] that loved me kind of growing up.  I--
Speaker 1: And you were the baby of the family.
Speaker 2: And I was the baby of the family and.  I had the--I had the formal school structure life, and I was teacher's pet all the time everywhere.  And then I had the kids. And the kids were--the kids were cruel.  They--it--and just sort of got more cruel as time went on.  In the beginning it was anybody that befriended me, as soon as their parents found out that we were friends then they suddenly weren't my friends anymore.  They were--they would pull them back.  And so that was really sort of odd.  So it was a--it was just a very lonely kind of existence there.  And then of course the community really didn't want us there just in general principle, but there were--you know, there were people that were fine.  There were people that didn't care one way or the other, but it--but it was hard.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, so, well, were there any--did, did any other black students ever enroll?
Speaker 2: Yes, but, of course, my siblings [Theodorsia Tademy, Joan Tademy Lothery and Lee Tademy] were also there. And then the other--the families that moved into the other houses eventually were there.  The issue was that I never--the entire time I was in Castro Valley, from the fourth grade to the twelfth grade [at Castro Valley High School, Castro Valley, California], I never had a black kid in my class.  I actually never had a black kid in my school, 'cause I was in a different--I was in a different age group, so I was never in, in the same school as my siblings or any of the other black kids.
Speaker 1: Now, probably needless to say, you never had a black teacher, right?
Speaker 2: Correct (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Correct.
Speaker 1: Okay, but they--you know, so you--but you're the only one.  But I, I guess what you're saying, in term- terms of the teachers, they treated you normally.  They didn't isolate you or try to--
Speaker 2: No, and not only didn't they isolate me, the teachers really adopted me.  I mean, they just really, really were trying to nurture me.  They would--you know, when I was in high school, I went--I got a National Science Foundation grant to go to the University of North Dakota [Grand Forks, North Dakota] during the summer.  They applied for me.  You know, they, they were always looking out.  They were always trying to give me extra things to do, extra credit things to do, extra whatever.  So it was--they--I had to fight to take homemaking because they didn't want me to take a class that was non-academic.  And it was just the opposite of what you would think.  The teachers were very, very, very much on my side, and that was without exception.  There wasn't a single one I could think of, which is so odd, but there wasn't a single one who was trying to limit me in any way.
Speaker 1: Yeah that, that is exception- is, is different--really different for those days.
Story_ID: 648129
Speaker 1: Now you went to high school where?  What was the name of your high school?
Speaker 2: Castro Valley High School [Castro Valley, California].
Speaker 1: Okay, Castro Valley High School.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay, this is in 1962?
Speaker 2: Nineteen sixty- 1962 to 1966.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So this is during the time of the--John Kennedy [President John Fitzgerald Kennedy] is the president, and space race is going on, Civil Rights Movement's on television--seen a lot of that.  I don't know--Motown [Motown Records] is kicking up (laughter).  I'm just try- you know, so.  What did you like to do as a freshman in high school?
Speaker 2: I actually read a lot.  That's mostly what I did.  Mostly what I did, I did solo. I did by myself.  I read all the time; I read; I studied. That's really what I did.
Speaker 1: So it can--kind of continued that you didn't have any close friends in school?
Speaker 2: Not really.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I had--I had some--I had some--I had some friends, but I didn't consider them close, and I had had--you know, most of the time whenever I'd get a friend they would opt out.  Either their parents would make them opt out, or you know, I was socially undesirable so.  So I, I didn't--I really didn't put a lot of effort into that.
Speaker 1: Okay, now did you have favorite books that you read?  Did you read fiction, nonfiction?
Speaker 2: I read anything.  And my favorite book was 'To Kill a Mockingbird' [Harper Lee].  That was just--that was a life changing book for me.
Speaker 1: Yeah, this is--it, it got a lot of attention in those days.  And then the movie--I think a movie came out--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --in '61 [1961] or '62 [1962], around the same time that you started high school.  Was it be--just before or just--you know.
Speaker 2: Yeah, but that a--that was huge.  It was huge, and it was huge for just a crazy reason.  It was huge because it convinced me that it was possible that there were honorable white people in the world.  And I know that sounds a little strange, but--so it was about Atticus Finch.  It was about somebody having principles and living by those principles in the interest of social justice.  That was a concept that, that just blew me away and gave me such tremendous hope that things could be different.
Speaker 1: While you at--while you were in high school, there were white volunteers going to the South for the first time I think in the summer of '63 [1963], '64 [1964], and you were aware of that kind of thing when you--
Speaker 2: I was aware but not as aware as I should have been.  I really wasn't.  I, I--you know, I've, I've looked back on it now, and I'm a little perplexed that I wasn't more invested, more active.  But I think I felt as if I was drowning myself, so I was just trying to--I was just trying to make it through.  I was just trying to make it through.  And, and truthfully, during that period of time, I was still in the, I'm not sure I'm gonna get out of this even alive mindset, so, yeah (simultaneous).
Story_ID: 648130
Speaker 1: You said you used to go back into Berkeley [California] to go to church [McGee Avenue Baptist Church]. Did the church provide like a social outlet for you?  Did you have friends--
Speaker 2: No (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) at church?  No?
Speaker 2: No.  And that--and that eventually stopped.  It was just--it was too difficult.  It was just too difficult to do and so we didn't.  We stopped going every Sunday, and so my world became sort of rooted in Castro Valley [California].  So I just--I no longer had the Berkeley connection.
Speaker 1: So just you and your, your older siblings at home I guess, right?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Just pretty much.
Speaker 2: Yep.
Speaker 1: Now but you said you did get a chance to go on some special trips because of your academic success, right?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: But they weren't necessarily social, so--right?
Speaker 2: No, they weren't social.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: No.  That whole--by the time I graduate [from Castro Valley High School, Castro Valley, California]--I mean, I didn't go to prom, none of that, none of that.  I mean, 'cause it was--it--the year after I graduated in sixty--so in '66 [1966] an interracial couple at a prom, that, that wouldn't have even--that wouldn't have played at all.
Speaker 1: 'Cause--
Speaker 2: It, it, wasn't gonna happen 'cause I didn't know anybody that would be interested and then--and I didn't know any--I didn't know any black guy that would take me, so--
Speaker 1: There weren't any that were trying to get out to Castro Valley when they found out about you (laughter)?
Speaker 2: There weren't any what?
Speaker 1: There, there weren't any that were trying to get out to Castro Valley becau- after they found out about you?  I mean, or, or saw you somewhere or you know?
Speaker 2: No, oh, no. Because Ca- it was in the middle of nowhere.  I mean, Castro Valley was, was Timbuktu [Mali].  It was just really far--my, my sisters [Theodorsia Tademy and Joan Tademy Lothery] were both gorgeous.  You know, they were both in Miss Bronze pageant in the--you know, they had all of that.  They had trouble getting people to come out to Castro Valley, and they had--they still had some ties with, with, you know, a different life, a different world.  I didn't have any of those ties 'cause (unclear) from the fourth grade.  So, no, I didn't really have anybody that would--that I could entice to come out.
Story_ID: 648131
Speaker 1: So you were National Honor Society--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --member and, yeah, so--but, but you weren't in any clubs or any of that kind of thing in--
Speaker 2: Not really.
Speaker 1: --high school [Castro Valley High School, Castro Valley, California].
Speaker 2: Not really.
Speaker 1: Did you play an instrument in the band or anything?
Speaker 2: I played the cello.  I played the cello, but that wasn't--you know--and, and I gave that up early.  I gave that up early.  I, I was no good, (laughter) and I gave up early.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, now did you do any writing in high school?
Speaker 2: I would say no, but I have a feeling that the answer is really yes.  So in my memory, I--that's not what I was pursuing.  What I wanted is I wanted to figure out a way where I could be independent and make a living.  So that, that was my total and complete focus.  So many of my teachers told me that I should be writing, and I never considered it for an instant. Not for an--not for one minute.  So if there was--if there needed to be a class play, I would have a teacher that would assign me to do it. You know, they'd say, "Who wants to do it?"  And five hands would shoot up.  And then, you know, I'd be in the back, and they'd say, "No, you're gonna do it."  So they were always coming to me to write things, so I did write, but it was only when assigned.  I didn't do it on my own, and I had no intentions of--I had no intentions of pursuing that 'cause you can't make money writing.  So I just--I would say that I didn't write 'cause to me you--when--if you say, "Did you write in high school?"  That meant you wrote on your own.  You were so driven to do it that you wrote on your own, and I never did.  But I was assigned to write a lot of stuff, 'cause teachers would just try to force me to do it.
Speaker 1: So they recognized that you, you--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --could do it.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: I guess.
Speaker 2: And they kept saying, "You need to be doing this."  And I kept saying, who's gonna pay me to do this?  Nobody.  So--and the same thing happened when I went to college.
Story_ID: 648132
Speaker 1: Now you mentioned going to North Dakota with a group who was sponsored by the National Science Foundation?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Now this is--so you were involved in science in a significant way in high school [Castro Valley High School, Castro Valley, California]?
Speaker 2: Well, this was actually my biology teacher and my calculus teacher got together and recommended me for me to do this thing, and I had done--I had done something for the science fair.  I think I had mice running through mazes or--I can't remember exactly what I did.  But I had, had some submission in the--in the science fair, and they had--they just decided that it made sense for me to, to pursue science.  And so they applied for me, and I went.  And it was something like eight students from all around the country--maybe it was twelve from all around the country, and we stayed in the dorms [of the University of North Dakota] in Fargo, North Dakota [sic. Grand Forks, North Dakota], for the summer.
Speaker 1: Fargo, North Dakota, over the summer.  That--well, that sounds like a delightful place to be--
Speaker 2: It was actually incredibly interesting, and it was one of the most impactful experiences of my life, in terms of going there and understanding for the first time what it was like to not be the feared minority group.  It was just--it was just a revelation to me.  I, I just was used to living life in a certain way.  I went there and the group out of favor that everybody despised and made jokes about and did whatever, was Native Americans.  And they had assigned me to be in the dorm with a girl from Mississippi, and they figured that somebody from California would, would be the most tolerant of this black girl--this other black girl in the science program.  And they were so shocked when I showed up and I was black.  They had no idea (laughter), and so we actually got to room together, which was--which was really sort of funny.  But yeah, it was a--it was a good experience, and I--it got me exposed to--more exposed to science and scientific pursuit and that kind of thing.
Speaker 1: Now when they, they put down the Native Americans, I, I guess the Lakotas there I guess, did, did, did--I mean, how did that make you feel?  I mean, when you--when you hear that kind of thing coming from--
Speaker 2: It was so confusing.  I mean, I couldn't--I was waiting for them to have circled around and include me, and they didn't.  And they were just little snide--for the most part, they were these little snide, "Well, of course they're lazy," or of course--you know, or, or it was something about drinking, or it was something about--it was--it was just small, diminishing attitudes.  And how did that make me feel?  It made me--it made me recalibrate what it is about people where they find it necessary to put somebody else down to make themselves feel better.  I, I had just never looked at it that way before.  I just never looked at it that way before.  And I couldn't--I couldn't rush to the defense because truthfully I didn't know any Native Americans, so I didn't even know what that was about.  I c- I just couldn't even figure out what is it that I can even say about this.  So it was--it was a confusing time.  It was confusing.
Story_ID: 648133
Speaker 1: In your senior year [at Castro Valley High School, Castro Valley, California], what were you focusing on as a career?  You know, did you have a vision of what you were gonna do?
Speaker 2: Psychology.
Speaker 1: Okay, and, and why? What--
Speaker 2: Well, actually it was between psychology and law.  And I very quickly--I went to Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.] for two years before transferring to UCLA [University of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California].  And I very quickly came to understand that the legal--or I was told--actually I didn't come to understand, I was told that women in law mostly did the behind the scenes, looking up the cases--that kind of work.  And I said that's not--I have no interest in that.  I have no interest in that.  And so I ended up pursuing psychology, and I graduated with a degree in psychology.
Speaker 1: Okay, now--
Speaker 2: And statistics.
Story_ID: 648134
Speaker 1: You went to Howard University [Washington, D.C.].  This is an all-black school [HBCU] on the East Coast, and you're out in California.  Did--was there a story about how you made the decision to go to Howard?
Speaker 2: When I was in Castro Valley [California], and I realized that I was gonna go to--that I was gonna live long enough to go to college, and I had the grades for it, and I had all of that, I got out an atlas.  And I opened it up, and I got out a wooden ruler, and I put one end of it on California in the Bay Area [San Francisco Bay Area].  And I went and I said what's the furthest away that (laughter) I can get from here and be with black folks and get a scholarship, and it turned out to be Howard.
Story_ID: 648135
Speaker 1: Okay now when, when you were in col- in high school [Castro Valley High School, Castro Valley, California], JFK [President John Fitzgerald Kennedy] was killed, right?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: And also I think another big, significant event was that same--well, earlier that year there's the March on Washington--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --too. So did you take--you have any thoughts about those events when you--
Speaker 2: Again, I was in a bubble.  And while they were events that were happening, they were events that I did not internalize.  I'm ashamed to say that at this point, because I was living through just an amazing time in history.  But they were of--they were obviously of interest, but it--it's almost as if they didn't have that much to do with me.
Speaker 1: Okay, you said you father [Nathan Tademy, Jr.], though he was associated with NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] on some level, he wasn't really political (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, absolutely--he was very, very nonpolitical.
Speaker 1: All right, so Howard University [Washington, D.C.], 1966, right?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: The fall of '66 [1966].
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: So what was going on at Howard when you--when you got to Howard?
Speaker 2: Everything was breaking loose (laughter).  So black power was coming--was on the rise.  There was--they were--over the course of--I was only there for two years.  And there was shutting the school down and protesting.  And my--as much as I had wanted to go to a black school [HBCU], I was appalled.  I mean, I was absolutely appalled, not for the social--not for the larger social happenings.  I was appalled that my education was getting interrupted.  Because in my mind, I had four years to get it together to be able to land the job that was gonna make me independent.  And that's how I considered those four years.  I didn't consider them to be years of learning things or--exactly.  I mean, if--that, that was a byproduct, but the real goal was I have to be prepared to go out there and land a job, and it has to be a good job, and it has to be a job that will grow into a better job, and it has to launch me and put me on my way.  So all of these things that were happening at Howard--I mean, I, I--truthfully, I wish I could go back and re-experience them, re-experience them.  But at the time they were in my way for what it is that I wanted to do.  This is just truth.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, as a Howard student--I guess he was out of school by then--Stokely Carmichael [Kwame Ture] that coined the phrase black power.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And people were starting to use the term black in place of Negro.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: But it hadn't really caught on--caught fire in the country, but in some places like D.C. [Washington, D.C.] and New York [New York] and it really started that.
Speaker 2: Oh, there were the D.C. riots when I was there, where they were burning Watts [Los Angeles, California] and they were--and then there were the D.C. riots.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: There were people carrying TVs out of the--you know, smashing the windows and--
Speaker 1: Now this is in '68 [1968] when--after Dr. King's [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] assassination.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: So, that, that time was an incredibly busy, vibrant time, but I just viewed it in terms of what I wasn't getting and how the clock was running out for what I, for what I needed.  So that's--(sighs).
Story_ID: 648136
Speaker 1: Were there any teachers or people at Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.] that you consider like mentors, or people that you learned something from that you--?
Speaker 2: Not really.  Not really.  It was--not really.  There were interesting teachers.  Who was it?  [HistoryMaker] Harry Edwards was there then.  He taught sociology I believe.  And I remember--I remember that, but I didn't really--I just did not strike up any mentorship relationships.
Speaker 1: Now did you pledge a sorority or anything like that?
Speaker 2: No (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Nothing social?
Speaker 2: I did not pledge.  I did not pledge.  It just made no sense to me that--the concept the ki- even if it were short lived, the concept that somebody was actually going to hit me was not gonna--it wasn't gonna happen.  It just was not gonna happen.  So and that was part of the whole pledging process is, you know, the breaking down and the camaraderie and then you, you know, go off together, but it was not--it wasn't worth it to me.  It wasn't worth it to me to be in a group if it had to start with something physical.
Speaker 1: Now, like, I guess the black student organizations didn't--weren't, weren't (unclear) (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I'm not an, I'm not an organization kind of girl.  I still am not.
Speaker 1: What about the fellas?  I, I know that they were probably, you know, knocking on your door or something or calling you--
Speaker 2: Oh--
Speaker 1: --and trying to get--
Speaker 2: Oh, (laughter) oh, I didn't know what you--where you were going.  Not really.  There were some, but not really.  It was--it was not overwhelming and I was so, I was so--I was still in my bubble.  And you know, I was trying to figure out why these guys were even talking to me.  You know, do they want me to write their paper?  They want me to--what, what is--what is this about?  I couldn't figure it out, really.  I just didn't--I'd never seen it.  I didn't know it.  So, you know, there, there were--there were some, but it's--I got into nothing terribly hot and heavy while I was at Howard.
Story_ID: 648137
Speaker 1: Sixty-eight [1968], I guess after the, the--your--this is after your junior year.  I guess you leave Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.] (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Um-hm. After my sophomore year.
Speaker 1: So- sophomore year, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: So you decided to come back.
Speaker 2: I did.
Speaker 1: And--
Speaker 2: I did and I went to UCLA [University of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I got a little scholarship there and cobbled together some grants and whatever.  Because I--you know, the, the nice thing about Howard is I had a four year scholarship there--full scholarship, and it would have been nice to finish there.  But I was ready to come back, and I--and I wanted to be someplace where, where academics--where I could pour myself into the academics.
Speaker 1: Okay, well, was that true at UCLA in--
Speaker 2: Not really (laughter).
Speaker 1: UCLA in 1969 that's--
Speaker 2: Not really.
Speaker 1: I think '69 [1969] is the year that the shootout between the US [The Organization Us] and the Panthers [Black Panther Party] took place--
Speaker 2: Correct, yes.
Speaker 1: --on the campus.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Do you remember the repercussions of that?
Speaker 2: So, UCLA was huge.  It was huge, and while there were--there were a lot of social events that were also going--just 'cause those were social times.  I managed to just sort of navigate my way still where I was just dealing with school.
Speaker 1: So it's--so you were living a (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So the answer is I was aware but not invested.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you were still kind of in a bubble.
Speaker 2: I'm still--yes, absolutely.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: Still in the bubble.
Speaker 1: And--
Speaker 2: Still in the bubble, still scared to death that I'm gonna be graduating.  What job am I gonna get?  I have to be prepared.
Story_ID: 648138
Speaker 1: So did you see yourself being a, a psychologist?  I mean, a practicing psychologist at all? When you--
Speaker 2: Well, then I started to understand that this--that I had really not done my homework at all, and that to be a psychologist, you don't graduate from college and go out and practice.  You have to go and get (laughter) an advanced degree of one kind or another, depending on what it is you wanna do.  And really psychia- psych- psychiatry is what I would have wanted, but I wasn't gonna do medical school and all of that.  And so what I decided to do was to go to more school and get an advanced degree but in business.  So after graduating from UCLA [University of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California], going out on some interviews and having, having them ask me how fast I could type--. Remember this is a very different time.  You know, because I was female--you know, I, I was a lot better student than a lot of the folks around me--a lot of the guys who were around me, a lot more serious about it.  They would go out on a job, they'd get a management trainee offer.  They'd ask me how fast I could type, so I said all right, that's--this is--that's not working for me, so I went back to school.
Speaker 1: This is 1970, right?
Speaker 2: This is 1970.  I went to UCLA, the--what became the Anderson School [University of California, Los Angeles Graduate School of Management; Anderson School of Management, Los Angeles, California], and I got my M.B.A.
Speaker 1: Okay. Now M.B.A.'s were--the--they were fairly--I mean, new I guess in those days, were--weren't they?
Speaker 2: They weren't new, but they were not a dime a dozen.  So if you got an M.B.A., you were serious about something.
Speaker 1: Now were there any teachers at UCLA that stand out as mentors or particularly useful in your--in developing your--you as a business student?
Speaker 2: No, nope, no.  That's just kind of not the way I roll.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you were an honor student, right?  You're, you're--
Speaker 2: I am.
Speaker 1: Right, and you--okay, but none of the teachers were special or--
Speaker 2: Not really.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Not really.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well, you were teacher's pet before.  That's why I'm asking this (unclear).
Speaker 2: Well--oh, it was this--in, in elementary school and middle school [A.B. Morris Junior High School, Castro Valley, California] and high school [Castro Valley High School, Castro Valley, California] it's easy.  It's harder--it's harder in college and plus I, I just didn't gravitate to that.  I didn't--I didn't sponsor that.  I didn't--or I didn't--I didn't cultivate it.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I didn't try to cultivate that ever.
Speaker 1: So you were--you were strictly business--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --in the business school.
Speaker 2: I really was.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I really was.
Speaker 1: All right, was any, any at--any particular aspect of business that you were, you know, attracted to?
Speaker 2: I really liked small business because my dad [Nathan Tademy, Jr.] had been a small businessman.  But I just wanted to see where I could go in business, and where that would take me.
Story_ID: 648139
Speaker 1: Now this is--these are the days when affirmative action was rolling out through the Nixon [President Richard Milhous Nixon] administration.  Also what, what he called black capitalism that was the new pro- program of the Nixon administration.  We interviewed [HistoryMaker] Arthur Fletcher, who invented--he came up with the concept of affirmative action.  And some other people that--you know, black men in the Nixon administration.  I mean, there are a lot of--looking back at that time there were a lot, lot of business opportunities being gen- generated by government activity, so.
Speaker 2: Well, to, to start out I wanted to work for a big company.  That I did.  I wanted to--because I didn't know what--I didn't want to start small.  I didn't want to start a small business, not start small, but start a small business.  So my first job was with Xerox [Xerox Corporation], and I did that for--in Los Angeles [California] with their computer division for a short period of time.
Speaker 1: Now just to get a perspective is that Xerox was something new in 1972.
Speaker 2: Xer- the--where I worked with Xerox--Xerox Rochester [New York] wasn't so new.  I mean, Xerox com--copiers wasn't new, but this was computers and computer printers.  So that was beyond brand new.  That was--they didn't know what they were doing.  They didn't--it was a big company, but it was a--an offshoot of a big company, and they were trying to do computer services, and computer hardware, and--it was actually a great learning experience.  It was a great learning experience.  But, yeah, it was--it was not the old--it wasn't an old staid, we know all of our processes kind of business, but it was a big company.  And it was a big company that actually took me on in a training capacity, which they, they wanted to see if they could do the IBM [International Business Machines Corporation] thing.  They wanted to see if they could take somebody who was very trainable, who had high potential, and they could train them in this--in the capacity for what they wanted.  And it was pretty fun.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, now where, where did you work for Xerox?
Speaker 2: El Segundo [California]. (Background noise).
Speaker 1: (TAPE INTERRUPTION)
Speaker 2: Okay, so you're working with Xerox out in El Segundo.  That's out by the airport [Los Angeles International Airport, Los Angles, California], right?
Speaker 1: Yes, yeah, been there, huh?
Speaker 2: Yep, we used stay out that way every now and then--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --you know.  Okay, so, all right, so they, they were--they were getting involved in computers and, and your job was?
Speaker 1: I was a presale systems analyst, so--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --I was the backup when they went out to make a sale to a customer, and I did all the technical stuff and the follow up and worked out of the sales office.
Speaker 2: Okay, all right, so did you--how long did you stay at Xerox?
Speaker 1: Probably for a year and a half?  That's so long ago (laughter).
Speaker 2: Okay.
Story_ID: 648140
Speaker 1: All right, so you were there a year and a half.  And, and where did you go after Xerox [Xerox Corporation]?
Speaker 2: And then I went to New York [New York], and I worked in brand management for Philip Morris [Philip Morris Inc.; Altria Group, Inc.]--in marketing for Philip Morris.  It was actually series of rotational assignments.  Once again, shamefully selling cigarettes--marketing cigarettes.
Speaker 1: Did you--did you feel any guilt about that in those days?
Speaker 2: Oh, yes indeed.  Well, I didn't smoke, but part of my job was actually to try to recruit people to smoke and to smoke our products.  So I had to walk up to strangers and say, "You look like a Marlboro man.  Let me light this for you." (Gesture) (Laughter) It was just appalling.  (Laughter) It was appalling.
Speaker 1: This is a time when, when cigarettes were really under investigation--
Speaker 2: Yeah, they were.
Speaker 1: --and they were trying to remove the advertising from the air.
Speaker 2: They were really pulling back so they could still--they could no longer advertise on TV.  And, and it was starting to get more and more obvious that cigarettes kill.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you, you were there '73 [1973] (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) A year.
Speaker 1: --seventy- '74 [1974] I guess that you--
Speaker 2: Yeah, one year.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I was there one year.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 648141
Speaker 1: And what did you do next?
Speaker 2: Then I came back--I came back to the Bay Area [San Francisco Bay Area, California].  I ended up working--I worked a series of jobs.  I worked for Bay Area Rapid Transit in marketing.  And all of this was in marketing.  So I worked Bay Area Rapid Transit in marketing, and from there I ended up coming down to Silicon Valley to work at Memorex [Memorex Corporation].  And that was sort of the beginning of my real jobs in, in marketing in technology.
Speaker 1: Okay, so this is in 1978 at Memorex.  But now in the meantime, I have a note here that your, your [paternal] grandmother [Lenora Smith Tademy] passed in '74 [1974], right?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Right, okay.  And so did you go--which did--was the funeral in Louisiana?
Speaker 2: It was in Louisiana.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I did not go.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, and that your father in '76 [1976], he was--he had Ted and Lee Construction Company, Incorporated [Ted and Lee Construction Company, Inc., Castro Valley, California].
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Ted--yeah.
Speaker 2: So it's--that's my father and my brother.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So Ted is Nathan [Nathan Tademy, Jr.] and Lee [Lee Tademy] is my brother.
Speaker 1: Okay and, and by 1983, he said that, that your father, Nathan G. Tademy, is lit- listed as CEO and president of Transbay Engineers and Builders [Transbay Engineers and Builders, Inc.] and was one of the founders of the National Associate of--Association of Minority Contractors [National Association of Minority Contractors] and Transbay Engineers and Builders.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Right, okay.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: So this is an association of black contractors--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --in the--in the Bay Area?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: So this is the time when a lot of black professionals organized themselves; and so he organized the black contractors, he was par- part of that?
Speaker 2: Correct.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Correct.
Story_ID: 648142
Speaker 1: Okay, now to Memorex [Memorex Corporation].  Okay.  All right, so Memorex 1978--all right so you, you say this is your first real--
Speaker 2: Well it's not--these others were real too, but the-this was--since I have spent a lot of my career in--the, the first career--in high tech, that was the first time that it was really down in Silicon Valley and dealing with technology.
Speaker 1: Okay, so Memorex is really famous for audiotape.  You know, for a lot of people I guess a computer tape--I mean tapes for computers and that sort of thing.
Speaker 2: And what I did was, was actually computer supplies.  So it was marketing everything from magnetic cards to, to floppy disks.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Okay, so, how were you--now, so far in your career, after receiving your M.B.A. [from the University of California, Los Angeles Graduate School of Management; Anderson School of Management, Los Angeles, California] and, and working with Philip Morris [Philip Morris Inc.; Altria Group, Inc.] and, and Xerox [Xerox Corporation] and now Memorex, how, how were you treated in Corp- Corporate America.
Speaker 2: Well, it was--it was not an easy--it was not an easy time to be a woman in business, period.  I actually found it easier to be in the technology part, to a certain extent.  I wasn't a technologist; I was not an engineer.  That's a big negative.  That's a very big negative.  However, there's also quite a bit in technology that's really more about results than who you are, what, what you bring to--whether you're black, whether you're a female, what--whatever that is.  So, I did not find it--I didn't find it suffocatingly restrictive.  I found that I could carve out my own little value niches that were appreciated, that would get me a promotion, whatever.  Then I could go to the next step.  There was always something I could do.  And especially coming in from the marketing side, there--that was what I brought to bear, which is: how do we position this?  How do we market it?  How do we price it?  How do we sell it?  How do we--how do we specify what it should look like?  What is it?  Who's the audience?  All of that kind of thing.  And so I, I actually don't have the same kind of complaints that a lot of people had.  I, I found it someplace where I could stretch and grow.
Story_ID: 648143
Speaker 1: I know in the mid-'70s [1970s] there's a conference.  Black women scientists had a conference about the double bind, you know, being black and female in the sciences and that sort of thing.  Did, did you feel that kind of a double problem at all?
Speaker 2: I did and I didn't.  I--so if you were doing--if you were a scientist.  I was not a scientist.  I was not the technologist.  My field was the field that took that and said, how do we marry this to the market?  So that's different.  So yes, there was a double bind.  It didn't always work against me.  Sometimes it did and sometimes it didn't.  And my philosophy actually was, it is what it is, and I made it work; and I'm--I'll just push this for however far, and if I can't push it in this direction, I'm gonna push it in that direction, and I'll just see where I can go.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay. So, so you were at Memorex through--what time what (unclear)--okay, through--is that through 1981?
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Okay, and in 1981--now what--what's the highest position you, you had at Memorex?  What was the highest position you held?
Speaker 2: I don't have it there?  I think I was a product manager.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, and by--
Speaker 2: Right, I was a product manager, which believe it or not, at Memorex was the highest--I was the highest ranking woman there, (laughter) as a project manager--product manager, not project manager, product manager.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you were the highest ranking woman.
Speaker 2: I was the hi- when I went into Memorex I was the highest ranking woman.  They subsequently brought another woman in, in sales, I believe, in another division who outranked me.  But when I went in, I was the highest ranking woman there in a fairly low position.  So--yes, there was work to be done.  There's no question about that, but I got a lot of experience.  I got a lot of experience in just navigating the marketing world there.
Story_ID: 648144
Speaker 1: Says your, your father [Nathan Tademy, Jr.] passed in '84 [1984], right?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: So did, did you go back to Louisiana for the--
Speaker 2: No, no, no, he (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) or did they--
Speaker 2: --he lived here.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  Okay, yeah, in California, but it wasn't a--
Speaker 2: It was here.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: The funeral was here.
Speaker 1: All right.  Did you--did you think about the history at that point or any, any more than you--
Speaker 2: I'd been doing--
Speaker 1: --had before?
Speaker 2: My own family history?  I'd been doing--I'd been doing family history all along from the time I was in high school [Castro Valley High School, Castro Valley, California]. So--from the time actually even before, when we would be going back to Louisiana every summer.  And then after that we would go occasionally.  I went once with my father, and it was just my father and I exclusively to do a roots trip.  So no, I've been doing--I've been going back occasionally.
Speaker 1: Speaking of roots, I guess it ['Roots: The Saga of an American Family,' Alex Haley] was published in '76 [1976], I believe, in--or seventy--maybe earlier in the '70s [1970s] but another--the TV version of 'Roots' came out in '77 [1977].  And that seemed to transform--a lot of people were, "Oh, we didn't know."  It was just--it was a whole different--you know.  It's fir- one of the first public discussions about slavery--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --you know, took place.
Speaker 2: I, I remember that--
Speaker 1: In, in--
Speaker 2: --around the water cooler.  I remember that.
Speaker 1: Right.  Everybody saw it on the--on a miniseries and they go back and talk about it.  Did--how did that affect you?  Do you remember your feeling about that when it--when it came out?
Speaker 2: I remember--I actually remember talking to other black folks about it.  And I remember--it must have come in on a Sunday.  It must--no, it was--it was every night?
Speaker 1: Yeah, it was every night for--
Speaker 2: It was every for--
Speaker 1: --about a--
Speaker 2: --a week, right--
Speaker 1: --week, yeah.
Speaker 2: --something like that?  And I remember being angry.  That's what I mostly remember.  I remember having to go into work--into sort of the white environment again and just being pissed off.  That's mostly what I remember about it, and having to just re- you know, just retrench and calm down.
Story_ID: 648145
Speaker 1: So, well I'm gonna ask the question, what, what was--what--when you reflect on it, what, what about 'Roots' made you angry?
Speaker 2: It was, it was partially needing to--it wasn't what you would think, so it wasn't the normal I'm just angry for all these years of oppression.  Part of it was just being angry of having to live life twice, just having to do it two ways so that there was the, there was the having to be sympathetic in a white work setting talking about 'Roots' way where I was supposed to shepherd somebody through their feelings.  I don't know.  It just--the, the whole thing---I was really happy about much of it.  I was really happy that it got a showing.  I was happy that Alex Haley made money on it.  I was happy that some of these things that folks were saying they had no idea were actually out there and being talked about, although it didn't really come as very much of a surprise to me, the, the incidents themselves.  But it was a little bit of annoyance.  Maybe, maybe pissed off is the wrong thing, but it was annoyance.  It was annoyance of having to do the double life, and it was--it was--it was just a reminder in a very melodramatic way of what our history has been.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what you said was, was interesting that, that you felt that you--that they looked at you as someone who should shepherd white people through their feelings about 'Roots.'  And that's how they--you know, being the only--one of the few black people in the workplace--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --in the work environment like that, I guess that--
Speaker 2: Right, right, and it--and it required--I mean, it took up so much of the publa- public--so much of the culture, so much of the air, you know, that week that it aired.  It just consumed everybody.  Everybody was in it.  Everybody was watching.  Everybody was, was waiting for the other shoe to drop in the, you know, in the, in the story and then wanted to process and talk about it.  And so I guess--I guess that's not--it--that isn't necessarily the role that I want to take all the time.
Story_ID: 648146
Speaker 1: Correct me if I'm going too fast.  Now in '81 [1981] you began to work at ITT--
Speaker 2: Qume.
Speaker 1: --Qume, okay.  And what, what does ITT Qume do?
Speaker 2: That was a (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Or what were they--
Speaker 2: That--well, they did a lot of things, but that particular job was around printers, so I was doing marketing for printers--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --and printer products.  Memorex [Memorex Corporation] had--Memorex wanted me to move to Rochester [New York].  They were bought out.  The division I was in was bought out.  They wanted me to run it and move to New York.  I had done that once, moved to New York, I wasn't doing that again, so I, I got another job and did that one for a short period. Two years?  I don't--
Speaker 1: I guess until--maybe until '85 [1985].  I, I don't know (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) But at any rate--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: So, and, and that was really marketing printers.
Story_ID: 648147
Speaker 1: You were doing something similar with Alps  North America [Alps Electric (USA), Inc.], right?
Speaker 2: No.  So, so, Alps was a--so the next position was a--was a job that I had for seven years, and that was a Japanese electronics company.  And so no longer was it--well, some of it was the same, but it as--it was really the U.S. operations for a Japanese company.  And--
Speaker 1: That's Al- that's Alps (unclear)--
Speaker 2: That was Alps--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --which was just fascinating.  It was just absolutely fascinating.  So we sold a lot of component parts--a lot of component parts that go into computers. So, you know, Apple [Apple Computer, Inc.; Apple Inc.] was a big customer, and Dell [Dell Inc.] was a big customer, and IBM [International Business Machines Corporation] was a customer.  And so anybody that made computers--you know, a lot of those parts would come from, from us.  And that was really a great opportunity for more responsibility.  And I left there as a vice president and general manager.  I think I came into Alps as a marketing manager, and I left as a--as a vice president.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, so it's--was it a--I guess, was, was the management different from the American companies?  I mean, because it was--
Speaker 2: (Laughter) It was totally different.  It was a Japanese company.  It was no kidding a Japanese company, and my boss was Japanese living in the states, but he was Japanese.  And a lot of the business that we would do would be, you know, going back to Japan and doing business--a lot of negotiating there.  It was--it was different in a great way because they knew that there were things that they did not know.  The company knew that there were things that they did not know about working in the U.S. market, and so I got to try all sorts of things.  I, I had a--I had a very good time there.  It was fun.
Speaker 1: Okay, did you have a chance to go to Japan?
Speaker 2: A lot.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I went to Japan plenty.  So--
Speaker 1: Now was this--how did that--had you been abroad a lot before?  I mean--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I, I had traveled a fair amount, but this was even more so.  And going to Japan was very interesting because they just didn't quite know how to deal with me.  I was very apprehensive, thinking this is going to be a huge challenge, being black and being female working in a Japanese company.  And what I very quickly found out is that being black and being female was just--didn't even compare to the fact that I wasn't Japanese.  Either you're Japanese or you're not.  All the rest of it is just little fine points (laughter).  So that meant that, that they wanted to develop their U.S. market, and I was a conduit to that, so I really got to, to play around a lot.  Going to Japan, they didn't quite know how to treat me or what to do with me.  I was the highest ranking person there in the company.  This is a Fortune 500 international company.  I mean, it's a big company, and they didn't quite know what they were supposed to do with me, but they--we, we figured it out together.
Speaker 1: Okay, now in 1989, while you're with Alps, I guess you were featured in Fortune's people on the rise column.  So this is--right?
Speaker 2: Yep.
Speaker 1: And also in Ebony's Speaking of People and--so--I, I mean, did this kind of like confirm for you that you were doing the right things or?
Speaker 2: The--(makes sound) sure, sure.  I, I, I thought it was interesting.  I'm not sure I thought it was life or death.  It was--it was nice to be recognized.  It was nice to get on some lists of people you should know, but it--I wasn't necessarily seeking that out.
Story_ID: 648148
Speaker 1: Now this is in 1992 you joined Sun Microsys- systems [Sun Microsystems, Inc.], right?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Now how did that tran- how did that take place?
Speaker 2: They actually came looking for me.  So I was--I was in Alps [Alps Electric (USA), Inc.].  I was--I was supposed to be the--I was sort of the next--I was being groomed for--to run the all U.S. operations in--for Alps, for the company.  That's--and deciding whether that's really what I wanted to do.  I got a call from a headhunter, and Sun Microsystems was looking for a vice president and general manager to run one of their operations.  And they came after me very hard.  The difference was really a financial difference because Sun had stock.  It was a U.S. company, and it had stock, and I finally--I decided that that's what I would do--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --that I would go to work for Sun.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you come in as a vice president and general manager with stock options too, right?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: So, okay.  Sun Microsystems is a Fortune 500 company in Silicon Valley in Palo Alto [California].  And what--so did you, you only, you only stayed three years, right?
Speaker 2: Correct.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That's correct.
Speaker 1: So what was the--what was the life like at Sun?
Speaker 2: Sun was a--very much like all high tech, Silicon Valley companies.  It was gladiator style.  It was eating raw meat.  It was drinking out of the fire hydrant--very fast paced, very competitive, very engineering focused, very fast changing.
Story_ID: 648149
Speaker 1: And I did that for three years. I ran my group for three years; and then I decided that that's not what I was gonna do anymore, and the--that's not what I was gonna do anymore wasn't--I wasn't gonna do Sun [Sun Microsystems, Inc.] anymore.  It's--I had done almost two decades of business, and I decided that I wanted to do something else.  And so I jumped off the train.
Speaker 2: Now do you remember Genelle Trader?
Speaker 1: Sure.
Speaker 2: And [HistoryMaker] Dorothy Terrell?
Speaker 1: Of course.
Speaker 2: They're two people we've interviewed I think [sic.]--
Speaker 1: Good.
Speaker 2: --were, were at Sun I think at some point.
Speaker 1: They were.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: We were all at Sun at the same time.
Speaker 2: Okay, now what do you think the percentage of black people were at Sun?  You think--
Speaker 1: Whatever it was it was miniscule.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: It was very, very few, and that's, that's true of high tech period.
Speaker 2: Okay, they also vouch for what you said, that you, you would either eat lunch or be lunch--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --at Sun.  Yeah, so, so you just got, got tired of that environment or?
Speaker 1: I had been doing it for a long time, and it was time--and things go in cycles in these companies where you have to re-up.  You know, you, you do something for twelve months, eighteen months, sometimes eight months--whatever--and then there's a big reorganization and you re-up.  And you, you know, you start off and you do it again, and you have a new boss, or you have this, or you have that.  And I just--I had already started feeling this way at the company before, at Alps [Alps Electric (USA), Inc.], where I had said this is my last corporate experience.  I don't know quite what I wanna do, but this is--you know, I've done this enough.  And at Sun I just said I--this is not energizing.  This is not energi- I can keep doing this.  You know, I have a great position here, but I don't want to.  I just don't want to, and I don't know what I wanna do, but I don't--I don't wanna do this.  And part of--I would not have thought that if I was in my thirties, in my twenties, or my thirties, or if this was my second job.  But it was time.  I just felt like it was time to not keep repeating the same experience.  I said I wanna do something totally different.  I just don't know what it is.
Speaker 2: Okay, but had, had you stayed at Sun, you would have done this until retirement I guess, right, the same cycle of, of activity, building something up and then have it changed, then working for somebody else, and then building something up again and--
Speaker 1: And that's not all--that's not necessarily bad.  It's, just that it wasn't feeding me in what I wanted fed, so that was a personal decision.
Story_ID: 648150
Speaker 1: Now did you have any idea what you were gonna do (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) None, zero.
Speaker 1: --outside of business?
Speaker 2: Zero. None.
Speaker 1: Had you considered becoming a psychologist again or--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: --or pursuing that or?
Speaker 2: No, I had no idea.  What I did is I, I actually made a deal with myself.  It was a contract just with myself that for one year, no matter what, if a headhunter called--great job, whatever--no matter what, I was not going to go back into a corporate environment.  You know, I had enough to stay out for a couple of years--three years probably.  And so I was gonna take that first year just to listen, just to listen to silence if necessary, but just to see what happened.  And then I would take the second year to look for something that was meaningful employment, something that would pay me.  That was my original plan.  It didn't work out that way.  But, but for the first year I just did not--I just didn't do anything.
Speaker 1: Okay, did you do--did you do any research on your family history at least?
Speaker 2: So that's what happened.  The, the thing is that I was so busy--I was so used to working incredibly long, incredibly intense hours that suddenly I had nothing to fill my time, and I started working genealogy like a job.  And I worked it (laughter) and worked it and worked it, and the more that I started pulling all of the--all of the stories together, the data together, the time together, the characters together, then I said these are some fabulous stories here; these are just amazing.  And I got more and more interested, and the more that I--the more that I stumbled a- across, the more I was determined to stumble across more.  And then finally, I decided that I would--was gonna write it.
Speaker 1: Okay, well, I remember you telling us earlier that you probably, you pretty much work alone on things, but did, did you join any genealogical societies or anything or did you--were you--did you go--did you (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I didn't join a genealogy society.  I didn't--I didn't do any of that.  I just worked it on my own.  I did eventually hire a genealogist.  I hired a genealogist because a lot of the records that I wanted were in French, and I can't--I don't speak French.
Speaker 1: Now, this genealogist was fluent in old French, right?
Speaker 2: Correct.
Speaker 1: Yeah, which is different from modern French.
Speaker 2: Correct.
Speaker 1: So you had to find a specialist.
Speaker 2: Right--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --and, and a specialist in the Cane River area.  So her ancestors were actually neighbors with my ancestors in the exact same area.  And so she knew neighborhood by neighborhood what was happening, so I hired her.  But I didn't--you know, I didn't join a genealogy group when I was doing the research part.  I didn't join a writing group when I was doing the writing part.  It was--this loner thing was a little crazy.  So when I sat down to write it, I just started writing.  And I had never written anything before.  I had never really--you know, high school [Castro Valley High School, Castro Valley, California].
Speaker 1: Were you writing it from the--consciously or something that would be consumed by the public?
Speaker 2: When I first started, I was writing these little stories for my niece and nephews, and they were just so uninterested.  I said you wanna be interested, I'll weave you a tale and make you interested.  And so I--then I--then I sat down and I said okay, I'm gonna do this long form.  And then as time went on, it occurred to me that what I really, really wanted is I wanted it to be long form and for people to be able to see it.  And that hadn't been how I had started out.  I had started out saying I'm gonna write this.  I don't know what I'm gonna do with it.  I'm not crazy enough to think that I can actually write a book, but I--by the time I was in it, I said, I--I'm gonna make this work.  I'm gonna, I'm gonna make this the best that I can, and the most intriguing story that I can.  And then I wanted it to be commercial.
Story_ID: 648151
Speaker 1: Since the days of Alex Haley's 'Roots' ['Roots: The Saga of an American Family'], re- genealogical research in black families kind of got amped up.  But so by 1995, there are associations and people writing books about genealogy on some level or another.  Even, there was a white guy who wrote a book called 'Slaves in the Family.'  I think Edward Ball wrote about--
Speaker 2: I reviewed it.  Yeah--
Speaker 1: Did you?  Okay.
Speaker 2: --it's right over there on the bookcase, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And there are other books that come out with, you know, information that either heretofore hadn't been really shared publicly or talked or discussed and that sort of thing.  So, so in--so from--you worked on this from '95 [1995] until--it's not pub- published until 2000, right?
Speaker 2: Two thousand one [2001].
Speaker 1: Two thousand one [2001], so this is six years of--
Speaker 2: It's, it's not six concentrated years.  So I didn't really start it--I started it probably in--I was doing a lot of research.  I didn't start really writing probably until '97 [1997].  And then once you finished--once you finished writing, it doesn't come out for a year and a half, so it's not six years really--
Speaker 1: So--
Speaker 2: --but it's--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --enough years.  It took me three years to write it.  It took me three years.
Speaker 1: That's actual writing (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I had no clue.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I had no clue it would take that long but, you know, it took fourteen drafts and three years.
Speaker 1: And it's a 560 something page--
Speaker 2: It all depends on what the format is, but it's not short.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So, now, well, tell us something about--is it e- about the research.  Was it--I know you, you mentioned you, you hired a genealogist, but was it--what was it like trying to do re- research in Cane River, Louisiana, and--I mean, couldn't you--were the--archivists I guess the people in the public buildings receptive to you doing that kind of research?
Speaker 2: Well, it depends.  So the research that I did in Colfax [Louisiana]--I did all the research at the same time, so I didn't do the research for 'Cane River' [Lalita Tademy] and then I went and did research for 'Red River' [Lalita Tademy].  I was doing all that research before ever deciding to write a book, let alone two.  And when I would go back, I would do a lot of the research in Colfax.  The Colfax research was difficult in the beginning because they were fighting me in a way.  They were not being very helpful.  If--I'd go to the courthouse, I'd ask for certain do- you know, I'd look them up in the card catalog.  I'd ask for certain documents.  The people behind the counter would wait on all the white folks before they would come to me.  They--and if another white person walked in, they'd just drop whatever they were doing, and they would work on them.  And it was very clear that they were taking their time.  Even if there was nobody there, they were taking their time on bringing me out whatever it was that I asked for.  They were not trying to be helpful.  Over time--and by time I mean decades, years, decades--over time, they started to be helpful.  After Oprah [Oprah's Book Club], they were quite helpful, and it was a whole different thing.  For 'Cane River,' very specifically when I was trying to find very specific information there, the, the Cane River genealogy society there was very, very helpful to me, and they were trying to be helpful.  I had a woman--a, a woman that I hired there to take me around the properties, to take me around Cane River itself to fill me in on history and background and all of that.  She was fabulous.  So, yeah, it, it totally differed by time, era and then by person to person.  And then as--after the one book came--the first book came out, then it was so greased.  People really wanted to help a lot.
Story_ID: 648152
Speaker 1: I was wondering, what is the re- and I looked it up, but I'm still not, not quite sure.  What is the relationship between Cane River itself and Red River?  Is--?
Speaker 2: They're just two different bodies of water, and they're not related necessarily, and--
Speaker 1: One is not a tributary of another one?
Speaker 2: No--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --and so--and they've moved over time.  The rivers themselves have moved.  And Cane River is really a lake at this point.  It used to be thoroughfare.  It's more of a lake, and people have their boats there.  And Red River goes through--winds through several states.  It's long, you know, and people from Texas say, "Oh, Red River's ours."  And people from Louisiana say, "Oh, Red River's ours."  And people up--so Cane River is a smaller body of water, and they are just in close proximity to one another that's all.
Speaker 1: Now Red River is the same Red River that dramatized in the movie 'Red River' with John Wayne and--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --Montgomery Clift--
Speaker 2: Yes. Yes, yes (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) back in the '40s [1940s].
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: If you think about--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --across the Red River.  I remember the song (laughter).  But then, then Cane River is that--now, now is this the same territory that Jean Toomer wrote about in his--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --po- poetry, 'Cane.'
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, and it's an area where they grow a lot of cane [sugarcane], right?
Speaker 2: Well, there's cane there.  There's cane there and--you know, and hence the name, but now it is--you know, it got plugged up and it, it just--it's not what it used to be.  It just is not what it used to be.  But they're two--they're just two different bodies of water, but the proximity of--so I named one 'Red River' [Lalita Tademy] because Colfax [Louisiana] is very near Red River, and Aloha [Louisiana] is very near Red River.  And Cane River is sort of on the other side and Natchitoches [Louisiana] is there.  And, and they're, you know, thirty minutes.  That's all they're--you know, they're very close.  They're just very close, but they're, they're two different histories, two different paths.
Speaker 1: 'Cane River' [Lalita Tademy] is covers your mother's [Willie Billes Tademy] side of the family basically and 'Red River' your father's [Nathan Tademy, Jr.] side.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: The Tademys.
Story_ID: 648153
Speaker 1: Here's something here that I just, just--I underlined that--before I didn't even realize that we underlined this, but Cane River Creole National Historical Park [Louisiana], which is--so this is considered Creole country, Cane River--
Speaker 2: Yes (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) right?
Speaker 2: Yes, it is.
Speaker 1: Okay, and--all right, so--
Speaker 2: Along with New Orleans [Louisiana], obviously.  But it's very Creole.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, so, now what territory were you trying to cover?  You, you were trying to cover the--I know the stories of your, your [maternal] grandmother [Eva Brew Billes], your great-grandmother [Emily Fredieu Billes], and your great-great-grandmother [Philomene Daurat Fredieu], right?  Am I right?
Speaker 2: Not so much--not so much grandmother.
Speaker 1: Okay, gr--
Speaker 2: Starting with the greats.
Speaker 1: Okay, starting with the greats.
Speaker 2: It's the greats.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Really.
Speaker 1: And it's three of them.
Speaker 2: Four.
Speaker 1: Four of them, all right.
Speaker 2: Four.  So in 'Cane River' [Lalita Tademy], it goes back four.  In 'Red River' [Lalita Tademy], I can't go back that far, so it goes back three.
Speaker 1: You go back to Sam Tademy?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Now 'Cane River' now did--how diffi- once you--you, you had fourteen drafts you said.  Were, were these drafts a result of working with a literary agent intelli- or, or, or, or feedback from people or, or how many--what did you--
Speaker 2: So I had fourteen drafts.  And a draft to me means that I start at the beginning.  It's not that I've gone in and I've changed the chapter around, or I've gone in and I've, you know, amped up a scene, or I've gone in and I've--it means starting at the beginning and the first word and not stopping 'til I get to the end, and doing everything that needs to be--changing everything that needs to be changed all the way throughout.  So I don't think--I think that I probably for 'Cane River' I showed--my memory is a little faulty here, but I probably didn't show it to anyone for four drafts or so--three or four drafts, except for my sister, who'd be my first reader, and you know, I'd show her the--like draft two.  But, yes, some of these changes were as a result of talking to people and having them say, "This is weak, this is strong," whatever.  Some, some of them were just random readers; some of them were agents.  I was trying to get an agent.  For 'Cane River,' I, I didn't get an agent for a very long time because nobody was interested.  They weren't interested in the story; they weren't interested in how I told the story--either one.  And so I got a lot of rejections, and each rejection, then I'd go back and I'd do another draft and strengthen it.  And if they had given me anything useful--if they had said you know, "I'm just not really sympathetic with these characters," then I would go in and I'd really work on the character.  And then I'd have another draft.  I'd send it out again to somebody else.  And they would say, "The dialogue doesn't feel fresh to me," and I'd go in and I'd work on the dialogue and do another draft and you know, whatever.  So the fourteen drafts were for several reasons.  One is I didn't know what I was doing.  I didn't really have writing jobs.  You know, I didn't ha- I didn't have any experience in doing it, so I wasn't quite sure.  I had to write the anger out 'cause I--you know, the first--the first few drafts were very preachy.  They were very--I mean, I was mad.  I was just mad.  And you know, I--and, and somebody was gonna have to pay.  You know, and I'd have whole rambling paragraphs about the man or whatever it was.  And so I needed to go back in and I need to--I needed to not only take that out, but I needed to actually inhabit every one of the characters, even the characters that I did not like very much.
Speaker 1: By inhabit you meant to, to learn their motivations and--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --then feel what they were--
Speaker 2: I had to understand where they were coming from.  I had to figure out how they could do the things that they did, some of which I found so horrifying, but that didn't matter.  It's still--I, I needed to understand the times that they lived in.  I needed to understand how they could bring themselves to have the attitudes that they had.  And so that took a long time and a lot of character development, a lot, a lot, a lot of character development; and a natural progression.
Story_ID: 648154
Speaker 1: Now this is different from some other historical fiction.  The famous--there's an author 'Gone with the Wind,' Margaret--
Speaker 2: Mead (laughter).
Speaker 1: (Laughter) No that's the other--
Speaker 2: Mitchell, Mitchell (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Mitchell, yeah, Margaret Mitchell.  It, it--to some now--some say that she didn't spend a lot of time trying to inhabit some of the characters (laughter).  They were just basically stereotypes--
Speaker 2: Correct.
Speaker 1: --that, that could be--
Speaker 2: Correct.
Speaker 1: --seen on people's coffee tables or whatever.  Here's the mammy; here's the so and so and just put 'em in there--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --and get 'em to talking, you know.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: But--
Speaker 2: And that is--and that is--you know, I, I say this a, a lot.  When I sat down to write this, I sat down very, very, very specifically to write a non-'Gone with the Wind' [Margaret Mitchell] book.  Now I actually think that 'Gone with the Wind' is interesting--stereotypes up the yin yang, but interesting.  I mean, it's, it's got a plot and a storyline and it drives, and you know, all of that.  But the stereotypes will kill you.  And that's not what I wanted to do.  I wanted to write this piece of history--this, this time in history from the point of view--no kidding point of view of my people and without them having to be all good or all wonderful or perfect or--you know, 'cause they were very flawed also, just trying to get over.  They were just trying to get over.  So that's--that was my intent.  And I actually had 'Gone with the Wind' in mind when I started to write this and as I was writing it, 'cause that's not the book that I wanted to write.
Speaker 1: Now there a--some review I read in the--when I was researching this that, that said something about this was an answer to 'Roots' ['Roots: The Saga of an American Family,' Alex Haley].  But I couldn't figure out how this is true.  It puzzled me to, to read that.
Speaker 2: It's an answer to 'Roots'?
Speaker 1: Right, a long overdue answer to 'Roots' I think is what the sentence said.
Speaker 2: Oh, I haven't even see that.  So if it was--it--this was a review of the book ['Cane River,' Lalita Tademy]?
Speaker 1: Um-hm, something--
Speaker 2: I have to tell you I do not read reviews.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I absolutely, positively do not read reviews, so I wouldn't have seen it.
Speaker 1: Yeah, a long overdue answer to it.  You know, who--I--it puzzled me.
Speaker 2: Now I've heard--now I have heard--'cause I've seen it excerpted and quoted--that this is the female 'Roots.'  I've heard that, but I--yeah.  I don't--I can't--I can't help you with that 'cause I don't know what that means, the long overdue answer to 'Roots.'
Speaker 1: Okay.  Yeah, it boggled me.
Story_ID: 648155
Speaker 1: But now you had to make an important decision early on, in terms of you doing historical research--very, you know, specific research.  And you find out things that--we were discussing before like, you can't know everything, you know, from looking at one document or another.  You know, you gotta kind of put it all together and get a sense of what happened in a historical piece.  How did you come to the decision not to write a history but to write a, a historical fiction using historical figures?
Speaker 2: I knew that there were pockets of things that I would never know, and that the best I could do is conjecture.  And then once I decided, all right this is about conjecture.  I don't want this to have footnotes.  I don't want this to be even remotely have footnotes.  I--so I'm gonna need to do it as fiction and then my conjecture I can just weave in as part of the story.  And so it was a conscious decision.  I made it very early on.  It was not a difficult choice.  I didn't want it to be--I didn't want it to be nonfiction, where if there was one piece of it that was contested or off that the whole thing could be dismissed.  What I wanted to do was to capture the flavor of the times, which is hard to do in history, and a lot of historians actually don't even try to do that.  That's what was important to me, and motivations were important to me.  So what my characters--why my characters, who are my ancestors, made the decisions that they made, that's what hooked me; that's what fascinated me. You know, why a woman would stay with the father of her children after slavery, and she's now free and she doesn't have to theoretically.  How, how does that work?  Why would that be?  And it was.  I knew it was because I have all the documentation.  I, I know when the kids were born.  I know that there was an opportunity for her to go in a different direction and she did not, and I wanted to know why.  You know, I, I wanted to--I wanted to know why Emily [Tademy's maternal great-grandmother, Emily Fredieu Billes] was so color struck.  I wanted to know all of these things.  And in order to do that and to go through motivations, that to me falls more in the realm of fiction than nonfiction.  And that's why I decided--and it was a very easy decision.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, and it makes it ver- a singular book in, in the sense that I, I have not--I'm trying to think of another one that does that, and I don't know if I can.  You know, there's so many that has--uses the characters from their own family history in, in a fictional book.  But--and I've read histories where Annette Gordon Reed's 'The Hemingses of Monticello' ['The Hemingses of Monticello: An American Family'].  She, she explores the motivation of--and she clearly says this is a--this--it could have been like this or it could have been like that, you know, or Sally [Sally Hemings] could have been thinking this or that 'cause we don't know what she was thinking you see.  She never wrote a word, you know.  We can only speculate what, what her choices might have been or what she could have been doing.  So when I was reading, you know, 'Cane' ['Cane River,' Lalita Tademy] it's a similar--seemed to be a similar kind of--there, there's similarity in the two approaches even though one, one is history and one is historical fiction.  I don't know.  I'm gonna shut up though (laughter).  I'm talking too much probably, but that's--
Speaker 2: No, that's--
Speaker 1: --that's because--
Speaker 2: No, and that's true, and that's why I like this as a blend of fact and fiction.  And I--and I realize it's a little odd, but there are a lot more people doing it now.  And it--and it worked for me and for my purposes.  And the, the thing that I wanted is I actually wanted that crossover, which is why when I sold 'Cane River,' I sold the book on the basis of the words.  And only after I had signed the contract then did I go--I went to the editor and I said, "Okay, here's my idea.  What I really wanna do--you got the story--you've bought the story, but now I wanna put real pictures in there."  I wanna put real documents in there.  I want people to be reading along, saying oh, this couldn't possibly have happened.  This is--you know, she's making all this stuff up.  And then you turn the page and pow!  There's a picture of the woman.  Or there is the document that said yes, they were sold.  Or there is whatever.  And I wanted this confrontation between fact and fiction, where you don't know exactly where the line is.
Speaker 1: So I guess what you were doing is breathing life into these documents and photos and, and stories from your family, you know.
Speaker 2: That's what I was trying to do.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: And I was trying to do it--initially I was trying to do it for a very small audience.  I was trying to do it for my niece and nephews; and then it just kind of grew and got bigger and got a life of its own.
Story_ID: 648156
Speaker 1: When did you get--have a serious offer for the--you know, to publish the book ['Cane River,' Lalita Tademy]?
Speaker 2: So I couldn't get an agent for a very long time, thirteen rejections over probably a year and a half.  Nobody wanted it; nobody was interested.  And finally I got an agent, and the agent then said, "Okay, I want you to work over the summer," the industry sort of closed down over the summer, "so I want you to rewrite it one more time, and I want you to make it shorter."  And I said, "Okay," so I did.  And I rewrote it one more time, and then it was ready to go out after Labor Day in I guess it was 1999.  And we sent it out, and I knew that it was gonna get the same rejection.  It was just gonna be the same process--the same horrible process I'd been through for the last eighteen months.  And it went out, and it went out on a Friday, and Monday there was a bidding war in New York [New York].  Now these different houses--you know, the editors were calling me up saying, "Here's why you should come with me to my house, and here's why we want it, and here's how we'd treat it, and we really love this."  And, and that was a huge surprise.  It was a huge, huge surprise.  And it sold by--you know, after this back and forth and back and forth it sold by that Wednesday.  That just doesn't happen.  That just does not happen and hasn't happened to me since.  The--but it then took on a life of its own.  It went out, did well, and was just starting to--you know.  It had been out for maybe--I don't know--six weeks, eight weeks, something like that, and I was just starting to ease off of the whole publicity schedule thing and then Oprah [Oprah Winfrey] called, and then it took off again and in a huge way, just huge, huge, huge way.  So that was--that was pretty gratifying and pretty surprising actually, very, very surprising.
Story_ID: 648157
Speaker 1: What do you think it was about the book ['Cane River,' Lalita Tademy] that excited people at that point?
Speaker 2: So one of the things that--another surprising thing.  So one of the things that just confounded me for so long--I thought that it could be an interesting story for black folks.  I mean, that's--and I just, just in terms of who would be drawn to the book, not that that's all that should read it.  But I thought, you know, small book.  And as I did so many appearances and traveled and promoted and did all of that, the feedback I got was amazing to me that came back from marginalized people--however you define that--there's--that identified with this, that just identified with the themes of the book; it identified with people who are put upon, who are marginalized, who are resilient enough to come back, who still carve out their own lives, who have to make the really tough decisions of how are they gonna raise their kids.  Are they gonna raise their kids in the old way?  Are they gonna try to mainstream and assimilate?  It just really struck a chord with people who imagine themselves in it.  And these were people--I've, I've had, you know, Vietnamese women or just women period or just people I did not expect.  I absolutely, positively did not expect that they would be my audience who were, and I think it's that chord.  I think it's that chord of making things work, even when times seem so horrific or so hard or so impossible that there is some way that you can navigate it still.  And I think that that's what--the resilience I think--the strength and the resilience.  You know, there are so many book clubs that I talk to and they all try to decide which one of them--who is which one of the characters in my book.  You know, I'm Emily [Emily Fredieu Billes]; oh, I'm Philomene [Philomene Daurat Fredieu]; oh, I'm Suzette; oh, I'm Elisabeth.  You know, that kind of thing where there's just really an identification that I am grateful for.
Story_ID: 648158
Speaker 1: What you have also is a book I guess it's rare in that women are commenting on historical--the historical flow in--of events and through their activities and lives rather than men.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: So--
Speaker 2: And it's--and it's actually one of the--it's one of the differences between my two books that are out there, and one is very--one ['Red River,' Lalita Tademy] is pretty male centric and one is pretty female centric.  And definitely the publishing world wants that female centric view for the female readership.  But yes, it is--it, it, it va- it not only validates, but it really reinforces the role that women have had to play in history and not all literature does that.
Speaker 1: I think it, it adds also--it kind of rounds out the stories of African American women in history in this--especially the history of slavery where I think a lot of us feel that we know what happened 'cause it's self-evident in the colors we have.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: But we really don't know their story.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yep, yeah, and I was--I was surprised.  I mean, I can't write about something where I'm not surprised.  And I was so surprised of all these families in Louisiana that were intact.  You know, it wasn't what, what I would have expected--would have been--especially in plantation life, it would have been--the families would have been just more separated, that, that a woman would have had three different fathers for the three different kids just because her life wasn't necessarily her own.  All of these--you know, again, based on real characters, based on real lineages that I can trace, it was one father.  Now whether he was present in the household or not is a different story, but these were intact families where the sacrifices that were made were made so that they could remain intact.  And that, that was a clear goal that they would be a family forever.  And I just thought that was remarkable.  I thought it was remarkable, and it was against my expectations when I first set out to do the research.  I expected to find something different and I didn't.
Speaker 1: I think most men look at that period of time they, they see African American women as complete victims of you know--and there's, there's a lot of victimization there, but I don't think they--our men focus on the motive of keeping the family together as being the strongest maybe motive for women to do things they do, rather than--I, I think they see it as, you know--they'll see it differently.
Speaker 2: Right. Right, right.  So I'm, I'm--I--that's what I wanted.  I wanted the feel of that.  And it's a microcosm and there are different microcosms that would be totally different.  But this one of 'Cane River' [Lalita Tademy] I wanted to be of four generations of women who were remarkably different from one another, you know.  They--it isn't the same thing repeating, even if the circumstances repeat.  It's--you know, these are four different approaches to what you make of your life, and how you create family.
Story_ID: 648159
Speaker 1: Now when 'Cane River' [Lalita Tademy] was published, and Oprah [Oprah Winfrey] especially picked it up as a book of one of the Oprah's Book Club selections, you became somewhat of a celebrity then, even more, more so than in the corporate world I would guess.  And I saw you on Oprah's show ['The Oprah Winfrey Show'] and other people saw you.  And you know, the book was re- widely reviewed and, and discussed.  The second book, 'Red River' [Lalita Tademy], does not seem to have caught the same kind of attention and can--do you have any idea why or any thoughts on it?
Speaker 2: Yeah I do.  The--for a couple of reasons.  And again, I, I was warned against doing it.  It's a--it's a more male perspective.  It's a far more harsh book.  I mean, how could you get more harsh than slavery?  But you can.  It's a far violent and harsh book because it's exploring a massacre and the aftermath to that massacre.  So it couldn't have gotten the same--I don't believe that it wouldn't have gotten the same boost that (unclear)--that Oprah gave 'Cane River' just because it's, it's just a different vibe; it's a different feel of book.  And the book, I will tell you, came out just the way I wanted it to, so it's not as if I think it's deficient; I don't, but I do think it's different.   And I don't think that it's light reading.  And it's not that 'Cane River' is light reading, but it is so much more palatable.  It's so much more female energy identifiable, and 'Red River' is more male energy.  And it--and it didn't have the--it didn't have the Oprah magic.  You know, it didn't have the, the Oprah finger put on it.  So I didn't--I don't know.  I didn't go on the Oprah show, and didn't have the same promotional.  It did really well in its own terms, and I am very pleased with that, and I'm very pleased to add that to the body of literature about a very little known incident that happened in Louisiana in the 1800s.  But that's not where my intent was.  My intent wasn't to come out with 'Cane River II.'  My intent was to portray a period of time in history, a part of this country, and to put it out there.  And if people can find it, I am really, really pleased.  And if it is not, if, if it's not comfortable reading at night, I understand that totally.  But it is what it is.
Story_ID: 648160
Speaker 1: Now it seems to me that this is the kind of literature that should be read and discussed in the schools, you know, on some level.  You know, if other literatures instructed in the public schools, this seems--certainly this literature certainly seems to be especially instructive for black children and I would think all children.
Speaker 2: So are you talking 'Red' ['Red River,' Lalita Tademy] or 'Cane' or either (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) 'Red' or 'Cane'--either one, you know.
Speaker 2: Let me tell you the most amazing, amazing thing that happened one month ago--amazing.  I went to Caddo Parish in Louisiana, and at the--for a speaking gig by invitation.  And I went there and they had--this was a high school; it was a magnet high school.  They had thrown out 'Uncle Tom's Cabin' [Harriet Beecher Stowe] which they had still been teaching.  They had been teaching 'Cane River' [Lalita Tademy] there for the last ten years.  And they--it was like I was a rock star when I went there.  It's a huge school, huge.  And so there were six hundred students in an auditorium.  They were streaming it to their freshman and sophomores who couldn't fit and they were in their classrooms.  They had assigned parts of the book to different classes so that they had assigned it to an art class so that they had done artistic work on it.  They had assigned it to a history class.  They had assigned it to a literature class, and the students wrote about their ancestors using the 'Cane River' style of developing the story--amazing, just amazing.  So when it happens, it happens to very good effect.
Story_ID: 648161
Speaker 1: So my name is Julieanna Richardson.  I'm the interviewer.  And Matthew Hickey is the videographer.  And I'd like to ha- start out by having you state your name and spell it for us.
Speaker 2: [HistoryMaker] Lalita Tademy, L-A-L-I-T-A, Tademy, T-A-D-E-M-Y.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what we're gonna do today--you were interviewed by Larry Crowe on November 7, 2012; (cough) and we want to supplement the, your interview.
Story_ID: 648162
Speaker 1: I'd like to start out--not at the beginning but to start out with your decision, how you came to decide or to go to Howard University [Washington, D.C.].  And the--and let's start there in terms of your description of the campus that you arrive on.
Speaker 2: Well, first, I decided to go to Howard because I had grown up in a suburb in, in California [Castro Valley, California] that was pretty much all-white, and I wanted a different experience.  And so I used the atlas method to choose where I was gonna go to school, which is back in the day, it was opening up an atlas, and getting a ruler, and figuring out the furthest point from the town in, in California where I lived to the other coast.  And Howard came out beautifully for that, and they gave me a four year scholarship, a full ride.  And so I was delighted to go there and to have a, what I anticipated would be a very different experience, a cultural experience, and being around black people.
Speaker 1: So, Lalita [HistoryMaker Lalita Tademy], let me ask you, what, what were your parents' [Willie Billes Tademy and Nathan Tademy, Jr.] reactions to, to your, you know, decision and your process?
Speaker 2: My, my parents were just--neither of my parents were college graduates.  And, but there was never a discussion about whether or not I would go to college.  It was always assumed that I would go to college.  And as long as I went, that was enough for them.  So, my decision to go to Howard versus going to the UC, one of the UC campuses, University of California campuses, wasn't as important to them as the fact that I was committed to getting a college degree.  So, I, as a matter of fact, had no idea about the Ivies.  I had no idea that there was such a thing as a Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] or a Yale [Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut] or a Princeton [Princeton University, Princeton, New Jersey] or any of that.  I just knew that I was going off to college, and I wanted there to be as little financial strain as possible, because we didn't have a lot of money.  We, we definitely were not poor, but, but it was going to take a lot to send me to college.  And so a four year scholarship, I think they breathed a sigh of relief that there would be that sort of financial help.
Story_ID: 648163
Speaker 1: And this, what year is this?
Speaker 2: And this is 1966.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And there is a lot of activity in 1966 (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) There is a lot of activity in 1966, but it really heats up in 1967.  So, when I went off in '66 [1966], it, it wasn't the hotbed that it was soon to become.  Walking on the campus for Howard University [Washington, D.C.] was an amazing thing to me.  I mean I, I couldn't believe that not only were there so many black people in the city itself in Washington, D.C., but on the campus. It was, it was just all new and different.  And very truthfully, parts of it were traumatic to someone who was (laughter) as unexposed as, as I was at that time.  What I was looking for was a different experience, and I got it, including walking into the cafeteria the very first day, and there was only one choice, and it was hot pickled pork hock.  And I had no (laughter) idea what in the world I was supposed to eat. (Laughter) I just had crackers that day.  But it was, it was a, it was a bit of a shock on many different levels.  So I was very used to Louisiana food because my mother [Willie Billes Tademy] carried that with her and, and made sure that, you know, gumbo and, and all of that, and grits, and greens, and red beans, I knew what all of that was.  I, I didn't know what some of the other things that were appearing were.  But it was, it was an experience, and it was an experience, it was an experience on many different levels.  One of the things Howard was trying to do was to make sure that their students succeeded by giving a lot of supplemental cultural kinds of things.  So I was in an honors program there.  And they would take us out to recitals, and they would, they would do a lot that was trying to acclimatize people that had not been necessarily exposed to city offerings.  And I f- I found a lot of this just unfamiliar.
Story_ID: 648164
Speaker 1: A lot of Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.] for me was unfamiliar.  And you know, I was seventeen.  I was, I was very exposed in some ways, very unexposed in other ways.
Speaker 2: Let's talk about that a little bit, you know, how exposed in some ways and how unexposed, and what was familiar and what was different.
Speaker 1: Because I had come from the suburbs, you know, and because my parents [Willie Billes Tademy and Nathan Tademy, Jr.] were, and, and especially my mother, was very interested in us being prepared, we, we--she would take, she would take us to the city and see plays, or, or she would try to expose us in those ways.  We had in Berkeley, California, before we moved to Castro Valley [California], we had plenty of black neighbors, and there was that camaraderie.  There was the church [McGee Avenue Baptist Church, Berkeley, California], a Baptist church.  And so I was used to that sort of community.  I was absolutely not used to social life, because as one of the very few black girls in the town that I lived in, in Castro Valley, I never dated.  There was no expectation that I would ever be included in any social activities, really.  And so, to go to Howard, where suddenly there were parties, and there were boys who were interested--and at first I thought they just wanted me to do their homework.  I, I couldn't figure out why (laughter) they were interested in me.  That's how naive I was.  But it was, it was just a transition.  It was just a transition, like being plunked down in a, in a foreign country almost (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So what, what were people's reaction to you too?  Did they, did they know you were a little green around the, the (laughter)--or are there other green people too--there too?
Speaker 1: There--
Speaker 2: Because there's, you know, a lot of people are coming into this place.
Speaker 1: People were green in so many different ways, and, and so it was very interesting to see.  And of course I, I found friends.  I did find people that I felt that I had something in common with or that I was drawn to, and, and that made it easier.  But I do know that I was pegged as a California girl.  I do know that I was considered a bit odd.  I know that I was one of the first to wear a miniskirt.  It was when that, when that (laughter) phase came in.  And I had come back from a visit to California I think over Christmas, and I came back with my little miniskirts that--you know, and I went barefoot sometimes, which was just, well, who is this person?  But mostly, mostly, I studied.  Mostly, I was about trying to get prepared to be independent and support myself.
Speaker 2: Now, Lalita [HistoryMaker Lalita Tademy], let me--who was your roommate?  Did they, did they assign people?  Do you remember your roommate the first year and--
Speaker 1: They assigned.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: They assigned, and my roommate was Anita Henry [ph.].  I had, I had actually, there were four of us in a room.  We had bunk beds, even.  And I remember Kay-Kay [ph.] and Anita.  And there was always a pinochle game going (laughter) all hours of the day and night.  Yeah, and so it was, it was also more communal.  I was very used to being alone.
Speaker 2: I see.
Speaker 1: I was very used to being on my own, making my own way, by myself, figuring things out.  And there was just a constant influx of activity, and people, and parties, and get-togethers, and things in Wheatley Hall at Howard.
Speaker 2: Okay.  So--oh, so you were living in Wheatley Hall.
Speaker 1: I was living in the dorms--
Speaker 2: Okay, in the dorms.
Speaker 1: --for both years that I was there, before I transferred out.
Story_ID: 648165
Speaker 1: That's what, and that was the other question, you know, why you transferred out, out [of Howard University, Washington, D.C.].  But before we get there, okay, so those two years there, (clears throat) I just--if you could describe more, like, are there professors that you're, you know, getting to know?  Are there--you know, who are the influencers there, you know, and the experiences, the other students, you know?
Speaker 2: It was more the other students than it was the professors, very truthfully.  And it was more--the, the academics were not the problematic part, after the beginning, after I realized that I wasn't as smart as I thought I was, and that I actually had to go to school--I had to go to class, and, and I actually had to study for the test, because I thought, I thought that I didn't have to do any of that until I got my first C (laughter).  And I was shocked; I was absolutely shocked.  So--
Speaker 1: What did you get the C in?
Speaker 2: It was math.  I think it was calculus.  I can't remember what, but it was math.  And we, we had a little quiz, and I got an A, and that just fed my little ego.  And then the next one it was C, and I could see it was going south from there.  So I, I sucked it up (laughter) and said okay, now it's time to, to buckle down and study.  But there was a lot that was going on because it was the '60s [1960s], and it was the emergence of many things.  It was the emergence of black power; it was the protests against the Vietnam War; it was student protests, period that made the campus a very live place.  And some of the professors were even joining in those struggles.  And so it wasn't only the students; it was a political awareness that I am sorry to say I didn't share in.  I was so very focused on wanting to get good grades and determine my future that way, that, that I didn't join into any of the social protest movements.
Speaker 1: But, Lalita [HistoryMaker Lalita Tademy], also I think, or what I'm told, on campuses, you know, they weren't necessarily the hot--a lot--some of the hot that was coming from the students and not the administration at the beginning.  So, let me--was [HistoryMaker] James Cheek, was he the president then?
Speaker 2: Yes [sic.].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And he was trying to bring in new people like Andrew Billingsley and people like that--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --to, to change things.  So, but are you finding there--how many people are activists and involved, and how many people are not?
Speaker 2: So, it was just really beginning, and, and people were starting to speak out.  But this was, again, this was a campus where students, especially freshmen and sophomores, were trying to find their way.  And a lot of that way was not necessarily with the movements of the times.  And they were--so if I had to do a proportion, I would say it was maybe 20/80.  It was 20 percent of the people were activists.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: And the rest were, were just trying to navigate their way along a lot of issues a, around being away from home for the first time, around trying to keep up with social, not, not politically social but just social concerns, academic concerns, community concerns.  So, yeah, I, I would, I would say it was about 80 percent.  Looking back, I'm very sorry that, that I wasn't more aware politically and didn't join in (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now why do you say that?
Speaker 2: Because it was such an important time in the country, and it was such an important time to have a voice.  I was far too immature to accept that mantle.
Speaker 1: Right.  You know, I mean, you know, I don't know if you can--I don't know if it was important at that time too because I think that there is a lot of risks that people took.  And some people had--I don't want to say tragic ends, but it was, it was complicated.  I think the movement is very romanticized, you know, in some respects.  But, but the thing is, is that out of that movement came a lot of social progress.  But--
Speaker 2: And I'm grateful.  I'm grateful to those people that did weigh in, and I'm grateful to those people who--we, we had a, a strike at the school.  It was a student strike.  And the federal (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Was that your first year or second?
Speaker 2: It was my second year.
Speaker 1: Sophomore year.
Speaker 2: And, and those were people that were attuned to larger issues.  So, again, I'm not--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --no, I'm not beating myself up about it--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --but it, but it, it, it is interesting to me to look back and to see how little I concerned myself with all of those issues.
Story_ID: 648166
Speaker 1: So let me ask you, were you coming in knowing what you wanted to do and major in [at Howard University, Washington, D.C.]?
Speaker 2: I came in not knowing what I wanted to do.  What I knew that I wanted to do above everything else was to be able when I graduated to get a job.  Seriously, that's, that was my, that was my reason for being.  So anything that I did during school was about that day when I would have a piece of paper, and I could go into an employer and be considered valuable.
Speaker 1: So what, what, what subjects were you gravi- gravitating to, 'cause--
Speaker 2: Psychology.  So, I--my major was psychology.  My minor was statistics.  And that is--initially, I had wanted to be a lawyer.  I then, I then decided that that wasn't really for me because I heard that a lot of, a lot of times in law firms just women couldn't get hired.  And if they were hired, they were in a back room somewhere doing the research for the guys that were out front.  And I had--I wanted no parts of that.  So it was--when I went into psychology, what I didn't realize is how little prepared you would be with just a graduate degree in psychology, which is why--you know, jumping ahead--in 1970, with a degree in hand finally, and very excited about being able to go out and find job, and the going out and interviewing, and having people ask me how fast I could type, then I just turned right back around and--
Speaker 1: Got your--
Speaker 2: --got my M.B.A.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I just, I, over that summer, I just reapplied to UCLA, and I got into the business school [University of California, Los Angeles Graduate School of Management; Anderson School of Management, Los Angeles, California].  And I said all right, they're gonna have to take me seriously if I have an advanced degree.
Story_ID: 648167
Speaker 1: Back to Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.] though in the, in the--so you had, you've, you've had, at this point, you had a very practical approach to life.
Speaker 2: Very.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, what I'm wondering is, you had mentioned that you had not dated, and here, all of a sudden, you know, boys are interested.  So, was--did you have a, a nice social life there emerging?
Speaker 2: Not really, not really because I was very cautious, and truthfully, I could not understand why guys were talking to me.  I, I just couldn't figure it out, but I knew I wasn't gonna type anybody's papers, and I wasn't (laughter) going to, you know, I, I wasn't gonna write them for, for anyone.  And that's what I assumed it was all about, and so I held myself apart from a lot of that.  I would go out in batches to parties.  You know, a lot of girls go together to, to parties.  I had some dates, but they were--but I never settled and had a boyfriend.  And again, some of that seemed to be a distraction from what I really wanted to do (simultaneous).
Story_ID: 648168
Speaker 1: What did you do between your, your freshman and sophomore year that summer?  What--did you go back home?
Speaker 2: I went back home and I worked.
Speaker 1: Um-hm. And so why do you leave then, after your sophomore year?  What does--
Speaker 2: Because I felt--there was, there, there were a couple of things.  One was Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.] was--Howard had a lot of activism that was, that was going on.
Speaker 1: So describe that.
Speaker 2: So it was, classes were suspended because there was a strike, or, and, and I, and I felt that it was not going to get me the degree that I needed for the credibility of being able to go into an employer.  And I felt that it was, it was social.  It was more social than academic, in my head.  I, I'm not saying that that was true, but in my head I wanted more of an academic focus.  And so I had, I actually had called my mother [Willie Billes Tademy] about three weeks in, after getting to the campus, and saying I want to transfer.  I had a, I had a lot of scholarships to a lot of different places--and saying I want to follow those up (laughter) now.  I want a transfer.  And--
Speaker 1: So, so explain that to me.  How many places?  See this--
Speaker 2: Well, it was, I was a National Merit scholar [National Merit Scholarship Program], and, and so a lot of the, and a lot of the UC [University of California] campuses were open to me.  And Mills College [Oakland, California]--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --that's local was, you know, they wanted to recruit.  And I'm on the board there now.  But, but it was--of the choices that I had, I just wanted to make sure that I was not in California.  And three weeks in, I realized that that was a mistake, that I loved California.  I just didn't like the little town I was living in [Castro Valley, California].  But I--the, the--to go all the way across country for this very dramatically different experience wasn't necessarily what I wanted after all.  But I had a four year scholarship to Howard that was a full--that picked up everything (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Full ride.
Speaker 2: And when I called my mother and said, "I, I want a transfer," she said, "Well, we can talk about that after two years, but you will be there for two years" (laughter), which--bless her heart; I'm, I'm actually glad that she did that--which meant that I needed to settle down and just do what I needed to do before I could transfer back to California.
Speaker 1: And so you started that process like midway through the year, you know, to apply.  Did you have to do--?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.  And, and I got into UCLA [University of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California].
Story_ID: 648169
Speaker 1: So, what was UCLA [University of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California] like then?  You're living on campus at UCLA.
Speaker 2: I'm living--for the first year I lived on campus.  And it was in a big coed dorm that was, after, after Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.], which was very gender segregated, that that was very different.  But it was a big, big campus.  And the experience was what you would expect in a big campus.  It, there, there were a lot of people.  There were a lot of classes.  There were a lot of choices.  If I was orchestrating my own education today, college education today, I think I would have gone for something in the middle, not small, not large, but something in the middle.  But it was very large, but it also meant I felt I had more freedom.
Speaker 1: How many students did it have undergraduate--
Speaker 2: You know, I cannot (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) at the time?
Speaker 2: --remember.
Speaker 1: I was just thinking--
Speaker 2: But it was thousands. It was, it was large.  It was very large.  It was very large, and between undergraduate and graduate, people were spread out, and the campus was very, very spread out.  I made some friends there in the dorm, and, and I ended up being there for four yours between--
Speaker 1: You know--
Speaker 2: --between--
Speaker 1: Undergrad and, and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) finishing undergraduate and then graduate [University of California, Los Angeles Graduate School of Management; Anderson School of Management, Los Angeles, California].
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  So, the thing is--now do you change your major at all?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: No.  You continued.
Speaker 2: No.  So I was still psychology, and I think that's when I added the minor of, of--
Speaker 1: Of statistics (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) statistics.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So do you--who are your friends that you get to know there?  How, you know, how--who are they at this point?  And frankly, L.A. [Los Angeles, California] is a hotbed of, of activity too (laughter), so.  I mean the whole country is, but L.A.--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --is--
Speaker 2: Right.  But there were so many pockets.  There were so many different pockets at UCLA.  And it's one of the things that I really appreciated about Los Angeles as, as a place, is that you could be so many things.  You could be hippie; you could be, you could be anything.  You could be five things in a given week and go to different neighborhoods.  And that was very appealing.  That was very appealing to me.  Again, I was all about--my, my friends were--I actually had a friend who was an initial roommate, Gail [ph.], who, whose parents lived in L.A.  And I lived for one year in graduate school with her parents--
Speaker 1: So they became (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) in their house.
Speaker 1: --they became like an adopted family.
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.  And, and it was helpful in getting around.  But it was, you know, L.A. was a big place.  I couldn't afford a car.  I rode a bicycle (laughter) a lot.  And, and I was working in order to, to help support myself.  So it, it--I, I had a busy life.  And again, I was very focused.
Speaker 1: And summers, were you spent--were you going home, or you were--
Speaker 2: Summers I was, summers I was going home, or later I worked in a bank as a teller.  And I would do that; and then I would, I would do that more full time in the summer.
Story_ID: 648170
Speaker 1: You know, now, how--why the choice of business school?  And the reason I say that is, you know, you, you know, before you were saying I wanted a job.  And then you said well, I, you know, it's the questions that people are asking, you know.  But there are other advanced--you know, and you said I wrote--you know, law they had told me I would end up, you know, not--typing for someone else, so, or being in the back.  So, but why business?
Speaker 2: My father [Nathan Tademy, Jr.]--
Speaker 1: Because this is still early for women to be going to business school.  I'm sorry.
Speaker 2: My father was a contractor and became one of the first black independent contractors in the Bay Area [San Francisco Bay Area, California].  And, and I saw him making a business.  And, and it is something that I actually was good at.  I could help him.  Even when I was in high school [Castro Valley High School, Castro Valley, California] I was helpful.  I didn't know exactly what I was doing, but I had a head for it.  And business (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Explain that a little bit more.
Speaker 2: Well, whether--
Speaker 1: You helped him with--
Speaker 2: --whether it was, whether it was helping to generate bids for jobs, whether it was accounting, whether it was those kinds of principles.  I didn't even know to call it accounting.  But I have a mind that needs organization, and, and I wanted to organize him and his efforts.  And I saw his cronies, many of whom were small businessmen; they would have--one of the stores that I worked in, in Berkeley [California], for whenever I would come back during the summers, and they had a furniture store.  And I would organize the furniture store and the inventory and the, and just get them--organized is the only way that I can put it.  And what that translated to me to mean was business, and so I decided that I wanted to get an M.B.A.  And it was as much to learn the information as it was for the piece of paper and being able to go in with a resume that said take me seriously; I have an M.B.A.
Speaker 1: And this is--would this be 1970 at that point?
Speaker 2: So this is nine--when I graduated in 1972--
Speaker 1: Right.  And--
Speaker 2: --with an M.B.A.--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --from UCLA [University of California, Los Angeles Graduate School of Management; Anderson School of Management, Los Angeles, California].
Speaker 1: Right, right, right, right.  So you entered in '71 [1971] then maybe--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I entered in '70 [1970].
Speaker 1: Seventy [1970].
Speaker 2: So I graduated--
Speaker 1: Right, right, right. That's right--
Speaker 2: --undergraduate [University of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California] in '70 [1970].
Speaker 1: --seventy [1970]--(unclear).
Speaker 2: And I--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Seventy-two [1972] is when I--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --entered the workforce.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, and, and I say that because in context, people are just--men are just--I mean African American men are just coming into business school.  And, and women are, you know, they're, they're, they would be coming in a little later.  So I'm just saying you were early in on the whole thing.
Speaker 2: No, I wasn't the only one, but I was early.  I was definitely early.
Speaker 1: So, so tell me what your--how large is the business school that you come into?  How, how--are there sections?  And how many African Americans are in your class?  And how many women are in your class?
Speaker 2: So the class was--so we're talking about ten or so and--of African American, not, not the, not the whole class, and which was pretty bonded actually, because--this is men and women.  And it was pretty bonded because we were in a sea of white.  And so it wasn't just those that were coming in.  It was second year students as well getting their M.B.A.  And you know, we helped one another.  We socialized with one another.  I actually dated a guy that was, that was in his second year.  And so it, it, it, it felt manageable.  It all felt manageable at that time.
Story_ID: 648171
Speaker 1: So, let's talk about that group of ten.  So you're talking about ten both in first and second year?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, how large was the overall business school [University of California, Los Angeles Graduate School of Management; Anderson School of Management, Los Angeles, California]?
Speaker 2: I don't, I don't know numbers.  I just (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) You didn't. Okay.
Speaker 2: --don't.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  So, who is in that group of ten?  Would we know any of the names?
Speaker 2: Probably not, probably not.  I mean, everybody went on and had a life--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --but it, it, there weren't big names--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --in it.
Speaker 1: So, Lalita [HistoryMaker Lalita Tademy], let me ask you, what was the course of instruction then?  And do you--before I go to course of instruction, how many--do you know percentage wise how many women?
Speaker 2: Of the ten?
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: I think there were four of us.
Speaker 1: Oh.
Speaker 2: I think there--I mean it was, it was--that's what I'm saying.  I wasn't alone.
Speaker 1: So it was like eve- almost evenly divided?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  It, there, there were, there were a fair number.  You know, I never felt as if I was holding down the fort, which, you know, over the course of a career, I have felt that many, many times.  I didn't, I didn't really feel that.
Speaker 1: You know, and what's interesting too about this time is--well, (laughter) really, I don't even know if you're aware of Black Enterprise, 'cause they're a newsletter about, right about this time before a magazine.  But there's a lot of--the Urban League [National Urban League] is active, things like that.  So, but what are the group of you thinking you want to do?  Is--what are the discussions about what you're going to do with your business degree?
Speaker 2: And a lot of it was really very similar to mine, which was (laughter), we're, we're gonna go out and we're gonna be self-sufficient.  We're gonna go out and we're gonna get a job.  You know, I, I, I hear people today, and they're talking about they're gonna go and they're gonna start their business; they're gonna do this; they're gonna do that.  A lot of it then was about joining an organization that had already, that was already established.  It was, you know, a big win was graduating and working for IBM [International Business Machines Corporation].  That was a huge win. And then being prepared to, you know, sort of fight your way up the ladder there.  You know, my first job out was with Xerox [Xerox Corporation].  So I mean it was that, it was that joining an established company, and that's what we--that's what many of us expected to do.
Speaker 1: That's right.  Well, that, as you're saying, that, that, those were the times I mean that people--that was a big--you know, corporations, they gave you validity, get a job.  Even family members were saying get a job.
Speaker 2: Not only get a job and get benefits and, and go someplace where you can grow in that job, not that you can get experience and jump off to something else--
Speaker 1: That's right.
Speaker 2: --but that you just can punch your way all the way up and maybe retire after you've been there for thirty years.  That, that is inconceivable today.  But at that time it was not.
Speaker 1: So, who--of, of the ten, did they all get similar jobs in that way?  Do you remember that?
Speaker 2: Because we were in L.A. [Los Angeles, California], somebody got a job at Boeing [The Boeing Company].  I know that.  Somebody got a job at IBM.  Somebody got a job--I got a job at Xerox.  I'm trying to remember, trying to remember who went where.  But it was, it was in that vein.
Story_ID: 648172
Speaker 1: Now I want to also understand, in the, in the classroom instruction--before we start your job--what are, what are--is there--do the professors treat the male and females similar?  There's not any of that?  What is the instruction?  You know, I know that at Harvard Business School [Boston, Massachusetts] they're known for the case study.  What is the, the method of instruction that's going on (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And we had case studies.  We also had case studies.  And a lot of the--I actually do not--when I think back on UCLA business school [University of California, Los Angeles Graduate School of Management; Anderson School of Management, Los Angeles, California], I don't think back on any particular handicap being female.  I just don't, I just do not remember it.  I don't think about any particular handicap being black, exactly, other than the normal, the normal things that, that just happened.  And I do remember support, the social support from both of those groups, female and black.  And so that is not, that's just not in my memory.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And did you, did you like business school overall?  Did you like the, the, the method, you know, the case method?  Did you--did the--I'm just, I'm asking because this--
Speaker 2: I did.  I did.  I thought--because there wasn't one answer.  And when I--so, so here is the transition that I had to go through.  When I went to--when I graduated from high school [Castro Valley High School, Castro Valley, California] and I went to Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.], one of the biggest academic challenges that I had was understanding that you get partial credit for things.  That never occurred to me in my entire high school career.  But at Howard, sometimes if you just talked about stuff on a test in a blue book, you just kind of put out what you knew and theorized and put it out there, you could get a good grade for it.  You didn't know all of it, but you knew something, and you had a, and you had an angle.  That was life changing for me, is to understand that you could take what you did know, even if you didn't know everything, and you could make a proposition out of it.  And somebody would reward you with it, with a good grade.  So that was, the, that blue book experience and just writing stuff out, was amazing.  So, I think that that was sort of the same sort of thing with case studies years later, which is, somebody tells you what happened with the business.  They can't tell you what would have happened if you did things differently, but you can hypothesize, and you can just try things out and say what would happen if I did this or if I did that?  And it wasn't a multiple choice; it was trying to figure out what went wrong, when it went wrong, what would correct it.  That was exciting and fun.  So, I'm not sure if that was (laughter) your question, but--
Speaker 1: No, no, no--
Speaker 2: --it was very interesting to me to do that case study experience.
Speaker 1: So you did very well then?  It was, it was--
Speaker 2: I, I did fine.
Speaker 1: You did.  So, (cough) so that, that was essentially, you know, my, my question, 'cause sometimes people, they found the case study method, you know, complicated or maybe the environment too competitive, you know.  I mean, there are all kinds of things that either minorities or women are saying sometimes coming in these environments at the time that you're, you know, you're coming through.
Story_ID: 648173
Speaker 1: You graduate, and you interview.  Now what was the interview process back then?
Speaker 2: The interview process was mostly for--what I assumed that I would do and the job that I would get would be a management trainee.  That was, that was the title at the time; that was the title.  And I, when I interviewed the first time, after just getting a B.A. [from the University of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California], that's when the question was always how fast can you type.  It was very clear that the path that people envisioned for me was through a typing pool, was, was administrative.  When I graduated and got my M.B.A. [from the University of California, Los Angeles Graduate School of Management; Anderson School of Management, Los Angeles, California], and I interviewed at the same places that the guys were interviewing, that the women were interviewing, it had eased up a little but not totally.  But the bigger companies had a more accepting policy, both in terms of gender and race.  And so the interview process was really finding somebody that worked at one of these places that knew somebody, and then going in and talking your way in.
Story_ID: 648174
Speaker 1: So, what was their management training program?  'Cause the--both IBM [International Business Machines Corporation] and Xerox [Xerox Corporation] were known for their training programs.
Speaker 2: However, (laughter) however, Xerox's training program for copiers back east was magnificent, as was IBM's training program.  Xerox was trying something new.  They wanted to enter the computer business in L.A. [Los Angeles, California], in El Segundo [California], and so they were experimenting, and I was the experimenter.  I was the experimentee.  And what they decided to do was they said we're gonna get somebody we know is, is competent, who has been successful academically, so they have the, sort of the brain power to do this, and we're gonna see if we can make this work when we don't have a formal program in place.  And so, it wasn't for copiers; it was computers and computer services.  And so I went to a lot of training, but it was individual training, and it was--they, they were just trying things out.  And I went into a sales office as, as a presale systems analyst for computer--this huge computer printer that they had, that they had developed and that they were selling to Aerospace [Aerospace Corporation] and whatever.  And I, and I went into the sales office, and no one would use me as the presale systems analyst because I was green; I didn't really know the product; and I was female.  Like, you know, and a salesman lives or dies by whether they get the sale.  Why would--you know, this, this is community here.  This isn't charity.  And so, no one would take me on a call.  They would grab another analyst.  So I'm study, study, study, study, study, so that I know the product, so that I can demonstrate the product, and, and they still won't. And they still will not take me on sales calls.  Even the one female salesperson that there was said, "I especially will never take you on a call.  I already have my own problems in getting my credibility," (laughter), "together going into these accounts.  I'm not bringing another female in."  So it, so it was no longer about me not knowing the product.  I could show that.  But I would write their proposals.  I would, I just went salesperson by salesperson by salesperson, showing them what value I could add going into these accounts.  I would--they could offload a lot of the work to me.  I would do it.  I'd turn it back--they could do it, you know, they could then present it as their own.  I didn't care.  I just wanted to go in, get the experience, and, and that's how I started.
Speaker 1: And you did that for how long there?
Speaker 2: I only did it for a year.
Speaker 1: Year, so 1972 to '73 [1973].
Speaker 2: Yep, I only did it for a year.  But the, at the end of that year, it was really interesting.  At the beginning of that year, the regional manager came and said, "Do you--is there anything I should know about?"  And I said--again arrogant--I said, "These people won't use me.  This is ridiculous.  I'm a great, I'm a great vehicle, and they, they won't take me in on their sales calls.  They won't use me."  And I just knew that he was gonna go out of that office, and he was gonna wag his finger and say (laughter), "You, you need to, you need to utilize this resource we have here."  Instead, he closed that door and he said, "That's just whining."  He said, "If you, if you have value, then you'll show you have value.  Do not expect anybody else to fix this except for you."  And that was a shock.  And that's when I went and did my salesman by salesman strategy.  And, and a year later--this is right before I left--at the national, the Xerox national sales meeting, this guy had a little time chunk, this regional manager.  And he told the story of this green systems analyst that came in and how he had chided this person.  He never named my name.  He said he had chided this person, and this person had tuned- turned it totally around and was one of the leading systems analysts in the company.  Yeah, when it was just--it was just sort of amazing.  So, it was, it was great that I could do that, but it was a very hard year.  (Laughter) It was a very, very, very hard year of just trying to get people to believe that I could help them do what they needed to do.
Story_ID: 648175
Speaker 1: So what, what did you do after that then?  You leave?
Speaker 2: So I went to, I moved to New York [New York] and--to work for Philip Morris [Philip Morris Inc.; Altria Group, Inc.].  And I worked for Philip Morris for--once again, this is really short duration, but I worked for Philip Morris in New York as a brand management trainee, which is what I wanted to do.  I just didn't want to do it for cigarettes in New York.  And so eventually, you know, ultimately, I transferred back to California, which is where I, which is really where I wanted my career to be.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But I, but I loved marketing, and so (cough) that was a very useful stint that I had in understanding brand, brand management, advertising, sales, marketing, the whole--
Speaker 1: Now, you know, how was UCLA [University of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California] in that regard in their instruction in the marketing arena?
Speaker 2: It was fine.  I don't think it was a leading company, but I don't think many companies were.  And what I, what I actually found is that my training in psychology or my education in psychology, it was such a firm foundation for everything I ultimately did, both in terms of people and in terms of how to structure a business or how, how to, how to motivate and just the principles of psychology in making things happen, getting things done through people.  And so I used a lot of--a, a, a lot of what UCLA did, and they were touting as brand new emerging principles, were things that I had learned as a psychology major.  They just spiffied them up a bit and sort of aimed them towards the business world, but I found a lot of that to be of a piece.
Speaker 1: What was the--how did you find the, the Philip Morris environment or structure, the corporate structure, you know, for low level entry person?  How did that differ from Xerox [Xerox Corporation]?  Did you--can you tell me that?
Speaker 2: So it was very, it was so much more hierarchical.  It was so much more East Coast hierarchical.  And so a lot of what happened at Philip Morris was more about who got to be in the room when.  And a lot of what I did was, a lot of what I did was learning the business and feeding ideas to other people.  And that was very instructive but not something that I wanted to do long term.  And I did not, and I did not want to stay in New York.  I just didn't want to.
Story_ID: 648176
Speaker 1: So you came, so you come.  Does BART come in at that point?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I came back.  I went to--I, I did a series, I did a series of, of stints in marketing that got me to Silicon Valley.
Speaker 1: Okay, so can you tell me those series of steps?
Speaker 2: So, I worked for BART, which is the Bay Area Rapid Transit system, and I, and it was in marketing, and it was to increase ridership and to do market research studies, that kind of thing.  I went from BART to Memorex [Memorex Corporation].
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: And I went into Memorex as--this is, this is fairly shameful on Memorex and the world's (laughter) point of view.  I was the, I was the highest ranking female at Memorex as a product manager, which just goes to show how hard it was for women at that time.
Speaker 1: And this is in 1978, right?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  But you worked--
Speaker 2: At--
Speaker 1: --there for a while.  That's not a--
Speaker 2: At--
Speaker 1: --series--that--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --so wait.  You were at bay area transit for three years--
Speaker 2: Yes (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) I think.  And did you like that work there too?  Did you--'cause the market research that would taken to your--you know, that's--would have been more substantive in some respects.
Speaker 2: Well, a lot of it was--actually it was really interesting work.  It just wasn't work that I wanted to do full time forever.  And the marketing at BART, I, my fantasy was more doing more brand management, more consumer marketing.  That's what I really wanted to do.  Doing consumer marketing in the Bay Area [San Francisco Bay Area, California] was very difficult.  There were very few companies where you could actually do that.  And by then I knew I really wanted to stay in California.  I didn't, I didn't want to go to the Midwest, which is where you do a lot of brand management work, or New York [New York], which is where you do a lot of brand management work.  So this was, it was interesting at BART, and I, I did a lot of what you're calling substantive work.  But--
Story_ID: 648177
Speaker 1: You were talking about, you know, that--which was interesting and to me that, you know, a lot of the market research was in different, you know, in New York [New York] and in the Midwest--
Speaker 2: And not research (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) consumer market.
Speaker 2: --not research.
Speaker 1: Right, research.
Speaker 2: I wasn't that interested in research per se.
Speaker 1: You, you wanted to do the marketing.
Speaker 2: I wanted to do the marketing, and so I actually got a job at Memorex [Memorex Corporation].  And this is before Silicon Valley was Silicon Valley, was the Silicon Valley we know today.  But that was breakout opportunity of really establishing some creative opportunities to do marketing.
Speaker 1: But can you talk about--'cause Memorex was a big name back then, right?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And so, can you talk about, you know--where was it headquartered?
Speaker 2: Down, down in San Jose [California].
Speaker 1: It was?  Okay, I see.
Speaker 2: Santa Clara [California] actually.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: But--
Speaker 1: So, so what, at what point was the, the company at that point, because--yeah.  I, I had read here that in 1971 that they had the shattering glass ad- advertisements--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --but--
Speaker 2: Ella Fitzgerald.
Speaker 1: Right, that's, that's right.  So, so, can you talk about the, you know, just the company that you're coming into, how it was structured, and were you brought into, into the marketing area? Or were--
Speaker 2: So I was brought in--so the, the company itself--
Speaker 1: How did you get the job in the first place or learn of the job?
Speaker 2: I could tell you--I don't really remember exactly.  I don't--I wasn't recruited for it, which means that I must have heard about it, or they must have advertised for it.  My suspicion is that they advertised for it, and I sent in a resume.  I didn't know anybody there, but I knew that that was more on the track of what I wanted to do.  And the company itself had a, had consumer--they had the, the tapes that you talked about, but they also had business divisions, and I was in the business portion of it.  So the Ella Fitzgerald shattering the glass, that wasn't me.  But what I did have an opportunity to do, I was, I was actually, I was actually brought in as a product manager for supplies.  And so these were printer supplies, and, and it was things like, it was machine supplies.  It was things like mag tape [magnetic tape]--doesn't exist anymore--audio tape, all of those--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --kinds of things.  So, when I went in, the structure of the company was that it, the divisions were headed by a general manager, and then under the general manager there was sales and marketing.  And the manufacturing was another arm of the company.  But for the sales and the marketing, that was exactly the environment that I wanted to be in.  We were a small division of the company, which had huge advantages.  And it had huge advantages because they didn't really monitor so much what we did because we were so small.  And that meant that I just got to play.  I just go to create.  I got to create distributor events, and, and, and advertising, and promotional.  Anything that would sell the product I got to orchestrate that and then turn that over to the salesmen.  It was a lot of, it was a lot of freedom in it, which was, which was surprising.  And if it was in a larger division that was more established, I would have never gotten that--
Speaker 1: So--
Speaker 2: --and that was fun.
Speaker 1: --so did you work in teams?  Was it a team?  So was it you as a project manager and the sales manager?  Was the, was--
Speaker 2: Yes, it was teams.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It was teams.  And by, by the end of that, we were actually, that division was purchased by Burroughs [Burroughs Corporation], by a, by a company back east.  And they wanted me to come and run that as the general manager, but I was not going to move back east.
Speaker 1: I see (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) (Laughter) So, so that was, so then it was time to look for another job, which I did.
Story_ID: 648178
Speaker 1: So I went to a very, very small--it's a records kee- it's not that small, but it was a recordkeeping company, TAB Products [TAB Products Co., LLC].  And that, that was really a way station.  I think I was there for--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --a year.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: I, well, what, whatever--until I could really find my next job, which was at ITT Qume.
Speaker 2: So can you talk about this? 'cause I don't, I'm not so familiar with ITT Qume.
Speaker 1: So that is, again, now I'm in printers, and Qume was a printer product, and ITT [ITT Corporation; ITT Inc.] bought them.  And so, so Qume, I went in as a product manager probably, and I was recruited there.  So that was a--this is people are now starting to come and pull me into, into some companies.  And at, at Qume it was, it was about computer printer supplies.  And that was a, it was a small division.  And I can't remember what my last position was there.  Do you have it?
Speaker 2: No.  I have--no, I don't.
Speaker 1: Well, it was--
Speaker 2: But you worked there for (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I was a marketing manager.  I was--
Speaker 2: You worked there for like four years, right?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Three, maybe three.
Speaker 2: Three, okay.
Speaker 1: Maybe three, and I, but I ended up going from product manager, marketing manager; and then I went to a Japanese company [Alps Electric (USA), Inc.].
Story_ID: 648179
Speaker 1: And I went as a marketing manager at Alps Electric [Alps Electric (USA), Inc.].  And Alps sells, sold a lot of products, a Japanese, Tokyo [Japan] based company that sold a lot of products that don't have their name in it.  But that's the keyboard if you have an Apple [Apple Computer, Inc.; Apple Inc.], or it's the memory if you have an IBM [International Business Machines Corporation], a PC [personal computer], or it's whatever.  So it's a lot of components, and it was audio, so Alpine [Alpine Electronics, Inc.], a lot of the high end equipment for cars.  And so it was a, and it was an electronics company, electronic component company.  And I was there for my longest stint to that point in any job ever, which was seven years I think.  And I came in as a marketing manager, and I left as, and I left as a general manager, general manager and, and vice president.
Story_ID: 648180
Speaker 1: Explain the environment there, because you know, when we think of Silicon Valley, we think of it being creative and cutthroat and fast paced.  But can you talk about--'cause really we're talking about companies that are very tech, tech oriented.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And so, but how was the--how are you structured, and what do you contribute to your growth?  And what are you learning?
Speaker 2: So I'm actually learning an amazing amount at Alps [Alps Electric (USA), Inc.], and it, but it is a, it is a nontraditional (laughter) path in, in Silicon Valley.  Number one, it's a Japanese company.  The leadership is Japanese, and they wanted entree into the American market.  And so what they did is they set up a new division.  And my boss at ITT Qume, who is a woman, found the opportunity and brought me along.  So--
Speaker 1: And what was her name?
Speaker 2: Anne Adams.  And she, she--we created the entire thing and the, this division.  And the, sort of the good part about all of that was almost anything that we wanted to do at that time we were able to do, as long as it wasn't crazy expensive--we were able to do because we would say well, this is just what you need to do to penetrate the market.  And so it wasn't, it wasn't following any blueprint.  It was just, it was creating a team.  It was creating our own structure.  We had a, an agreement with Tokyo [Japan] that they would sort of let us alone for the first two years and just fund us, so it was, it was like a small business.  And what we were--again, this is around printers. This is around printers, printers, printer supplies but also a lot of peripherals.  And we put together an American team.  We went off to Japan quite a lot to pitch our ideas.  We worked with the factories in Japan.  We worked with a lot of our development.  Most of our development was, our, our heavy duty development was in Japan with Japanese engineers, so there was a lot of negotiating there.  And our, our U.S. operation was more putting an American face on it and doing a lot of the finish work kinds of things or the customer integration kinds of things.  So, it--you know, and we got to work with the big guys.  You know, we got to work with IBM [International Business Machines Corporation] and Dell [Dell Inc.] and Apple [Apple Computer, Inc.; Apple Inc.] and--in providing products for them and the, the technical specs and integrating them into their new products and, and the new product development.  And it was, it was exciting.  And when my boss left, and she actually went off to do some things on her own, then I stepped up and, and took her place.
Speaker 1: And then is that, is that when you--or then after that you went up to vice president, you said, or, or--
Speaker 2: No.  She, she actually made me a vice president.  She went off; and the--Kameoka [Suetomo Kameoka], Kameoka-San made me a general manager.
Story_ID: 648181
Speaker 1: I have a couple of questions.  One, the negotiations, or getting to even know--to do business in, in Japan and working for [Alps Electric (USA), Inc.]--how was that?  And also being female, you know, I just, I'm interested in that whole thing, because at this point in time, still people are--there's a lot of discussion about doing business with the Japanese--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --or even what is appropriate, you know, to say or do.  And there's a lot of that discussion in, in the corporate world.
Speaker 2: Well, again, we just sort of forged our own way.  And I thought that, as usual, I might have some issues with being female, and I might have some issues with being black.  But it is what it is, and we're just gonna do business and go over there.  And what I discovered really was that there was very little issue being female and very little issue being black.  The big deal was not being Japanese.  So, those others were just little, (clears throat) they, they were just small bullet points.  The not being Japanese was a whole 'nother world.  But it was fascinating, and it was fascinating in any number of ways, because I had to, I had to figure out how the Japanese were comfortable doing business, how to get things done through them--that was our major resource--and, and even just the social things.  You know, going to visit Japan, I was very often the highest ranking person, and so there's a whole protocol for that.  But it's odd when the highest ranking person (laughter) is a woman, and, and you can't do some of the same things that you expect to do.  And so I would be taken to the mama-san's place, and they wouldn't know what to do with me (laughter) exactly when I was there.  And there, there would be some woman coming asking me to dance and you know, just trying to make me comfortable and pouring my drinks.  And, and none of us knew (laughter) what we were supposed to be doing, but we worked it out, and, and we figured it out.  And you know, we just put some little rules in place of--because one of the--early on, one of the biggest things was that you negotiate during the day.  This is the '80s [1980s] now.  You negotiate during--if you come over as Americans, you negotiate during the day, and at night (clears throat)--and you--everything seems straightforward.  It's through interpreters.  A lot of it is around, might be around product specs or terms and conditions, or whatever it is.  But at night, then you go out.  But when you go out, after the first drink, after you have the first drink, then you can say all the unofficial things that you can't say in the negotiating session.  So you can say--you might be saying yes, we can do that; yes, we can do that; yes, we can do that all day long.  But at night, after that first drink, you hear, that's absolutely impossible (laughter); there's no way we can pull that off.  And so it is you just have to understand that there is one thing that you say out of politeness and the spirit of cooperation, and then there is the real negotiating that gets done very often in the evening.  So, as the evening goes on you change places, so you go from one place to the other; you go to the next place.  And the rule that I had is that I would go to two places 'cause I needed to know what they really had on their mind, and there needed to be that discussion.  But things would devolve after the second, next place into something I didn't want to know about, and I didn't want to be a (laughter) part of, and so I would have somebody take me back to my hotel.  And often if I had come with other guys, they could go, but I wasn't gonna go (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Right.
Story_ID: 648182
Speaker 1: So you're talking because it becomes very--you know, the drinks are flowing, and they're ending up in--you know.
Speaker 2: Yeah, and, and they can't be held accountable because they're drunk, but they're not really drunk.  It is just a way--it's a, it, it was just a very odd, it was a very odd thing.  You take one sip of a drink--now things have changed I'm very sure, but this is the way it was when I started [at Alps Electric (USA), Inc.] (laughter).  You take one sip of a drink, and then you have an excuse that oh, didn't really mean that, when it's exactly what you've been wanting to say all day long, and then you can have a real discussion.
Speaker 1: So, Lalita [HistoryMaker Lalita Tademy], when you first realized--I mean were you prepped that that was the way it was gonna be (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Absolutely not (laughter)--
Speaker 1: So--
Speaker 2: --absolutely not.
Speaker 1: So, when you start realizing that this was a pattern, I mean really how long would it take to get to the deal then if you, you know, if it's--so the next--is this just one day, or is this over a series of days?
Speaker 2: It's a series of days.  It's over a series of days, and it--so the other piece of this is that you can be told things informally by your translator, who is usually your own engineer that's come.  And they do a lot of, they do a lot of talking when you're not there.  And then they can tell you what's really being said and what's real and what's not real.  There, there was a lot--this was confounding to me, but there was a lot of negotiation that was formal, and we weren't talking about real things, but you had to go through that process in order to get there.  And you, but, and, and you had to not stay for too long, because sometimes they would just wait you out if they didn't want to cave to something.  You know, if I, if I had something that I wanted that was a negotiation point, and they knew I was getting on a plane the next day, they would just try to wait it out.  But if you waited for too long, then you were there forever, and the negotiations never went anywhere.  It was just all, it was all very exploratory.  And we got to know one another, and we got to know who was serious when.  And these are at many different factories in Japan.  And each factory had their own style, and we had about nine of them.  So negotiations were interesting.  They were interesting.  It was fascinating.  It was, it's one of the most, it was one of the most exciting, frustrating, incomprehensible, fabulous experiences, and my work life was doing that.
Speaker 1: No, see, but some people might be irritated with it, you know, 'cause it's so unlike the United States.  And then--
Story_ID: 648183
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) The other question I have for you is, because you were opening up these markets in the United States, you know, and the companies that you're talking about, the Dells [Dell Inc.] and the--
Speaker 2: Apples [Apple Computer, Inc.; Apple Inc.](simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) Apples and all of that, these are all company--this is new in these companies' life cycles, right?
Speaker 2: This was not brand new, but it was newish.
Speaker 1: It's newish. I'm--
Speaker 2: It's newish.
Speaker 1: --(unclear)--
Speaker 2: It was all newish.  And they were--we were sort of an intermediary between the factories in Japan and the operational arms of these large companies.
Speaker 1: That, that are early in their life cycle--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --is what I'm saying.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: You know, they're--wow, okay.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: So you were really there at the beginning.
Speaker 2: (Nods head).
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, what are you learning that is--'cause on the other hand, you know, on the end-user hand in compan- you know, in corporations and everything, you know, these are, these things are being used, or they're being marketed to, you know.  So, what--at this point is micro- what is the relationship, and what was sort of critical?  What is the interrelationship with--between a lot of these companies?  And who are your competitors?
Speaker 2: So our customers were Microsoft [Microsoft Corporation], and Apple, and IMB [International Business Machines Corporation], and Dell, and, and we had Key Tronic [Key Tronic Corporation].  We, we had, we had a whole panoply of, of competitors who also sold hardware into these companies.  The, there was, there was a feeling at the time that the, there was very high quality coming out of Japan, and so that was something that we could tout.  A lot of the issues were around pricing, engineering flexibility and support, and development.  And so what I'm learning throughout all of this is product life cycles.  It is--with- without actually working at those companies that are, were our customer, it, it was seeing what their marketing thrusts were and having to fall in line and perform under their product life cycles.  And all of that was fascinating.  I was learning a lot about people management, remote.  And you know, then it wasn't--you don't send an email; it was faxes.  We had people coming in--well, this is really dating everything, but we had, we had employees that would come in early to collect all the faxes and to be able to distribute them.  So, you know, you needed that administrative support.  You couldn't do a lot of this yourself, just because the communications took such a long time.  And if you're dealing with other parts of the world, they're on a different timeframe than you're on.  But I learned so much about, I learned so much about people and organization and, and how to structure and really, entrepreneurial spirit of just getting things done; just making things happen, getting things done, looking at things in a different way in order to push the envelope.
Story_ID: 648184
Speaker 1: So what was the employee growth of your organization [Alps Electric (USA), Inc.] from the time you started to the time you left?
Speaker 2: Well, from a couple of people, it was in the hundreds.
Speaker 1: Woah. That's tremendous growth.  And what about revenues?  What, what was the--how, how did--what were your annual revenues about at the time?
Speaker 2: In--it was probably--I'm thinking by the end, maybe two hundred million [dollars].
Speaker 1: That's huge.
Speaker 2: Well, it was a--
Speaker 1: Yeah, that's--
Speaker 2: It was a lot flowing through there (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay, yeah.
Speaker 2: There was--this isn't small.  It's not--
Speaker 1: No, no.
Speaker 2: --heard of--it's not necessarily a company that everyone knows about, and particularly since the name was never on a lot of these products.  But these were very high volume products that we had (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So--
Story_ID: 648185
Speaker 1: So, the other question is what happens--what are the deals that are being structured in terms of compensation, you know, at this point in time, you know, with a high growth, you know, organization?  What--I'm just--
Speaker 2: So, so that is an excellent segue into my next job, because in--by now, it is--I've been there seven years.  It's 1992, and a Japanese company has no stock options.  And I'm working in a place in Silicon Valley where that's what it's about.  It's becoming, that's, that's what it's about.  And I was recruited very hard by Sun Microsystems [Sun Microsystems, Inc.] and partially through my work with some of the larger companies.  The, the, I, I think the referral, one of the referrals from the headhunter actually came from a guy at Microsoft [Microsoft Corporation].  But, but it is, but it is--I'm starting to believe that my career is--that, that the corporate portion of my career is pretty much done.  I'm not wanting to stay in forever.  And it's also becoming clear to me that there is the expectation by Japan that I'm gonna take over all the U.S. operations.  And that's not really what I wanted to do, and it certainly isn't something that I wanted to do with no options involved.  So when Sun came--
Speaker 1: So they would pay high salaries, but no options, okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That is correct; that is correct.  And so, I interviewed actually with Eric Schmidt, who is now the chairman of Google [Google Inc.].  He was my hiring manager at Sun.  That was back when he was at Sun.  And he brought me on board.  And so then that was another, that, that was another career arc until I left three years later.  So I was at Sun for three years only, but it was, it was an, it was a good three years.
Speaker 1: So talk about those.  So, going in, you negotiate stock options?  Is that what--
Speaker 2: (Nods head).
Speaker 1: So they were--so talk about the, you know, that, that point in time.  What are they--what, what makes a good deal, you know, where someone comes on?
Speaker 2: So, the, the--everyone speaks for themselves.  For me, the big deal was great salary, potential for big bonuses, and stock options, all three.  And they really did want me there.  And so I was able to, I was able to get a, a nice package with all three of those things.  And even, even had the company done badly, I still would be doing better financially than I had done at Alps [Alps Electric (USA), Inc.].
Story_ID: 648186
Speaker 1: And I was brought in to manage the printing and imaging business at Sun [Sun Microsystems, Inc.] under Eric Schmidt.
Speaker 2: Uh-huh. I see (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And--
Speaker 2: --that's significant.
Speaker 1: --so, and for that I had sales, marketing, development, engineering, manufacturing.  You know, so I was a general manager, so I had P and L [profit and loss] responsibility.
Speaker 2: Which is significant within--
Speaker 1: Which was significant for me.
Speaker 2: It's significant for, really at that point in time, any female.
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Okay, I'm--okay.
Speaker 1: Yes (laughter), yes it was.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: But, but it was, but it was--that, that's what made it interesting.  I didn't want to do one function.  Even, even if I'd gotten a wonderful financial package, I wanted to run something, and, and that fit the bill.  So I went in to, I went in to Sun as vice president and general manager.  And three years later--
Speaker 2: Okay, can I--so there at--I'm sorry.  Just, okay, 'cause part of this interview--first of all, it's good we came back and did all of this, because part of this inter- I mean none of this was covered in your other interview in that way.  And, and the thing is, is that this is like really at the, the, you know--
Speaker 1: (Laughter) It's not at the beginning, beginning (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It's not at the beginning--
Speaker 1: --but it is, but it is--
Speaker 2: --but it's at the, it's at an important part.
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Let me put it that way, okay.  So, what, what I guess I'm wondering is, now, was [HistoryMaker] Dorothy Terrell there at the--
Speaker 1: Dorothy was there.
Speaker 2: She was there already?
Speaker 1: She was there already.
Speaker 2: Okay, and what was her role versus your role, your--
Speaker 1: So Dorothy ran--they had planets.  They called them planets.  And Dorothy ran a planet called SunExpress [SunExpress, Inc.].
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: And so hers was a distribution arm of Sun.  So Sun had a lot of parts, huge company, and a lot of it was sold directly by sales, a very large sales force, to, to companies, to large companies, and small companies.  But some of it was done through distribution, so it was third party distribution.  And that's what Dorothy ran, and she ran it out of Boston [Massachusetts]--
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: --but she came to California also.  And so to have two black women--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --yes, at, at the same time was amazing, and it's, and it's interesting.  Dorothy and I look nothing alike, but people would confuse us (laughter).  And, but, but it was, but it was quite interesting.
Speaker 2: Nothing alike.  Gee, you're light; she's dark, I mean (laughter)--okay, okay.  It's just there're those black females (laughter), okay.
Speaker 1: There they are (laughter).
Speaker 2: So were the two of you then the higher--highest ranking then within--
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: --the organization?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: And how large is--
Speaker 1: And--
Speaker 2: --Sun at the--
Speaker 1: --and Dorothy--don't ask me numbers.  I never can remember (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay, you don't remember, o--
Speaker 1: --numbers, so I don't know numbers.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Story_ID: 648187
Speaker 1: Dorothy [HistoryMaker Dorothy Terrell] was actually higher ranking than I (clears throat) was because she was a direct report of Scott McNealy.
Speaker 2: Right, right.
Speaker 1: And I worked for Eric Schmidt, who reported to Scott McNealy.
Speaker 2: I see.
Speaker 1: And we were in, we were in pretty different parts of the country, not only country, but different parts of the company.  And--
Speaker 2: Well--
Speaker 1: Yeah?
Speaker 2: What I find interesting about Eric Schmidt, that caught my attention because Google [Google Inc.] is on the software side, and this is--is this still computer peripherals at this point?  Or, what are you--
Speaker 1: It, it--he had software and hardware.
Speaker 2: I see, okay.
Speaker 1: And yeah, he had a, he had, he had planetoids.  So, (laughter) you know, this is a planetary system, and so we were one planet, but there were five planetoids.  So--
Speaker 2: So, seriously--
Speaker 1: --he had--
Speaker 2: --so, so Sun [Sun Microsystems, Inc.], Sun, the sun--
Speaker 1: Yeah (laughter).
Speaker 2: --the planetoid.  So they literally--that's how--it was--
Speaker 1: There were--they called them planets, but they were for different, the, the planets were for different products that the--or different services, or different whatever.  Service was a planet, and different products were planets, and software was its own planet.  Eric was actually chief technology officer at Sun for a while.  And he, he was sort of a big brain guy.  And he--this was only one of his stints at Sun where he was running these five--he was in charge of these five businesses that he had general managers, VPs and general managers running.  So, that's how, that's how all of that was.  But Eric is very, was, was very smart in terms of software, the emergence of the cloud, oh, a lot of those things that didn't quite exist in those days.  I, I will never forget Eric calling his five VPs upstairs one day and saying, "You all have to see this; you all have to see this."  And it was the precursor to the Internet.  It was Mosaic [NCSA Mosaic], and it was, "This is gonna take over one day.  One day this is gonna--." They didn't call it the cloud then, but you know, it was, it was a high- highly technical environment and a high--an engineering environment.
Speaker 2: I see.  So, if--I, I have to--why did you leave?  (Laughter) And I know you're, you're--was it your mother [Willie Billes Tademy]? I--you know, some- someone was against you.  They were like, what are you doing?
Speaker 1: Most everybody said that.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Most everybody said that.
Speaker 2: But, but what--I mean, but it was, it was to be, but I'm just saying.  Okay, and, and everybody--I mean Dorothy did well; you did well; Genelle [Genelle Trader] did well; I mean lots of people seemed to have done financially very well.
Story_ID: 648188
Speaker 1: Why do you--I mean if you're like, in the midst of all that, what didn't you like about it?
Speaker 2: So there are a couple of things: one, I'd been doing what I had been doing for twenty years.  And I could have continued to do that, and I just didn't want to.  What I was finding is--
Speaker 1: But what--but wasn't this a different culture at Sun [Sun Microsystems, Inc.]?
Speaker 2: It was a very different culture.  It was a very--so, at Sun, it was very male centric.  It was very engineer centric.  It was very young centric.  It was a, it was an, it was an environment very much like most of the companies by then, successful companies. Very hard charging, like drinking out of the fire hose every day.  And it was, it was set up very gladiator style, so, so, it was doing battle every day.
Speaker 1: So can you explain that to me, drinking out of the fire hose kind--
Speaker 2: It, it, it--so what that means is that it was not only hard work, it was, it was things are coming at you from every possible angle all the time.  It, it was a global company, so something was happening somewhere always, a lot of fires to, to be put out, a lot of paranoia, a lot of, a lot of just that energy of never being able to say I don't know; let me, let me figure this out; let me study this, and, and see how we go from here.  It was immediate.  You make your--you, you move along; you clip it along.  And all of that was fine.  I just did not feel that that's what I wanted to continue doing, and I was tired.  And I didn't feel as if I could figure out what it is I did want to do as long as I was in that environment.  And I was in a, in a constant mode of protecting my people, which is what I wanted to do.
Speaker 1: Protecting them from other hires, protecting them from demands?
Speaker 2: All--not, not from demands, but just, so there were--every twelve to eighteen months everybody recreated themselves.  Org- the organization went into upheaval and recreated itself.  So there would be big reorganizations, and some things would get absorbed; some things would get, would get sort of spun off; some things would whatever.  And so it was just, it was, it was a, it was just a constant movement.  And the, the truth is that the technical parts of a job are the least interesting to me.  That's always been the case.  And I could have kept doing what I was doing and gone through all of these, you know, continue to go through the upheavals because that's what Silicon Valley was by then, but I didn't want to.  I just didn't want to.  And I knew that, I knew that I would be tempted if I took a sabbatical to come back, because it's very tempting.  I mean it was a very--it, it, it was, it was prestigious; it was lucrative, all of those things.  And so that's when I decided I'm just gonna step off into the void, and I'm gonna quit, and because I don't even want that in my head, that that's something I could come back to.  And truthfully, I don't believe that you can step off for very long.  And Silicon--and something that's that fast moving, if you're out for six months, you kind of don't know what's going on anymore, you just don't.  And so I decided the only way for me to change my life is for me to have some faith that something good is out there, and so I quit.  Remember that--I mean it--I think it would have been a different, I think it would have been different--I'd never been married, was in my late forties; I'd never been married.  I'd never had the time or the ability to go that deep because I was working; I mean I was always working.  I was always advancing.  And I wanted to see what else there was.  And I had no idea how to have fun and just have fun.  So I quit.
Story_ID: 648189
Speaker 1: Did you have financial consultation, like, someone to say, you know, this is how long you can live for?
Speaker 2: No.  I figured it out myself.  I had three years.  I had three years.  And for me, the--you know, I figured it out, and I knew--I, I didn't retire.  I knew I would have to work, and I'd have to bring in money, but I had three years of living.  And, and so, I said the first year I'm going to just--I made a bargain; I made a bargain with myself.  So the first year is just going to be decompress, figure out what, what am I interested in, what else could, could there be, but you know, no huge pressure, just, just do whatever seems interesting.  The second year was figuring out if I had made a mistake or not.  And the third year was going to be looking for a new job if things didn't go--if I didn't find something, it would be looking for that next thing and that new job.  So I had three years, and I figured that just had to do.  And I didn't know what would happen year four, but I knew, I knew what could happen the first three years.  I didn't know what would happen year four or beyond.  So, that's what I did.  And the first year, what I ended up doing--again, just because I'd always been so incredibly driven and so used to having my plate very, very full, working really, really hard at something, I ended up working really, really hard at genealogy of my own family.  And you know, I did some other things.  You know, I traveled.  I did other things.  But that's what drew me back again and again and again, as I started to uncover the stories of my ancestors.  And so about that second year, I said well, somebody should, somebody should be documenting (laughter) this.  These are amazing stories.  And you know, who, who else had the time to do it?  And so I said well, maybe it's me.
Story_ID: 648190
Speaker 1: This seems highly unlikely (laughter).  I mean--
Speaker 2: It's true.
Speaker 1: --where was the writing?  Where was the writing background?  I mean psych- I'm--where is the writing?  Where is the, the novel?  Where is that--where is the literature?  Where is this experience?
Speaker 2: So I will say that I was a voracious reader, so I read all the time.  I love novels.  I love, love, love the written word, so I read all the time.  I had never even written a short story.  I'd, I--teachers in school had told me--had assumed that I would do something having to do with writing.  And I never took any of that seriously because you can't make a living doing that, and all I cared about was making a living.
Speaker 1: Getting a job.
Speaker 2: And, yeah, that's all I cared about, is just being self-sufficient.  That was the most important thing to me.  And so, when they would say, you know, you really have, you really have the ability to, to, to narrate something, you really have the ability to do this, I would just, whatever.  Only when I got, when I had my hands on all of this rich material, did I say I need to do something with this; maybe I'll write a book.  And then I decided to write it as a novel because I truly believe that you get at the truth more through fiction than you sometimes do through nonfiction.  And what is interesting to me aren't so much facts and figures.  What's interesting to me are emotions, and motivation, and why people do what they do, and what people do when they are in untenable situations, and playing that out, and the sacrifices that, that people make for their children, the, the ingenious ways that people have to try to shape their own circumstances.  And that's what I wanted to relay.  So where did the writing background came from--come from?  I had, I had never taken a writing course.  I had never done any of that; but I had a story that was beyond amazing, and I just had to figure out how to do it.
Story_ID: 648191
Speaker 1: And the research that went into the story, you know, in the other interview you talk about that, you know, calling--well, you did very detailed research.
Speaker 2: Very.
Speaker 1: You know, and you wouldn't sort of let it go.  And, but did, did you become part of a genealogy group?
Speaker 2: Not really, not (laughter) really.  I'm a loner, so (laughter), you know, a lot of what I do is I just do on my own.  And I do it out of sheer stubbornness and sometimes stupidity, that I don't realize it can't be done.
Speaker 1: Okay, so, so when you go to write the book ['Cane River,' Lalita Tademy], how long does the book take?
Speaker 2: Three years, it took three years.
Speaker 1: To write?
Speaker 2: It took three years to write.
Speaker 1: So you're at your end of your three years, your bat- passed it.
Speaker 2: So the good thing about options, about stock options, are that if the company does well, it's like having a little oil well in your backyard.  And you (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So it keeps on giving.
Speaker 2: So it just (laughter) keeps on replenishing.  And so I was at the end of my three years, but I still--the, the--Sun [Sun Microsystems, Inc.] was really going a little supernova at the moment, and so I got an extension, and again, never enough to totally retire on, but enough so that, that, that's not how I needed to spend my day, worrying about whether I could pay the mortgage.  So, that three years, I got an extension on it because there was more coming in.  And by then, I was so committed to the story that, that's what I was going to do, because it took me three years to write, but it took me a long time to publish.
Story_ID: 648192
Speaker 1: So you wrote the whole manuscript [of 'Cane River,' Lalita Tademy]?
Speaker 2: (Nods head).
Speaker 1: And then you send that to agents, and agents are telling you no.
Speaker 2: Correct.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And then, then what happens?
Speaker 2: So after I get my, "Slavery's been done, we don't want to touch this," there's an agent that comes, that I actually--I actually start to get shaky about what it is I have.  And I say to myself, once again, been way too arrogant--you're not--you haven't taken classes or anything.  You need to take a (laughter) class on writing a novel.  And, and so I enrolled in UC Berkeley Extension [Berkeley, California], where you submit chapters, and everybody critiques them.  And the instructor--I submitted three chapters, and the instructor came to me and said, "This is phenomenal; how much of this do you have?"  And I said, "Well, the whole thing."  And she (laughter) said, "I want to introduce you to my agent."  And three days later I had an agent.  So it was her agent, and because once I had the agent--and then I rewrote.  You know, a lot of this is rewriting.  I, I rewrote, and it was submitted to New York [New York], and then it was a--
Speaker 1: How long (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) bidding war.
Speaker 1: --how long did the rewrite take?
Speaker 2: The rework- the rewrite was over the summer, so, two, three months, something like that.  And--
Speaker 1: What did, what did the agent say?  What, what changed?
Speaker 2: Oh, it was way too long.  It was just way too long.
Speaker 1: So how long was it?
Speaker 2: And--I bet, I bet it was six hundred pages, something like that.  And I had--and I just couldn't bear to leave some of the stuff out.  You know, you get--but sometimes as a writer you get enamored with your own stuff.  And (laughter), and you just slow down the storytelling as opposed to making it crisp and what it needs to be, and you'll lose your reader.  But again, I didn't know this.  I didn't study it.  I didn't prepare for it.  I just was sort of doing this out of desire and respect and honoring the ancestors and all of that.  But I, I squeezed some of it out and made it shorter, and then it went to New York.  There was a bidding war.  I loved the eight--I loved the editor that I ultimately got.
Speaker 1: What, at what, what--
Speaker 2: It was at, at the time it was Warner, Warner books [Time Warner Book Group; Hachette Book Group], and then they got bought by--but she, she was, she was really great.
Speaker 1: So the editor at that point, the editor takes you through another set of revisions.
Speaker 2: That is correct.  So then it got squeezed down even more.  And, and she hired--she had (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So your bidding war got you what?  What, what kind of advance did you get in advance?
Speaker 2: I, I don't say.
Speaker 1: Oh, shoot.
Speaker 2: I don't say.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It was, it was quite a nice advance.  It was--
Speaker 1: This is un--
Speaker 2: --quite a nice advance.
Speaker 1: Do you know how unheard of that is?
Speaker 2: It was quite a nice advance.  It was--it enabled me to, it enabled me to, it enabled me to not be nervous and to say well, let me see this path through.  And so that was great.
Story_ID: 648193
Speaker 1: And then, of course, when Oprah [Oprah Winfrey] picked it, then--well, I mean it came out.  It was--
Speaker 2: It came--
Speaker 1: --doing well.  And then--
Speaker 2: It came out.
Speaker 1: --six weeks out--
Speaker 2: It made The New York T- (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) Oprah picks it.
Speaker 2: --New York Times best sellers first.
Speaker 1: For seventeen weeks--
Speaker 2: And then--
Speaker 1: --seventeen weeks.
Speaker 2: -o--okay.
Speaker 1: No.
Speaker 2: And then, then that process, it, it came--it was on Oprah's--
Speaker 1: So, they--it's hard to know that first week which--
Speaker 2: Have--
Speaker 1: --the, the first week is the week that it made The New York--the first week after Oprah picked it was when it made The New York Time--it's, is when--
Speaker 2: And we're talking (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) it made The New York Times best seller list.
Speaker 2: We should say the name of the book, 'Cane'--
Speaker 1: 'Cane River' [Lalita Tademy].
Speaker 2: --'River.'  We should say the name of the book.
Speaker 1: And, and so, then that just kept it, that kept it on The New York Times best seller list for seventeen weeks, which is a big deal, and that was fabulous.  And it, it just catapulted (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And you went on the Oprah--
Speaker 1: And I went on the Oprah show ['The Oprah Winfrey Show'], and actually it was, it, it was quite interesting.  I was getting ready to go for the final taping.  We'd been taping all summer 'cause it was summer book pick in 2001.  And I was getting ready to go for the final airing of the show where I would do a walk on.  A lot of this was doing a package ahead of time for the whole hour of the show.  And the final, I was getting ready to go to Chicago [Illinois].  I had the earliest morning plane.  I don't know if it was seven a.m. or what it was, to go and have the walk on on the show when she--when they, when they aired the segment.  And it was 9/11 [September 11, 2001].  It was the day that--
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: --they grounded all the planes.  And so, so I never got a chance to actually do the walk on on the show, although they did air the show, but they couldn't get anybody in.  So, so that was in 2001.
Story_ID: 648194
Speaker 1: This, I mean, it's an incredible story no matter how--it's like Cinderella and the ball (laughter).
Speaker 2: Well, yeah.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) I mean, it's, it's like--
Speaker 2: It just kept going.  It, I mean, and, and it was a lot of, it, it actually was a lot of very scary work and wondering if anybody cared.  And all those rejections by all the agents had pretty much convinced me that nobody, nobody wanted to hear any of these stories.
Speaker 1: What kept you going?
Speaker 2: I'm not a hundred percent sure.  But I, I do know, I do know that I felt that I couldn't let down my ancestors.  This was a story in their voice about a time that was truly unimaginable, unimaginably tough.  It was slavery; it was the Civil War; it was Reconstruction; it was the Jim Crow South; it was generation after generation of hardship.  And in every case, they made life better for their children.  And it was a, it was a story that I thought needed to be out there in a non-'Gone with the Wind' [Margaret Mitchell] kind of way.  And so, it was that (clears throat) it was that that kept me going.  I thought it needed to be out there.  I didn't, I didn't necessarily think it would be a, a big book.  I didn't know exactly what I had 'cause I'd never written a book before.  But I knew that I wanted it to be in a certain voice, from a certain perspective, and I wanted it to be a view of the world that isn't always portrayed about those times in American history.  So, I think that's what kept me in the game.  It was just I'd done it; I thought it deserved to be published just for the document part of it, the documentation part of it, even though it was fiction, and so I just kept at it.
Speaker 1: You know, I, as someone, as I was telling you off camera, who read the book ['Cane River,' Lalita Tademy], I cried at the end.  I mean it was just--I'd learned so much.  And it was so well written--
Speaker 2: Thank you.
Speaker 1: --about a, a period of time we don't know enough about, you know, from that perspective.  We just know slavery.  We don't, we just don't, we don't know about it.  So, I just thought it was a very, very important wor- piece of work, and it was, as I said to you, it was almost I felt like--and I know you said--but either I'll describe it was one of two ways: the business high--side (laughter) either got closed, and the creative side opened with--and then I felt like there was a laying on, on of hands of your ancestors.  I just, I mean it--I kept saying, how did she, how did she do (laughter) this?  And where did all this beautiful writing come from?  And obviously, you know, people can read a lot of novels, but it doesn't mean that they can write one, you know, and hit it out of the ball--park like that.
Speaker 2: It was hard work. I mean it wasn't as if, you know, we were sitting down and something passed through me, and it all just--
Speaker 1: But--
Speaker 2: It was three years of every single day.
Story_ID: 648195
Speaker 1: But tell--can you describe that process?  Like, what was your writing schedule?
Speaker 2: So, on the first book ['Cane River,' Lalita Tademy]--I've written three books.
Speaker 1: I'm talking about on the first one, the (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) But on the first book, I wrote it all by hand.  And the reason I had to write it by hand is that I couldn't write it on a computer.  As soon as the blinking cursor went, the business side that you were talking about got operational, and the creativity just dried up.  So I had to do it by hand so that I wouldn't be trying to do something bottom line or try to figure out how to make it profitable or so that it could just be truly no kidding creative.  So I would sit down in the morning.  I had what I called butt time.  I would sit down.  I was not allowed to get up, not for anything, not for a cup of tea, not for anything.  And for three hours, minimum, I would write, and I would just write.  And it would be virgin page writing.  Whether it was terrible or wonderful, I would just write.  And at the end of three hours I could stop, unless I was just really in it, and then I would go maybe for four.  And after four hours, for the virgin page, I can't do anymore.  My brain explodes, so I can't go any further than that.  Then (clears throat) then I would take what I had handwritten, and I would type it into the computer, which was a very slow process because (laughter), because I never really learned to type.  So I'm a very slow typist.  I would type it into the computer.  I would print it out.  And then in the afternoon, I would mark up the printout of things that I wanted to change or add or who knows what.  And then I would input all of that into the computer again and print it out again.  So, that was my day.  And I did that for, never taking a single day off, I did that for nine months, Sunday to Sunday, three hours minimum, more often six, seven hours, every single day until I had a first draft.  And then I started to rewrite, and I rewrote for over two years, of just going back and polishing and expanding the story and developing the characters, of making sure that what I had was authentic, 'cause it's very research based; it's very--to make sure that I didn't have just big chunks of data in there, big--you know, I'm so pleased that I found this, I found this data, that I'm just gonna force you as the reader to know what the price of cotton is, you know.  So then I had to go through and make sure that it was in small chunks so that it felt authentic, and it made you feel as if you were living in those times but that it wasn't overwhelming history (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Wow.
Speaker 2: So that was just rewriting and rewriting and rewriting.
Story_ID: 648196
Speaker 1: So what are you learning about the characters, you know, you're an- really your ancestors?  What are you learning about them in that process as you're living with them and rewriting?
Speaker 2: Well, one of the (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) You know, 'cause it's--
Speaker 2: Yeah, one of the, one of the things that was the hardest was to--and you know, a big difference between the first draft and the last draft--was to not--was to make sure that I was writing as if I was living in the times, which meant that I had to inhabit the characters, and that I wasn't looking at them--at the time it was 20th century eyes--but that, that I wasn't looking at them from the current day, but I was living their life as they would live it.  And so a lot of, a lot of what I had to do is, through these characters, is to react to the environment the way that they would react to the environment.  And what I found is that--I, I think this is the history of our people--is that you have to be resilient.  I mean, what is the choice?  There are choices.  I mean, you can--if you're a slave, you can try to run.  If you are a slave, you can, you can just try to outlast it.  If you are a slave, you can turn to violence.  You can--there, there are any number of things that you can do, and I wanted to explore a lot of those. And in my first book ['Cane River,' Lalita Tademy] I explored from the female point of view.  My second--I mean that's based on my mother's [Willie Billes Tademy] side of the family.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: My second book was 'Red River' [Lalita Tademy] and I wanted to explore that from the male point of view, and that's my father's [Nathan Tademy, Jr.] side of the family.
Speaker 1: And, and that was a, a uprising.
Speaker 2: And that was--
Speaker 1: Was up--
Speaker 2: It was, it was--
Speaker 1: That, that, that was not--
Speaker 2: --it was a hundred black men in a, in a courthouse in Louisiana.
Speaker 1: And that's called Cane, Cane--
Speaker 2: And that's called 'Red River.'
Speaker 1: 'Red River.'  Sorry, 'Red River.'
Speaker 2: So, but (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And I was wondering the rivers.  You have rivers and creeks (laughter).  You--it's--
Speaker 2: And the Creek, the Creek is not a body of water.
Speaker 1: I know (laughter).
Speaker 2: It's actually about an Indian [Native American] tribe--
Speaker 1: I--
Speaker 2: --the Creeks ['Citizens Creek,' Lalita Tademy] (laughter).
Speaker 1: Creeks. I know, but I'm just saying it's--(laughter) no, I know, I know.
Speaker 2: I know. There there's a lot of water.
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: No more, no more water.  There will be no more water I guarantee it (laughter).
Speaker 1: So, but what--so after the writing of the first book and this extraordinary, extraordinary response to your very--for your hard work but extraordinary response, how do you handle that?  What is that like?  Is it almost like--I mean, I don't--what were you--you said you weren't even sure what to expect.  Now, obviously getting that, whatever the undisclosed advance, you know, that, that was some validation.  No one, no one, no one is going to give that kind of--and it--well, whatever, a lot--whatever kind of advance you got, no one's gonna give that for a first time writer that doesn't have a name, no one.  So that must have been some indication.  The New York Times is validation; and Oprah [Oprah Winfrey] is like, (makes sound) (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) (Nods head).
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 648197
Speaker 1: So how do you handle the response?
Speaker 2: So it, it was overwhelming.  There's no question about it.  And I, I actually did a lot of touring and met some other Oprah [Oprah's Book Club] authors.  And pretty (laughter) much without exception, there was a trough.  There was a--you fall into a little bit of a hole.  'Cause there's so much coming at you, that when you want to go back and be creative in a new direction, it's a lot harder.  There's a lot more distraction.  And it's not only a demand on your time, but there is a mental energy that it takes.  And for me personally, I am wildly an introvert.  So, it takes a lot of--it, it took a lot of effort to do the promotional parts of, to do the promotional responses. And I wouldn't give it up for anything, but, but it was, it was difficult.  It was difficult walking down the street and having somebody recognize me that I didn't know and who wanted to talk.  So, it, it took me a while to get back on track.  Fortunately, I had already started writing my second book ['Red River,' Lalita Tademy], because there's such a long lead time from the time that--from the time that somebody buys your book to the time you're published is a year, a year and a half, two years long.  And so, during a lot of that time, I had started writing the next book, thankfully.  So I could go back and, and do that, but it was, it was difficult getting my head back into the game.  And then added on to that was, was meeting my future husband [HistoryMaker Barry Williams], which was just a humongous distraction and sort of carried me a little off course.  But, how do you respond?  The best you can.  It was just, it was just difficult for me as an introvert; but you know, you do what you do.
Story_ID: 648198
Speaker 1: So how did you meet Barry [HistoryMaker Barry Williams]?
Speaker 2: I met Barry at a party.  I met my, I met my husband at a, at a mutual friend's party.  And we started dating; and two years later we were married.
Speaker 1: See, and this is the thing.  Remember how you said I had never--you know, I didn't have, have time for that.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And so you closed that door, and all this other happens.  It's somewhat--so what--he had been married before.
Speaker 2: He had, and his wife--he had been divorced, and then his wife had passed.  His ex-wife had passed.  And I actually, I actually met him, another HistoryMaker, I had actually met him one week after his last son [Andrew Williams] had moved out of the house.  So there was, you know, he also had sort of an open door, and the timing was quite good for both of us I think.
Speaker 1: So what, what was appealing about him to you?  In, in many ways, he's a businessperson, also very successful in his own right.  You--how did the two--what did you, what did the two of you see in each other?
Speaker 2: I had said to Barry on our first date--he was interesting to me.  When I met him at the party and we were talking, he was so different than everybody else.  He was just so very, very different.
Speaker 1: What do you mean by that (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Very gregarious, very outgoing.  He, he's a big man.  He thinks in a big way.  He loves having people around.  You know, we're just opposites (laughter).  We're just opposites.  But I told him on our first date, I said, "You know, just so you know, I don't have a clue how to have fun, but I want to remedy that."  And he said, "I can help you with that," and it was on.  So, it was--what did we see in one another?  I think, I think that he is a writer wannabe.  I think he admires that as a, as life's work.  I think that we complement each other actually very, very well.  And he likes to have fun, and I have learned, I have, I have learned ways to have fun with him.
Speaker 1: And he's been very supportive of your writing.
Speaker 2: (Makes sound).
Speaker 1: And, and he takes great--
Speaker 2: (Makes sound) (Laughter).
Speaker 1: --he takes great, great pride--
Speaker 2: Yes, he does.
Speaker 1: --in--I mean--
Speaker 2: He does.
Speaker 1: --as he should, you know.  But he takes great, great pride in that.  And so it's just like it's a nice package in that way (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, it works incredibly well.
Story_ID: 648199
Speaker 1: I was thinking when you were talking about the fact that you had started to write 'Red River' [Lalita Tademy] beforehand, how sometimes, you know, people have--they're the one--only, only one book, you know.  And they never get to writing the second book, you know, and because the first book, in this case, where it's widely re- you know, received.  So, tell us about the writing of the second book, because that's all--you know, writing of the first book ['Cane River,' Lalita Tademy], it's a vacuum.  No one is around.  I mean, no one there to critique, no one--I mean, you got it all out, no one there to critique, no one there to say no, just yourself.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: So how does--so let's talk about, you know, the--so, had they preapproved the book, or was it easier?  Did you have the same?
Speaker 2: No, no, oh no, no, no, no, no.  I've only sold my books one at a time.  And I don't do it on spec.  It's only when I've finished, and it's always been hard to sell.  The first book was the easiest book to sell.  The second and third ['Citizens Creek,' Lalita Tademy] were harder.  And part of it, part of it was the first book was about women.  The second book was from the point of view of men, and that's kind of not what my publisher was looking for necessarily.  But, no, so sight--sitting down and writing the second book, I always knew that I had those two books.  One was from my mother's [Willie Billes Tademy] side; one was from my father's [Nathan Tademy, Jr.] side.  So, if I had never written another word, I knew that I would do two of those.  So for the second, for the second book, the process was easier but not by much.  And it was easier because now I could just create directly from the computer.  I no longer had to write by hand, so that was great.  That eliminated hours every single day.  But, but I wrote that, and ultimately I got a very nice advance, but it was less than the first advance, which was shocking to me.  I thought it went the other way.  But it was, it was a second book after an Oprah book [Oprah's Book Club].  And you can't duplicate the Oprah experience.  That only happens once.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: That only happens once.  And so it was actually read by--I'm actually very proud of 'Red River.'  But it was read by some fewer people than the first book because the first book had such a big splash, but I'm still pleased with it.  And by the third book--
Speaker 1: And this is what--I mean, you're in your mid-fifties.  This is the thing that is--I mean, it's like a new--I'm sorry--it's like a new career.
Speaker 2: It was.
Speaker 1: And--
Speaker 2: It was, it was a new (laughter) career.  It was a new career, and especially since it takes me three to four years to write the book, and then there's that publishing time also.  So in between books, it's a long time.  It's a, it's a--you know, from one book--from a publishing of one book to the publishing of the next book, it's a lot of years, you know, and so decades almost have passed.
Story_ID: 648200
Speaker 1: So, by the third book, which was not based on my family at all, it was just based on a character that, that I stumbled upon, who's a real life character in Oklahoma.  I just did a multigenerational story from him.
Speaker 2: Can you talk about that?
Speaker 1: Sure.  It, it's called 'Citizens Creek' [Lalita Tademy].  And this is really the first African Creek chief after the Civil War.
Speaker 2: And Creek is an Indian [Native American].
Speaker 1: And Creek is an Indian.  He--
Speaker 2: An Indian (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) he was--
Speaker 2: --an Indian tribe.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And he was, he was actually the slave of the Creek Indian chief himself.  And he rose in the tribe and ended up representing all the slaves and then the freedmen of the, of the Creek tribe that he was in.  And it's a miraculous story.  He's, he's an amazing man named Cow Tom.  And, and the story is about Cow Tom in the 1800s and his granddaughter, Rose [Rose Jefferson Simmons], who had her own ranch with her husband [Jake Simmons, Sr.] in Oklahoma in the late 1800s and the early 1900s.  And it's a--and they are the pillars of, of a family that exists today, the Simmons family, that's very involved in--used to be involved in oil.  That's how they made their fortune, the biggest black oil broker, certainly in the state, in the country.  So, it was finding this, and then fleshing it out as a novel--
Speaker 2: How did you find it?
Speaker 1: A friend of my husband's [HistoryMaker Barry Williams] actually was related to this family.  And he gave me a book that had been written, a biography ['Staking a Claim: Jake Simmons and the Making of an African American Oil Dynasty'] that had been written--
Speaker 2: By the fam- (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) about, about--by a journalist, Jonathan Greenberg.  And he had written a book really about Jake Simmons, and Rose was his mother, and Cow Tom was his great-grandfather.  And the, most of the book was about Jake Simmons, Jr.  And as interesting as he was, it just, that, that wasn't interesting enough for me to want to write about.  But Rose I thought was just a phenomenon and Cow Tom even more so.  I saw where she got all of her moxie.  And so that's--those are the ones that I, that I wanted to write about.  And I love putting a spotlight on history that people don't know.
Speaker 2: And see, and I was going to say that this, this is a particular interest of mine, you know, is the interrelationship between the black community and Indians. And you touch upon the owner--I don't want to go into detail, but you touch upon the ownership of Indians--I mean slaves by Indians, which, you know--
Speaker 1: People say what, what?  I, I didn't know--
Speaker 2: But there are lot of (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) that even happened.
Speaker 2: --white journalists who believe--I mean white historians who say that the only relationship between blacks, Indian is were--Indians--were slave.  I've had two very--I mean one person at the National Endowment for the Humanities, so I don't want to go off track from your story, but there has been that, you know, over our project, 'cause that's one of the areas I'm interested.  So that was interesting and the Creeks, because you hear so much about the--what's the other everybody's a--
Speaker 1: Cherokee.
Speaker 2: Cherokee, right, right.  So, so it was all that that I found, you know, fascinating when I read the covers--
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: --there, but--and descriptions.
Story_ID: 648201
Speaker 1: Can you talk about--so, this is a different--this is not a family story, as you said (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No.
Speaker 1: And so--
Speaker 2: Not at all.
Speaker 1: --what was your--was your approach the same?  Did you approach it the same?
Speaker 2: Well, yes. So, partially.  Every time it's different.  I keep thinking there's a template, but there's not.  So, I, I had a lot of information, and, and the foundation really was this book, the Making of an, of an American Oil Dynasty ['Staking a Claim: Jake Simmons and the Making of an African American Oil Dynasty'].  And I did a lot of research.  I did, I read the book, and Jonathan Greenberg had interviewed a lot of family members, current day family members.  And so it was really laid out, and I was so interested.  Then I went back to find what happened in Cow Tom's earlier life, and you know, sort of where he came from and what wars he fought in.  And so it was a--the, the process was pretty much the same in terms of becoming familiar enough with the material so that I had a sense of the time period, and I had a sense of the, of the land.  And the Oklahoma land is different than Louisiana land.  But I had a sense of the land and then starting the craft, the story of these real people, and to populate these times with what had to be very significant historical happenings, whether that was moving the Indians [Native American] off of their land on the Trail of Tears, and they took their slaves with them, or the tribes needing to decide whether they were gonna fight for the Union or the Confederacy.  I didn't know that even was an issue or the fact that there are black tribesmen who considered themselves both black and Indian.  Re- regardless of what tribe you're talking about, they considered themselves both.  And all of that was fascinating.  But I, but I pretty much did it the same way, which is decade by decade trying to figure out what the inflection points were in history and what the feeling of that decade was and then writing people into that and giving them personalities of their own.
Speaker 1: So what was the response?  Did you--how much time did you spend in Oklahoma?
Speaker 2: So it was just trips.
Speaker 1: Trips (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I, I never--I don't, I don't go and stay a long time.  And part of it is, for me to write, I sort of need to feel like an outsider.  And so I, I, I just go for long enough for things to be new and fresh and surprising, and then I, you know, get out of town.  The whole time when I was writing both 'Cane River' [Lalita Tademy] and 'Red River' [Lalita Tademy], you know, I went for many trips.  I never stayed more than three days.  And you know, that's just I'd, that's just part of my--that's optimum for me.  So I went to--so I've been to Oklahoma just a couple of times, and I've met with some family members there.  I found Cow Tom's grave.  You know, I've, I've gone to different, gone to different cities to sort of get a feel for what kind of plants grow, what, what, what the earth is like, what the sky smells like, what the air smells like, you know, what are the colors, that kind of thing, so that I can bake all of that in.  But they're ver- they're trips; they're just trips.  I don't, I don't go and stay.
Speaker 1: So, what was the writing like of this book ['Citizens Creek,' Lalita Tademy] then?  I mean, how did--did it differ?  I know your process didn't differ, but the--
Speaker 2: Well, it, it differed only in that this was not my family.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: And, but even if it is my family, even when it was my family, after a while, you know, it gets, it gets hard.  As a writer, you inhabit your characters, and so after a while it, it's--they become reality to you.
Speaker 1: So, that--I guess what I'm, what I'm meant--I'm trying--I'm not asking it right.  Did you find this harder to write?  You know, you--
Speaker 2: It's all hard.  I find--
Speaker 1: It's--
Speaker 2: No.  I find it all equally horribly difficult to write.  Writing is not fun.
Story_ID: 648202
Speaker 1: So, which of them are your f- do you have a favorite of the three?
Speaker 2: I have--sort of, kind of, and not really, so it depends.  Sometimes 'Red River' [Lalita Tademy] is my favorite, actually.  Sometimes 'Cane River' [Lalita Tademy] is my favorite, and I think that--but I--it's not clear to me whether I'm keying off of how deep a chord 'Cane River' struck in other people.  It's not clear to me that it's, that it's my favorite.  But I know how, I know how deeply people bonded to it.
Speaker 1: So talk, talk about that.
Speaker 2: So I've had--my expectation, when I got published--and again, I, I just knew businesspeople.  I didn't know any writers; I didn't, I didn't know that whole world.  But my expectation when I was published is that I was gonna find a niche audience.  And the niche audience was going to be probably black women of a certain age.  That's what I had in the back of my head.  It--this will appeal to people, you know, who, who sort of are in that: I've lived a lot of my life already; now I'm interested in maybe delving a little deeper and whatever.  And what I found was that it's a story about other; it's a sto- it's an other story.  So it's not about--it's about marginalized people.  So, I would go and I would, I toured a lot, a lot.  I made a just hundreds and hundreds of appearances.  And what I would find is that people would stand in line, and they would come to me, and they would talk about, "I have read this book, and you know, this is like my experience."  And I would smile and nod my head.  And the thought bubble in my head was, this is a Vietnamese (laughter) woman.  What is she talking about?  What is she talking about?  And it was that it's people that have, that have to decide whether they want their children to assimilate or not, people who have to decide whether they want to keep (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Is this--
Speaker 2: --hold of their culture, or they want to propel their children in a different way.  It's about people who are immigrants who come in and, and feel not welcome, or who feel as if they have been discriminated against, or feel whatever.  And so, I have had, I've had the most unlikely people who have come to me to talk about how deeply they were touched by 'Cane River,' because it took them to a place where they recognized an emotion, if not the details, of how they got there.  So I'm writing about slavery, Civil War, Reconstruction, Jim Crow South, but in talking to many people, I'm writing about resilience, and how you raise your children, and what it's like to be in a country that doesn't necessarily welcome you, and you know, and on and on and on.  And that was, that was surprising to me.  And so that's why, because I've heard so many of these stories, I--'Cane River' has to be a favorite also, 'cause it's touched people in a, in a lot of ways that I did not expect.
Story_ID: 648203
Speaker 1: Now what about the last book?  What about (unclear) Creek ['Citizens Creek,' Lalita Tademy]?  What about that?
Speaker 2: In what way?
Speaker 1: It--people's response to that.
Speaker 2: Oh, people invariably start out saying, "I didn't know that Indians [Native American] had slaves; I didn't, I didn't know that black men occupied this, this unique position in the tribes as translators and interpreters; I didn't know that so many blacks were moved into Oklahoma, you know, in the, in the removal; I didn't know--." There are just a million, "I didn't know that."  And then it's, it's a lot about the facts that they didn't know or the history that they didn't know.  And people find it very interesting.  The best conversations--not best.  That's not the right word at all.  Some of the most interesting, to me, conversations are about what happens in later generations to people who are traumatized.  And that has bubbled up a few times now in conversations that I found fascinating.  So, how people responded?  In many different ways.  When you put a book out, as an author, this is what I've come to understand: you put a book out, and you know what you intend.  You know what you think you've written.  But once you put it out there, it's in the public domain, and it doesn't belong to you anymore.  And people will find what they want to find in it.  And sometimes it's the exact opposite of what you intended.  And it's not necessarily what you think you were trying to say, but it's what they picked up.  And it's not yours anymore, so it's theirs.  So that's been surprising to me.  And now I can more just sit back, and whatever you say you got out of it is fine.  That's on you.
Speaker 1: So--
Speaker 2: And it's your life experiences that you bring to it that determine what it is you do get out of it.
Story_ID: 648204
Speaker 1: So is another book in the works?
Speaker 2: There's one in my head.  There's actually one that I finished that I'm probably not gonna do, that I'm not--probably not gonna publish.
Speaker 1: Now, why?
Speaker 2: Because, just because. Because it's not, it's not really what I want it to be, and I'm not sure that I want to spend the emotional capital to make it what I think it needs to be.  And the other is that I have a new idea that's starting to populate my head.
Speaker 1: Do you want to share that?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Oh.
Speaker 2: No (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay, so, I understand.  You know, and I was thinking, oh, you could do a lot of work around our content.  We've got lots of content.
Speaker 2: (Laughter) I know, I know, I know.
Story_ID: 648205
Speaker 1: The thing I would like to have you share is a story about Stanford that you were telling me, you know, about being on the freshman--'Cane River' [Lalita Tademy] being on the--okay.
Speaker 2: So, so--
Speaker 1: And the young man.
Speaker 2: So 'Cane River' was selected--so I wrote 'Cane River' in 2001.  In 2015, fourteen years later, Stanford University [Stanford, California] selected it to be assigned reading for the incoming freshman class, which is thrilling, just absolutely thrilling.  So, one of the, the--the process that they, that Stanford goes through is they actually send the book to the accepted class.  And they sent--they read it over the summer.  Then they set up with professors on campus online conversations and discussions and Q and A about the book.  And then the freshmen come to class, come to Stanford, a week early for--I don't even know what they call it.  For in my day it was freshmen orientation.  But they're, but they're there, and they're doing all of that initial stuff before the whole campus comes back.  And during that week, the president of Stanford interviews.  The- there are three authors that they do this, three books and interviews the, the three authors that they have selected.  So I went to Stanford campus during freshmen orientation, big auditorium, all these young kids, you know, just seventeen, eighteen year old kids.  And we had the interview.  And afterwards there were long lines of kids that wanted--they, they wanted selfies, and they wanted, you know, they wanted to take the pictures, and they wanted autographs, and they wanted to ask more questions.  They'd had an opportunity to ask questions, but they wanted one on one.  And I--and there was a, a guy that came up.  He'd stood in line, and he came up, and he looked very preppy.  He, he looked--he was a white, young--he looked entitled, to me.  He looked very preppy.  And he said, "I just wanted to tell you that there were three books assigned.  And I knew I'd like Walter Isaacson's book.  And, and I knew I'd like Tobias Wolff's book.  And I left yours for last, because there, there was--I--there was no commonality.  There was nothing that could inform my life, because this was a, this was a historical book, and it didn't have anything to do with me."  And he said, "I just wanted to tell you I was wrong.  And I really, I really loved this book, and it, and it had a lot to do with me.  And it was about resilience, and it was about, and it was about what people do in, in difficult circumstances.  And, and I really appreciate--and, and it told--and it informed me in ways and gave me a point of view that I had never had before."  And, and he thanked me.  And I thought this is unexpected and pretty wonderful.
Speaker 1: And, and it speaks to what can happen when people are able to really touch the black experience.  I mean, the comments that you're talking about from him, the Vietnamese woman, you know, speak to how universal--and the power of--I hate to use the term struggle.  But the power of the stories and the experiences that are known as the black experiences, it speaks to that.  So I, once again, want to applaud you.
Story_ID: 648206
Speaker 1: I want to ask you where you are in your life right now; and what things you want to do that you haven't done.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I, I don't, I don't know exactly myself.  Where am I in my life?  I, I suspect that I've had a chapter one and a chapter two, and I might be ready for a chapter three.  I, I really don't know.  I don't know whether I will continue writing or not.  I suspect I will because this, the, the story in my head is getting stronger, stronger.  But it's not like anything I've done.  And so I think, I think that the, I think the reason that this, that fourth manuscript is sort of sitting there, even though it's pretty done, it doesn't feel new to me anymore, what I'm thinking about feels new, and I think that that's necessary.  I think that it's always necessary to have something new and augmented.  But where I am in my life is, I have done more than I set out to do.  And if, and if someone had told me when I was fifteen that I would have had two careers and gotten through both of them okay, I think I would have been pretty pleased about all of that.  And where I am at this moment is--
Speaker 1: Three.
Speaker 2: Three careers?
Speaker 1: No, it's not three careers.  But you're happily married [to HistoryMaker Barry Williams].
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: You had a very successful career in Corporate America.  I don't mean to (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes.
Speaker 1: I just mean and then you have this amazing career as an author.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.  I just want to be open.  I just want to be open to, I want to be open to positivity.  I want, I want to use what talents I have to rescue forgotten stories or unacknowledged stories.  I will, I will say this, I will say this: the story I'm playing with in my head is a story about a woman of a certain age.  And you know, I'm not being coy about it, but protagonists pretty much have to be thirty years old (laughter).  They have to be twenty or thirty or forty years old.  And I'm--that's not where I am in my life.  And I'm more--and, and I'm really interested in what is almost an invisible class at this moment, which is older people, and not older people as a problem or as a disease set, but as people with still great potential and life and vibrancy.  And that's what I would like to do.  I'd like to be open enough to offer up something in a different way than I've been able to before.  And I don't know what form that takes, but I want to explore it.
Speaker 1: I just had a feeling that it might be around that, or what--I don't know.  But I just was thinking that because I can't--you know, we didn't touch upon that 'cause we didn't touch upon your early years.  But I just was thinking about how traumatic your--once you left Berkeley [California] and then move out there and how that inward--I don't know--the inward living (laughter) manifested itself in--I don't know.  I, I mean, most people throughout their life never--dream but never are able to manifest their dreams, you know.  Do you think about that?
Story_ID: 648207
Speaker 1: I want to ask you about the black--this--what you think the legacy of black people are.
Speaker 2: My goodness gracious, that's huge.  So, so, where to start?  I think that a lot of the legacy of black--one of the easy answers is black people at this point, the reason we're coopted so often, in terms of culture, is that we've just, we've been under the gun, literally, for so long, in so many different ways, and we still manage to survive; we still manage to move forward.  We have a lot of pathology.  I think that we have a lot of issues around the trauma of being black that we have to overcome.  We--I don't want to use that word--that, that we have to get beyond.  But I think that we lend such richness to the comp- to this country, in terms of our, in terms of our--I keep saying this--but resilience, just in terms of our resilience, just in terms of our creativity, just in terms of our having to take a different path in order to just, in, in order to just make it.  And I think that we have an incredible amount to offer, but I sometimes feel, I sometimes feel that the barriers for the underclass are insurmountable, that there has been oppression for so very long, I don't, I don't know how to get around that; I don't know how--I don't what we can do.  So, what is our legacy?  At the top end, our legacy clearly is we're innovative; we are, we are creative; we're persistent; we're resilient, and, and all of that is amazing.  But we have such, we have such negativity around so many of us, I don't know how we lift all of us up.  I don't know how we do it.
Speaker 1: So that really speaks to hopes, but that also speaks to concerns.
Speaker 2: Oh, huge concerns--
Speaker 1: Concerns.
Speaker 2: --huge concerns, huge, huge concerns.  And I'm concerned with gaps.  I'm concerned with sort of the luckiest of us and the least lucky of us, and that's not just black and white; that's along every continuum you can think of, whether, whether you're talking about economics or whatever it is.  I'm concerned about huge gaps that just keep getting wider.  And I think as black folks, we--the gap is just so, so big right now, and I don't know what the answer is.  I, I thought for a long time that it was education, but I, I, I don't see sufficient, I don't see sufficient solutions there.  And how do you educate someone who is, who's trapped, who's trapped in an environment that doesn't reinforce anything that you can give them through some structured educational institution or organizations?  So, yeah, I have huge concerns, huge, huge, huge concerns.
Story_ID: 648208
Speaker 1: And what do you want your own legacy to be?
Speaker 2: My, my legacy's, my legacy, my legacy is around my output in writing, as far as I'm concerned.  So, I don't have children of my own, and so I didn't form little beings, and that's, you know, that's, that's not available.  But what, what I see is putting works out there that other people hopefully can read and evaluate and respond to and that create a different narrative and a different voice out there.  And, and that's, that's really what I wanted to do from the beginning, didn't know how, and just, you know, it was a lot of trial and error.  But that's what I want.  And even, even if it's just one person that picks one of my books off a library shelf or whatever and it makes them think about human dynamics in a different way--that, that's a legacy to me.
Story_ID: 648209
Speaker 1: When you think of the young girl you were--and you know, I started your interview later than you started your original story with us--how did she evolve?
Speaker 2: Through trial and error.  So, a lot of the evolution was around being put in different situations, with different requirements, and figuring out, and figuring out just how to keep moving, figuring out how to be productive, trying to figure out how to add value.  The, the evolution--so in this nature versus nurture mix, I think that both are absolutely critical.  And I think that the story would have been very different if I hadn't had loving parents, [Willie Billes Tademy and Nathan Tademy, Jr.] you know, parents that just invested in me in any number of ways.  I think the story would have been different if I didn't get, if I didn't get an education, an academic education.  I think the story would have been different if I had gone to a traditional company and stayed there for a long period of time and hadn't hopped around.  I think that the, I think the story would have been different if I hadn't jumped off the moving (laughter) train of a career and opened myself to a lot of other, a lot of other possibilities.  I think all of it would have been different.  If the circumstances were different, it wouldn't have had the same, it would have had the same ending.  And so, I know that I started from two parents who thought that I had crazy potential.  They, and they made that very known to me.  And because of that, I've just always been seeking that.
Story_ID: 648210
Speaker 1: This photo was part of the inspiration for 'Cane River' [Lalita Tademy].  It's the Billes family and it is (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Spell it.  Can you spell Billes (unclear)?
Speaker 1: B- B-I-L-L-E-S.  And the second from the left is Emily Billes [Emily Fredieu Billes], who has a significant part of the book, as a character and a significant part of the book.  And she was my great-great-grandmother [sic. great-grandmother].  And, and it's her children by Joseph Billes, who was a Frenchman, who does not appear in the picture.  So the people in this picture are their five children.  It is, it is my--it's Mary Billes, and then, of course, Emily Fredieu, then Josephine Billes, then Angelite Billes [Angelite Billes Coutee], Theodore Billes, who is my grandfather, that's T.O. Billes, and then the last is Joe Billes [Joseph Billes], who died as a child.
Speaker 2: And Theo is spelled, T-H-E-O.  I'm sorry.
Speaker 1: This is my mother, Willie Dee Billes [Willie Billes Tademy], as a child.  She always hated the middle name Dee.  But this is her as a child sitting in front of their house in Louisiana.
Speaker 2: This picture that hangs on my wall is some of the inspiration for 'Red River' [Lalita Tademy], my second novel.  And that is my father [Nathan Tademy, Jr.] with his hand on his hip, barefoot as a little boy in Louisiana, and his two brothers and a sister and his father, Theodore [sic. Nathan Tademy, Sr.].
Speaker 1: This, this photo is a family photo of my mother, my father, and my two older sisters [Theodorsia Tademy and Joan Tademy Lothery].  I was not yet born.  But even my older brother [Lee Tademy] has a little place in my mother's stomach in this one, even though you can't really see him; she's pregnant.
Speaker 2: This is a photo of my wonderful husband, Barry Lawson Williams [HistoryMaker Barry Williams], and myself at a Boule [Sigma Pi Phi Fraternity] dinner dance, as I recall.
Speaker 1: This was actually a magazine cover and an insert, and someone who interviewed me on my life journey; and they called it 'A Way With Words.'
