Story_ID: 31792
Speaker 1: Dr. Taylor, we're gonna get started by slating.  My name is James Stith, and I am the interviewer.  Scott Stearns is the videographer, and Larry Crowe is an observer [from The HistoryMakers] and your daughter, Trina [Taylor Brown], is an observer.  I'm gonna ask you to start by stating and spelling your name, including your middle name?
Speaker 2: Okay.  My name is Julius H. Taylor.  J-U-L-I-U-S, Henry, H-E-N-R-Y, Taylor, T-A-Y-L-O-R.
Speaker 1: Okay, and now your date and place of birth?
Speaker 2: The date of my birth was at Cape May, New Jersey and February 15, 1914.
Speaker 1: And--okay, that was your date of birth and place of birth.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Today's date?
Speaker 2: Today date?
Speaker 1: Um-hum.
Speaker 2: Today's date is seventh month, the 13th day, 10th year [July 13, 2010].
Speaker 1: Okay, and the location of this interview, the address?
Speaker 2: The address of this interview is at Morgan State College-University [Morgan State University was granted University status in 1975] on the second floor of Calloway Hall.  The number, room number?
Speaker 1: Doesn't matter.  Okay.  Your occupation?
Speaker 2: My occupation, I'm retired now.  I was a physics professor at this institution for fifty years.
Story_ID: 31793
Speaker 1: Okay, I'm now gonna ask you what we call "Parade Magazine" type questions.  First, what's your favorite food?
Speaker 2: Food?
Speaker 1: Favorite food?
Speaker 2: Fish.
Speaker 1: Fish.  Your favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Fall.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Your favorite color?
Speaker 2: Blue.
Speaker 1: Blue, okay.  Your favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Florida.
Speaker 1: Your favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: "How are you getting along?"
Story_ID: 31794
Speaker 1: All righty.  Now, I want to talk about your ancestors.  How far can you go back?
Speaker 2: I can only go back as far as my grandfather.  His name was Coleman [sic, Charles Woodland] Taylor, and he lived to be ninety-eight years old.  He died at Cape May Courthouse, New Jersey.
Speaker 1: Was that your maternal or paternal grandfather?
Speaker 2: Paternal.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you--okay, let's talk about your grandfather?
Speaker 2: Grandfather?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: I knew very little about my grandfather to tell you the truth.  He never went to a doctor, lived on a farm.  And, of course, he wasn't eating out of cans and things like that.  And he ate a lot of things that we are afraid to eat today, but evidently, as my doctor used to say to me, you have good genes, and that's what counts.  And he had good genes.
Speaker 1: What did he do?
Speaker 2: He was a farmer.
Speaker 1: Okay, in Cape May?
Speaker 2: No, in Cape May Courthouse.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, and where is that located?
Speaker 2: It's in South Jersey near Wildwood in Cape May.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you remember a favorite saying that he had or things he liked to do?
Speaker 2: No, I don't remember anything much about conversations that I've had with him.  He died not too long after my birth [sic, 1947, unless referring to maternal grandfather].  So I don't know too much about him, don't know anything about my grandmother [Angela Lively Taylor] at all.
Speaker 1: Okay, do you know whether he was--was he a slave or was he free?
Speaker 2: I don't know.  He probably was free.
Speaker 1: Okay, and let's talk about your grandmother.
Speaker 2: Grandmother, I didn't know anything at all about my grandmother.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Nothing at all.
Speaker 1: Okay, do you know where they got married and how they met?
Speaker 2: No, they met somewhere in that area.  She was a, she was born in Virginia, came up to New Jersey to work.  See, my parents only went to the third and fourth grade.  So they met somewhere in the Cape May County, New Jersey.
Speaker 1: And so you don't have a recollection of your maternal grandparents?
Speaker 2: Un-un [no].
Speaker 1: No, all right.
Story_ID: 31795
Speaker 1: Then let's talk about your father.
Speaker 2: My father was a concrete--
Speaker 1: His name?
Speaker 2: My father's name, Coleman H. Taylor.  He was a mason.  He was very, an unusual person, my father.  He only went to the fourth grade, and my mother went to the third grade.  But he built buildings.  He built a bank.  He could do almost anything, could do most anything.  And I used to always wonder.  I'd say, how did he learn all this stuff and he only went to the fourth grade (laughter).  But he could do almost anything.
Speaker 1: And he was born in--
Speaker 2: Born in that same area [Cape May Courthouse, New Jersey], yeah.
Speaker 1: Same area, okay.  Do you know much about his background?
Speaker 2: No, except that he was, when he got out of school to help with his father [Coleman Taylor] and never went back.  But some of the things that he could do, I can't, I just can't figure out how he was able to do them because he had actually very little education (laughter), but, you know, somebody would want a certain thing done to their house.  And he would just take a shingle and write down on the shingle and just, it'll cost you so much and so much, he'd tell them (laughter).
Speaker 1: What's your most--
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: Okay, we were talking about your father.  And you had just given me his name.  Could you repeat that and also tell me his date of birth?
Speaker 2: Gee, I couldn't tell you that.  I couldn't tell you his date of birth, but I just have no idea at all.  I just have no idea at all.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I don't even have the date of his death, but I was in college when he died [1954, Taylor was Morgan State University].
Speaker 1: Is there anything that I haven't asked you that you remember about your father that you would like to talk about?
Speaker 2: Well, I think he changed my life early because the last job that I worked with him was building some steps in front of a house.  So we went to this job.  And my, I said to my father, I said, we've got too much, too many people here.  He said, what do you mean?  I said, "Pop, we don't need those two men."  I said, "I can make the mortar.  I can bring you the bricks."  I said, and "You can build the steps."  I said, "We don't need those men."  And my father smiled at me and he said, "Did you have breakfast this morning?"  I said, "Sure, Pop, I sat right along side of you."  He knew that.  He said, "That's right."  He said, "But you see those two men.  They didn't have any breakfast."  That changed me a lot because I'd been thinking about myself only rather than thinking about helping other people.  And it had a very important effect on my life, I think. Yeah.
Story_ID: 31796
Speaker 1: We're now gonna turn to your mother [Julia Price Taylor].
Speaker 2: My mother was a maid and she worked in downtown Cape May Courthouse.  In fact, she worked at a drugstore, and it's an interesting thing that the druggist liked me.  And he gave me those jobs to do around the drugstore.  And later on in life, he told me, he says, you know, he says, you don't have to do that hard work your father's [Coleman H. Taylor] doing.  He says, you can go to college, and you can enjoy the American Dream.  Well, at that time, I didn't know what the American Dream was, but (laughter) I found out later, he was right.  But, yeah, I think he had a very important impact.  I went to college with fifty dollars, a trumpet and a suitcase.  The fifty dollars I got from that druggist to help me go to college.  In fact, when I put the money up with bursar at the college, he looked at it and he smiled.  Now, this was right after the '29 [1929] crash.  He said, Mr. Taylor, he said, this doesn't meet your initial payment.  I said, "I know that, sir."  He said, "But you'll be hearing from home, won't you?"  So I said, "If I hear from home, I said, they'll be asking me for money."  So, and it was the truth (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 31797
Speaker 1: Could you state for me your mother's full name?
Speaker 2: My mother's name is Julia Price Taylor.
Speaker 1: And do you remember her date of birth?
Speaker 2: No, not date of birth.
Speaker 1: No date of birth, okay.  And where did she grow up?
Speaker 2: She grew up in, near Norfolk, Virginia, very close, Elizabeth City [North Carolina] I think it was, Elizabeth City.
Speaker 1: Do you know how your parents met?
Speaker 2: No, I don't have no idea at all, except she came down there and was working in, at the sea shore in the summertime.  And somehow he [Coleman Taylor] met her.  I don't know how he met her, but we were very close to Cape May in Wildwood where a lot of people vacation.  She always had a good job in the summertime.  So they met somehow.  I don't know.  I have no idea.
Speaker 1: Are there any special stories that she used to tell you that you remember?
Speaker 2: No, they didn't talk much.  In fact, I often look back on my life and say, gosh, suppose I was able to get from them what I'm trying to get to my children, you know.  I said, my life would have been all together different if I had some input, but it just seems to me, for example, when I was going to school, it was a matter of passing, not excelling.  I wasn't worrying about excelling.  I was just, wanted to pass and get out the class and go to the next class.  But I should have had somebody to tell me, say, what are you gonna do with the rest of your life?  What would you like to do?  Well, what profession would you like to enter?  You know what I mean?  Nobody was telling me anything, and I was just watching what other people were doing and tried to do the same thing myself.  So I got along pretty good.  In fact, I never flunked a course in my life.  I never (laughter), and so they were passing.  I'm gonna pass too (laughter).
Speaker 1: As you look back on your parents, who would you say you are most like, your mother or your father?
Speaker 2: I think I was more like my father, more like my father.  I'm pretty sure, yeah, 'cause I was a tinkerer too.  I could do a lot of things when I was coming up.  In fact, when I went to the University of Pennsylvania [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], I met a fellow at lunchtime and found out he was a glassblower.  And he says, why don't you come by the lab, and I can show you a few things.  So, that was another thing that happened in my life.  I went by the lab and I talked to the glassblower.  And he showed me a lot of things about glassblowing and taught me a few things.  So I got very good at glassblowing.  In fact, I taught glassblowing at Morgan [State University, Baltimore, Maryland].  I taught glassblowing.  I could make glass ducks, and I could--for example, when I was in graduate school, most of the vacuum systems were all glass.  And they all cracked.  And I was the only one in the physics department that could seal 'em and repair 'em.  So that was a nice thing too because they were lucky and said, Jules, I got a leak; come on over and see if you can find it (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.  How many siblings did you have--
Speaker 2: Two.
Speaker 1: And could you give me their names order of birth?
Speaker 2: Son's Dwight Spaulding Taylor and Trina Spaulding Taylor [Brown].
Speaker 1: And where were you in that mix?  In the oldest or the youngest or the middle.
Speaker 2: Oh, you mean--
Speaker 1: Of your siblings?  You gave me your children.  Your brothers and sisters?
Speaker 2: Okay, you mean, oh.  There were six children in the family, six, three boys and three girls.  So there were three boys and three girls.  So I was right about in the middle--
Speaker 1: Okay, and their names?
Speaker 2: Margaret was a girl [1917-1994], Morris was a brother [ -2000], Coleman was a brother [1911-1978] and Elizabeth [1908-1998] was a girl.  [His other sister is Mildred Taylor Lightboot, 1910-1990].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 31798
Speaker 1: In terms of growing up, what was your earliest memory?
Speaker 2: Well, gee, I had a lot of fun going to high school [Middle Township High School, Cape May Court House, New Jersey], a lot of fun going to high school, a lot of fun.  And I didn't mind the work, but I had no idea at all about going to college.  See, that's what hurt me so much, and if someone had told me when I was in high school that I should have taken more mathematics and more of this and more of that, depending on what I wanted to do, I think it would have helped me a lot because when I went to the University of Pennsylvania [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] to study for, take such courses in physics because my high school physics teacher had to teach physics and chemistry.  So I majored in chemistry in college, so I figured I'm gonna have to teach physics and chemistry, if I'm teaching college, so--or teaching high school.  So I decided to go up to the University of Pennsylvania after I graduated from Lincoln University [Oxford, Pennsylvania] and take a couple of advanced undergraduate courses in physics.  And that's how I got mixed up in physics.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, you mentioned the druggist that told you to go to school--
Speaker 2: What?
Speaker 1: The druggist--
Speaker 2: The druggist, yeah.
Speaker 1: --who told you to go to school.  What was the, other than being a druggist, how did you get to know him, and--
Speaker 2: My mother [Julia Price Taylor] worked for the family.  She did work for the family, and she said--I don't know.  Somehow he says, "Do you have a son?"  I'd for somebody to work in the drugstore.  And she said, "Sure, I have one."  So she sent me up there, and he, they asked me to do this and do that.  So he liked me and I got so I could do just about everything up in the drugstore.  But he took a liking to me.  But he helped me, he helped me because he really wanted me to go to college (laughter).  But I haven't told you about why I was--what was happening to me.  Right out of, in my senior year in high school, they started a band.  So I bought myself a trumpet.  And I played that trumpet day and night, and that next summer, I was in a night club playing.  So I had a trumpet.  I had a car, I had girls, I had everything.  Why do I wanna go to college, you know.  Then I met this girl that I married, and she told me, this is not gonna work.  And I could tell you an interesting story about that (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: She had never heard me play the trumpet.  So she wanted to hear me play the trumpet.  So I said, I'll pick you up tonight and take you down to Cape May [Court House, New Jersey], and you can listen to the trumpet.  So I did, and during the course of the evening, she was talking to some girls on the table next to her.  And I was wondering what in the world they were talking about over there.  So on the way back, taking her back to her home, I asked her how did it go.  She said, "Oh," she said, "You can blow the trumpet all right, but it's not gonna work if we're gonna get married."  I said, "Why?  I said, I thought I was gonna do this the rest of my life because I was having so much fun.  She said, "Do you wanna know what one of those girls said?"  I said, "What did she say?"  One of those girls said, "I'm gonna take that trumpet player home with me tonight."  She said, "And that won't work in our marriage."  So that was the end of my music.
Speaker 1: Okay, well, let me back up a little bit before you get there.  Let's talk about your elementary schooling.
Speaker 2: Elementary?
Speaker 1: Yeah, do you remember--
Speaker 2: Well, I played football, basketball, I did everything, you know.  But it was just that anything everybody else was doing, I was gonna do it too.  But I was on the track team.  I was a high jumper and a pole vaulter (laughter).  We used to go down to the woods and get a nice slim pole and put it up on the roof so all the bark would fall off of it.  Then we would wrap it with tar paper, tar tape, all the way around cause if that pole breaks, it would splinter and might kill you.  And that's how I learned how to pole vault 'cause we didn't have, we didn't have any bamboo poles to pole vault with.  So I pole--I was the first black to pole vault at the Penn Relays, first black to pole vault at the Penn Relays [the oldest and largest track and field competition in the United States].  A guy from Yale [Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut] beat me.  He did fourteen feet, and I did twelve something (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay, very good.
Speaker 2: That was in the '30s [1930s].
Story_ID: 31799
Speaker 1: Now, do you remember any of your elementary school teachers?
Speaker 2: LARRY CROWE:	Can we get the name of the school?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: LARRY CROWE:	And where it was.
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I remember, well, the teacher that I remember so much was my math teacher in high school.  This woman gave us fifty problems every night, homework.  And if you didn't have those problems the next morning, she would be at your house that night to find out why.  So you had to have those problems.  So I hated the woman cause I said, I said, if I can do one, I can do all fifty.  She said, I know that, she said, but you do fifty.  So I would do fifty, and I didn't realize what she was doing until I went to Lincoln [University, Oxford, Pennsylvania].  When I went to Lincoln, there was a--in college, everybody at Lincoln, no matter what your major was, you had to take algebra and trigonometry.  I didn't even have to buy a book.  I knew it all.  I had it all in high school.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, then I loved that woman.
Speaker 1: Okay, but let me take you back.  What was the name of your elementary school?
Speaker 2: Elementary school?  Well, I know very little about what, you know, the teachers that I had.  But--
Speaker 1: LARRY CROWE:  The name of the school (unclear).
Speaker 2: Yeah, okay.  The name of the school?
Speaker 1: The name of the school.  Middle Township Elementary School and Middle Township High School.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: They were all together at one place.
Speaker 2: Okay, so the high school and the elementary school were in the same building?
Speaker 1: Yeah, right, right.  Well, the elementary school was a building and the high school was a building on the same lot.
Speaker 2: On the same lot?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Okay.  About how large was it?
Speaker 1: We had--how many pictures was on that graduation thing, Trina [Taylor's daughter]?  About thirty?  I graduated, when I graduated, about thirty people graduated from my high school class.  But in my regular classes there were like, oh, twenty, twenty-five kids to the elementary school.  But I didn't have any problems in school at all.  I was always passing.  But my point was, I wasn't excelling.  That's the thing I, that hurt me later on in life.
Speaker 2: And when did you recognize that you had not been excelling in--
Speaker 1: When did I recognize--?
Speaker 2: --that you had not been excelling, that you changed your focus?
Speaker 1: Oh, that's when I really--even though when I went to Lincoln, I never really was trying to excel.  All I was trying to do was to pass.  But when I went to the University of Pennsylvania [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], it was a different ballgame all together 'cause the first class I walked in, everybody was shaking their heads.  They knew everything the professor was saying.  It turns out that I had never had a course in vector analysis.  Boy, so I had to run to the library, get a book on vector analysis, stay up a whole week just, late in the night, studying vector analysis.  But the next week, when I went back to that man's class, I understood what he was talking about.  I could nod my head too (laughter).
Story_ID: 31800
Speaker 1: I still want to probe your early childhood.  And what was it like growing up in your community?
Speaker 2: Well, South Jersey [New Jersey] is like a peninsula.  It's a peninsula sticking down there.  Cape May is the end of it, end of South Jersey.  And people grow up there and died.  For example, when I said I wanted to go to college, I wanted to go to college, everybody thought I was crazy 'cause they said, why don't you take over your father's [Coleman Taylor] business, you know?  But I don't know, it was a very interesting--I had a very interesting young life.  I always had a good job in the summertime.  I could work in garages, and I could work on cars and do things like that.  So it was very interesting.
Speaker 1: What about your family life, your interaction with your siblings, with your brothers and sisters?
Speaker 2: Oh, you know, it's a funny thing.  We never were close as a family.  We never were close, like, for example, if we were going to a dance, we all would go separately, you know.  If we, in other words, we all lived sort of independently.  We were never really close, never really close, not at all.
Speaker 1: What about holidays?  What were they like?
Speaker 2: Holidays was, there was, wasn't too much going on on holidays.  You always had a big dinner, but not very much interaction between the siblings.
Speaker 1: Did you consider yourself poor at the time?
Speaker 2: Huh?
Speaker 1: Did you consider yourself poor?
Speaker 2: No, no, no.  No, we had, my father [Coleman H. Taylor] made a good living, but he hired so many people trying to help him that he (laughter), he wasn't, I mean he had, we had everything we needed at home, but not any excess.  But we were never short of food or clothing, something like that.  We always had that.
Speaker 1: What smells remind you of your childhood?
Speaker 2: Smells?  Well, the smells I enjoyed most probably was my mother used to make a thing called, I think it was Brown Betty or something like that.  And when you'd come in that house and smell that Brown Betty (laughter), I'll never forget that, (laughter) never forget that.
Speaker 1: Okay, we're gonna take a short break.
Speaker 2: Um-hum, okay.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION):  The signal for the end is just that.
Speaker 2: Got you.  I missed a clue.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Well, you've got about five minutes left.
Speaker 2: Okay, good.  Then, so we talked about the smells.  Are there any particular sounds or, that--
Speaker 1: Oh, well, (laughter), so many sounds, we lived near a railroad track.  And (laughter), the trains coming through there in the middle of the night, blowing the, you know, making all the noise along with the sirens, not the sirens, but the noise that they made.  It would wake you up.  In fact, we were so close to the railroad track that actually when the train came by, you could feel the house shake a little bit, yeah.  But that was about, that's about all I can remember about that.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Story_ID: 31801
Speaker 1: In terms of your value for education, where did you get that?
Speaker 2: Well, see, like I told you, I went all the way through Lincoln University [Oxford, Pennsylvania] without worrying about anything because--oh, I was just passing.  Nobody was telling me I should be studying and learning this and learning that.  And, but I wish, I certainly wish that someone had told me that in order for me to go to graduate school and get a degree in physics, I should have taken these courses at Lincoln.  I didn't take the courses at Lincoln.
Speaker 1: But in terms of the kids that you went to high school with or you went to elementary with, how many of them graduated from high school?
Speaker 2: How many of the kids graduated from high school?  Just about everybody in the class, senior class graduated, but there was only about--there were five blacks in my class, five blacks, who all went to college, all went to college.
Speaker 1: Okay, and in your family, did your parents [Coleman and Julia Price Taylor] think that finishing high school was gonna be enough or did they also--
Speaker 2: No, they never said anything much about.  They didn't say much about it because, but they were happy for me to go to college.  And my father was always bragging about he had a son in college (laughter).  But--
Speaker 1: So in terms of the friends that you had in school, what were they like and what was your interaction like with them?
Speaker 2: Oh, well, see by--I was sort of an athlete, pretty good, not great, but good.  And that puts in contact with a lot of kids that were in the same things that you're in.  In basketball, I had basketball friends.  I had football friends.  I had track friends, you know, and we talked a lot about winning medals, talked a lot about winning medals.  How many medals have you won?  How many medals have you won?  So, so there was quite a lot of interaction, but most of these were white kids because like I say, there was only five in my graduating class, blacks.
Speaker 1: Okay, and in terms of the things that really influenced you as a young person, what stands out in your mind?
Speaker 2: That what?
Speaker 1: That influenced you as a young person?  I mean what were your greatest influences?
Speaker 2: Well, I saw, when I looked, all I had to do was look around me and see that nobody was thinking about going to college.  Nobody was thinking about their future.  And I just had to keep worrying.  Of course, like I said, I thought I was gonna play that trumpet, and after I got pretty good at that trumpet, I said, well, it'll take me, I'll probably have to leave this place.  But it'll probably be--I'll be good enough to get a job playing in a band.  But I sure wished, I just sure wished I had somebody to tell me the things that I should have been told as I was coming along.  I just kept going along, whatever, you know, but you need somebody to tell you that this is what you should be doing, and I didn't have anybody to tell me.  And it hurts, it hurt.
Story_ID: 31802
Speaker 1: --You were talking about your trumpet playing.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: But before we follow up on that, I wanna go back and talk about your life at school and what it was like?
Speaker 2: In high school [Middle Township High School, Cape May Court House, New Jersey]?
Speaker 1: Let's do elementary school [Middle Township Elementary School, Cape May Court House, New Jersey] and your interaction with your other classmates.  You said there were only five of you [blacks]--
Speaker 2: One thing about it, we did everything, everything the rest of class did, we did it, you know.  Actually, I didn't know too much about segregation and all that, so I didn't know much about that at all because I got along very well in that small town, you know, very well.  I got along very well.  In fact, I, when I really learned about how black people were being treated, happened when we went to Washington on a senior trip in high school.  We had to stay in the Whitelaw Hotel [first luxury hotel for African Americans, 1919], and we couldn't stay in the Mayflower [Renaissance Washington, D.C. Hotel].  And that said, and they hired a student from Howard [University, Washington, D.C.] to take us around, and we'd run into our classmates.  That hurt.  I mean I was always with them, you know, and here they had to hire somebody to show us around Washington [D.C.], and we would just run into these classmates everywhere we went because they had the same program we had.
Speaker 1: Did you classmates talk to you about that?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, yeah.  The white kids talked to me.  We talked about everything.
Speaker 1: And so what kinds of things did you talk about?
Speaker 2: We talked about, for example--
Speaker 1: I mean that experience?
Speaker 2: You mean about that experience.  Well, well, they said, said to me, says, a lot of them said, I didn't appreciate the way they treated you all.  But that, the hotel was terrible.  That Whitelaw Hotel was terrible.  I mean, you know, but that was the first time I really felt being black, you know.  It was, made a big difference.  And that was in 1932.
Story_ID: 31803
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Now, let's go back to your trumpet.  Why did you pick that instrument?
Speaker 2: Well, I, I don't know.  I just, I guess it--I was very, very good with my right hand, and I said, if I play a saxophone, I'll have to play two hands.  I said if I play the trumpet, I said, I'll only have to play one hand, and it might be a lot easier.  But other than that, there wasn't any reason other than I'd listened to, what's the name, the black trumpet player, died a few years ago.
Speaker 1: LARRY CROWE:  [John Birks] "Dizzy" Gillespie?
Speaker 2: No, not "Dizzy" Gillespie, but I had listened to Dizzy Gillespie too.  I listened to, Satch Moe [Louis Armstrong], I listened to him a lot.  And so I said, I believe I can do what he's doing (laughter).  But I had a very good ear for music, a very good ear for music.  I didn't know that if you can't carry a tune, you should never try to play any kind of an instrument.  And I had a brother, my father brought him two violins.  He would tell my father, this doesn't fit right under my chin and all this other business.  But then later on, when I wanted to go to play music, the instructor told me, he said, hum this tune.  I said, I'll sing it.  So I did it.  He said, oh, you won't have any trouble.  He said, show me your teeth.  I showed him my teeth.  He says, you're perfect.  He said all you gotta do is practice.  So, so that's when I learned that if you can't carry a tune, don't fool with music cause how do you know when you play a bad note.
Speaker 1: Did you sing?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I sang too, yeah.
Story_ID: 31804
Speaker 1: What kind of a young person were you in terms of were you mischievous, were you--
Speaker 2: Yeah, we were mischievous, yeah, we were very mischievous.  We did, we did all kind of tricks, like Halloween tricks and all that.  (Laughter), Yeah, we did all kind of things, we did everything.
Speaker 1: What kind of tricks did you pull?
Speaker 2: Well, (laughter) the bakery, for example, put out their old bread for the people to pick it up.  We went up there, got that bag of bread and went up to the court building and took the flagpole, flag thing and broke the bread up and put it around the rope and pulled it up, kept--we had bread flying all the way from the top of the flagpole (laughter).  We did all kind of tricks (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay, what was your earliest encounter with science?
Speaker 2: Well, I guess it was actually in high school.  I was the class artist in high school.  And in biology, I got an "A" in art and a "B" in biology (laughter).  That says, your art is better than your biology (laughter).  I could draw the leaves and the, all the other things that you had to do.  I was good at it, pretty good at that.
Speaker 1: But you said that you never pushed yourself as a student?
Speaker 2: No, not until I went to--I never studied until I went to the University of Pennsylvania [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania].  Those Jewish kids were about to run me out of that classmate.  And I made up my mind, I said they're not gonna run me out of here.  I'm gonna get this stuff, and like I tell you, I'd go get, go to the library and get a book and learn it.
Speaker 1: But you went to the University of Pennsylvania as a physics major.
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Oh.
Speaker 2: Let me tell you what happened.  Like I told you, I felt that I would have to teach in a high school, and I had to teach chemistry and physics.  But I only had chemistry, and I only had one physics course.  So I told my wife [Patricia Spaulding], 'cause I got married in my senior year at Lincoln, and I told her, I said, I need to get some physics.  I said, "Why don't I go up to the University of Pennsylvania and take a couple of physics courses, and I'll get a better high school job."  She said, "That makes sense."  She said, "I'll work and we'll do it."  So I took, I went up to the University of Pennsylvania and I told the professor that I wanted to take a couple of courses.  And he said, well, fine.  He said, we'll give you one graduate course.  We'll give you a graduate course in x-rays.  That was very easy.  But anyway, at the end of the year, I passed both those courses.  And he said to me, he says, "What are you gonna do next year?"  So I said, "I'm gonna try to get the high school job because I got this, these two University of Pennsylvania courses on my transcript."  I said, "It's gonna make me eligible for a better high school job."  He said, "Oh, no, no, no."  He says, "Why don't you come back next year and get a master's degree"--
Speaker 1: But I wanna pull you back to your childhood--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --because what I'm trying to get a handle on is, you had this interest in math and science--
Speaker 2: I built a radio when I was in elementary school.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I (laughter), you know, out of oatmeal box, wrap a string around the thing (laughter), I did all that kind of crazy stuff.
Speaker 1: What drove you in that direction because you were a good art student?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, I mean just like you take and put a needle down on some (unclear) and you get a diode. And I said, boy, that's funny.  You know, why does electricity only go one way, you know, and things like that just excited me.  But I don't know why I didn't major in physics when I went to college, but the professor actually asked me.  He said, what do you wanna major in?  I said, I haven't made up my mind.  He said, well, do you like science?  I said, yeah, I like science.  He said, well, major in chemistry.  I said, "That's okay."  So I just majored in chemistry, but then after I was in there, I had no problem with chemistry.  I passed all the courses in chemistry.  But then I realized I needed some physics.  That's why I went to the University of Pennsylvania.  I had no idea of getting a doctorate degree when I went.  Only, I went there to get two courses.  That's all I went there to get.
Speaker 1: Now, were there teachers early on--I'm still trying to get a sense of what piqued your curiosity in the sciences?
Speaker 2: Well, I don't know.  Like I tell you, I built radios and things like that.  I did a lot of things.  I don't know what really piqued my--it took my curiosity, you know, I said, oh, I think I can build a radio.  So I built a radio.
Speaker 1: Was that for a science fair project?
Speaker 2: No, no, no, I just wanted to build it.  I wanted to build one, went and bought the parts (laughter).
Speaker 1: Did you have a family doctor at that time that you--
Speaker 2: There was really, one doctor in town, Dr. Cryter (ph.), and he was a very good doctor.  And he did everything, did everything.
Speaker 1: Did he talk to you about what he was doing?
Speaker 2: No, no, no.  But then the, like, for example, a guy had a--I was the first one to have one of those engines that propel a bicycle in town.  A guy had one that wouldn't run, and it turned out that the magnet on it, it was demagnetized.  So I re-magnetized the magnet, fixed that motor up and I was running around town in this, with an extra wheel on the back of my bike.
Speaker 1: So about what time was this?
Speaker 2: About eighth grade, eighth grade.
Speaker 1: About eighth grade.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And you knew about magnetism?
Speaker 2: Yeah, oh yeah.
Speaker 1: And do you know when you first learned about magnetism?
Speaker 2: No, no, no, watching probably compasses probably.  That's probably where I picked it up, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, did you spend a lot of time reading?
Speaker 2: Reading?  No, the only things that I wanted to learn something about, I had a library card.  I always, I read books, you know, in the library.
Speaker 1: What kind of books did you like?
Speaker 2: Well, all adventure mostly, adventure mostly.
Story_ID: 31805
Speaker 1: We're gonna switch to your sports because--
Speaker 2: Sports?
Speaker 1: Yeah, where did you first get interest in high jumping and track?
Speaker 2: Well, I got that in elementary school, got that in elementary school, certainly [Middle Township Elementary School, Cape May Court House, New Jersey].  I don't know, I could--I always figured, I always watched people to do running and jumping and pole vaulting.  But pole vaulting was my main thing, but it really, I really wanted to be a great pole vaultist, but you have to be a great gymnast.  I was not a gymnast.  But I was able, my best jump in the Penn relays was twelve feet, six, something like that.
Speaker 1: Do you remember where you learned how to build your own pole?
Speaker 2: To do--
Speaker 1: To build your own jumping pole?
Speaker 2: Oh, I, oh, well, the point was, we didn't have that bamboo pole.  So we had to get something. So my father, "Well, why don't you go down to the woods and get one of those straight"--well, I called the name of it.  I forget what it was now anyway.  And he says, "All you have to do is put it up on the roof and let the bark fall off of it" --
Speaker 1: Probably Poplar?
Speaker 2: Huh?
Speaker 1: Probably Poplar?
Speaker 2: Yeah, but I don't know what it was.  But anyway, and we would tape, tape the thing around with tape just in case it broke.  But (laughter), then when I went to the Penn Relays, they didn't have that wicker pole.  You run down that thing and put that pole and that felt like your arms were gonna come off.  But now, that thing just bends and throws you over the bar.
Speaker 1: Yes.  Now, what was your first introduction to the Penn Relays?
Speaker 2: When I first went to Lincoln [University, Oxford, Pennsylvania].  When I first to Lincoln.  See, I was, we pole vaulters, they took us out to Lincoln.  My wife's brother graduated from Lincoln, and they had a track meet at Lincoln in the spring to try to entice blacks to come to Lincoln.  So I went to Lincoln for this track meet.  And they, I was pole vaulting above the CIAA [Central Intercollegiate Athletic Association] record in high school (laughter).  So they said, you have to come to Lincoln.  So that's probably why I took, went to Lincoln, the introductory of my going there as a high school student.
Speaker 1: Did you know about other schools?
Speaker 2: No, my, the only thing--for some reason I, somewhere stuck back in my mind, I wanted to go to [University of] Michigan [Ann Arbor, Michigan].  I don't know why I wanted to go to Michigan.  I wanted to go to Michigan, you know.  But then they told me, said, "You can go to Lincoln and work your way through, but you can't go to Michigan and work your way through."  So I think that's the main reason I went to Lincoln.
Story_ID: 31806
Speaker 1: I wanna go back to your trumpet and because you met your wife about this time.
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: And could you--just to have it in the right context?  Could you tell us about--
Speaker 2: Well, it turns out that I was sort of trying to go with my wife's sister.  And she went to Freedman Hospital in Washington [District of Columbia].  And that's when I started to look at the other sister (laughter).  But it turns out this family was, everybody was professionals, everybody was professional, brother, her brother was a state judge in Harrisburg [Pennsylvania].  And another brother was head of the chemistry department at Morgan [State University, Baltimore, Maryland].  Another brother was a realtor here in Baltimore.  And so the whole family was professional, you know what I mean?  And my wife said, "You just have to be a professional."  Yeah.
Speaker 1: Do you recall how you met the family?
Speaker 2: Well, I met the family because somewhere along the line I was in somewhere at a party or something and this sister asked me when I was born.  For some reason, I was talking, I don't know why it came up.  But I told her when I was born.  And she said, I didn't ask you when I was born, but who told you that that was my birthday?  It turned out that this sister, Belle, her name was Belle, had the same, born the same day I was born.  Yeah, and that's how I really got started in that family.
Speaker 1: Now, we started back to your musician life, you had learned to play the trumpet and you thought it was gonna take you lots of places.
Speaker 2: Oh, man, I was having so much fun.  You don't know how much fun I was having.
Speaker 1: How did you learn about all those places where you thought the trumpet was gonna take you?
Speaker 2: Well, I, you know, you see a television was coming on, and you'd see what's going on broadly.  And you'd look at it and you'd boy, this would be a good life to live.  You travel, and, you know, it just seemed like a nice thing to do.  But (laughter), like I was telling you, when she [Patricia Spaulding, Taylor's wife] told me, when I took her to the place where she could hear me play that trumpet, that ended that music.  No more trumpet.  But I did play a little bit while I was at Lincoln [University, Oxford, Pennsylvania].  We had little bands at Lincoln, you know, played at Cheney State, Westchester State Teachers College later on.  We played at Conowingo Dam (laughter) [Susquehanna River, Maryland].  I was at Conowingo Dam and, man, the rain came up and they were, they had a pig on a stick.  They brought that pig in and they started cutting the meat off that pig, you could see the blood.  You know those people ate that stuff?  They asked me did I want some.  I said, no, I don't want any of that (laughter).
Story_ID: 31807
Speaker 1: Now, where am I? Was your family particularly religious?
Speaker 2: No, no, no.  I don't remember, I can tell you a story.  The mayor of my town and my father at one were in business together.  They both died at the same time.  So at my father's funeral, you would surprised, there were more White people there than black people.  So I asked one of them, I said, Timmy, I said, why didn't you go to the mayor's funeral?  He said, "The mayor was no man like your father."  He said, "Your father, if you didn't have anything, you walked up to him and said, Colely, we don't have any food in the house.  Do you have anything I can do?"  And he said, "Colely would say, get a shovel and go to work."  He said, "Your father's all together a different man than the mayor."  So that's why, like I say, he hired a lot of people that he didn't need.  But he helped a lot of people that needed it.
Speaker 1: What was the most valuable lesson you think you learned from your father?
Speaker 2: I think it was that incident I was telling you about before, when he told me that those people didn't have any--he was trying to get me to say, get me to learn something that, don't--stop thinking about yourself and think about what you could do for other people.  And I think that was the biggest lesson I learned.  And I think I sort of lived that way all of my life.  I go to church.  But it's like I tell everybody, I said, Micah 6:8 [Bible verse] is the answer to everything.  Micah 6:8 (simultaneous)
Speaker 1: (Unclear).
Speaker 2: Micah 6:8, metaphorically speaking, Micah 6:8 says, be truthful in all your endeavors.  Do you know that's everything you do in life?  Then it says, have mercy.  Then it says, walk humbly with your God.  And that's what, the thing that I try to do.  That's what I've tried to do for many, many years now.  But I go to church and somebody asked me one day and said, well, why do you go to church?  I said, I go to church and support the church because the church helps a lot of people that need that help cause a lot of things about church I don't understand though, a lot of things.  I don't understand, for example, why the Catholic priests didn't go to jail.  Nobody's explained that to me yet.  You know, if I did what they did, I'd go to jail.  Why come they didn't go to jail?  They go to another parish to do the same thing over again.  I don't understand that.
Speaker 1: Now, when you were growing up, was--first, what was your religious faith?
Speaker 2: I was Methodist.
Speaker 1: You were Methodist?
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: Did you seek to--
Speaker 2: I was Methodist when I was a child, but when I went to Lincoln [University, Oxford, Pennsylvania], Lincoln is Presbyterian school, and then I really became a Presbyterian and I've been in the Presbyterian ever since.
Speaker 1: Okay, why did you make that switch?
Speaker 2: Well, (laughter) I guess--when I went to Lincoln, you got some money by learning the catechism.  And I learned the catechism, and I guess that sort of turned me on to Presbyterian, the catechism.
Speaker 1: Was chapel mandatory when you were at Lincoln?
Speaker 2: Huh?
Speaker 1: Was chapel, church, mandatory when you were at Lincoln?
Speaker 2: Yes, it was, it was, yes.  Yeah.  Everybody had to go to chapel.
Speaker 1: How often?
Speaker 2: Well, you were supposed to go every Sunday.  They would take attendance.  They would take attendance.
Story_ID: 31808
Speaker 1: Okay, talk to me about your time at Lincoln [University, Oxford, Pennsylvania] and describe those things that stand out in your mind about that Lincoln experience?
Speaker 2: Well, the Lincoln experience (laughter), the first day when I got there, I got in a fight when I first got there.  Well, me and another fellow drove up there in a beat-up Ford.  And (laughter) we stopped in between a couple of dormitories, and all the sophomores came running around the car.  So one of them started asking, asking questions.  So I said, what you asking me questions for?  He said, dog, he said, don't worry about why I'm asking you questions.  You just answer 'em.  I said, I'll answer what I wanna answer (laughter).  So that guy said, you're a smart aleck.  I said, well, maybe I am, but I don't like the way you're talking to me.  So anyway, he grabbed my necktie and he ran it up tight against my neck.  I said, wait a minute.  Then he said, get out of car and mark time.  I didn't know what mark time was.  So (laughter) anyway, I got out the car and as soon as I got my feet on the ground, I hit that guy.  I hit him, I hit him hard (laughter).  And they, the sophomores just picked me up, and that was the end of that.  But I said, don't you mess with me anymore cause I said somebody is gonna get real hurt, real bad.  Then there was another guy there from Wildwood, New Jersey who said, he told the sophomores, said, don't mess with him, said that guy's crazy, said he'll kill you.  So the sophomores never bothered me anymore, never bothered me anymore (laughter).  But then I got very friendly with a lot of students, you know, I got very friendly with a lot of students.  And, in fact, the first Thanksgiving I took one home with me cause he had no place to go Thanksgiving.  So I took him home with me and he became Thurgood Marshall's [Associate Justice of the United States Supreme Court, 1967-1991] right-hand man, Carter Williams.  He became his right-hand man.  And we've been friends ever since, been friends ever since.  He's in New York.
Speaker 1: Were there faculty members at Lincoln who really stand out in your mind?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, there was a lot of faculty members.  See, Lincoln was "The black Princeton" [University, Princeton, New Jersey].  I don't know if it's still called that.  When I was there, it was called the black Princeton.  The Princeton professors would retire, come to Lincoln.  They'd give them a house and they'd stay there for, like about $3,000 a year, something like that, and their kids could go up in the country, see the country anyway.  And so I had a good--my chemistry professor had a Ph.D. in math, had a Ph.D. in chemistry, retired from Princeton.
Speaker 1: Do you remember his name?
Speaker 2: Oh, I thought I had it on the tip of my tongue.
Speaker 1: Okay, we'll come back to that.
Speaker 2: Anyway, and his hobby was tracking where boats were going.  He could tell you where any boat was going and where it was gonna dock and how long it would be there and all that.  He just did that, his hobby.
Story_ID: 31809
Speaker 1: Now, so this is about the time that you met your wife [Patricia Spaulding].  How long did you know her before you got married?
Speaker 2: Oh, I had seen her around.  I, nothing went on cause I was looking at her sister.  When her sister left, then I got real attentive (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay, so tell me the story about your marriage to your wife?
Speaker 2: Well, we decided we'd get married so we went to, I guess about ten miles from Cape May Court House [New Jersey] to a white church [in Seaville, New Jersey] and asked the man would he marry us.  And he said, "Yes, I'll marry you."  So we just got married.  We didn't tell anybody for a year.  We didn't tell anybody for a year 'cause oh, I just didn't tell anybody.  I was still in school and she was, she was about three years behind me in school.
Speaker 1: What did her parents think of this?
Speaker 2: They liked me, they liked me and she was very--one thing I liked about her, she was very smart.  My wife was very smart (laughter).  She came to Morgan [State University, Baltimore, Maryland] to go to college.  The first day she was there, they sent a note around asking is anyone in the freshman, coming in the freshman, who can take shorthand and do typing.  It turned out that she was the only person in that freshman class that could do shorthand and typing.  She walked out of that room and went to the president's office, and she became administrative assistant to five Morgan [Morgan State University] presidents.  One of them called the house one night, said, Ms. Taylor, I can't find the Xerox [a document copied via a dry photocopying technique] folder.  And she laughed and she said, Xerox doesn't start with a "z".  It starts with an "x".  He said, "Oh."
Speaker 1: Did you ask her father for her hand in marriage?
Speaker 2: Oh, ask her what?
Speaker 1: Her father?
Speaker 2: No, no, we just, we got married, no they didn't know it--nobody knew we were married.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: We just went and got married.
Speaker 1: So when did her parents find out that you were married?
Speaker 2: Well, I, her brother found out first, and I think her brother got it back to the family.
Speaker 1: You know, a long time ago, you told me a story about your wife's father and--
Speaker 2: My wife's father.
Speaker 1: --your wife's father and when you asked him if you could marry his daughter, and what answer did he give you?
Speaker 2: I don't remember that.
Speaker 1: It had to do with staying in Baltimore.
Speaker 2: Huh?
Speaker 1: It had to do with staying in Baltimore.
Speaker 2: I don't remember that.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, okay.
Speaker 2: I don't remember that.
Speaker 1: Now, let's talk about your children--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --and how many did you have and what were their names?
Speaker 2: I have two children, Trina and Dwight, two, a boy and a girl, alpha and omega (laughter).  But they both have done well.  Trina, Trina finished high school at sixteen [years old].  She finished college at the University of Maryland [College Park, Maryland] at twenty.  At twenty-one, she was working full time at IBM.  And she retired in her fifties from AT&T [Inc.] with full benefits.  My son sits on the board at T. Rowe Price [Investment management firm].  And he just retired from a job in office properties, and the company hired him back as a consultant at $100,000 a year of one year.  Now, he's in, right now, he's in Hong Kong [China].  He's taking a vacation.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 31810
Speaker 1: --on that first problem on the exam, they're not going go to that second problem.  See?  So what you have to do, I always gave four problems.  Four problems that's all I gave, four.  The first one an idiot could almost do it.  That second one, you got to know a little bit of physics.  That third one, if you did it, you a 'B' student.  And the last one, you an "A" student, if you do it.  And they would go to the library and check out all the books out of the library.  Couldn't keep any books in the library.
Speaker 2: Okay, why don't you save that story because we're getting ready to get started again.  I want to get that on tape, okay?  (RESUMES INTERVIEW) The--when we stopped you had met your wife [Patricia Spaulding], and you had gotten married secretly.  And I understand it was your wife who convinced you to keep on going to school.
Speaker 1: Um-hum.
Speaker 2: Would you mind relating to us that story?
Speaker 1: Well, yeah, actually, like I say, everybody in her family was professional.  And she wanted a professional life, and she'd been living around professionals all of her life.  It turned out that her father was a brother to C. C. Spaulding, the man that started the North Carolina Mutual Insurance Company, okay.  So the whole Spaulding thing has been professionalism, you know what I mean.  So her brother, her oldest brother was a State judge in Harrisburg [Philadelphia].  And like I said, the other brother was a chemist at Morgan [State University, Baltimore, Maryland].  Another brother was a realtor.  So and just the normal thing that she would have wanted somebody with a profession.  And, of course, see, I had not idea about going to college.  See, all I wanted to do was blow that trumpet (laughter) 'cause I was having a lot of fun.  But, so that was the best move I ever made in my life.
Speaker 2: So now you get your AB degree--
Speaker 1: Yeah, at Lincoln [University, Oxford, Pennsylvania].
Speaker 2: --at Lincoln, and what did you do next?
Speaker 1: That's when I went to the University of Pennsylvania [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania].
Speaker 2: Okay, so you went immediately from, to the University of Pennsylvania?
Speaker 1: Yeah, I went right away because I figured I had to teach chemistry and physics.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: So and I had no idea of getting a doctor's degree.  All I wanted to do was take a couple of courses.
Speaker 2: So tell me about the faculty at University of Pennsylvania when you went there?
Speaker 1: The faculty of University of Pennsylvania was half Jewish and half gentile, okay.  And so when the War broke out [World War II], they got a contract.  And they had to hire some students.  Who do you think they hired first?  I got hired first.
Speaker 2: And why was that the case, do you think?
Speaker 1: Because they, the Jews were afraid to put a Jewish boy and the White were afraid to give up a white boy, so I was the only choice (laughter).
Speaker 2: Now, what about the other students who were there?  Were you the only African American student?
Speaker 1: I was the only African American student there all the time I was there, only African American.  But they, I had a wonderful relationship at Penn.  Dr. [Gaylord Probasco] Harnwell, who later became president of the University of Pennsylvania [Physics professor, 1938 - 1953; University president 1953-1970], would come down to the lab if I'm having a problem with my research.  He would come--and the man was fantastic.  He would come in there and sit down and say, "Jules, have you tried such and such and such?"  "Jules, what do you think about if you did such and such and such?"  And then you would come in and say, "Oh, such and such and such.  Yeah, I think something like that might work fine."  He said, "Well, why don't you give it a try?"  Actually, when he left the room, you would sort of feel like you had found the answers to what was wrong (laughter), you know, but he had led you to the answer, you know, by the questions he would ask you.  He was great at that.
Speaker 2: Now, you went there to get a master's [degree]--
Speaker 1: No, I went there to get two courses.
Speaker 2: To get two courses, yeah.
Speaker 1: And then they said, stay and get the master's [degree].
Speaker 2: Stay and get the master's [degree].
Speaker 1: Then when, then when the War broke out, I was working on my--well, when the War broke out, what really happened was I went down to West Virginia State College, okay.  And that's when I found out that you had to have a doctor's degree.  So they paid me $2,400 for twelve months at West Virginia State College.  And they, I wrote a letter to Dr. Harnwell, and I told him that I would love to be a college professor, but I realized I have to get a doctorate degree.  I said, are any scholarships available for me to come back to the University.  And he wrote me a letter and right away told me that he would give me $1,800 to go to school.  And that helped.  Then I got a Rosenwald fellowship, so everything worked out.
Speaker 2: Alright.
Story_ID: 31811
Speaker 1: Now, what was your research?
Speaker 2: Solid state physics.
Speaker 1: Solid state physics.
Speaker 2: In fact, there's two, there were two articles in that thing that I gave you.
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Did you see them?
Speaker 1: Yes, I saw them, but--But tell me about that research?
Speaker 2: Well, that research was, if you take a solid state crystal and compress it, all the, everything changes, everything changes.  Well, my advisor said, "Jules, I got an idea about what we can do."  And I asked him, "What can we do?"  And he says, "We can put pressure on these silicon, germanium that are, and we can study the mobility of the ions and Hall effect and some other things, resistance and says that'll be a good thesis problem for you."  So we took a hydraulic jack.  With the hydraulic jack I could get two thousand atmospheres [pressure measurement].  And so I studied the germ--germanium and a couple of other things.  And then I wrote an article for the "Physical Review".  And then Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] grabbed it, Harvard grabbed it--no, MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts].  MIT grabbed it.  They could go to many times the pressure I was going to, but you know what would happen?  They got the same results that I got, same results, but at two thousand atmospheres.
Speaker 1: Now, initially you started out wanting to be a teacher--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --and you wanted to be a teacher at the high-school level versus until you realized you had to have physics.  And then you realized you wanted to be a college professor.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Where did you passion for research come from?
Speaker 2: Well, I was always curious about things, always curious about things.  Why does this happen, you know?  I wanted to know why.
Speaker 1: But when I look back at the, many of the people who were of your generation who were teaching--
Speaker 2: They weren't thinking about physics.
Speaker 1: They weren't thinking, but even those who were thinking about physics, they weren't thinking about doing research.  They weren't thinking about publishing.  You did.
Speaker 2: Yeah, well, I just loved, I loved to be in that lab, and I loved to dope those crystals with arsenic and other things to change their qualities and properties.  And, in fact, we didn't know anything at all about a clean room.  So I was in charge of doing the doping at the University of Pennsylvania [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] in physics.  So my advisor would say to me, he says, "Dope up such and such and such." So, I'd start doping and I'd melt the whole thing and defuse it with the dope.  It'd come out perfect, perfectly.
Speaker 1: And for a layman who is watching this, what do you mean by doping?
Speaker 2: Doping is, you see, you take something out, take something out of a crystal, you got some calcium.  You take some calcium out and put something in that place for that calcium.  See, that's doping it, that's doping it.  So, but let me tell you know what happened.  Then the professor would say to me, he says, "Jules, that last batch you made wasn't like the first batch."  I said, "I made it the same way."  He said, "Well, something's going on around here."  You know what it was?  We didn't know anything about a clean room.  And the woman would come in and sweep and the dust would fly all around the room.  You can't have any dust, you know.  It took a long while to find out about that.  But we found out about, um-hum, we found out about it.  And from then on we didn't have her, she wasn't allowed in the room at all.  She wasn't allowed in the room at all.
Story_ID: 31812
Speaker 1: Now, solid state was a new field back in those days.
Speaker 2: Huh?
Speaker 1: Solid state was a new field, emerging field.
Speaker 2: Yeah, right, right.
Speaker 1: How did it feel to be on the forefront of a field?
Speaker 2: Fine, I mean fine.  (Laughter) But you put up with people like Shockley (laughter).
Speaker 1: Tell me about [William B.] Shockley.
Speaker 2: Shockley had it, when you go to a physical science meeting, Shockley would have five, six, seven, eight, ten people following him, everywhere he went, everywhere he went.  Here comes Shockley and his crowd, you know (laughter).  But I don't think he liked us too much (laughter).
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: Talk to us about Shockley's theory [Shockley's research was in solid state physics].
Speaker 1: Well, Shockley actually stole the stuff.  He didn't, he wasn't the man that did it.  But just like, when you're in a group and somebody's over you, you might do the thing in the group, but he gets the credit.  That's what Shockley did.  He took the credit, he took the credit.
Speaker 2: There were a number of you pioneers who did an awful lot of work with many people who went on to get Nobel Prizes.  How many of them do you think should have shared in that Nobel Prize?
Speaker 1: How many what?
Speaker 2: Should have shared the credit for that Nobel Prize?
Speaker 1: Oh, I think people like [Herman] Branson should have gotten it, for example [1954 Nobel Prize in Chemistry for discovery of alpha-helix protein structure].  Branson, Branson did the work.  Branson did the work, you know.  He should have gotten--I don't think he was even mentioned.
Speaker 2: He was not.
Speaker 1: Ah, darn (unclear), that's terrible.
Speaker 2: What about people like--when did you meet John Hunter?
Speaker 1: Who?
Speaker 2: John [McNeill] Hunter [Physicist]?
Speaker 1: I, I, you know one thing.  I only just spoke to him.  I never really did have, know him very personally.  But I know he and his wife are both great teachers.  Both of them are great teachers, yeah.  And I wondered how he was able to attract physics students at that time, and he was attracting them.  I certainly would have like to have known that, how he did it because I'm sure there weren't any models that the people could model after when he was, when he first started teaching.
Speaker 2: What about Warren Henry?
Speaker 1: Warren Henry [physicist], he went to the University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois].  He was good, one of the nicest guys you'd ever wanna meet.  I was having trouble measuring magnetic fields, and you know, he came all the way from Howard [University, Washington, D.C.] over to, over here to show me how to do it.  And I never will forget that.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: He was just a great guy.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Story_ID: 31813
Speaker 1: Well, before I get that far, let's go back to where you now have come to Baltimore, and you are starting the Department of Physics here at Morgan [State University, Baltimore, Maryland].  Could you talk to me about that experience?
Speaker 2: Well, when I came to Baltimore, I had less equipment in Physics than they had--I mean I had less equipment in physics than we had in my high school.  So I told my wife right away, I said, we've got to leave here, said I wanna do some research.  She said, oh, no, said, we've got to stay because my mother's here.  And she said, you'll make a difference.  (Laughter) I just wanted to do some research.  So I said, okay, I'll give it a try.  So what I did was, I went over to Hopkins [Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, Maryland] to talk to Dr. Dekee (ph.) who was chairman of the Hopkins physics department.  And I said, Dr. Dekee, I'd like to have a couple of your advanced undergraduate students to help me develop a major at Morgan.  When I went to Morgan, they were teaching one course for pre-meds, and that was, that was nothing.  It was nothing.  You know what I mean.  And I threw the book away right away anyway (laughter).  So Dr. Dekee gave me permission to hire a couple of students.  One of them spent his whole life at Morgan, whole life, came and started as an instructor, as an undergraduate instructor.  So by that and the kids that I was getting from Polytechnic [Baltimore Polytechnic Institute, Baltimore, Maryland], we could offer good courses.
Speaker 1: How did you start the relationship with Hopkins?
Speaker 2: Oh, when I first came to Morgan, Dr. Dekee called me.  He said, we have a lot of equipment over here that we're not using anymore.  And I didn't have anything.  I had nothing.  And he said, we'd certainly like to give it to you 'cause it's still useful.  So he did give us a lot, a lot of equipment, a lot of equipment.  And then I was a good--of course, his wife was an astronomer at Goucher [College, Baltimore, Maryland].  And she would--
Speaker 1: Now, that was about what year when you started (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: That was in the early '50s [1950s], [sic, 1949].
Speaker 1: Early '50s [1950s].
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, what was the--those were interesting times in the city of Baltimore [Maryland] in terms of the racial situation.
Speaker 2: Oh, it was bad.  It was bad.
Speaker 1: So how did that work?
Speaker 2: Well, what happened was, for example, black people could not go downtown and try on clothes.  So they had to go somewhere else to buy clothes.  But it changed, it changed slowly, but it changed.  I remember my kids asking me, is that a movie that we can go to?  In fact, when I came to Baltimore, they graduated their first dental student in '60s [1960s], you know.  Things were bad here.  They were really bad.
Speaker 1: So I'm thinking about--hang on for one second--your going over to Hopkins and bringing those students to Morgan which at the time was not predominantly black, but probably all black, to start a physics program.  And so with the situation that we had in the city of Baltimore and I'm assuming that those students coming from Hopkins were white, were they?
Speaker 2: Um-hum, they were white.
Speaker 1: Okay, so what were the relationship like?
Speaker 2: Well, the relationship was good with them.  I got along fine with them.  I had no problem at all.  They were so happy to have a job and they never, you know, at that age, they were really enthused about teaching.  So it sure helped me.  I don't think I could have done it 'cause I was trying to do too much and then trying to do research, too.  I just, when I first went there, I was just running from here to there.  I never had a secretary, and all the time I'd been here, I never had a secretary.  So that's why my stuff is everywhere.  You know you throw it in a pile, and you don't know where you threw it.
Story_ID: 31814
Speaker 1: So talk about the growth of the [physics] department [Morgan State University, Baltimore, Maryland]?
Speaker 2: The what?
Speaker 1: The growth of the department.
Speaker 2: Oh, well, as soon as we produced, started producing Ph.D.'s, then the department grew.  It really grew.  Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, and your first student was?
Speaker 2: Carl Clark.
Speaker 1: Carl Clark.
Speaker 2: Yeah, Carl Clark [graduated from Morgan State University in 1958, Charles Harper and Conrad Williams also graduated from this program in 1958].  Yeah.  He was, he had a problem.  Got darn it, he had a problem.  That guy would, I'd give a--I'd go to lecture, and then Carl would go to sleep.  And I'd give an exam and he'd make one of the best grades.  I said, "How do you do this?"  And I found out he had some kind of disease that people go to sleep.  I didn't know what it was.  Well, anyway, I said to him, I said, "If you go to graduate school, you make sure you tell people that you've got this problem.  Otherwise, they'll think you're not interested in what they're telling you."  But he would do it all the time.  I don't know if he ever got over it.  Did you know him very well?
Speaker 1: Yeah, and I know him well.  Now, you produced a significant number of African Americans who went on to get a Ph.D.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Would you like to talk about any of them?
Speaker 2: Well, what's the name, I think, I think that [Conrad] Williams [also a HistoryMaker] was my best student by far, the best student, strongest one.  But all of them, I think were pretty darned good, all of them that I had.  See, I was getting, I was getting, when I was getting those kids from Polytechnic [Baltimore Polytechnic Institute, Baltimore, Maryland], I was getting the best kids in town, you know what I mean?  So if you had that mathematical background that you usually don't get, black folks weren't getting it when I was coming along.
Story_ID: 31815
Speaker 1: So, the--
Speaker 2: Now--
Speaker 1: --you can teach them physics, you can teach 'em physics, but you--one thing about teaching physics, you have to do a lot of demonstrations 'cause they haven't seen anything.  That's how I remember when I was teaching friction, I'd walk into the class, and I'd take a meter stick, and I'd put it on my hands like this.  Then I'd slowly pull my hands together like this, and every time it would come out on fifty [centimeters].  Then I'd put finger here and put one finger way out on the end, and I still would do the same thing.  They always come out on fifty [centimeters].  So I said, why is this coming out on fifty [centimeters] all the time, you know?  The kids, you get all kinds of answers.  You get all kinds of answers, but soon they figure out, why does that hand move faster than this one here?  Oh, this one's got more weight on it, you see.  (Laughter) So it doesn't move.  So I think, see, they had never seen things like that, you know what I mean?  And I was pretty good at demonstrations.  I was very good at demonstrations.
Speaker 2: Okay, talk to me about your teaching philosophy.
Speaker 1: You, the main thing is, you're not there to impress them about how good you are, you know.  You're there to teach 'em, you know what I mean?  And when you give an examination, like I said, don't clobber them with that first problem 'cause they're not gonna go to the second problem, okay.
Speaker 2: When did you learn that?
Speaker 1: Huh?
Speaker 2: When did you learn that?
Speaker 1: I learned that as soon as I found out that if you did clobber them, they wouldn't do the second problem.  I said, okay, I'll work it out.  So I had a grade, that the first problem, anybody can work it.  The second problem, you've got to know a little bit of physics.  The third problem, you've got to be "B" student.  The fourth problem, you might be an "A" student, but I, the point was I couldn't keep a book in the library.  They would check every book, with every problem worked out in that book.  They have all those problems.  They'd have all those problems (laughter).
Speaker 2: So what did you do to ensure that so many of your students went on to their Ph.D.s?
Speaker 1: Make sure that they had the foundation.  You see, I had no foundation.  I had no foundation at all.  And I said to myself, I said, I'll never send anybody away from here to study physics unless they have the foundation.
Speaker 2: Okay, but what caused them to have that belief in themselves, because most students--
Speaker 1: If they like you, if students like you and they trust you and they believe in you, they'll do what--they'll listen to you.  They'll listen to you.  Yeah.
Story_ID: 31816
Speaker 1: Now, you had a number of students who went to Howard.  You had a number of students that went to Howard University [Washington, D.C.]?
Speaker 2: Yeah, um-hum.
Speaker 1: Was there a special relationship with that university?
Speaker 2: No, no, no.  A lot of kids don't wanna leave home, don't wanna leave home.  And Howard just happened to have, they had some good people over there. [Warren] Henry [physicist] was excellent in what he was doing, very excellent.
Speaker 1: Yes.  How well did you know Henry?
Speaker 2: Not too well, although I knew that most of the students would come back over, and they would always talk about Dr. Henry, Dr. Henry, Dr. Henry.  So I figured that he was a pretty good guy.  But when he came over and helped me with magnetism. That taught me something too about a man that would come all the way from Washington to help me with my problem.  Yeah, I liked that.
Speaker 1: Now, Dr. Henry was one of the very first African Americans that I knew of who had his work cited in, you know, lots of places.   Hausing (ph.) Resing (ph)., for example, cited his work in their book.  What do you think caused him to rise to the top?
Speaker 2: I think, I know I had a teacher at Morgan, Dr. Dillard.  He was chemistry and he was at University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois] at the same time Henry was at the University of Chicago.  And he said, Henry worked very hard, worked very hard.  And he was very much liked at the University of Chicago. So I never had much contact with him, but all I knew he was a good teacher, and he was willing to help anybody that wanted to learn.
Story_ID: 31817
Speaker 1: When we were finished, we were talking about your experience at Morgan [State University, Baltimore, Maryland].  What I wanna do is to go back and pick up something that I forgot.  I wanna talk about your West Virginia State [University, Institute, West Virginia] experience.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Tell me how you got there?
Speaker 2: Oh, there was a professor that had, wanted to go to graduate school.  And he was the only one teaching physics at West Virginia State College.  And they were looking for someone--now, how in the world somebody told me that there was going to be a job opening at West Virginia State College.  So the War [World War II] broke out at the same time, and things were in upset at University of Pennsylvania [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania].  And I decided that I'd better go get this job.  Somebody told me about it so I applied for the job, and they hired me right away.  But then when I got down there, I made, Sidney Coleman, I don't know if you heard of him or not.  But he was a business manager of some kind, but he would give me food.  They gave me food.  They put me in a good house, a smooth house, a beautiful house.  And oh, they treated--and then they found out that I could do surveying so they asked me would I lay out the tennis court.  And I said, sure.  So I laid out the tennis courts for them.  And they just wanted me to stay.  They wanted me to stay but when I got that offer to come back to study more at University of Pennsylvania, Dr. Davis said that I couldn't refuse that.  That's how I got there.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 31818
Speaker 1: Now, now, let's go back to your days at Morgan [State University, Baltimore, Maryland] because not only did you happen to produce an outstanding physics department, but did an awful lot of work which expanded Morgan.  As an example, you started a golf team.
Speaker 2: Yeah, we got a championship golf team.
Speaker 1: Yes, as I recall your very first year.  So talk to me about that.
Speaker 2: Golf, you know, they--see, why, coaching golf, you learn a lot about kids, you know.  (Laughter) I'll never forget.  We had a match down at West Virginia, not West Virginia, a school in, where Wake Forest [University, Winston-Salem, North Carolina] is.  What's the school there, black school?
Speaker 1: North Carolina Central University [Durham, North Carolina]?
Speaker 2: Winston-Salem.
Speaker 1: Okay, Winston-Salem [State] Teachers College [later Winston-Salem State University, Winston-Salem, North Carolina].
Speaker 2: Yeah, Winston Salem.  So I, when I went--oh, bring that up.  There was something.  What did you just ask?
Speaker 1: About your experience starting the golf team at Morgan?
Speaker 2: Golf team at Morgan.  So the guys came to me, and they said, we'd like to go down a day ahead of time, give us some money.  So I gave them some money.  Boy, when I got down there, they asked me, they said, where in the world did you find these people?  They liked to tore up the place, you know what I mean?  And I asked them, what, I said, you know, you can't do that.  You know what I mean.  I got on them about it, but just the way they--I had a long, hard time trying to get them to win.  They didn't have this winning thing.  All they wanted was to have a lot of fun, you know what I mean?  So, like for example, we started out, and the first day of the golf tournament and we're way ahead, and we lose the golf tournament, you know.  I said you--
Speaker 1: What year was this?
Speaker 2: This was--
Speaker 1: About?
Speaker 2: --about in the '50s [1950s], '50s [1950s] and the '60s [1960s].   So I find out they have a party or go somewhere and do something crazy and they come back the next day and they can't play golf worth a darn.  So I said, you can't do that.  I said, you come, you came down here to win, and said, that's what it's all about.  But they didn't, they weren't taking golf seriously.  It took me a long time to get them to say, we're going down there to win this tournament, you know what I mean?  So, and I don't know why they were that way at first, but it was, I couldn't understand.  How could be so far ahead the first day, and the next day, they can't play.  They'd go out and party.
Speaker 1: Did Morgan have a golf course?
Speaker 2: No, no, Morgan didn't have a--
Speaker 1: Where did you practice?
Speaker 2: They never, they never had a golf course.  We practiced on Mount Pleasant [Golf Course, Baltimore, Maryland] mostly.
Speaker 1: How did that work?
Speaker 2: It worked fine, worked fine, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, because I'm thinking in terms of black golfers and, you know, most of them didn't have a place to play.  That's where Langston [Golf Course, Washington, D.C., segregated golf course; opened in 1939] got its--.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 31819
Speaker 1: Where did you learn to play golf?
Speaker 2: Well, I caddied in high school.  The golf course was about four miles from my house, and we could play golf on Monday afternoons.  Only, some of us only had one club, but we'd get out there and hit the ball around the golf course with the one club.  You'd put with it (laughter).  And you pick it up and then you, after you start picking, you know, somebody beat you and then you'd work harder trying to find out why he beat me and what do I have to do to change to be in competition, you know.  So I have, I guess I have, what do you say, Trina [Taylor Brown, Taylor's daughter], about fifty golf trophies in the cellars, at least fifty.  Fifty, I was pretty good at it, and I never took a lesson.  I just watched what the guys were doing, and said, well, if they do it that way, I'm gonna try it that way, you know what I mean.  So I learned a lot about golf.
Speaker 1: Who did your team play?
Speaker 2: Who'd they play?  We got the first black college tournament.  It was Howard [University, Washington, D.C.], Cheyney [University, Cheyney, Pennsylvania] and Morgan [State University, Baltimore, Maryland].  And Howard won it.
Speaker 1: So you played all black teams?
Speaker 2: All black teams, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Oh, we played one white team in New Jersey near Woodbury, Glassboro.
Speaker 1: Glassboro, it used to be Glassboro State [later Rowan College of New Jersey, Glassboro, New Jersey].
Speaker 2: Yeah, right, right.  We played them.  That's the only white team we played.
Speaker 1: Okay, and how did you go about instilling in your golf students the desire to win?
Speaker 2: Well, I told them, I said, you know, I said, you know you don't have to--as you get older, this is one profession where you'll be meeting a lot of professional people.  And I said, you'll be surprised at what goes on professionally on a golf course that's not golf.  And I said, and every little bit that you can learn about golf, cause you can move on up in the echelon so it will help you later on in life.  And they believed me, they believed me.  They just, sometimes just acted crazy (laughter).
Story_ID: 31820
Speaker 1: Okay, now, I wanna go back to something again.  You once told me about a professor that you had the University of Pennsylvania [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] that really helped you out.
Speaker 2: Yeah, that was Dr. [Gaylord Probasco] Harnwell.
Speaker 1: But, who blocked something later on.
Speaker 2: Yep, he sure did.  I couldn't believe it.  I, I just couldn't believe it.
Speaker 1: Okay, could you talk about that experience?
Speaker 2: Well, one of the professors--well, let me tell you how much they liked me.  They wanted to make sure that I got a degree.  That's one thing they wanted to make sure I made a degree.  Now, there was a kid that told the professor, says, I didn't like your lecture today.  I says, oh, my God, I said, he's gone.  He was gone.  He was Phi Beta Kappa [honor society].  They flunked him.  When you go to that oral examination, if you're not clean when you go there, they're gonna flunk you, you know what I mean.  So it's a funny thing, the professor asked me, said, what are you doing Saturday?  Bring your wife and kids and come on out to Swarthmore [Pennsylvania] and have barbeque.  We did that and the next week, one of the professors said to me, what are you doing the weekend?  Come on out to the house and have barbeque.  I said, Trina [Taylor Brown, Taylor's daughter], I mean, Pat [Patricia Spaulding, Taylor's wife], I said they're trying to find out if we can represent the University of Pennsylvania.  So I'm walking down the hall now in this building and the woman said to me, said, "Jules, what do you know about Hall Effect?"  I said, "I can handle that.  It'll be good"; said, "Well, what do you know about Schrodinger's Equation?"  I said, "I can handle that."  So what do you think happened when I went in that oral examination.  They asked me the same thing.  They just wanted to make sure that I got the degree.  But they could have done the same thing to do me that they did to that other guy, you see?  And that guy was smart.  He was walking around the hall with his test paper in his hand.  And the professor came out and said, "What are you doing out here?"  He said, "I was waiting to see if I could see you to hand you my test paper."  The professor said, "Where did I tell you to stick the (blanking) paper when you finished it?"  He said, "In the office, in his cube," whatever it is.  He said, "Why didn't you put it in there?"  And he said, "Well, I thought maybe somebody would look at it."  "Go put it in there," the professor told him to go put it in there.  He flunked the guy.  He never got his degree at Penn, and he was brilliant.
Speaker 1: So why do you think you got that support?
Speaker 2: Huh?
Speaker 1: Why do you think you got that support?
Speaker 2: Oh, you don't know what I did.  I was the only one in my class that could fix radios.  Every time you look up there was a radio sitting on my desk with a note on it, said, Jules, can you fix this?  And I'd have to not only go to the store to get a tube or resistance or something to fix the darn thing, and I never turned anybody off.  But it was hurting me 'cause I shouldn't be doing that.  I should be studying, you know what I mean?  But if they make up their mind, either you're gonna get the degree or you're not gonna get it.  And if you have proved to them that you're worthy of that degree, you're gonna get that degree.  They'll see to it.  But you'd be surprised.  That boy, that boy was brilliant.  Excuse me, when he first came there, I never will forget.  He was in one of these classes that I had, had two briefcases with books in them, two briefcases.  He'd come to classes with his books, and he say to the professor, says, "What's the name of your textbook?"  The professor would tell him.  And he said, "Well, thank you."  He'd go back and get his two briefcases and he'd disappear.  So, 'cause they would say to us, "Have you seen him?"  I said, "oh, he's around," he said, "Well, he hasn't been to class."  So it came to final examination.  That boy tore him up, tore him up.  But he never went to class.  So (laughter).
Speaker 1: So, that's part of the story.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 31821
Speaker 1: You published your first research paper, and what was it about?
Speaker 2: That was, okay, my first, well, actually, it was about my thesis was my first one from the University of Pennsylvania [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania].  That was my first one.  Since then I've a lot of publications since then, but that was, that was the first experiment that was ever done in high pressure, first experiment ever I'd done in high pressure.  And I thought I had it nixed until, until MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts] could go to several, several [a much greater pressure] --
Speaker 1: Now, in lay terms, what was important about that experiment?
Speaker 2: Well, it's a lot.  Any change in pressure on a semiconductor in an instrument would alter the properties.  And what it's supposed to be doing, it won't be doing it, you see.  So that was really the key to what happened under any kind of pressure.
Speaker 1: Now, let's talk about the equipment that you used in your work at U-Penn [University of Pennsylvania] and then when you came to Morgan [State University, Baltimore, Maryland] and also start trying to set up your own research lab here.  How did you make that transition?
Speaker 2: Well, I had a good relationship with the man down in the shop.  And that man made a high pressure bomb for me, gave it to me--
Speaker 1: What's a high-pressure bomb?
Speaker 2: It's a bomb about this long and it's about this big around.  It's got a hole in it about this big around.  Okay, and--
Speaker 1: Why do we call it a bomb?
Speaker 2: Well, I don't know why they call it a bomb, but it's called a high-pressure bomb.  And then it has on the end, on one end is a long stainless steel tube, comes out, that you can put or stuff a sample and stick it out through that tube, then put a magnet around it so you could get the properties to say what's going on.  But he did that, he just did that because he liked me.  He did that because he liked me.  So when I got, so when I came to Morgan, I had the high-pressure bomb to do the work, so that's why I got a government contract and--well, that helped me get a government contract.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 31822
Speaker 1: Now, when did you first start working with government labs and funding agencies here at Morgan?
Speaker 2: Funding agencies?
Speaker 1: Yeah, when you first started working with the--
Speaker 2: Oh, oh, that was, oh, that was in the '70s [1970s] mostly, in the '70s [1970s], yeah.
Speaker 1: And what was your experience in getting funding for the kind of work that you were doing?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, the key is to be able to write a proposal.  You've got to learn how to write a proposal.  So what happened was, I got elected to the National Science Foundation [NSF] to review grants.  And that's how you learn how to write proposals (laughter), write proposals because you see good ones and you see bad ones.  You know what I mean?  So you know just what you need to be saying, you see.  So that helped me a lot in writing proposals.  So when I got this Army thing from ONR [Office of Naval Research, Arlington, Virginia], and--but that helped a lot.  But actually, I got--now, we had a man named Dr. [Clarence F.] Stephens [mathematician at Morgan State College from 1945-1962].  He went up to the New York system [State University College at Geneseo, New York].  He went up to the New York system because the president said we think that a person can both teach and do research.  And he would use me as an example a lot, you know what I mean?  But this guy was an excellent teacher.  In fact, up at that New York City school system, they wondered how did we let him go.
Speaker 1: What was this?
Speaker 2: Stephens, Dr. Stephens.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: All those kids were getting Ph.D.'s and he had a quiet room where they could go study (laughter).
Speaker 1: And what was the name of the school?
Speaker 2: At Morgan [State University, Baltimore, Maryland].
Speaker 1: At Morgan.
Speaker 2: He had a quiet room at Morgan.  Yeah, he wanted to develop mathematicians.
Speaker 1: In terms of your work when you were at Morgan--
Speaker 2: Huh?
Speaker 1: In terms of the work that you did when you were at Morgan, what did you like the most?
Speaker 2: I liked the teaching most.  Really, I really liked to teach.  I really liked to teach.  I liked to see the kids' eyes light up and say, oh, gee, I didn't know that, you know or I'm glad that you explained that to me.  Yeah, I think it's teaching.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 31823
Speaker 1: What was your professional society affiliations?
Speaker 2: American Physical Society [APS]--
Speaker 1: Okay, of all of the, like the American Physical Society.
Speaker 2: Well, I belong to the, Chesapeake Section of the--
Speaker 1: AAPT [American Association of Physics Teachers].
Speaker 2: AAPT.
Speaker 1: That's where I first met you.
Speaker 2: I was chairman of the Science Division of the Maryland Academy of Sciences [Baltimore, Maryland] and when we first built the new science building on Inner Harbor and I went to all the science things that were happening in the area which professors after me did not go.  So things would happen at Loyola [University Maryland, Baltimore, Maryland] and [Johns] Hopkins [University, Baltimore, Maryland], I'd go to all those things, seminars and everything, go to everything.  But--
Speaker 1: Well, that's what I'm getting at because in my earlier professional life, when I would go to these meetings, I would always see you.  I didn't see many other people.
Speaker 2: No, no.
Speaker 1: So what was the difference?
Speaker 2: I don't know.  They didn't have, well, the point is, when you're into science, you want to know as many people that are in that science in your area as you, cause if you have to lean on somebody, you'll have somebody to lean on, you know.  But since they weren't doing--like I say, when I went to Morgan, nobody was doing any research, nobody.  And they got after me because I was doing research, you see what I mean?  So I don't know.
Speaker 1: What made you persist?
Speaker 2: Huh?
Speaker 1: What made you persists?
Speaker 2: I just loved doing it, I just loved doing research (laughter).  I remember one of the kids, interesting story, he wanted to be a physicist but he just didn't have it.  So we're in the lab one day and I said to him, Kelvin, I'll tell you about that in a minute, I said, "Plot this up, plot this data up," and I said, "It should come out in a straight line."  So he said, okay.  So he put two points down on the graph paper.  He said, "Doctor, you were right.  That's a straight line (laughter)."  So they called him Dr., Lord Kelvin, after Lord Kelvin and today, he goes by that name.  He doesn't know that they were talking about absolute zero (laughter).
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: And Kelvin was (laughter) and Kelvin was something, had two points.  He said, they're in a straight line (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay, now I wanna go back to your professional society affiliations.  You were very active in the Chesapeake section and the American Association of Physics Teachers--
Speaker 2: Right, right.
Speaker 1: --what caused you to gravitate towards those two organizations?
Speaker 2: Well, number one, they were, things were happening in those things in an area.  So it gave me a place to go, and I would always go to the meetings, always go to the meetings.  And I would give papers on this, that and the other.  But, because you've got--I mean you're out there trying to help people, you know that you're trying to help people.  So you've got to find out what other people are doing.  And you've got to do it.
Speaker 1: But again, you were different.  I mean when I talk to many of your colleagues, they didn't publish.
Speaker 2: No, no, un-un.
Speaker 1: And so, I'm still, what I'm trying to push is where did you get that?  What--
Speaker 2: Well, it's just like--I don't know, but I liked to do it.  I was at a meeting one time and a lady said to me said, why haven't you published some of these things that you're talking about?  And I said, well, I said, we're a close-knit family and we just do what we think we should be doing, but we're not out there trying to impress anybody.  We just do what we think we should be doing.  If, I don't see why you would get a Ph.D. in physics and not want to research.  I can't understand that.  How can you get a Ph.D. and not wanna do research?  I mean, now, you just--you've got the tools, they've given you the tools to do it, and you're not gonna use 'em.  And when I went to Morgan, nobody, nobody was doing any research, nobody.
Speaker 1: But yet, most of your students walked away knowing that they had to do that?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 31824
Speaker 1: Something lighter.  What do you like to do for fun?
Speaker 2: What do I like--
Speaker 1: What do you like to do for fun?
Speaker 2: For fun?
Speaker 1: For fun?
Speaker 2: Golf, but I can't do that anymore.  I love golf, I love golf, been playing it all my life.  And, but I tell everybody, as you move through this journey of life, you have exits.  When that exit comes up, you've just to leave it alone.  I mean it's gone.
Speaker 1: Was it, when you stopped shooting your age?
Speaker 2: Well, towards the end, I couldn't drive the ball as far as I'd been driving it, nowhere near as far as we used to drive it.  And some of the shots, you see a funny thing about golf is, you have to be able to tell just what distance every club is going to score, in order to score.  And, for example, I used to hit a seven iron 150 yards.  Now, I have to hit a five iron, you see.  So I just said, the game is getting away from me.  I've got to exit (laughter).
Speaker 1: See, I once remember you telling me that ever since you were eighty seven [years old], you could shoot your age, and it was getting easier every year.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, that's true, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, alright.
Story_ID: 31825
Speaker 1: Now, of all the things that you did as a scientist, what things did you like the most or like the best about being a scientist?
Speaker 2: I think when Dr. [Gaylord Probasco] Harnwell sent me that letter saying that my thesis had been sent to somebody in the University [of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] and had been accepted for publication in the American Journal of Physics, I think that was one of the happiest days of my life.  I think that was one of the happiest days of my life.  I said, "Goodness, I'm gonna get a degree."  But to mention what you said about the disappointment that I got, a professor told me, he says, "Jules, they're gonna give you a job at the University of Pennsylvania in the Physics Department."  I said, "You think so?"  He said, "Yeah," said, "Everybody around here likes you."  And so I didn't think anymore about it.  It never happened.  So one of the professors came by later on and told me, says, "You'd be surprised who blocked your"--and it was Dr. Harnwell, who was just, had treated me like a son.  He treated me like a son.  But he's the one that blocked me.
Speaker 1: Do you have any idea why?
Speaker 2: Huh?
Speaker 1: Do you have any idea why?
Speaker 2: No, unless he just didn't want a black student, a black guy on the faculty at the University of Pennsylvania, perhaps, I don't know.  I don't know.  But he was good to me.  That man was good to me.
Speaker 1: Have you learned about any of the other obstacles that were placed in your path along the way?
Speaker 2: I don't think I had many obstacles placed in my path.  I don't think I had many obstacles placed in my path.  No, no.  Like, for example, listen to this.  I was working in the Belvedere Hotel [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] as a waiter Friday night, Saturday night and Sunday night.  I did it for one year while I was a Penn [University of Pennsylvania].  I had a 9:00 o'clock class at the University of Pennsylvania on Monday morning.  Now, I had to get up before night, before night was done and drive to Baltimore [Maryland] to Penn for that 9:00 o'clock class.  I did it for a year.  And then they said, "We've got to get you a job here."  I said, "You can't do this."  They were right, but I did it for a year.
Story_ID: 31826
Speaker 1: So you had mentors, you had people who looked out for you?
Speaker 2: Yes, I had people who looked out for me.  I sure did, yeah.
Speaker 1: Did that [having mentors] influence the way you operated when you became a professor?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I think, oh, you'd be surprised the number kids who would come to me and ask for a letter of recommendation.  You'd be shocked.  Here was a girl who came to me with tears in her, she had tears in her eyes, crying.  She said, "Doc, I'm in trouble."  And I said, "What's the trouble, what's your trouble, Tina?"  She says, "I have a full scholarship to go to University of Pennsylvania to study for the doctorate in mathematics."  And I looked her dead in the eye, and I said, "You can't go up there."  I said, "You can't go up there."  She says, "I know it."  I said, "Sure you know it because you were Ms. Morgan.  You're Miss AKA [Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority], and Miss Mathematics."  Her father was a teacher there at Morgan [State University, Baltimore, Maryland].  And I knew she was smart, but she wasn't doing the work, you know what I mean?  So she said to me, she says, "Well, Doc, it must be something I can do."  I said, "Oh, yeah," I said, "I know exactly what you can do."  She said, "What is it?"  And I said, "You sit right down there now and write a letter to the law school and you tell them that you have this scholarship in math to study phys--and that's all they need to know 'cause you're telling them that you're smart and that you can think.  And that's what a lawyer has to do."  To make a long story short, she's a big-time lawyer, a judge, big time judge in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] now.  She was a lawyer.  She's a big-time judge.  A guy came to me and said, "I wanna go to Hopkins [Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, Maryland]."  He said, "You know, Hopkins don't like black students."  I said, "They'll like you."  He said, "You think so?"  "Yeah, they'll like you."  And I said, "You get ready to go to Hopkins, and I'm gonna write a letter for you."  But see I knew exactly what Hopkins wanted to know.  You know what they wanted to know?  Does this guy know what our expectations are of an entering student?  So what did I have to tell them?  I said, I'm a graduate from an Ivy League school, University of Pennsylvania in Physics.  I have taught this student, and he's a top-flight student.  I said, he will finish in the Top 10 percent of the graduating class for the PhD in chemistry at Hopkins.  They took him.  Now, not having a secretary, I had a letter from them saying anybody I'd represent, they would take.
Speaker 1: Now, was it because they knew you--
Speaker 2: Yeah, I taught him.  I taught the student.
Speaker 1: Yeah, he's a student.  I mean did the people at Hopkins--
Speaker 2: Oh, no, no, no.  I didn't know anybody in the chemistry department.  I didn't know anybody in the chemistry department, but all they wanted to know was I qualified to say what I said because I had been through it.  You know, I went to Penn, not qualified.  But I had to go to the library and stay up all night and doing studying and everything.  I don't want anybody to do that.  But you'd be surprised at the number.  I had a bunch of students that came to me and said in their senior year, this was a physics student.  He says, "Doc," he says, "I can make more money, and I can have a better life if I switch right now to medicine."  I said, "Well, what's the problem?"  And he said, "I haven't got any biology."  I said, "You don't need a lot of biology."  I said, "Don't you know music majors go to medical school?"  He said, "They do?"  I said, "Yeah, they go to medical school (laughter)."  He said, "Well, what am I gonna do?"  I said, "Here's all you have to do."  I said, "This year, get that biology, general biology book."  And I said, "You learn everything that's on every page."  I said, "Learn everything."  And I said, "And you take the MCAT [Medical College Admission Test] and you kick 'em."  He's a doctor (laughter), he's a doctor.
Story_ID: 31827
Speaker 1: We're talking about what excites you about science.  And how has technology changed the way people in your field do their work?
Speaker 2: Oh, well, you know, actually, when I graduated from Penn [University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], my advisor told me that if you're out of the field for five to eight years, he said, you're a lost ball in high weeds 'cause you don't know what's going on, you know what I mean.  And it's gotten closer now.  Things change so fast, so fast.  So you've got to pick out a niche and do your thing as fast as you can because it's gonna be gone.  It's gonna be gone.
Speaker 1: When did you realize that there was nothing that you were teaching that you had learned when you got your Ph.D.?
Speaker 2: Oh, (laughter), oh, God.  You wonder why--well, see what actually happened was, I stayed down in that--I'd bring new people in at Morgan [State University, Baltimore, Maryland].  I'd stay with that introductory physics cause I knew, I knew that if you didn't turn 'em on there, you're gonna lose 'em.  You see.  And some, you'd be surprised at the number of teachers that are out there trying to impress people.  I wasn't trying to impress anybody.  I was trying to help them.
Speaker 1: How much do you use the practical effects that physics could have on your life to encourage and motivate your students?
Speaker 2: To encourage more physics students.  Well, I guess, could go back to my hometown from, like I said, I was the first black to go to college from my hometown.  But what effect did that have?  My next-door neighbor became a dentist and went to Lincoln [University, Oxford, Pennsylvania] and went to Howard [University, Washington, D.C.].  And he wouldn't have gone.  And I told him, I told him when I was in college, I said, all you have to do is to keep cutting this grass, these lawns, taking that money and putting it away.  I said when you graduate from high school, you can go to college.  But then something very interesting happened down in Whitesboro[-Burleigh], New Jersey.  They honored me one time down there, and they honored several other people at the same time.  But every one of them got up and said, "He was my mentor".  That really made me feel good.  All of them got up and said, "He was my mentor".
Speaker 1: You've gotten a number of awards.  Which one or two stand out in your mind as the ones that meant the most to you.  I know this is a tough question.
Speaker 2: Gee, any award that I got, I appreciated it, but I don't-- wasn't thinking and I never thought about the fact that one was more important than the other.  Well, I never--we weren't people that blew our horn a lot, you know, even though you got the award.  Just like, for example, my son [Dwight Taylor] sits on the board of T. Rowe Price.  Nobody knows anything about that.  You'd be surprised.  Nobody knows he sits on the board of T. Rowe Price.  But if somebody else had done what he had done, and notified the "Black Enterprise", "The Afro", everybody would know about it.  But we never worried about that.  We never worried about things like that.
Speaker 1: Do you believe that the awards that you got, they came in time or do you believe that you got them much later than others would have gotten them for the same amount of work?
Speaker 2: Well, I did get a letter from a man about a year ago saying that--I'll never forget, "You should have gotten the award instead of somebody else."  I'll never forget that.  He said you earned the award.  You're the one that should have gotten the award.  It was a white who told me that.  Yeah, but I never thought about it.  But one thing, you have to be careful when you're black.  I went to a golf tournament in Seven Springs out on the Turnpike, Pennsylvania Turnpike.  And they had a hole, closest to the hole.  My ball almost fell in it for a hole-in-one.  And when it (laughter), when they made the awards that night, they said, the closest to the hole on such and such and such.  It wasn't me.  It was another guy.  I said, "Oh, nah, nah." I said, "No, no.  That won't work, that won't work."  I said, I told them, I said, "Ask that man right there.  He was playing with me.  My ball was getting ready to fall in the hole."  So they said, "Oh, we're sorry about that."
Speaker 1: And one of the reasons I asked that question--
Speaker 2: Huh?
Speaker 1: One of the reasons I asked that question was that, see I recall when you got the, when you received the Distinguished Service Citation from AAPT [American Association of Physics Teachers].  And it was an interesting ceremony because it was you, John Hunter [physicist], and I believe, [Halson] Eagleson [physicist]--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --at the same time.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And I recall saying that I thought you already had that, but you hadn't.
Speaker 2: No, no, no.
Speaker 1: No.
Story_ID: 31828
Speaker 1: Any comments on that at all?
Speaker 2: Well, as I say, I tried to be in everything that I could be in because I think it was important for me to know these people because you can never tell when somebody can help you.  You know, you can never tell, and I would hate to have somebody around me that could help me and wouldn't help me because we've never interacted.  So that's why I joined everything.  And I worked hard at the Maryland Academy of Sciences [Baltimore, Maryland].  We, all we had were some bullheads and that was the main thing.  We had quite a few bullheads in the upper, on the third-floor library, Enoch Pratt Library.  And that's all we had.  And now we have a beautiful thing down there (unclear).  And I met a man that was with--oh, I forget who he was with, but I know that he gave, they gave the building to the University of Maryland in Baltimore, University of Maryland, Baltimore County.  What's the boy's name, Hope?
Speaker 1: I'm not with you.  I--
Speaker 2: You don't know who's the president there?
Speaker 1: At-
Speaker 2: (LARRY CROWE):  Hrabowski?
Speaker 1: Oh, Freeman [A. Hrabowski, III, president of University of Maryland, Baltimore County, starting in 1992], yes.
Speaker 2: Yeah, you've got to interact, and you've got to get out there and you've got work in those organizations.  It's just not namesake; get up there and work, you know.  For example, like when I was on the board at the Maryland Public Television, it got to the point where I wasn't making really good contributions on the board.  So I told them, I said we need to get a younger person on the board in my place so they can bring some fresh ideas to the scene.  For example, I said, I said the last meeting I was in, I brought up the fact that, asked what was being done about long-range planning.  And you found out that nobody was doing any long-range planning.  And you wanted to know why.  I said, but I wasn't coming up with enough of those kind of ideas about being--in a board, you just don't sit on a board.  If you can't make contributions, you need to get off the board.
Speaker 1: Yeah, but how do you think you happen to have gotten on a number of those boards you were on?
Speaker 2: Well, let me tell you something.  If you're black and you get on one good board, you're gonna be on every board in town because everybody is gonna try to get you on their board.  My son [Dwight Taylor] makes more money on boards than he makes on his job.
Speaker 1: Yes.
Story_ID: 31829
Speaker 1: Now, when you became a physicist and told people that you were going to be a physicist, most people would say that blacks didn't do physics, is that correct?
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: Do you think that it's changed at all in the interim, and if so, how do you think it has changed?
Speaker 2: Well, I think more, and, of course, certainly there's more people now than ever studying physics.  That's for sure, but there's, it has not ballooned where I thought it would balloon to.  It hasn't gone there, and I don't think it's gonna go there because these schools today have graduate degrees, you'd be shocked, you'd be shocked if you looked at a program, a graduation, the different kinds of degrees they're offering today, you know.  And it's easier for somebody to get one of those degrees and get a job, like criminal justice, for example.  That wasn't even thought about when I got a degree, okay.  But Lincoln [University, Oxford, Pennsylvania] produced more in that than anything else, anything else.  So I think we have to worry about physics because--engineering, for example, has taken so many physicists, oh, taken a gang of them, engineering.  Yeah, so--
Speaker 1: Now--
Speaker 2: I think it's gonna be difficult today and particularly in our schools to maintain a department.  It's gonna be difficult.
Speaker 1: And many of our colleagues that--
Speaker 2: Huh?
Speaker 1: --our students aren't as good as they used to be.  Do you believe that?
Speaker 2: I don't believe that.  I don't believe that.
Speaker 1: Okay, what do you think?
Speaker 2: I believe the students are just as good as ever, they're just different.  They're just different.  That's what it is.  You know, I was mentoring in the Meadow Junior High School. So I went in there one day and I said, today I'm gonna teach--
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: I said, "Today, I'm gonna teach you how to take a square root number."  The kids said, "What do I wanna do that for?  I can do that with my calculator."  So I said, "Yeah, that's true." I said, "But suppose you're in an exam, and you have to take the square root of a number, and your batteries go dead."  The kids said, "Oh, if you've got a calculator, you'd better have a backup."  They're not dumb.  They're just different (laughter).
Speaker 1: Yeah, a famous book by that title.
Speaker 2: Huh?
Speaker 1: There's a famous book by that title.  There's a famous book by that title [They're Not Dumb, They're Different: Stalking the Second Tier (Occasional paper on Neglected Problems in Science Education), 1994].
Speaker 2: I know, I saw it, but I said, I've been it for years and somebody's written a book about it (laughter).
Story_ID: 31830
Speaker 1: So, if you were talking to a group of us about how to get kids more interested in physics, what would you say?
Speaker 2: I'd say, well, physics is so much a part of your life, plays such a role in your life, so many things.  I mean you're walking, jumping, so many things that you do in life that are really physics, really, are really physics.  Exercise, mostly are physics.  That's the main thing.  Physics is very important, very important.  Just like I was telling you that I remember telling kids that, I said, "You can't get out of that chair if it wasn't for friction."  I said, "You wouldn't be able to stop your car if it wasn't for friction."  But they said, "What?"  I said (unclear).  I said, "When you try to get up, you're gonna push against the floor, and your feet are go right on out, you know what I mean.  So you can't get up."  So anyway, like I said, that first course, you've got to do a lot of demonstrations, a lot of demonstrations and good ones.  I remember I taught a year at the University of Maryland [College Park, Maryland] during a sabbatical.  And I just told the man what I was gonna, what I was doing, and he says, "I'll have the demonstration set up."  And I go in there and everything is set up completely.  So all I had to do was demonstrate it, you know what I mean.  So the kids got a, always got demonstrations when I was teaching there.  You know, they offered me a job, and I knew something was coming because I noticed every once and a while I'd see one of the teachers looking through the window of the door to see what I was doing, you know.  But when you've taught in the black school where these kids, 90 percent of them, their parents did not go to college.  And (laughter), you have to really be a mother and a father, and it's really a--and you've got to understand, maybe if you're too bright, you don't understand what an average student or a little above average student can do, you know what I mean?  So I mean a kid comes in, for example, and says to me, says, "What about such and such and such?"  I said, "Did you read the textbook?"  He said, "Yeah."  He said, "I read it twice."  So I opened the book, and I said, "Well, read this now."  So he read it.  And I said, "Will you ask me that question again?"  "Yeah." I said, "Read it again."  He read it twice before it answered his question.  You see what I mean?  Now, you assume that when you ask a kid did you read the book and he, or he sort of thumbed through the book and come back to your class the next day, he didn't get what he should have gotten.  He didn't get it, you know what I mean.  Okay, so that's why I say you've got to do good demonstrations, good demonstrations and stay down there in that introductory course.  That's the main course.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 31831
Speaker 1: Were you ever tempted to leave Morgan [State University, Baltimore, Maryland]?
Speaker 2: Was I?
Speaker 1: Were you ever tempted to leave Morgan?
Speaker 2: No, not after I got there.
Speaker 1: Not asked to leave, but were you inclined to leave?
Speaker 2: No, no, no.  I never felt, I never felt like they appreciated what I was doing.  There was one guy named Bernie Hollis who was head of the science department--you ever met Bernie?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Bernie was the only one that was interested in what I was doing.  He knew I'd produced those--there was actually, while I was there, I know ten people left there, left Morgan and got doctor's degrees.  So Morgan, so Dr. [Frederick] Oliver, Dr. Oliver wanted to name an auditorium after me.  And you know what they told him?  Oh, no, we can't do that.  We can get money for that.  And my wife, my wife [Patricia Spaulding] raised so much fuss that man, they named the auditorium after me.  But I never really felt like I belonged like, you know, I never got that feeling while I was here.  I never got that feeling.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, talking about Dr. Oliver and Dr. [Conrad] Williams, you were able to get some of your very good students to come back to Morgan.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: How did you do that?
Speaker 2: I don't know.  They just wanted to come back, both of them, both of them wanted to come back.  I guess they definitely felt that they would have gotten at Morgan what they got, and maybe they wanted to do the same thing I was doing, you know.  So I made up my mind.  I said, you're leaving here in physics unless you're a physics major.  If you're a physics major, you're gonna do everything, thermodynamics and quantum mechanics before you get out of here (laughter).
Speaker 1: Did you hand pick Dr. Oliver to succeed you?
Speaker 2: No.  No, he just applied, and I was glad because, I was glad--you know, you'd be surprised, as you get older and you're not out there knowing what's really going on, things go by you.  You've got to bring in new blood all the time.  You've got to bring in new blood all the time.  You just hope it's good, yeah.
Speaker 1: And then you talked Carl [Clark] into coming back and joining you for a while, or did you do that?
Speaker 2: Oh, Carl, well, Carl's from Baltimore, [Maryland] and he just wanted to have something to do, just wanted to have something to do.  But I think he got to the point where he was having health problems, and I told him well, enjoy his later years with his wife, you know, take it easy.  You got a pension and everything, you don't have to do it.
Speaker 1: Right.
Story_ID: 31832
Speaker 1: I wanna go back to an earlier day at Morgan [State University, Baltimore, Maryland] when you formed a connection with Goddard Space Flight Center [Greenbelt, Maryland, part of the National Aeronautics and Space Administration].
Speaker 2: Oh, I don't know how I got that connection, but they were always after people from Morgan to come down there and work in the summertime.  And I think George Alcorn told me I ought to come down and do something down there.  So what happened was, I went down and I joined the Technology Transfer Department.  And I would read all the incoming mail and journals and things like that, and move them around to people at Goddard that were interested in what's in the books.  So I worked there for a couple of years.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: So did you send many students to Goddard?
Speaker 1: Oh, yeah, well, one girl, she disappointed me very much.  She had a good job at Goddard.  And this guy out in California started this "A" American Institute--Afro (unclear) American Institute of Science.  Have you heard about it?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Yeah, well, he needs to do a better job of looking at people's background before he puts them on, take them.  He's just taking in anybody that sends him anything.  He takes them in, and that's not good.  That's not good.  We have a teacher at Morgan.  He's not a doctor, but he sent his stuff into that organization and said, Earnest, no, Dr. Earnest Career Having, Jr., physics.  See, so they called me from Howard [University, Washington, D.C.], and said, "Look at the new inductees locked over last year."  And I said, "What for?"  They said, you'll find out when you look at it.  But you see, it's just wrong.  I don't know why he would have done that.  Why, I mean it was a good idea because the neurosurgeon down at Hopkins [Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, Maryland], is one, has gone through it, you know.  It's some good people in there.
Speaker 2: It's some very good people in it.
Speaker 1: Yeah, good people in there.  But he's taking in some people--now, this girl down at Goddard, she put her name in as a doctor, and, of course, they sent me a--Howard just, they jump on me because this guy, Hammond, had gone around and told everybody that he was my student.  I never taught him anything.
Speaker 2: I always thought you did.
Speaker 1: Well, he tells everybody that.  And his wife told me, says, you have to look after him because he's your student.  I said, what you're talking about (unclear) I never taught him anything.  He sent somebody out here to get me to help him build a telescope.  Well, you know who built the telescope.  He never asked a question about astronomy, he never asked a question, you know, about anything in what's going on.  And I had him to polish the lens.  He was doing it wrong.  I said, stop, stop, I said, we'll have to get a new kit, you know (laughter).  So I had to polish the lens.  I had to do the whole thing myself, but he got a scholarship to go down to St. John's [College], Annapolis [Maryland].  So he came to me and said he was going down to St. John's.  I said, you can't go down there.  But he was trying to impress me, you see.  And he went up to IBM [International Business Machines] with my students and asked Sheroikin (ph.) who is an authority on lasers, where does the light pump come from in a laser?  So Sheroikin went all through optical pumping, but he didn't have the background to appreciate what Sheroikin was saying.  So after he got finished, Sheroikin got finished talking, he asked Sheroikin, he says, but where does the light from?  So, now, when I meet one of those guys, you know what they say to me?  Well, where does the light come from?  And they laugh.  You see what I mean.  But that's his, that's the way he is.
Story_ID: 31833
Speaker 1: We talk, all of us like to talk about our students who go in to get a Ph.D. in physics.  But you had a number of students who came through your department.  Can you talk about some of the things that some of these folks did, but not in physics--
Speaker 2: You mean--
Speaker 1: --and as physicists say, foundation for lots of things that we do.
Speaker 2: Well, I had a couple that turned into medical doctors because they're the only two that I actually lost that started, two of them.  They (unclear) actually, like I say, you could be in music and get into medical school if you can think.  You've got to be able to think.
Speaker 1: Now, along the way to build as strong a department [physics department at Morgan State University, Baltimore, Maryland] as you built and to have a tenure as long as you've had, you had to take some risks.  What do you see as your biggest risk?
Speaker 2: Yeah, well, my biggest risk was trying to impress the administration what we needed.  That was the biggest risk.  That was hard, that was very hard to do.  But you see, you don't know what it was like when I first came here.  And let me tell you what happened.  I went to a faculty meeting, and the dean said, we're gonna study the failing student.  So I said, "Dean," I said, "There's a lot of books written on the failing student.  What we need to do is to read those books, see how we can improve on them."  What do you think the dean said to me?  He said, "Oh, no, we wanna come up with our own ideas."  I said, "Oh, my God, you're gonna reinvent the wheel (laughter)," you know.  I said, what have I got myself into (laughter).  But that's what the dean said.  So you see I had a lot of things going against me when I first came here.  They didn't wanna do what I wanted to do.
Story_ID: 31834
Speaker 1: What I'm looking for here, and I've gotten--
Speaker 2: Huh?
Speaker 1: --I'm having a senior moment.  But you wrote a book--
Speaker 2: On 'The Negro in Science'.
Speaker 1: Negros and science [sic, 'The Negro in Science', 1955].  I was calling it the "blacks in science".  You know, it's wrong.  What was the circumstance behind your writing that?
Speaker 2: Well, Dr. Jenkins said somebody should do it.  Dr. Jenkins said that.  And he asked me would I try it, give it a try.  I said, yeah, I'll try it.  See, I got, that took a lot of my time, oh, a guy proofing and all that stuff, you know, [Dr. Herman] Branson [black physicist] helped me a lot, Branson helped me a lot.  In fact, [Halston] Eagelson [black physicist] got mad with Branson about that because Branson didn't say anything about Eagelson.  He got mad about that.
Speaker 1: Yeah, Branson was [John] Hunter's first student.
Speaker 2: Huh?
Speaker 1: Branson was Hunter's first student.
Speaker 2: He was?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: I didn't know that.
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: (LARRY CROWE):  Charles Branson?
Speaker 1: Herman Branson, president of Lincoln [University, Oxford, Pennsylvania] and, yeah.
Speaker 2: Branson was smart.  He was a good lecturer, excellent lecturer, yeah.
Speaker 1: So, you worked closely with him.  How was he as a colleague to work with?
Speaker 2: Huh?
Speaker 1: How was he as a colleague to work with?
Speaker 2: Fine.  Branson was an excellent person.
Story_ID: 31835
Speaker 1: Now, you arrive at some conclusions about why there were so few African Americans, then Negroes, in science.  What did you--
Speaker 2: Well, number one, I think is, you see, kids aren't put through what we went through in elementary and high school.  I tell everybody about my math teacher.  Anytime you have to do fifty problems a night, you've got to learn it.  I mean how are you gonna do fifty problems a night and not learn it, you know what I mean?  If you did that today, they'd fire you, you see.  So kids are coming.  They're not prepared, you see.  And therefore, when you're talking about physics and math, you've got to study.  You've got to be wanting to do it, you know what I mean?  And I think that they've--and we didn't have gangs either, you see.  We just lost a kid here in Baltimore [Maryland], God, had all things in the world before him.  He went back to his old roots, got shot last week, you know. Do you think--
Speaker 1: I think, for example, when I came to Baltimore--Morgan, I was getting kids from Dunbar [High School, Baltimore, Maryland].  Dunbar had, I'd say at least 60 percent of their teachers had master's degrees because they couldn't teach in the white schools.  Now, look what happened.  What happened was this, when they integrated, they took all those good teachers out of Dunbar and put them in the white schools, right, and brought some poor ones to put back in Dunbar.  And that made Dunbar go down.  But I got some good students from Dunbar.
Speaker 2: And there is a history behind that--
Speaker 1: The first black graduate from St. John's [College] in Annapolis [Maryland, 1952] was a neighbor of mine, Martin Dyer.  I don't think you know him.
Speaker 2: I don't know him.
Speaker 1: Yeah, anyway, he was the first black graduate.
Speaker 2: Did you have a relationship with St. John's--
Speaker 1: With St. John's?
Speaker 2: --did you have a relationship with St. John's?
Speaker 1: No, I didn't have a relationship, but I went down there for certain lectures, yeah, I went down for certain lectures.
Speaker 2: What about the (unclear) University in the Baltimore area?
Speaker 1: Loyola [University Maryland, Baltimore, Maryland] was very, very nice.  I had more of a relationship with Loyola than I did with Hopkins [Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, Maryland] actually.  But Loyola was fine.  They were fine.
Speaker 2: What about the Chesapeake section.
Speaker 1: The Chesapeake section, yeah, well. I worked hard in that.  I, now, Dr. [Frederick] Oliver, I don't think he ever fooled with the Chesapeake Section, but I worked hard in it.  I really worked hard in it 'cause we were determined that we were gonna have a good science center because that mess we had up on the top of the library was nothing, that was nothing.
Story_ID: 31836
Speaker 1: You were talking about the Chesapeake Section [of the American Association of Physics Teachers, AAPT] and the work that you did to get that started.  Tell us about your interaction with your colleagues in that section.
Speaker 2: Well, I got involved, I don't know how I really got involved with it, but I heard about it.  And I said, well, I ought to be part of that thing, you know.  So I found out where they were gonna have this meeting.  I went to the first meeting, and I, well I fit right, I was fitting right in with everything that was going on.  So I said, well, I'll stick with this group.  So I stayed with them all the time I was at Morgan.
Speaker 1: And you were there, and John Hunter [black physicist] always came to that meeting.
Speaker 2: Yeah, right.
Speaker 1: And I recall both of you brought students.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: I don't recall anyone else of color who attended that meeting, am I wrong about that?
Speaker 2: Yeah, you're right, you're right, you're right.  I was telling Dr. Hollis, said you should join the organizations, join them, join them.  But I don't think he ever joined them.  Well, I don't know what it is.  Some blacks just don't feel comfortable, you know, in a situation.  I've never felt uncomfortable.  Maybe it's because I didn't notice so much about it as I was growing up as a kid 'cause I played all of football and basketball as a high school student.  And I was, what--
Speaker 1: Did it have to do with your childhood and upbringing?
Speaker 2: Well, well--
Speaker 1: You were in an integrated--
Speaker 2: Yeah, we, all, everybody in the family, my brother won every honor at manual training in high school.  He built a banjo clock.  He built a laid-in desk.  He could do it, he could everything, just my father [Clayton Taylor].  He was very good at everything.  But he, only he never went to college, finished high school and that was it.
Speaker 1: Now, not only in the Chesapeake Section, but you were on the governor's--
Speaker 2: Science Advisory Group.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Yeah, that was a nice thing.  We would advise the governor on various problems.  And if the governor had a problem that was scientific, he would bring it to us and ask us could we help him out with a solution.  So we'd have a committee that was interested in whatever it was to work on it and give the governor a letter.  Yeah, so that worked very well.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Story_ID: 31837
Speaker 1: Now, did you notice any difference in the support that Morgan [State University, Baltimore, Maryland] received--
Speaker 2: Huh?
Speaker 1: --that Morgan State received because of the various governors that you worked with?
Speaker 2: No, no.  Nothing.
Speaker 1: In terms of the support for education from various presidents, did you see any difference?
Speaker 2: Well, I don't know how it works.  It's all political, all political.  And the president who's just retired [Earl S. Richardson], he must have had a beautiful relationship Annapolis because this place has just grown like topsy, you know.  And every building that this guy has put up--well, for example, Dr. [Horace A.] Judson and I wrote the proposal for the engineering building.  We took it down to Annapolis, and they told us that that was the best proposal that they've ever had up to that time.  But you see Morgan never gives you any credit.  They never gave Dr. Judson any credit for that, never gave me any credit.  They could have named a library after him 'cause that's something, you know--
Speaker 1: Okay,--
Speaker 2: --because that's something.  But they didn't, they didn't do it.  That's why I say I never really felt like I belonged.
Speaker 1: Okay, you were here during Dr. Richardson's tenure [1984-2010].  You weren't, I think you--had you retired when he came?
Speaker 2: No, no.  I retired in '86 [1986], but I stayed on until '99 [1999].
Speaker 1: Okay, yes, okay.  But he had a reputation for always having his facts and figures.  Did he talk to faculty?
Speaker 2: Did he talk to what?
Speaker 1: Yes, I said he had a reputation for always having his facts and figures correct.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Did he talk to faculty to get that?
Speaker 2: I don't know, I don't know.  He--well, let me tell you something.  A fellow died.  He went to the funeral, and he's not too bright.  His wife is very smart (laughter), but he's not too bright (laughter).  So he says, I'm very sorry to lose this man because he's the one who would come to me and tell me who to look out for.  So, could you imagine saying something like that?  This guy is dead, and he says, "I'm sorry to see him go because he was the only one who would come to me and tell me who to look out for."  (Laughter)
Story_ID: 31838
Speaker 1: Now, okay.  How much were you involved in the design of this building [Calloway Hall, Morgan State University, Baltimore, Maryland]?
Speaker 2: What I did was the following, I drew up the plans and took them up to Swarthmore [College, Swarthmore, Pennsylvania], and I had Swarthmore look over the plans.  And one of the main things that they told me which I had not even thought about was outlets, you know, electrical outlets.  They said, you can't have too many.  Put 'em everywhere.  And they told me about having a very good auditorium for, and how big it should be for the enrollment and so forth.  So then we gave it to the architect to draw it up.
Speaker 1: But you've got congregational places for students to hang out in this building which was unusual for a physics building of that era.
Speaker 2: What, conversational building?
Speaker 1: A place where students could sort of walk into the building or hang out and just sit around.  Every time I walk into this building, I see students sitting in the hallway and--was that designed or did it just happen that way?
Speaker 2: No, it's I guess the way the students are.  Yeah, yeah, I didn't (unclear).
Story_ID: 31839
Speaker 1: Okay, alright, light note.  Let's go back to talk about your fishing 'cause we--
Speaker 2: Oh, I've always been a fisherman.  I have a friend who, he had a great big boat.  He had a boy to run the boat down to the Bahamas.  We'd fly down to the Bahamas, and we'd fish and fly back.  And he, the boy would bring the boat back.  This year, every year recently, I used to have a boat and outboard motor but it got to be, you know, go through all that and maybe the time you have off from teaching in summer school or being at school, it might rain that week (laughter) or the next two weeks.  And so it got to be habit.  So I gave everything away that I had, and I just, I do a lot on party boats, fishing, but this year I only fished once, and that was rock fishing.  And we went rock fishing.  You take six people, and you rent a boat, and you go out and they'd have about, they had at least fifteen lines out.  And you drag them across the water, and if the fish bites, they say, pick up that reel, and you wind it in and that's your fish.  Yeah, so I've been doing that now for the last ten years.
Speaker 1: And you're allowed what, two per people?
Speaker 2: Huh?
Speaker 1: You're allowed two per people?
Speaker 2: No, one, only one fish.
Speaker 1: Oh, one, okay, only one fish.
Speaker 2: But it's like this.
Speaker 1: Okay, had to be what, twenty inches or above.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, so what got you into the fishing?
Speaker 2: Well, a boy in my, a boy took me fishing near a place called Stone Harbor [New Jersey].  It's above Wildwood [New Jersey] on the Jersey coast.  And he taught me about how to fish, how to troll, he taught me everything.  And I haven't been lately to see if he's still living but I did go by once about four or five years, and he was still alive.  But that got me interested in fishing.  And so I've always been fishing, always.  But this, like I say, this year, I just only went that one time so far.  Julian got rid of the big boat, the big boat he got rid of that.  He now has a boat that's about twenty-five feet long, two 350's [boat engines], two 350's on the back, outboards.  The thing will fly.  So he got it down to Cape Charles [Virginia].  And we'd go down there, and he's got a van that's almost as long as from here to that window, and maybe a little bit longer, one of those great big vans and it's got everything in it.  So you can sleep in it and what not.  If we don't do that, we stay in a motel while we're down there, drive down and go to--.  We haven't done it, he hasn't done any fishing at all this year.  See he, he has to, he has to work three months to pay his insurance.  He has to work three months to pay his insurance.  And that's--Isn't that something?
Speaker 1: That's a healthy insurance.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: For what he does.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Alright.
Story_ID: 31840
Speaker 1: What was the biggest transition that you had to make when you went from active faculty to emeritus faculty [at Morgan State University, Baltimore, Maryland]?
Speaker 2: Active--
Speaker 1: Active faculty to emeritus faculty, when you retired, 'cause you stayed here?
Speaker 2: Oh, well, the people just kept bothering me wanting me to help them.  I made, I became (laughter) a mentor.  That's what I became, a mentor really.  So I only taught one or two courses.  And I had plenty of time.  But it didn't worry me too much.  I didn't mind helping them.  I didn't mind helping them at all.  But it was mostly helping them.  That's what mostly I did after I retired.
Speaker 1: How long did you keep up your research activities after you retired [1986]?
Speaker 2: Oh, I didn't do, I didn't do much.  I didn't do much at all after I retired, didn't do much at all.  No.  I didn't do much research at all.  Well, your point was, it wouldn't have been right for me to try to take up a space, what space we had and try to do research.  And the young people are coming on.  They wanna do research, and Conrad [Williams] was, Conrad was taking up a lot of space, and I didn't wanna influence what he had to do.  And, in fact, I'm glad that he came, and I'm glad that he brought what he has brought here to the school.  But I thought maybe they would have named that building after him because he designed that building, brought all the--got $4 million worth of equipment.  What small school has $4 million worth of equipment in solid state physics?  I understand, I don't know whether it was true or not.  I might have to ask the girl downstairs, but I understand that a Hopkins [Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, Maryland] student did his thesis on something in that building.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I believe so.
Speaker 2: It's state-of-the-art stuff, first-class stuff, and he's given lectures all across the world, everywhere.
Speaker 1: Now, let's talk about that.  Say, you step back and take a look at many physics faculty who are at HBCUs [Historically Black Colleges and Universities], who are not highly valued on their campus at all, but outside the campus, lots of people come to them for advice.
Speaker 2: Yeah, right, right.
Speaker 1: What's your--
Speaker 2: Well, let me tell you.  A president today wants to say, when I came to this institution, such and such and such was the case, look at I now.  They had "X" number of buildings.  Now, they have "X" plus number of buildings.  And all this is due to what I have brought to this school during my tenure.  And they don't worry about anything else.  They don't worry about anything.  For example, they've stopped naming buildings after professors.  They're naming them after people that contribute to the schools.  See, for example, I had a classmate [Bernard Serin, demonstrated isotope effect in superconductivity, 1950] at Penn [University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] with me who wasn't a great physicist, but he was a good plugger.  And he went up to Rutgers [The State University of New Jersey] and they built a new physics building just about, I guess about maybe ten years ago.  And they named that building after him, Serin Hall (ph.), Serin Hall [Serin Physics and Astronomy Lab] on Rutgers campus.  He was my classmate at Penn, yeah.  But the white institutions are still doing that.  They're, you know, honoring the students, but like I said, no matter what you do, like Conrad [Williams], as much as Conrad will bring to this school, unless he brings them some money, he's not gonna get anything named after (laughter), and that's not right.
Speaker 1: Now, how do you think we change that?
Speaker 2: Well, I think, I don't--I think it all depends on the, I think you might be able to get a president that thinks like the old presidents used to think and do what should be done.  But that's the only way it's gonna happen.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 31841
Speaker 1: Now, you worked under a number of presidents at Morgan.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Would you like to talk about one that you most admired?
Speaker 2: Well, [Martin D.] Jenkins [tenure, 1948-1970] was the man that changed this school.  Jenkins demanded that if you're a professor, you have a Ph.D. degree, you should be doing research and that involves teaching.  And he made some mistakes (laughter).  He appointed some guys that shouldn't have been appointed, but I know he mentioned one man to me, and I had to laugh at the man.  I laughed at him.  He said, and I think this guy represents everything we're looking for and a bright young guy comes to this school to do research and teach.  The guy didn't write a letter, didn't write anything while he was here, you know.  But he was of these guys who said, "Yes, Mr. President, yes, Mr. President".  And he liked him, you know.  So he made a lot of mistakes, but he was the one that really changed this school around.  This school was in pretty bad shape when he came.  Yeah, but he changed everything.  He got people doing work.
Speaker 1: One of the things that I recall about you is that when people called you and asked for recommendations, you had a knack of telling people how they were, how this person where they're asking, without being negative.  How did you develop that tact or that skill?
Speaker 2: Well, you know what the student can do.  You know what the student can do.  Just like I was telling you about that girl.  I knew she was smart.  She was smart cause she knew that if she didn't do my physics, she was gonna flunk.  She knew that.  She (laughter) did my physics.  And that's why she came to me to ask me what she could do.  But I just didn't let anybody sneak out.  You couldn't sneak out.  I mean you had to do my work.  I mean I (unclear) explain it to you like a baby, but if you don't know how to do my work, you're gonna fail.  They, everybody knew that.  Everybody knew that (laughter).
Speaker 1: I mean, case and point.  I remember a person that I once called you and asked for a recommendation.  You asked me a question.  You said, "Do you have a great organization?"  And I said, "Yes."  And you said, "Do you wanna keep it that way?"  And I said, "Yes."  And then you said, "Don't make the hire."
Speaker 2: Don't make what?
Speaker 1: Don't make the hire.  And you didn't say anything, but I thought it was just succinct, and I have always valued that.  And I've talked to other people who called you to ask advice about people.  You always had the way of putting it, without being negative, and I just thought it was a special skill.  And what I'm trying to probe is where did you learn that?  From whom?
Speaker 2: I don't know.  I just think it's, well, that's part of your bringing up.  If you don't have interpersonal relationships with people--I know my friend [Horace Judson] down at Grambling [State University, Grambling, Louisana] walked off the job [as president] in October.  Did you hear--do you know about that?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: He has the worse interpersonal relationships that you could ever have.  And the guy that he took with him was just as bad as he was.  Now, he improved the president's mansion, put a fence around it, and they didn't have air conditioning in the library.  That's stupid.  That's just plain stupid.  But let me tell you about interpersonal relationships.  This guy had a girl to come to his house and spend the weekend.  She went home Monday morning.  She didn't hear from him for two weeks.  So she says, "I wonder what's wrong?  I ought to call him and find out what's wrong."  So she called him, and she said, "I was worried about you.  I hadn't heard anything from you."  He said, "Well, didn't you have a good time while you were here last, week before last or whatever it was."  She said, "Yeah, I had a nice time."  He said, "Well, I had one too so what's the problem?"  That's just, see.  Now, he's, he wasn't, he's brilliant.  The guy is brilliant, no question about that.  He went up to the New York system, and when he was interviewed, it was over.  This is the man we want.  He did something stupid up there.  He lost the job up there.  That's when he went down to Grambling.  Now, he did something stupid down in Grambling and I don't know where he is now.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 31842
Speaker 1: Now, you got an honorary doctorate from Grambling [State University, Grambling, Louisiana]?
Speaker 2: Huh?
Speaker 1: You received an honorary doctorate from Grambling.  Do you know what led to that?
Speaker 2: Well, they knew what I had done, but, you see (laughter), and they knew what I had done for them.  I mean both of them came, and I even wrote a letter for Justin to go to Lincoln when they were looking for President Nelson.  But I'm glad he didn't get it because I found out some of these other things about him that scare me, you know.  You've got to have good interpersonal relationships with people.  Otherwise, you're gonna have trouble, plenty of trouble.
Speaker 1: Was Tom Odom one of your students?
Speaker 2: Odom, no?
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right, you knew Tom?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  I was trying to remember, I think when he got his undergraduate degree.  I couldn't remember.  Okay, we've talked about a number of things.  Is there something that I should have talked about that I haven't yet?
Speaker 2: No, looks like you've covered the waterfront (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, I wanted to, you know, make sure that there wasn't anything you felt strongly about that I had not missed.
Story_ID: 31843
Speaker 1: Okay, what I wanna come back to though, is that I wanna end up with your work with NASA [National Aeronautics and Space Administration], and I wanna ask how did the climate here change, here being at Morgan, after Sputnik [1957]?
Speaker 2: Oh, it changed, I think it changed a lot because people started getting contracts that they wouldn't have gotten before.  Like Goddard [Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland], for example, would have summer programs for students that they wouldn't have gotten before.  A lot of things changed, a lot of things changed.
Speaker 1: Now, did you do a master's of art in teaching program here?
Speaker 2: Any what?
Speaker 1: A master's of art in teaching program here?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: So you didn't do that.  So you didn't (unclear) (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: No, I, you know, I worry about that, and particularly in black schools.  Whatever you do, I think you should do it well.  Now, why is Swarthmore [College, Swarthmore, Pennsylvania] such a great school?  Why is Hanover College [Hanover, Indiana] such a great school?  They're not trying to do everything, but what they're doing, they're doing it well.  And I think that the same thing should happen in schools like Morgan [State University, Baltimore, Maryland] and Lincoln [University, Oxford, Pennsylvania] and all the rest of them.  Whatever you do, do it well, right.  But we wanna say, oh, they've got a program in such and such.  Oh, we have one in driver license too, whatever, you know.  Now, it doesn't make any sense to me.  Just whatever you should do, you do it well.
Story_ID: 31844
Speaker 1: You've mentored an awful lot of people along the way--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --if you were starting out today, would your advice to that group of students change in any way?
Speaker 2: I don't think so, I don't think so.  No, no.  I would want them to achieve--and nobody told me to achieve, darn it.  I'm mad about that.  But I would never tell them, I would never send them out not prepared because it's just not--it's not your job to do that.  Your job is to teach.  It's a funny thing.  I, my first job was a grade school job down in Whitesboro, New Jersey.  And a boy would do things.  And I would see him do 'em, and I'd ask him, "Why did you do that?"  And he'd look at me and say, "I didn't do anything."  I'd say, "You did do something.  I just saw you do it."  He said, "I didn't do anything."  So I went to his mother and I said, "Your son has a problem."  I said, "He does things that he shouldn't be doing and when you ask him about it, he says he didn't do anything."  I said, "That's a serious problem."  That woman looked at me, you know what she said?  You teach him, I'll raise him.  He had been in jail--I don't know whether he's still living or not.  But he'd been in jail most of his life, you see.
Speaker 1: That brings up another question I wanted to ask you.  You made a comment that if you're in class and you have a white student who doesn't do well, they will dig in and work whereas if you have a black student, who's used to excelling and they don't do well, they'll walk away and find something else to do.  Do you think that's still the case?
Speaker 2: I imagine so.  I imagine so, yeah, I imagine so.  Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 31845
Speaker 1: Let me talk about some philosophical questions.  If you look at the field of physics, where do you think it's gonna go in the next, pick a timeframe, ten, twenty years?
Speaker 2: Well, I think, I actually think that we'll, the frontier will always be pushed back, back, back, but there'll always be a frontier of needs that we'll have that only technology will solve.  So therefore, in the going schools, you'll always find a cadre of students that are going to keep pushing that frontier, pushing at that frontier and trying to solve the problems.  So, in other words, looking into the unknown, trying to find out what's in there, I think there will always venues to search for solutions, you know what I mean?  There'll always be something.  I mean just like this thing they have now.  I didn't realize that oil was gushing a mile down in the ocean [Deepwater Horizon Oil Spill, 2010].  And you had to have robots to do what you have to do down there.  And, boy, without robots, you would never do anything, you know.  And now, so I was wondering why they didn't have a cap and have two outlets on the cap so that when you put the cap on there, stuff could come out both those outlets, okay.  Now, one of the outlets, you can turn off.  You turn that one off, and you put the hose that's gonna carry it up on that one, while it's turned off.  And then after that, you turn that back on and turn the other one off, and you're in business.  I don't know why they didn't, maybe they're doing something like that.  I don't know (laughter).
Speaker 1: To what extent--
Speaker 2: It makes sense to me 'cause you're not stopping the flow, so it's not gonna be a whole lot of pressure on the cap.
Speaker 1: But the issue becomes, they thought the backflow plan was going to work.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: It didn't.  And so they had a single rescue plan in mind.  When that one didn't work, they were up the creek without a paddle.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I don't know what the status of the thing is.  I haven't had a chance to read about.
Speaker 1: What they're doing now is, they put a cap on, and it's in place [Third cap placed July 15, 2010, day after the interview; well "officially" sealed on September 19, 2010].  And the big question is will it take the pressure--
Speaker 2: Will it blow off?
Speaker 1: --will it blow off?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: And so they have to find that out.
Speaker 2: Okay, we talk a lot about interdisciplinary fields and interdisciplinary science, but we're still pretty much stove piped.  If I look at colleges and universities around the country, the structure hasn't changed much in the last forty years.  Do you think it will?
Speaker 1: No, no, no.  I mean there's still gonna be, there's gonna be some inflow of different things that result from what we've been doing only it might be a branch or something that somebody discovers while looking at something else that starts a whole new venue of research, you know.  So, like I say, the frontier is gonna always be there, always gonna be the "what is back there that we wanna get to".  And they're gonna get to it.  I do believe that.  And there're gonna, always be those minds that wanna do something like that.
Speaker 2: If a young--well, I'll ask you two different questions and you can tell me if the answer will be different.  If a young person walked up to you and said they wanted to do physics, and if a young African American walked up to you and said they wanted to do physics, would the advice to each of them be different or would it be the same?
Speaker 1: First I would ask him does he love mathematics.  If he told me he loved mathematics and he thinks, he knows that he loves physics, I would encourage him to go on.  I would encourage him to go on, but mathematics is the queen.  I mean it's a key (laughter).  You've got to have that math, got to have that math and you've got to be able to think mathematically, you know.  Without that, you're a lost ball, okay, you just can't do anything.
Speaker 2: So you would give each of these two students the same advice?
Speaker 1: Right, right.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Story_ID: 31846
Speaker 1: If you were going into physics today, how would your choice of fields been different or the same?
Speaker 2: Well, I guess it depends on your background.  See, my background is solid state physics, so I would want to do solid state physics.  I (unclear) solid state physics.  But I can see where something would happen, some spring off from something that's going on now will happen and everybody would be interested in that particular thing.  And you might have an interest in that thing and say, well, you know, maybe I should take another look at this, you know what I mean?  So I might change the map, change the lines, but I think it would have to be something lie that, that would spur your interest in making a change from what you have already done, yeah.
Speaker 1: If your son or daughter had walked up to you and said, I want to be a physicist, what would you have said?
Speaker 2: If either one of them wanted to do it, I would go along with the program depending upon what they had done up to this point in math and science and what their, why--first I'd wanna know why?  What is your interest in wanting to do it, but if you had the mathematical background, I think you should use it.  It's like my daughter--my daughter [Trina Taylor Brown] took the examination for NSI, NSA?
Speaker 1: NSA [National Security Agency].
Speaker 2: She blew 'em away.  Now, she would have been top-flight in Cryptology.  She did things that the teacher even stole the things that she made, the teacher stole them, kept them, didn't give 'em back to her.  But that would have made her use that mind more than she's ever used it before, but she wouldn't have been able to make the money that she's made (laughter).  So I think that's something that she would have had to worry about, but I think she'd been excellent in cryptology.
Story_ID: 31847
Speaker 1: Next two-part question.  What's your hope and aspirations for this Department [physics department, Morgan State University, Baltimore, Maryland]?
Speaker 2: Physics Department?
Speaker 1: Physics Department.
Speaker 2: Well, I worry about physics because it's gonna be hard to get physics students from now on, very difficult.  There's so many options that they have.  For example, take engineering.  There's a lot of physics in engineering and in four years, you can go out and you get a good job.  You can't do that with physics.  And if they're interested in say, well, I wanted such and such and such in life, and the quickest way for me to get it is to go this engineering way, you see.  And I think a lot of that is happening.  And I just don't, I think you're going to have a hard time maintaining the physics department to be honest with you.  Where are you gonna get the students that wanna study physics?
Speaker 1: Okay, but if this department does not persist, what does that say for what the physics profession looks like across the nation?
Speaker 2: Well, I mean, what depart--other people that are going the other way, going along with these new ideas and new things, they'll find jobs.  They'll find jobs.  Those people will find jobs.  So those schools that are doing that--for example, how did Lincoln [University, Oxford, Pennsylvania], where did Lincoln get all those people in criminology?  Where do you get all those people?  They had a host, I mean a host of people.
Speaker 1: They're also producing a number of physics students also--
Speaker 2: Yeah, right.
Speaker 1: --and they're among the top-ranked in the country.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I don't know (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 31848
Speaker 1: All right, how do you want to be remembered?
Speaker 2: Remembered? As a good teacher, not a great teacher, a good teacher, as a good teacher.  I think I was a good teacher.  I really do.  When I went to a therapy the other day, a girl said, I wanted to get in your class, but I was afraid I was gonna flunk (laughter).  And everybody said, take him, he knows physics (laughter).  I think I was a good teacher because I could understand the problems that kids have.  But I just think a bright guy that doesn't understand kids has a heck of a time teaching them because if you lose a kid the first five minutes of a lecture, you've lost him for the whole hour.  He's still up there, what is, what was he saying when he first started?  Said, I don't wanna get in this stuff, I'm out of here.  You've got to take care of it in that introductory class.  If you don't, it's gonna be worse than it is now.
Speaker 1: And of all the things you've done in your long lifetime, what are you most proud of?  What are you most proud of?
Speaker 2: All the things I've done?  I guess getting a doctorate degree physics.  I'm most proud of that.  I would have never thought that graduating from Lincoln [University, Oxford, Pennsylvania] with a degree in chemistry that I would be able to go to the University of Pennsylvania and [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] get a doctor's in physics.  But one thing, I had a good wife [Patricia Spaulding] and she just worked with me, and I was able to overcome all the hurdles that I had to hurdle over, and got the degree, you know.  But I think that was the best change I ever made in my life when I decided to, going for that doctorate.
Story_ID: 31849
Speaker 1: One of the things we forgot was the period of time when you worked at Aberdeen Proving Ground [a United States Army facility in Aberdeen, Maryland], could you talk to me about your experience there and--
Speaker 2: No, I didn't work--
Speaker 1: --well, when you were asked to do the job for them?
Speaker 2: Oh, that (laughter), I was in the most hostile atmosphere I'd ever been in my life.  And it was like maybe a hundred people in there working, and I was the only black person in there.  So when I first walked in there, they thought I was there for good.  So they ignored me.  I figured out right away what was wrong.  So I said, I know how to handle this.  So the next day I came and the guy says, how you getting along?  I said, I'm getting along fine, I says, but, you know, I'll be glad when I finish this job so I can go back to my regular work.  Things changed just like that (snaps fingers).  He said, well, let's go to lunch.  They took me to lunch, you know.  They got real friendly because they thought I was a threat to them.  I had this long bench with all this equipment on it, and they were all crowded around there making these meters to measure resistance in voltage and that sort of thing.
Speaker 1: Right, yes.
Speaker 2: Yeah, but they changed overnight.  I no longer was a threat.  So everything went fine then.
Speaker 1: Yeah, now they were trying to measure the speed of projectiles at Aberdeen?
Speaker 2: Huh, yeah.
Speaker 1: They were trying to measure the speed of projectiles when you (unclear), yes.  So talk about the job that you were asked to do when you thought that your advisor said maybe you should have told them that you were a Negro?
Speaker 2: Well, I told the advisor, I told him, I said, "What difference does that make?"  He said, "You don't know white people."  That's what the advisor told me.  But it's true.  I didn't know Dr. Harnwell, I never thought that he would block me.  I never thought that.  He treated me like a son.
Speaker 1: Yes.  Did that really--how did you recover from that?
Speaker 2: I recovered from it.  I mean, you know, of course, I had a job.  I wasn't worried about getting a job, but I mean to be a teacher at the University of Pennsylvania [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] would have been nice (laughter).  But I never thought Harnwell would do that, never thought that.
Speaker 1: Are there any other stories like that, that you would like to tell us about?
Speaker 2: That's about the only one I know that, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, very good.
Story_ID: 31850
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Go ahead, Dr. Taylor, tell us about this photo.
Speaker 2: JULIUS TAYLOR:  You want me to talk about this?
INTERVIEWER:  Yes.
Speaker 2: JULIUS TAYLOR:  This is a family photograph.  Reading right to left, Trina, my oldest sister, Elizabeth, my brother, Morris and his daughter, Ann.  And left to right on--well, anyway, I'm going right to right left.  That's Jason.  That's my son's son, my grandson and Dwight, my son and me the last one still on the left.  This was 1997.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Thank you.  Next.
Speaker 2: JULIUS TAYLOR:  I wrote that down 1995.
Speaker 1: (FEMALE VOICE):  1955.
Speaker 2: JULIUS TAYLOR:  Fifty-five [1955], right.
Speaker 1: LARRY CROWE:  	You're the editor of something.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, is there a date on there?
Speaker 1: JULIUS TAYLOR:  Yeah, it's a date on there.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, then we're fine because on something like that it's already captioned.  Okay, next.
Speaker 1: JULIUS TAYLOR:  Now, where in the world was this taken.  This had to be at somebody's party.
Speaker 2: (FEMALE VOICE):  Fourth of July about in the '90s [1990s].
Speaker 1: LARRY CROWE:  You can talk, you can describe them.
Speaker 2: (FEMALE VOICE):  It was at Tony's house on the Maggoty (ph.) River.
Speaker 1: JULIUS TAYLOR:  On the Maggoty River.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION): (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  We've got this photo.  Next one.  Go ahead, tell us what you can about this.
Speaker 1: JULIUS TAYLOR:  Do you know what that is?
Speaker 2: (FEMALE VOICE):  Uh-huh, that's my house on Father's Day when we used to always have Father's Day parties for all of the fathers.  And that is in Washington, D.C. around 2000.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Very good.
Speaker 2: (FEMALE VOICE):  That was a headshot taken for your Grambling-
Speaker 1: JULIUS TAYLOR:  Grambling Honorary-
Speaker 2: (FEMALE VOICE):  --degree, yeah.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, we should just mention that-
Speaker 2: JULIUS TAYLOR:  Where was that taken, Trina?
Speaker 1: (FEMALE VOICE):  Well, Ann is there so it has to be Jersey.  Wait a minute, let me see.
Speaker 2: JULIUS TAYLOR:  That's Jackie there?
Speaker 1: (FEMALE VOICE):  Yeah, Jackie and Ann.  So I'm trying to think where Jackie and Ann were together.  It's gotta be Jersey.  It's gotta be Jersey.  So that's Ann Taylor--
Speaker 2: JULIUS TAYLOR:  Jackie Lewis and me.
Speaker 1: (FEMALE VOICE):  And it's in South Jersey, and it was in the '90's [1990s], late '90s [1990s].
Speaker 2: (FEMALE VOICE):  That's me and you and that is at my house in D.C., and that was one of the father's--we used to take pictures every Father's Day in front of that same little tree.  So that was 2000.
Speaker 1: JULIUS TAYLOR:  So that's me and Pat, my wife.  Now, where was that taken, Trine?
Speaker 2: (FEMALE VOICE):  Lansdale Street.
Speaker 1: JULIUS TAYLOR:  On Lansdale Street, that's an old one.
Speaker 2: JULIUS TAYLOR:  It's got to be on the beach.
Speaker 1: (FEMALE VOICE):  On the beach in Wildwood.
Speaker 2: JULIUS TAYLOR:  Wildwood, New Jersey and my goodness, that goes pretty far back.
Speaker 1: (FEMALE VOICE):  All of my mother's family, her brothers and sisters and my mother is in the center sitting.
Speaker 2: LARRY CROWE:  You mean like right here?
Speaker 1: (FEMALE VOICE):  No, this one.  Yeah, and actually, George--do you know George Spaulding at Morgan?
Speaker 2: JULIUS TAYLOR:  George Spaulding is here.
Speaker 1: LARRY CROWE:  Right here?
Speaker 2: (FEMALE VOICE):  Yeah.  Did you know him?
Speaker 1: (MALE VOICE):  No.
Speaker 2: (FEMALE VOICE):  Okay.  The head of the chem--was he the head of the chemistry department?
INTERVIEWER:  He was head of the chemistry department, yeah.
Speaker 2: (FEMALE VOICE):  And that's in Whitesboro in the front yard.
Speaker 1: JULIUS TAYLOR:  Back yard of Whitesboro.  That's my wife's home.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  About what time would you place that?
Speaker 1: JULIUS TAYLOR:  It had to be, I'd say about '50 [1950].
Speaker 2: (FEMALE VOICE):  I'd say about 1950.
Speaker 1: JULIUS TAYLOR:  About 1950.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, good.
Speaker 1: JULIUS TAYLOR:  That's me and my great grandson.
Speaker 2: (FEMALE VOICE):  Who's named after you.
Speaker 1: JULIUS TAYLOR:  He has exactly my name, has exactly my name.  I don't know how that happened, but it turned out that I talked to the mother of the bride, and she said that she wanted the first child named after me, exactly with my name.  So I must have impressed her somehow (laughter).
Speaker 2: JULIUS TAYLOR:  This is after we got married, and her brother found out that we were married, and (laughter) because I was coming back and forth from the University of Pennsylvania and we had kept it a secret for a year and then it got out (unclear) somehow.
Speaker 1: JULIUS TAYLOR:  (Unclear) Trine?
Speaker 2: (FEMALE VOICE):  High school picture.
Speaker 1: JULIUS TAYLOR:  Huh?
Speaker 2: (FEMALE VOICE):  That's a high school graduation picture of mom.
Speaker 1: JULIUS TAYLOR:  High school graduation picture?
Speaker 2: (FEMALE VOICE):  Um-hum.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 2: JULIUS TAYLOR:  That's Morris my youngest brother and me and that must be (unclear), and that would have been the '70s [1970s].
Speaker 1: JULIUS TAYLOR:  That was taken in South Jersey at the County Fair ground, near the County Fair ground.  That's me, my oldest sister who, Elizabeth, and my brother, Morris.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 1: JULIUS TAYLOR:  Now, I don't know where this one was.  I have no idea where that was taken.  Do you?
Speaker 2: (FEMALE VOICE):  I think that was taken for the Maryland Public Television-- JULIUS TAYLOR:  Could have been.
Speaker 1: (FEMALE VOICE):  --when you were on the committee.
Speaker 2: JULIUS TAYLOR:  I was on the committee for the Maryland Public Television and that was picture was taken at the headquarters.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Would that have been in the '80s [1980s]?
Speaker 2: JULIUS TAYLOR:  What's that?
Speaker 1: LARRY CROWE:  What year do you think, '80s [1980s], '90s [1990s]?
Speaker 2: JULIUS TAYLOR:  In the '80s [1980s], yes.
Speaker 1: LARRY CROWE:  Okay.
Speaker 2: JULIUS TAYLOR:  I don't know where that one was taken.
Speaker 1: (FEMALE VOICE):  That was taken at my house here a couple of years ago in 2007.
Speaker 2: JULIUS TAYLOR:  07 [2007], Baltimore.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, got it.
Speaker 2: JULIUS TAYLOR:  Is this Lincoln or- (FEMALE VOICE):  Lincoln.
Speaker 1: JULIUS TAYLOR:  Lincoln University, receiving an honorary degree.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  When (unclear).
Speaker 1: (FEMALE VOICE):  2009.
Speaker 2: JULIUS TAYLOR:  '09 [2009].
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, next.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION): JULIUS TAYLOR:  Now, who is that?  Do you know?
Speaker 1: (FEMALE VOICE):  Ann told me those were your parents.
Speaker 2: JULIUS TAYLOR:  My parents?
Speaker 1: (FEMALE VOICE):  Um-hum.
Speaker 2: JULIUS TAYLOR:  Well, I don't know.  It looks like Morris.  (laughter)  She knows more about it than I do.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Are we agreed on the identity of these photos?
Speaker 2: (FEMALE VOICE):  That's what Ann told me.
Speaker 1: JULIUS TAYLOR:  Well, that's what Ann says.  She did the work.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 1: LARRY CROWE:   We know who that is.
Speaker 2: JULIUS TAYLOR:  This goes back, way back.  That must have been high school, you think,.  It says '76 [1976].
Speaker 1: (FEMALE VOICE):  No, that would have been in the '40s [1940s] (laughter).
Speaker 2: JULIUS TAYLOR:  Back in the '40s [1940s].
Speaker 1: (FEMALE VOICE):  Early thirties [1930s].
Speaker 2: JULIUS TAYLOR:  Thirties [1930s] or it was in the '30s [1930].  Just out of high school cause that picture was-
Speaker 1: (LARRY CROWE):  This is January 23, 1992, (unclear) gallery it says on the back.
Speaker 2: JULIUS TAYLOR:  That's the mayor of Baltimore, Schaffer, and she, of course, this is me, and I can't imagine what I was receiving at that time, some award for something.  But everybody knows Mayer Schaffer, also governor Schaffer.
Speaker 1: LARRY CROWE:  It's nineteen ninety two [1992] it says.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Next. JULIUS TAYLOR:  Now, who is that (laughter)?  She's got the date on that one.
INTERVIEWER:  Nineteen forty [1940].
Speaker 2: JULIUS TAYLOR:  Nineteen forty [1940], Pat.
Speaker 1: (FEMALE VOICE):  That's out here, isn't it, at Morgan.
Speaker 2: JULIUS TAYLOR:  Yeah, it's probably Morgan, yeah.
INTERVIEWER:  Now, question, it's on your third anniversary.  Is it the third anniversary of your marriage or the third anniversary of the--
Speaker 2: JULIUS TAYLOR:  This is the science faculty at Morgan.  I don't remember all the names, but this I me.  This is Dr. Spaulding, Dr. Frazier, in the mathematics department.
Speaker 1: (FEMALE VOICE):  I put the names on the back.
Speaker 2: JULIUS TAYLOR:  What's that?
Speaker 1: (FEMALE VOICE):  I put the names on the back (unclear).  Harold Delaney.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, next.
Speaker 1: LARRY CROWE:  Is that the one that was killed?
Speaker 2: JULIUS TAYLOR:  That's me and somebody--that's Dwight.
Speaker 1: (FEMALE VOICE):  Is that down at Turnberry or up here (unclear)?
Speaker 2: JULIUS TAYLOR:  No, this is up here.  It's Forest Park, it's up.  It was at some golf tournament, probably ten years ago.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
INTERVIEWER:  It says September 2004.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, moving on to the next photo.
Speaker 2: LARRY CROWE:  Who are these people from left to right?
Speaker 1: JULIUS TAYLOR:  This is Erick, Governor Erick, me and this a student at Morgan.  And we've got the, we had a championship golf team, and this was some honor that we got for producing it.  And that was-
Speaker 2: (FEMALE VOICE):  The governor.
Speaker 1: JULIUS TAYLOR:  What in the world is this?  Ann gave you this?
Speaker 2: (FEMALE VOICE):  No, it was in your stuff.
Speaker 1: JULIUS TAYLOR:  That one I don't know much about.
Speaker 2: (FEMALE VOICE):  That's gotta be a golf team from here because they have kappa hats on.
Speaker 1: JULIUS TAYLOR:  Oh, yeah, it's probably-
Speaker 2: LARRY CROWE:  Morgan State golf team?
Speaker 1: JULIUS TAYLOR:  We first, yeah, the first golf tournament we had, I organized the first black golf tournament for colleges.  And this is probably, yes, because that's Binks.  That's Binks.  He's a professional now.  So Binks has been out, what, 15, 20 years.
Speaker 2: (FEMALE VOICE):  From?
Speaker 1: JULIUS TAYLOR:  Morgan.
Speaker 2: (FEMALE VOICE):  Oh, no-
Speaker 1: JULIUS TAYLOR:  More than that?
Speaker 2: (FEMALE VOICE):  Yeah (laughter).
Speaker 1: LARRY CROWE:  This photo is much older than that (laughter).
Speaker 2: JULIUS TAYLOR:  But that's what it's all about.
Speaker 1: LARRY CROWE:  Another similar one.
Speaker 2: JULIUS TAYLOR:  Same thing, same thing.  It's another golf tournament.  Yeah, we had some very good golfers, some very good golfers.  Some of them could have gone professional.  Binks was the only one who went professional, and he's now working here in Maryland.
Speaker 1: LARRY CROWE:  Okay, here's a band here.  Is this a high school band?
Speaker 2: JULIUS TAYLOR:  That is my high school band, yeah.  That goes back to '32 [1932].  Yeah, that goes back to '32 [1932].
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 2: LARRY CROWE:  Now, here's another little one that I kind of got out or is this the same one.  It's talking about research and it's got a date on it too, '56 [1956].
Speaker 1: JULIUS TAYLOR:  Fifty six [1956], something about research, my research.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Next.
Speaker 1: LARRY CROWE:  This is just a cover of a research (unclear).
Speaker 2: JULIUS TAYLOR:  That's a final report for the Office of Ordinance Research, '59 [1959].
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, next.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION): (FEMALE VOICE):  My cousin, Ann, has been doing genealogy on the family.  So she's traced the family back to 1825.  And origin, anyway George Taylor and Mary C. Graves.  So this--she's also an artist so she, this is a depiction that she made of the Taylor tree.  And we're at the very top of it, I think it's right in the middle at the top.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, next.
Speaker 2: JULIUS TAYLOR:  My graduating class, 1932, Middle Township High School. LARRY CROWE:  And there's a story here.  You can tell that story. JULIUS TAYLOR:  Well, the story is that this guy and this guy are the same guy, and this is when panoramic cameras were just coming out.  So the man would take a picture here and move slow across the whole thing.  So when he got here, this guy jumped out, went around in back of the camera and got over here (laughter).
Speaker 1: (FEMALE VOICE):  And you know, I was looking at it.  This guy looks the same as this guy too.  I don't know whether they were brothers, but (laughter)-
