Story_ID: 633057
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe.  I'm interviewer today with The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Matthew Hickey.  Sir, can you please give us your full name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: [HistoryMaker] Sylvester Turner, S-Y-L-V as in Victor E-S-T-E-R and Turner, T-U-R-N-E-R.
Speaker 1: And do you have a middle name?
Speaker 2: No middle name.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: Sylvester is long enough.
Speaker 1: And I've been told that you've been called Sly (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) (Laughter) Yeah, I got that, got that nickname in, when I was at the University of Houston [Houston, Texas].  And then, when I went to law school [Harvard Law School, Cambridge, Massachusetts], I tried to drop it.  And I ran into a few people who knew me by Sly, and that got picked up.  And people, like Julieanna Richardson, have carried it forward to this day, so I--
Speaker 1: I see--
Speaker 2: Yeah, that's, that's a nickname.
Speaker 1: All right.  And, sir, what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: Nine, twenty-seven, fifty-four [September 27, 1954] and I was born in the City of Houston [Texas].
Speaker 1: All right.  And what is your title and occupation?
Speaker 2: I, I'm state representative of District 139 [Texas House District 139], which is in northwest Houston.  I've been a state rep now for twenty-three years.  And then, I'm also a, a founder and partner at the law firm of Barnes and Turner [Barnes and Turner LLP; Barry Barnes and Associates PLLC, Houston, Texas], and been affiliated with this firm for approximately twenty-eight years.
Speaker 1: All right.  And what is today's date?
Speaker 2: Today's date is, what, August the 15th--
Speaker 1: Right, and what--
Speaker 2: --twenty twelve [2012].
Speaker 1: Okay.  And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: You are, you are in one of my conference rooms at the, at the law firm.
Story_ID: 633058
Speaker 1: Now, before we go into depth, Julieanna [Julieanna Richardson] makes sure that we ask warm up questions and the--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --first, there are only five of them and they only require a short answer.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: The first one is do you have a favorite food?
Speaker 2: Spaghetti.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Well, let me, it's between spaghetti and oxtails, one of the two (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: Blue.
Speaker 1: Favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Late spring, beginning of the summer.
Speaker 1: Okay.  A favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: South Africa.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And the last one is do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: "I can do all things through Christ that strengthens me," Philippians four and four [sic. Philippians 4:13].
Story_ID: 633059
Speaker 1: Now, I'm going to ask about your family history.  I'm going to ask--
Speaker 2: Okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(Simultaneous) about your mother's side of the family and your father's [Eddie Turner] side.  But we'll ask about them separately, then we'll put them together.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: Ruby Mae Turner, first name, R-U-B-Y, Mae, M-A-E, and Turner, of course, T-U-R-N-E-R.
Speaker 1: And what is her date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: It would be August 12th of 1924.  She just celebrated her eighty-eighth birthday on Sunday.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That's next Sunday.
Speaker 1: And where was she born?
Speaker 2: She was born in Chappell Hill, Texas.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, what can you tell us about your mother's side of the family?   How far back can you trace them?
Speaker 2: I can only go back into my mom's parents, my grandfather and grandmother.  And I didn't know them very long--get a chance to know them before they, before they passed.  You don't, can't go beyond that.
Speaker 1: Can you give us their names?
Speaker 2: I can't even do that.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I was very, very young when they, when they passed away.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, I take it that not a lot of family stories passed along in, from your mother's side about--
Speaker 2: Well, the Turner family pretty much picks up with my, with my mom and dad.  Okay.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, there are no stories about Chappell Hill, Texas, I guess, or what--
Speaker 2: Well, I mean--
Speaker 1: --life was like there, and what they were doing there?
Speaker 2: --I mean, in, in the early years, I mean, we spent, we spent much of the summers in Chappell Hill 'cause my dad, my dad is also from Chappell Hill, let me just put it that way.  And so, and then, they moved, they moved to Houston [Texas] in 1954.  So, during the summers, my dad still maintained a small place up in Chappell Hill, and would take us up there because that's where he did a little farming, and raised some hogs, and had his own little, I guess, garden, watermelons, and sweet potatoes.  And, and so we worked up there during the summer, with my dad--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --and then, he would bring us, bring us back.  So, I got, I got a lot of familiarity with it up there, but by that then, both grand- sets of grandparents had already passed away.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But my dad just maintained a small place up there.
Speaker 1: Now, in terms of your mother now, did she grow up on a farm?
Speaker 2: My mom, both, my mom and my dad--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --yeah, they all grew up in Chappell Hill.
Speaker 1: Now, do you know if your mother's family owned their land or were sharecropping or what?
Speaker 2: They did--
Speaker 1: They owned the land?
Speaker 2: --they did 'cause I do, I do recall that after they passed, the land was divided up amongst, amongst the siblings.
Speaker 1: Okay.  How many siblings did she have?  You--
Speaker 2: On my mom's side, I think there were seven.  And she is the--my mom is the last surviving one.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, did your mother go to school in Chappell Hill, too?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, how far did she get?
Speaker 2: My mom went as far as the tenth or the eleventh grade.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Did she ever share with you aspiration or something that she wanted to do when she was young?
Speaker 2: Hm, not really, I mean, you know, education for, for both my parents became important for their children because neither one, neither one of them graduated from, from high school.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Okay.  So, my mom went as far as the tenth or eleventh.  Same thing, my dad, I think, went as far as the eleventh grade.  And then, subsequently, you know, you know, moved to, when they got married, moved here.  My dad was older than my mom, about nineteen, twenty years older.
Speaker 1: Now, I'm going to get to him in a minute--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, they are.
Speaker 1: --but we're going to get them together.
Speaker 2: All right.
Speaker 1: I just wanted to find out about your mother's aspirations, if she had a talent or something that she wanted to do when she was young that she might not have even fulfilled, but something that she really liked.
Speaker 2: Not, not, nothing that I can recall that she would that, that I can remember, that was conveyed to me.  You know, I'm, in my, in my family, I'm only, I'm on, I'm the, one of the younger members of my, of the siblings.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, did she talk about growing up at all to you, about what it was like to grow up in Chappell Hill?
Speaker 2: My mom, you know, grew up on, on the farm with--and they in Chappell Hill, my mom picked cotton.  You know, worked primarily on the farm, going to school, I mean that was, that was essentially it.  It wasn't a lot for African Americans to do in Chappell Hill, other than be on the farm, or if you're in school, play sports, but beyond that, no major industry.  Nothing like that was in Chappell Hill.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: Very agrarian.
Speaker 1: So, no stories that she's passed down or anything like that about working (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, not, not, other than, you know, working and picking cotton, being out in the sun.  Those--that type of stuff.
Speaker 1: Now, now did she have any, give you any insight in what race relations were out, like out in Chappell Hill?
Speaker 2: We, we never discussed that.
Story_ID: 633060
Speaker 1: Now, well, let me go to your father's side of the family.  Can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: Eddie Turner, no middle, no middle name.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what is his date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: Oh, my dad died when he was sixty-five, so I can't even recall the date of birth for my father.  When my dad died, I was thirteen.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  So, he was older than your mother [Ruby Mae Turner], you said, by--
Speaker 2: About twenty years--
Speaker 1: About twenty years so--
Speaker 2: --yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  That would make him, born in 1904.
Speaker 2: Yeah, and my mom was his second marriage.  My dad was married before.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Right now, you said your grandparents had passed away on your father's side, too, so you didn't know the grandparents.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I, I never, I never met my grandparents on my father's side.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, did your father talk about his dad, his mother, and what they--
Speaker 2: Not, not that I can recall.  No, you have to bear in mind when I'm coming through, my father's much older.  There were already four kids from a previous marriage, older, and then there are nine kids from my mom.  And I was number six of the nine, so I'm, I'm, I was on the, on the younger, on the younger side.  So, no, he, he didn't, he didn't speak much.  In fact, I met very few of my father's brothers and sisters on--I can only recall one that I met.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, okay, so did your--now your dad born in 1904, did he talk about what race relations were like in Chappell Hill [Texas]?
Speaker 2: No, not, not that, not to, not to me--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --okay, not, not to me.
Story_ID: 633061
Speaker 1: Did you get the impression from them that everything was okay in Chappell Hill [Texas], and it was just a matter of hard work and get opportunity or what?
Speaker 2: It wasn't as--we didn't have the conversation about what've--things were like in Chappell Hill.  What my dad [Eddie Turner] discussed with us is when, for example, when my dad was, in addition to being, like a farmer, a part time farmer, you know, farmer going back to Chappell Hill, my dad was a yard man, okay.  Here, I mean, in Houston, Texas, and so my dad would, for lack of a better phrase, load, load his boys up in a pickup truck on the weekend, and we would go across town in the City of Houston, and cut other people's yards.  And, you know, that's when we had conversations some conversations with regards to race relations, just, just noticing how some of the people, the yards that we were cutting, how, how some of the homeowners were treating us.  But my dad's point was, you know, just do your job, and do your job and, you know, get your money, and let's move on, you know, we simply got a job to do.  So, it was in, in conversations in that sense and, you know, those are--one particular example when we had, we had finished, and I was, I was what you call, I guess, like the bookkeeper.  I was, I was the one with the pen and the paper, 'cause I was the smaller one of the, of the bunch.  And my job was to kind of go and collect the money once we finished.  And there was one occasion in which the people, the lady didn't, white lady, she didn't, she didn't want to pay us.  I don't know what the reason was, and I went back and told, told my dad.  And, and my dad told me to come with him, and we went back to her.  And, and my dad said to her that, "Look, we've done the job.  We done what you asked us to do, and now it's time to pay us."  And she made some comment.  And my dad said, "No, no, it's time to pay us, and I want my money."  And then, when she went back, and came back to pay, she was going to, she was handing it to my dad.  And my dad said, "No, I want you to give to Sylvester [HistoryMaker Sylvester Turner] 'cause he was the one who asked for it, and he's the one who's collecting it, so give it to him."  And she did that.  My dad made it a point that, you know, you, you, do your job.  It doesn't matter what people's thinking may be, or what the attitudes may be.  You get it, you stand firm, and you move forward, but you don't let people disrespect you or mistreat you.  And that was an example that has always stood out, stood out with me.  And when we got back in the truck, he, he, you know, he, he reemphasized that.  So, you know, it's just those type of examples, you know, and, and seeing how my dad handled a situation.  He was not, he was not a hotheaded person, but he was very firm in, in how he dealt with others and he wanted, he wanted, he insisted on being respected, you know.
Speaker 1: Okay. Okay. So, now is there a story about how your--oh, well, I'm sorry, I didn't ask this question though.  Did, now did your father have a chance to go very far in school?
Speaker 2: My dad went as far as the tenth or eleventh grade.
Speaker 1: Okay, but--
Speaker 2: He did not graduate, no.
Speaker 1: So, they had a local school there, a black school in Chappell Hill that--now did the school, as far as you know, only go to eleventh or tenth grade 'cause some of the schools only did go to the tenth or eleventh grade (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, they, they went to the twelfth.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: They just--neither one of them graduated.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, I've heard lots of stories about schools in the black communities.  They sponsored schools only going to the tenth or eleventh grade, so you couldn't graduate there even if you--
Speaker 2: Right.  It's my understanding that, you know, they, for whatever reason, they didn't graduate.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So now, is there a story about how your parents met, I mean, I guess in Chappell Hill, they're going to meet--
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: --but is there a story how they got together?
Speaker 2: Naw, I don't--I guess, I don't know how they got together, but they certainly got together, and they stayed together until after my dad died.  And as a result, you know, there're nine, there're nine Turners from the union between my mom [Ruby Mae Turner] and my, and my dad.  And then, my dad had four kids from a previous marriage.
Story_ID: 633062
Speaker 1: Now, when you think about your parents' personalities and dispositions, their talents, their hobbies, they- their attitudes--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --mentalities--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --looks--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --how they walk--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --who do you think you take after the most?
Speaker 2: Oh, man, you know, many people say I look like my dad [Eddie Turner].  You know, I can, I can be, I can be tough, like my mom [Ruby Mae Turner].  My dad was more of a, of the diplomat.  There are times I, I pick that up from my dad, but I mean, my dad was a quieter personality, but a strong personality.  My mom, very independent, very strong willed.  And, you know, I looked like my dad, but you know, I'm blessed with having some qualities from, from them, from them both.  They're both hardworking, you know, you know, and strong positive role models, you know, so it's, it's kind, it's kind of hard to say.  I mean, I think I take, I share some, some strong qualities from, from them both, but certainly the looks of--when you look at the picture of my dad, yeah, I look like my dad.
Story_ID: 633063
Speaker 1: Is there any--there may not, you may not know the answer to this--
Speaker 2: What's that?
Speaker 1: --and it may be hard to even find out the answer to it, but I just, when I think about, you know, I was thinking about your [maternal] grandparents and them having land.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And every time I hear that story from black folks in the South, there's got to be a story around how you get land, how they got it, a drama around how they got it 'cause it's not easy to do necessarily in those days, you know, after the Civil War and stuff to get land.  So, is there any story about where they came, if they came from some other place other than Chappell Hill [Texas] to Texas, or if they, about how they got the land?
Speaker 2: I don't know how they got there.  Certainly, you know, a lot of the slaves that came to Texas, came through Galveston [Texas], and then made their way up I-45 [Interstate 45] through Houston [Texas], and, and headed, and headed west.  So, from Galveston to what we used to call Freedmen's Town, Fourth Ward [Houston, Texas], and then the next stop would have been a place like Brenham [Texas], Chappell Hill, the Hempstead [Texas] area.  And so, if you go, if you go to Chappell Hill today, you will, there are many, there are many Turners, those affiliated with the Turners in Chappell Hill.  If you go to a church called Ebenezer [Ebenezer Baptist Church] about to search in Chappell Hill, I had an opportunity to speak there about, oh, about seven or eight years ago.  The pastor, before I got up to speak, the pastor asked for, you know, everybody who's a Turner, or related to the Turners to stand up.  About 60 to 65 percent of that congregation stood up.  You know, there's another, there was another cousin, a nephew, who was the pastor of St. John [St. John Baptist Church] down in Chappell Hill.  So, there are still a lot of Turners in the Chappell Hill, Brenham area.  So, how long we've been there, I've not researched it, but I was fascinated to go back, and to see the number of people that are relatives.  And they, you know, my mom [Ruby Mae Turner], my dad [Eddie Turner] both come from relatively large families.
Speaker 1: Now, I know you mentioned Freedmen's Town in the Fourth Ward here in Houston.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Now, is that a town that was populated by the freedmen after the Civil War?
Speaker 2: Right, when--
Speaker 1: Let's, okay.
Speaker 2: --yeah, when, Galveston was, became the major, the major drop off point, so to speak, and then they would come, they would come up I-45.  And the next stop would be what we call Freedmen's Town, Fourth Ward, which is now referred to as Midtown [Houston, Texas] because it has changed dramatically from what it--I mean, from what it used to be.  And then, the next stop would be to keep travelling up, heading, heading west and, you know, a place like Brenham and Chappell Hill would be, would be a natural stop.
Speaker 1: Was Chappell Hill a black town?
Speaker 2: It was, there were a lot of African Americans up there--still, still is.  Chappell Hill, Brenham, all up in that area, and many of those individuals, their grandparents, or the parents then migrated back to a place like Houston.  So, my folks, like many people, and that were reared or born, and reared in Chappell Hill and Brenham, end up coming back and residing in, in Houston.  And my folks came from Chappell Hill to Houston in 1954.
Speaker 1: Okay.  But you don't know if it was Chappell Hill, it was like, were there any white people living in Chappell Hill?
Speaker 2: There are whites that are there, but a strong population of African Americans.
Speaker 1: Yeah, 'cause several of these towns in Texas are founded as black towns afterwards.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: You know.
Speaker 2: Right.
Story_ID: 633064
Speaker 1: Now can you name your brothers and sisters?  And, yeah, you're the youngest, right?
Speaker 2: No, I'm number six of the seven in between my mom [Ruby Mae Turner] and my dad [Eddie Turner].  But in terms, when you look at us all, there were thirteen in all, okay.  And two of the thirteen are now deceased, Albert [Albert Turner (ph.)], who was the, is the youngest, is deceased, and Eddie [Eddie Turner], who was the second, who was named after my dad, deceased.  And both of them have died within the last three to four years.  And then, there's, there's Madie Thompson, who is now living in Oakland [California].  There is Everett Turner, who's living in San Antonio [Texas].  Leon, we call him Mike, who's now from the Ruby-Eddie union.  The first two are from the first marriage.  And now, Leon Mike Turner [Leon Turner], Houston [Texas].  Marie Tyrone [Pearlie Marie Turner Tyrone], Houston.  Charles, which his official name is Albert [sic. Alfred], but Charles Turner, also Houston.  Patricia [Patricia Turner Dinnon], Clifford Turner.  Then myself, Robert Turner, Jacqueline Turner, Donald Ray Turner [Donald Turner].  Many of us are almost, almost, like two years apart, you know, except my, my last brother, who miraculously appeared representing the thirteenth of thirteen.  There's a drop off there 'cause my--he was, my dad was, my dad was sixty-five when my youngest brother came.  And then he died shortly thereafter, so that, I think that's, I think I named them all, I think that's all of us.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So, with the exception of Madie and Everett being in Oakland and San Antonio, respectfully--respectively, the rest of us are all still in the City of Houston.
Story_ID: 633065
Speaker 1: Where did you grow up here in Houston [Texas]?
Speaker 2: We grew up in what we call Acres, Acres Home, Texas [Acres Homes, Houston, Texas], which is on the north- northwest side of town.  For a long time, it was the largest African American--I guess you'd call it neighborhood area in the Southwest.  And it's a kind, like a low income, low income area, so to speak, but Acres Home.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: A-C-R-E-S Homes.
Speaker 1: Now, what ward is that in?  I know that's important in Houston.
Speaker 2: Well, the, that's the interesting thing about Acres Home is that it's not a part of the wards.  I mean, you had first, second, third, you know, fourth wards, so to speak.  That's all--those wards are all in like the, the east and south side of Houston.  Acres Home is in northwest.  And so, it's another African American settlement, so to speak, but in the northwest side of town.  And, and the name comes from the fact that when many of the African Americans came, they, bear in mind, many of them are coming from places, like Brenham [Texas] and Chappell Hill [Texas] where they own their own, you know, their little farms and stuff, so they were looking for places with some land.  And so, they were selling the land in Acres Home by the acre, and early on.  And so, many came, folks came, and they settled in Acres Home, so that's just how the name came about.  Since then, they've partitioned a lot of that land off in the smaller lots but--
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, I think I'm understanding what you're saying.  It's like a black township outside--it's separate from Houston.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: It's a black enclave of suburbs--
Speaker 2: Right.  It was not, it was not, for a long time, it was not within the city limits.  It was just right outside of the city limits.  In the last, let's say in the last twenty-five, thirty years, it was annexed by the city, so it now, it is in the city limits, but it didn't used to be.
Speaker 1: Okay.  I know there are similar places in Illinois outside of Chicago.  It's Robbins [Illinois] and Dixmoor [Illinois] which, and Phoenix, Illinois--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --that are like outside of Chicago, always been black.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And--
Speaker 2: Same thing.  I mean, you know, with the mailing address that's Houston, you thought you were in Houston, but you're outside, the City of Houston, the buses stop.  Acres Home had its own bus, own bus company [Acres Homes Transit Company, Houston, Texas] and its own, like little cab company, its own water company, you know, so separate and apart, in terms of services and from the city, but right out, right outside.  And then, the city came and annexed it, and then we took on the city services then.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Were the political leadership in Acres Home traditionally black?
Speaker 2: There was not that much.  You didn't have any elected officials coming out of that area because what ended up happening is that out- right outside of the City of Houston, but it was adjoined or a part of, let's say, like the school district that was predominantly white, a bigger system.  So, it was, it was a relatively large area of African Americans congregated in them, but not any political elected officials coming from that area.  Okay.  Years ago, when I was, when I was a kid, for example, many of my brothers and sisters went to the school system in what we call Aldine [Texas], okay.  Oh, and HISD, Houston Independent School District.  And then, when I came along, they then--whatcha call the word--redistricted, so to speak, the area, to the white school district, Klein Independent School District.  And so, we were used to integrate the white school district, Klein intermediate, and so forth, whereas my brother, older brothers and sisters graduated from, like Carver High School [George Washington Carver High School, Houston, Texas], or Booker T. Washington High School [Houston, Texas], which were within a few miles.  You know, we got, the area was then redistricted to Klein and we end up going eighteen miles one way by bus, so thirty-six miles going back and forth.  That was the, so you didn't have a lot of poli- you didn't have political leaders coming from there because it, the way things were aligned, the numbers simply were not there.
Story_ID: 633066
Speaker 1: We always ask this question.  Now, you grew up in Acres Home [Acres Homes, Houston, Texas].  What were some sights and sounds and smells of growing up?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.  Oh are we, are we on now? Okay. I'm sorry, I'm sorry. You know, okay, I grew up in Acres Home.  In Acres Home, I grew up in a subdivision called Garden City Elementary [sic.], which is a relatively small pocket of Acres Home, only two streets in--you know, you could, you got the major street that run past Acres Home, and then you could either take Stallings [Drive] or Bonanza [sic. Bonazzi Boulevard], McCrarey [Drive], I'm sorry, to come into Garden City Park.  I lived off Stallings.  And then, there was the local, the neighborhood school, Garden City Elementary and Junior High [Garden City Elementary and Junior High School (ph.)], that we all attended.  We all could walk there.  And most of the teachers lived in Garden City that taught at the neighborhood school.  So, I went there up until, let's say, like the sixth or seventh grade.  Most of my brothers and sisters all went up to there until like the eighth grade.  And then, they went to Carver [George Washington Carver High School, Houston, Texas] and Booker T. [Booker T. Washington High School, Houston, Texas].  When we came along, got integrated, they closed the neighborhood school, Garden City Elementary, they closed that.  And the school district that we were being combined with, Klein [Klein Independent School District], sold Garden City Elementary to the funeral home, Paradise Funeral Home [Houston, Texas].  And one of the reasons, I believe, that they did that, is because these, the property, the school, and the property kind of surrounded the subdivision.  And once they sold it to the funeral home, it could no longer grow.  It couldn't expand.  No more houses could be--I mean, you don't build in a cemetery.  So, the only kids that were going be coming from Garden City to be bused to Klein, if you didn't already have a home or kids, when coming from the homes that existed, that was going to be it.  So, it kind of limited the number of black kids that would be going, once they sold the local neighborhood school to the cemetery.  So, for me, there were thirteen black teachers at Garden City.  And when they, when everybody got the news that they were going to close Garden City, and we were going to be integrating Klein [Klein Intermediate School, Klein, Texas] (clears throat), the teachers told us, "Look, we're getting, you know, we've gotten you ready, you getting ready to undertake a new experience.  You are prepared.  Keep your head up, do well, you know, make us proud, and many of us will be going with you."
Story_ID: 633067
Speaker 1: So, was that true?  Did many of them actually go over to Klein?
Speaker 2: There were several of them that did.  Mr. Jennings [ph.], for example, was my eighth grade biology teacher, and at Klein Intermediate [Klein Intermediate School, Klein, Texas] he went.  Ms. Samuels [ph.], who was my sixth grade English teacher, she went.  It was great, tremendous.  You know, there were several who went.
Speaker 1: Who would you think, out of the thirteen, about how many you think went over to Klein?
Speaker 2: I don't--out of the thirteen, probably only, maybe about four to six, only about four to six.
Speaker 1: So, did the rest of them basically lose their jobs?
Speaker 2: They just went to other schools, either in Houston Independent School District--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --Aldine [Aldine Independent School District], much, much closer, but about four to six.  But those teachers, those thirteen black teachers that were at the Garden City Elementary Junior High [Garden City Elementary and Junior High School (ph.)], I give them a great deal of credit for laying the foundation for me and others who came through 'cause they did a tremendous job in getting us prepared academically, as well as mentally.  And then, of course, Mr. Jennings, who became one of my biggest cheerleaders, followed me all the way through from Garden City, to Klein Intermediate, to Klein High School [Klein, Texas].  I mean, he, he, I mean, he tracked my every move, and just was a tremendous motivator.  And you have to bear in mind, you know, my dad [Eddie Turner] had already died when I was thirteen, so it was people like him that really, was, played a very key role, yeah, in pushing me academically.  He, and he, you know, he would be out in the hallway, and at Klein, and he would, you know, he asked, "How are your grades? You keeping your grades up?"  And I say, "I'm doing, doing okay."  You know, he said, "Okay, keep, you know, keep your grades up, you know, make, make us proud."  And then, even in high school, you know, he, and mind you, these teachers also lived in the same neighborhood [Acres Homes, Houston, Texas], okay.  So, not only are they with us at Klein, so to speak, but they, you know, they will stop by your house, and talk to your mom and, you know, and parents, and or see you in the neighborhood and, basically, was, they were there.  Their presence was there.  And even, and then, so when I got to high school, you know, he kept saying, you know, "How, how are your grades?"  And 'cause I was, academically, I was pretty good.
Story_ID: 633068
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now I don't want to get you to high school yet--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --but does, but I wanted you to finish fleshing out the political story 'cause you were so into it, but let me--
Speaker 2: On the politics, there were no African American elected officials on the northwest side.  The leadership in the City of Houston [Texas], politically for African Americans, came from the northeast, the Fifth Ward [Houston, Texas], part of the time, or the south, the Third Ward [Houston, Texas].  That's where the, that's where Texas Southern University [Houston, Texas] was.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: That's where the leadership came.  The black leadership on the northwest side of the town, there was none.
Speaker 1: This the first time I really heard about this side of town, so I haven't interviewed anybody from there that I know of yet.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Everybody else is associated with Phillis Wheatley [Phillis Wheatley High School, Houston, Texas], and Booker T. Washington [Booker T. Washington High School, Houston, Texas], and Jack Yates [Jack Yates Senior High School; Jack Yates High School, Houston, Texas].
Speaker 2: That--when growing up, even as a kid, you know, I, I heard about Phillis Wheatley, Kashmere [Kashmere Gardens, Houston, Texas], Jack Yates, Fifth Ward, the Third Ward, Sunnyside [Houston, Texas], the MacGregor area [Houston, Texas], if you wanted to be a part of the black elite, so to speak, or the black intelligentsia.  However you want to refer to it.  But you didn't hear much from Acres Home [Acres Homes, Houston, Texas].  You know, that old expression said, you know, like, "Can any good thing come out of Nazareth," [John 1:46], you know, the thing, can any good thing come out of Acres Home?  But there were a lot of good things that were happening in Acres Home, simply under the radar.  We were outside of the city limits, so we were not participating or voting in any city elections.  And we were subdivided into so many other different political parts.  So, politically, there was a lot--I guess you can say to some degree, some political disenfranchisement we kind of left out, but you know.
Story_ID: 633069
Speaker 1: It sounds as if, though, that you're, if I'm reading you right, that there was a certain amount of unity in Acres Home [Acres Homes, Houston, Texas] and around the black folks that were there.  There were teachers, lived in Acres Home that were teaching at Garden City [Garden City Elementary and Junior High School (ph.)]--
Speaker 2: The principal, the principal lived in Garden City [Garden City Park, Houston, Texas].
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: The teachers, by and large, lived in Garden City.  The neighborhood church was right down the street, New Jerusalem [New Jerusalem Missionary Baptist Church, Houston, Texas], at the corner of Stallings [Drive] and Bonanza [sic. Bonazzi Boulevard] in Garden City.  You have the local stores and stuff.  You had your own bus company [Acres Homes Transit Company, Houston, Texas].
Speaker 1: And these are black stores, you said (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) The black stores.
Speaker 1: The black bus company?
Speaker 2: The black bus company.  So, we were all kind of all in our little world.  I guess you could say in many ways, maybe people would be more--a little bit more agrarian on that side of town.
Speaker 1: It was like, did people keep livestock, you know, around their house (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, in Garden--and they took, even then, some would say, even to this day, but in Garden City, for example, you know, there were people who had, they had hogs, man.  They had horses and cattle, even in Acres Home today.  People will tell you, City of Houston [Texas], you can't, you know, you're going to have horses in Acres Home.  You still have them.  And on any given Saturday, you're subject to see the cowboys forming their own little parade, and riding down West Montgomery [Road], even today.  And we just had our Juneteenth parade.  You can't have a Juneteenth parade in Acres Home without your horses.  I mean, that's just a part of who we are on the north side, and as we say, the north side for 44, we're the 44.  And that, we got the 44 from, that was the, the name of the bus, you know, even the city bus that came through.  It was the Stude- the Studewood 44.  But we, but in, but we say 44.  That's the identifier for those on the northwest side.  Carver High School [George Washington Carver High School, Houston, Texas] and Aldine Independent School District now, that was, that was a school,  And every February, they were putting on their parades coming right down West Montgomery and Acres Home.  That was another unifier.  They brought everybody out, and you line the streets in West Montgomery for the Carver High School parade.  And you had Ruby Rose, a Ruby Rose Barbecue [ph.] right there on the corner.  And a lot of those small businesses with the hamburger stands and barbecue--I mean it was, as a kid, that's what I, you know, those are sort of things that I remember that line, lined the road, and a lot of community pride.  And for people coming into Acres Home, there has always been a tremendous amount of community pride, and, you know, just like many African American neighborhoods back then.  Everybody knew everybody.  And, you know, mom [Ruby Mae Turner], dad [Eddie Turner] picked up the phone, calls somebody, and says, "Sylvester's [HistoryMaker Sylvester Turner] down the street," and, and if somebody's missing, everybody's, everybody is looking.  So, and it was an excellent place to raise your kids, but, politically speaking, you didn't have the city council person, or the school board member, or the state representative.
Speaker 1: So, there was a state representative, who represented you, but it wasn't of Acres Home, right?
Speaker 2: I--
Speaker 1: That's what I would have guessed.  You'll be some--
Speaker 2: I represent the first non-Anglo elected official on the northwest side of town.  When I took over in eighty--the election's in '88 [1988], and I ran in '89 [1989], my district [Texas House District 139], which includes Acres Home, but the northwest side was between 60 to 65 percent white.  And so, I represent the first non-Anglo elected official on the northwest side of town.
Story_ID: 633070
Speaker 1: Now you in--just now, have answered some of the questions that I asked first.  And that was, what were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up (laughter)?
Speaker 2: Hey, man, the barb- look, no better barbecue than in Acres Home [Acres Homes, Houston, Texas]--Ruby, Ruby Rose [Ruby Rose Barbeque (ph.)].  You couldn't beat a Parker's Hamburger [ph.], couldn't, you just couldn't beat it.  The music, the band, Carver High School [George Washington Carver High School, Houston, Texas], and the band, you just couldn't beat it.  The drive-in, the, you know, Shepherd Drive-In [Houston, Texas], you know, a lot of things happen there (laughter).
Speaker 1: So there's a drive-in theater there in--
Speaker 2: Used to be, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Couldn't, you couldn't beat it.
Speaker 1: You said a lot of things happened there that--
Speaker 2: Yeah, good and bad, you know, (laughter), yeah, good and bad, you know.  So, I mean, you know, all of that, the horses then, and even now.  Look, man, I remember one time coming through Acres Home.  I, you know, a cow walking right down the street, you know, in Acres Home.  The animals, the livestock, that was a part of Acres Home.  The old buses, you know, them old ones, you know, remember that, those sounds, sights.  A lot of good stuff, you know, black owned cleaners, black owned businesses.  The fruit and vegetable stand right there on Little York [Road] where you didn't have to kind of go outside, you know, it was right there.  All of those things, where you saw people being entrepreneurs providing goods and services--you saw right there.
Speaker 1: Now, is Acres Home still like that in terms of black ownership?
Speaker 2: It's more, not as much as, as before which is unfortunate.  Of course, the bus company now, we've been incorporating in the city, so it's the Metro bus system [Metropolitan Transit Authority of Harris County], so you don't have that.  Many of the black cleaners, for example, are no longer.  The barbecue stand, Ruby Rose, no more.  Parker's Hamburger, no more.  The food and vegetable market, so to speak, doesn't exist.  No, that's the, those are the unfortunate events.  As we have, since we have been incorporated, now you, you, all these businesses are competing with the bigger chains, the bigger stores.  But when we were, in a sense, self-contained, so to speak, and had to provide for ourselves, that was one thing, and they were there.
Speaker 1: Did Acres Home have a highway run it or anything like that--like in the urban renewal days in the city, I know most of the black communities had to suffer the highways.
Speaker 2: There was not a highway or freeway coming through.  The freeway represented the eastern boundary, but it was, in the sense, between two major, so it didn't have a freeway coming through it.  What has happened, though, is that they've extended roads now that have, that are going through.  It's made things, it's helped to make things, to improve the mobility, but at the same time, it is, to some degree, changing the character.  It's one thing when things are self-contained, so to speak, but as you start cutting through, and cutting down trees or removing homes, it does have a way of changing things.  But it's still Acres Home, and it's still a lot of community pride, and we're working feverishly to maintain that community bond and bring back that entrepreneurial spirit.
Story_ID: 633071
Speaker 1: Now what was your family church there?
Speaker 2: I went to--it was Mount Ararat [Mount Ararat Baptist Church, Houston, Texas].  After, let me put it, the first, and they've been a few churches in my life, Magnolia Missionary Baptist Church [Houston, Texas] is where my, is where I came through in my early, you know, kindergarten, elementary years, Pastor I.H. White.  And my daddy [Eddie Turner] was a deacon there, senior deacon there.  And that's when--but I kind of went there, like on Christmastime for the Christmas bags.  But let me back up now.  That's the only time I really wanted to go.  My dad made us go to like, Sunday school and church, but the only time I wanted to go was when, for the Christmas bags.  So, went through that and then, my dad then, and that's literally was like less than a mile from where we were born and reared.  And then, my dad moved membership to New Bethel [Bethel Baptist Church; Bethel Institutional Missionary Baptist Church] outside of Acres Home [Houston, Texas] under W.H. Dudley, and then, that's what, my dad died while at that church, and then it was W.H. Dudley who became like a mentor to me when I was thirteen.  And then, my mom [Ruby Mae Turner] moved the membership back to my, moved to Mount Ararat Baptist Church in Acres Home because my mom couldn't drive.  My mom never learned how to drive, and she wanted to be closer to home since my dad died.
Speaker 1: So, was New Bethel in Houston [Texas]?
Speaker 2: New Bethel was in Houston.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Just in northeast Houston, okay.  So, start out at Magnolia, then went to New Bethel, then my mom changed the membership to Mount Ararat, back in Acres Home, but I wanted to remain at New Bethel.  And my mom allowed me to stay at New Bethel under the leadership of Pastor W.H. Dudley.  The rest of the family went to Mount Ararat.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And so, I remained, I remained at New Bethel.
Story_ID: 633072
Speaker 1: You started out at Garden City Elementary [Garden City Elementary and Junior High School (ph.)], right?
Speaker 2: Elementary junior high--it went from the, from the first to the eighth grade.
Speaker 1: Okay, now.  I take it you might have liked school.
Speaker 2: After the first, I started clicking in the second grade with Miss Hall.  Dora Hall was my second grade teacher.  First grade, I didn't particularly care for.  Second grade, I started to click.  She was very instrumental in that.  She kept messing with me.  And--
Speaker 1: Now, had you had a preschool or kindergarten or anything?
Speaker 2: Did I go to--yeah, I did the kindergarten and then, from kindergarten to Garden City.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And then, bear in mind that many of these teachers had all taught many, if not most of my brothers and sisters, so I'm just coming right behind.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So Garden City now, in the second grade, things started to click now.  What happened?  Did something that you--
Speaker 2: Miss Hall--I give, I give the credit to Miss Hall.  I was quiet, didn't say much.  And every morning, Miss, you know, you come, Miss Hall was standing in the hallway.  She hugged all the kids.  I didn't want that, and I didn't want it, but I wanted it.  You know, kids were, you know, and I tell everybody, you got to be careful how kids respond because even though they may push you away, that doesn't necessarily mean they want you to not approach them.  And so, but I wouldn't say much.  And so, we--Miss Hall had these reading exercises, you know, you open the book, "Okay, Larry, start reading.  And then stop, Sylvester [HistoryMaker Sylvester Turner], you pick up." And I liked that.  And then, she kept at me, kept at me, and then I started opening up more.  I, I just started to open up more.  And then, one day, she didn't hug me.  I came in, she didn't, she was occupied or something else--well, I don't know what happened.  And I didn't like the fact she didn't, and I got a copped attitude.  And, and then she, she noticed that.  And she came back the next day.  She did and called on me to read, and I was eager to read for her, okay.
Speaker 1: So, the relationship really is what, you know, the relationship with the teacher really made the difference.
Speaker 2: It made the difference because, you know, she cared and she pushed, but she did it in a very loving way.  And even though I didn't say that necessarily to her, inside, you know, I--it made an impression on me.  And so, from her, second grade, then third grade was Miss Devon [ph.], and she was very similar.  And then, the fourth grade was Miss Benjamin [ph.], and she was the one who saw that I had a knack for spelling.  And so, she pushed, and got me in the spelling bee and all that, and I did, I did okay.  And then, then there was Miss Herndon [ph.], and Mr. King [ph.] in the fifth and the sixth.  And then, Miss Samuel [ph.] was my English teacher, and nobody could diagram a sentence better than her.  She made it fun, and I enjoyed it.  And them, it was Mr. Jennings [ph.] on the science.  So, those were the teachers.  And so, you know, I was--math, sciences, I liked.
Story_ID: 633073
Speaker 1: Those are the courses you liked the most?
Speaker 2: Math, science, I liked, and, and I liked, and I enjoyed the competition you know, how to, you know, back then, you go to the board, like they give you, like a--put an algebra equation to see if you could--the fastest one to balance it.  I enjoyed, I enjoyed the competition.  And, so, you know, it went from that and Mr. Jennings [ph.] saw that I had, that I enjoyed the sciences, so he pushed me on that.  So, those were the, you know, the formative years, so to speak.  And then, when we when they closed Garden City Elementary and Junior High [Garden City Elementary and Junior High School (ph.)], and then bused us to Klein [Klein Intermediate School, Klein, Texas]--
Speaker 1: Now, how old were you when that happened--'cause you would have started school, in, let's see, 1960, I guess?
Speaker 2: I was started, I was in the first grade when I was seven, so where would that put me?
Speaker 1: Maybe '61 [1961], I guess, right?
Speaker 2: Right.  So, that's about, that's about shortly after my dad [Eddie Turner] died so somewhere around what, thirteen, fourteen?
Speaker 1: Yeah, you said you were thirteen when your dad died.  Your dad must have--he was born in 1904 and died at age sixty-five, so 1969, he would have passed, I guess, right?
Speaker 2: Right.  Right about in that time.
Speaker 1: That would have been like further on down--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: You know, when you were--I guess about eighth grade, I guess.
Speaker 2: Right.  And so, I went, they, when I went to Klein Intermediate, I was in the seventh or eighth.  I think I was in the seventh grade and then, Mr. Jennings was--
Speaker 1: That's about 1967--
Speaker 2: Right, right about that time.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And, you know, grade wise, I continued to do well at Klein Intermediate.
Speaker 1: And you said Mr. Jennings was there, yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah, Mr. Jennings was there.  And then, from intermediate, then I went to the high school [Klein High School, Klein, Texas] which was right next door to the intermediate.  Again, eighteen miles one way, away, and I continued to excel and then participate in the speech program.  I--math, sciences, and I enjoyed the speech department, the speech and drama department.
Speaker 1: So, you weren't intimidated at all going to Klein, or Mr. Jennings kind of helped you get over--
Speaker 2: Before, before we left, all of the teachers, black teachers, got us together and said, "We want to prepare you for what you're about to experience.  It will be new.  You're going to a new place, but you are well prepared."  I mean, they, they really, how can you put it, they prepped us and said, you know, "You're ready, and now go."  And the whole thing, you know, "Go and make us proud, make, you're representing Garden City, you know, you're representing Garden City, and go, and make us proud."  And I, you know, and we listened to that, and then, you know, like I just said, and it meant some of us, we're going to be there with you.  And so, when we went, you know, initially, you're getting off the bus, here are these black kids, you know, we've been on the bus eighteen miles.  And all of a sudden, we're being led out the bus and you, and we're walking down the hallway, and you're seeing all these white kids looking at you like, you know, it's all like, you know, "Who are you?"  Some would speak, some wouldn't speak.  And in the first--and there were a lot of fights, a lot, there were brawls, not just fights, there were brawls in the hallway.  I mean, literally swinging, and I'm not talking about two or three.  I'm talking about there could be thirty or forty fighting in the hallway--brawls between the black and the white kids.  And I remember, I'm seeing all of that, and the guys and the gals.  I mean, it was, it was unreal because you had--it was like, it was like two worlds meeting each other for the first time.  And they were staking--and the white kids, I guess, were staking out their territory.  This was their school.  And black kids, we were coming and saying, "But you're not going to push us around, you know, we don't want to be here, but we're here."  And, and so, it was like two worlds meeting, and then what, come to find out what made it worse, it was the parents in many ways, that were providing the agitation and so, the kids, we were trying to decipher what in the hell is going on, you know.
Story_ID: 633074
Speaker 1: How did the school administration, were they--now they were ordered, this is court ordered desegregation [of the Klein Independent School District] (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right.
Speaker 1: --of course.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: That's the only reason why they're doing it.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: But, were they committed to being fair at all?  I mean, or how did they, with all these brawls breaking out and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I think everybody was trying to find a way, was trying to find the answer to, to all of this.  What's, what's the solution?  You know, here we are, and now we gotta, we all have to try to find a way to make it work.  And after those, I guess, after those, after people started to settle down, and people did settle down, it did calm down.  And then, we kind of gradually moved, moved forward.  I mean, the tension, the tension still exist--
Speaker 1: Let me ask you.  Were you personally involved with a fight there, and how did you deal with it?  I mean, you know, that's what--
Speaker 2: Well, I mean, you know, look, when you're in the hallway, and there's fighting going on, and pushing going on, I mean, you're right, you're just right in it.  And then, what you, what the teachers, especially like Mr. Jennings [ph.], and some of the others that came with us, basically said, "Stay out of it."  You, you, "Let's not get into this.  This is, this is a no win, so let's not, let's not get into this and, and calm down.  Everybody just needs to calm down."  And you have those kind of conversations going on, on both sides.  And then, of course, you know, they brought in outside elements, you know, the police and stuff to kind of keep control.  And it just--
Speaker 1: You know, what I'm thinking?  I'm like, I'm thinking, the police and the principal of the school [Klein Intermediate School, Klein, Texas], all those elements, and they were, and they turned against the black students.  I mean, the black students wouldn't have any place to turn, you know, I mean--
Speaker 2: Well, I told--
Speaker 1: So, did they try to do, did they try to make it fair, or were they--
Speaker 2: They--were to, at least, to get control of the environment.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Okay.  And said, you know, to everybody, "We're not having this." So they did take control of the environment.  You didn't have the, the brawls.  They kind, they kind of phased out.  And then, the way I look at it, it was just, you know, when hot air and, and cold air meet for, initially, you're going to have some turbulence, and that's what happened.  It was two worlds coming together at the same time.  And, but we got past that.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Okay, we got--
Speaker 1: How long did it take to get past the initial clash?
Speaker 2: Hm, let's just say, you know, first, you stop the fighting, at least the brawls.  You know, there may be a couple of people engaged in fighting stuff, but you stop the group brawls, so that phased out.  And then, pretty much, the fighting stopped.  You still had the tension.  You still had people not knowing each other.  I mean, you know, racism just don't, doesn't end like that because you got, you know, you got outside influences, the talking, you know, we're kids, you know, we're kids.  But what was happ- what did happen is that as the kids got to know each other, I think the situation started getting better, or started getting better.
Speaker 1: Now, do you think that, had a similar experience in one way, and not as dramatic as yours, but do you think it was more of a matter of the white kids getting used to the black kids, or the black kids getting used to the white kids, or (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I think, I think it's both.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I think we were both getting used to each other.  I think for, maybe from a white kid's perspective, you know, this has been their school, you know.  So who, who are these people, you know?  And, and they don't look like us.  We're probably--they probably never been around, especially this many African Americans at one time, in such close proximity.  And maybe they're hearing from their parents, so you got that.  On the other side, African American side, you know, here we're, we're on a bus.  We're being driven eighteen miles from, from our homes.  I was--the school that we have loved [Garden City Elementary and Junior High School (ph.)], that has been such a part of who we are historically, is now closed, and you're selling it to a cemetery.  Now, you're putting us on a bus.  We're going eighteen miles.  We're looking out the window and, you know, we're seeing--we're not recognizing any stuff that we're seeing.  And then, all of a sudden, we pull up to this, the bus pulls up, and we're being dropped off, and we're saying, go.  And we're walking into a, a venue that we are not familiar with at all and, and it seems as though everybody else is staring at us, as if we're in, as if we're animals in a zoo.  And so, you got some built in tensions there.  And you got, you know, outside influences on that end.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And now, here we go, we are kids.  And, and we're supposed to be in the same class, and walking down the same hallway.  And there has not been the mental or emotional adjustments having been made, and we expect to just move forward, as if we've been together all of our lives.  That's, that's asking a great deal of kids.  I don't care who you are.
Story_ID: 633075
Speaker 1: How are you treated in class?  I mean, were the teachers, were they--
Speaker 2: I mean, you have some teachers that were great.  You had some teachers that were maybe not as responsive.
Speaker 1: But did you have, I suppose, did you ever have a situation where they tried to isolate the black students in class and make them feel bad, and all that sort of thing and--
Speaker 2: I, I don't recall any of that.
Speaker 1: Did you have classes with other black students?
Speaker 2: In, in most of the classes, you didn't.  There may have been three or four black kids in a class 'cause bear in mind, the school was still 85 to 90 percent white.  We represented that 10 to 15 percent.  But the school, the school was still 85, eighty--let's say 85 percent white.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I know one of the strategies in other towns when they order desegregation was to isolate the black kids, and not let them have any classes where another black student--
Speaker 2: Well, there were not that many black students in a particular class.  So, I mean, I mean there were not enough of us to go around to, to represent any significant numbers, you know.  It was, it was--look, man, it was an adjustment.
Speaker 1: Now, did you take a college track course--I mean, course of study?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I took the advanced courses.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I took the advanced courses.  And from day one, from the day in high school, from the ninth grade, there were always three of us that were competing very hard academically, Jeannie Kessel [ph.], Pat Taylor [ph.], and myself, two white students and myself.  And from the ninth grade through the twelfth, people pretty much knew, academically speaking, there were three that were competing in the sense, academically, against one another.
Speaker 1: So, did the teachers allow you to compete fairly, or did anybody try to discourage you from pursuing like a, advanced placement classes and--
Speaker 2: No, no, no one did that.  The only example that someone tried to maybe provide some disencouragement or disincentive, I went, my sister, one of my oldest sisters, graduated from Klein High School [Klein, Texas], and I went to the graduation.  I was sitting in this, I was sitting in the stands.  And, and at the graduation, of course, they had the valedictorian and the salutatorian to speak, and that impressed me.  And I was sitting in the stands.  I was talking to--I think it was a teacher, Anglo teacher, and I asked, and how do they speak?  So, the person said, "Oh, that person, the kids, who graduate the first and the second in their class, are the ones who speak."  And I said, "Oh, I'm going to do that."  I said, "I want to do that."  And, and she said, "Look, if you just graduate in the top 25 percent of your class, you'll be doing great." You know.  And, and I thought that was odd.  Why, why did she tell me that, you know?  That's what I said to (unclear) and why.  And that's not what I asked, you know, so, okay, fine, no problem.
Speaker 1: So (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And that, and that, that was an added, an added motivator for me.
Story_ID: 633076
Speaker 1: Now did you get involved in sports or clubs or the school offices or anything like that?
Speaker 2: I debated for four years, was the district debate champ, and my partner and I, at Klein [Klein High School, Klein, Texas] for four years, regional champ, pretty much before.  And fell short on state, but, for four years.  I was president of the student body at Klein.
Speaker 1: Now, that's now, this is, you said, talking about 95 percent white school.
Speaker 2: Eighty-five--
Speaker 1: Eighty-five.
Speaker 2: --eighty-five, yeah, president of the student body.  I was voted Mr. Klein High School.  And end up graduating at the top of the class, so it was--I had a good run at Klein.  I had a good, I had a good, in spite of, in spite of how things started, I had a--
Speaker 1: I'd say, that's a pretty good run, yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I had a real good run.
Speaker 1: Now, I know I didn't ask you, I didn't ask you about the Hispanic students--
Speaker 2: Not that many.
Speaker 1: --or the Mexicans as you would call, or everybody would call, not that many at (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Not that many.  I just remembered, and quite frankly, I just remember the white students and the black students.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Not that many Anglos.
Speaker 1: I think it's interesting, yeah, you call Anglos, the white students, Anglos.  I mean, just like the Mexicans Americans call them, you know.
Speaker 2: Right, right.
Speaker 1: Does it--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --and I don't think some of them called the cowboys, too (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right, now you'll meet, who said that, too.
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: But, that's, so there weren't that many there, huh?
Speaker 2: Not, not that many Hispanics at, at Klein.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well, were there certain high schools in the city that were predominantly, I guess, say, like Houston [Texas], there had to be some, there were predominately Hispanic?
Speaker 2: Hispanic, I am, yes, on the east side.  Of course, all of that has changed today in 2012.  But when I graduated, for example, from Klein, in 1973, the numbers were not nearly as large as they are today of Hispanic students.  And in the Klein Independent School District, which was a suburban school district outside of the City of Houston, the population of Hispanics was not very large at all at that time.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Things have changed.  But back then, it was primarily whites and blacks.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  Houston, they don't, all these Texas cities have a different dynamic.  I think, in San Antonio [Texas], you'd be--
Speaker 2: San Antonio would be Hispanic.
Speaker 1: --(unclear) with the majority Hispanic population.
Speaker 2: That is correct.  Corpus Christi [Texas]--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah, same.
Story_ID: 633077
Speaker 1: Let me just go back and talk about some popular culture stuff before we move you on to college [University of Houston, Houston, Texas].  But when you were growing up, what kind of music did you like, and what kind of music were you exposed to in Houston [Texas]?
Speaker 2: You know, R and B, soul, I've always been a big fan of gospel, for example.  And, (unclear), I am a product of the church, you know, started slow, but that's, that is, when I end up staying at New Bethel [Bethel Baptist Church; Bethel Institutional Missionary Baptist Church, Houston, Texas] under the leadership of Pastor W.H. Dudley, most, a lot of my time was spent at the church.
Speaker 1: Did you have, like leadership positions in the church that--
Speaker 2: He thought I was going to be a minister.  And so, so what he did when I end up staying with him, staying under his leadership, and then the church, the minister of music, she lived in Garden City [Garden City Park] in Acres Home [Acres Homes, Houston, Texas].  And so, she would pick me up and take me, and so I was, for example, on a Sunday, I was there, man, all day.  And I was there from Sunday school, eleven o'clock, church visitation at three, four o'clock, director of Baptist Training Union at 5:30, and he had me to stay until seven o'clock.  And then, at the age of fourteen, you know, we have these annual Youth Day programs at the church.  And he said, "Bro- Little Brother Turner [HistoryMaker Sylvester Turner], I want you to be, be our Youth Day speaker.  You'll be the only speaker."  I'm not, I did that for ten consecutive years.  And then, when we were go on church visitations, to go in somebody else's church, you know, he, of course, when he would get up, and he would say to the church where we were.  "I have a young lad with me, and I'm going to ask Brother Turner to get up and speak for about three to five minutes on whatever the Lord has placed in his heart today.  And then, when Brother Turner finishes, my choir will sing, and then the next, for us, will be--then I will come up and preach."  And, and he, he did that for years.  And then, that Sunday, Sunday night, I'd been there all day.  He would stay, he would say, "Brother Turner, I want you to sit on the front row, sit right here, front row, and I'm not going to preach long tonight, folks.  I'm going to do a (unclear)." And then he would look at me and say, "Brother, Brother Turner, Sylvester, what that means is that I'm only going to preach for about five to seven minutes.  I'm going to go up, and I'm going to come down." And, and he did that.  And then, he would talk to me and say, and--, "Sometimes you don't have long to develop some, a long presentation, so you got to know how to hit it, and you got to know how to close it."  Well, I was with him for all those years.  When he goes, when going to association meetings, I was under his wing.  When going to national Baptist conventions, I was under his wing.  And so, when I told him that I was getting, going off to college, to really, to law school [Harvard Law School, Cambridge, Massachusetts] that, you know, he was a little disappointed.  But, anyway, yeah, that going back, so music, all kinds, jazz, I like that, gospel, loved that.  And, quite frankly, you know, I kind of like it all.  I mean--country and western, I mean, you know, I was--
Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite country and western group?
Speaker 2: Oh, not really.  I just, I just like the sound of music.  I, I--
Speaker 1: Now, what was, Archie Bell and the Drells where--
Speaker 2: Archie Bell and the Drells--
Speaker 1: --where I know they are, they're a band that announced that they're from Houston, Texas.
Speaker 2: Texas.
Speaker 1: And, you know, and we heard them in Ohio and everywhere else.
Speaker 2: Yep.
Speaker 1: You know, but they were one of the few bands that announced, "We're from Houston."
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Hey, man--
Speaker 1: And they want you to know, you know.
Speaker 2: Just like I want you to know I'm from Acres Home [Acres Homes, Houston, Texas], the 44, you know.
Speaker 1: Everybody--all the hip hoppers know what the Fifth Ward [Houston, Texas] is--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --you know.
Speaker 2: They know Fifth Ward.
Story_ID: 633078
Speaker 1: Did you know any musicians that went on to any kind of national status growing up?
Speaker 2: Didn't know them personally.  Of course, like now, everybody knows Yolanda Adams and the gospel singers, stuff like that.  And then, Holliday--
Speaker 1: Jennifer Holliday?
Speaker 2: Jennifer Holliday, she comes out to, she comes out the Fifth Ward area [Houston, Texas], and graduated from Booker T. Washington High School [Houston, Texas] which is in my district [Texas House District 139].  So, you know, people know, you know, those folk.  You know, those are the ones stand out to me right now.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, I'm just--now, did you go to movies and that kind of thing when you were growing up that--
Speaker 2: A little bit, not, not a whole lot.
Speaker 1: I know you mentioned the drive-in being a scene--
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, that, that was a hangout spot there [Shepherd Drive-In, Houston, Texas].  There was (laughter), yeah, now that--look, we know like everybody else, I mean, you know, yeah.  I think, not necessarily to go to watch the movies but (laughter)--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Well, yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  That's where the movies were playing.
Speaker 2: That's where they were playing.  Look, man, I, I tell people, my life is not so much different than most of the folk that I was--grew up with, home boys that I grew up with.  I've just been blessed.  And some of the things that I even wanted to do, and I saw them doing, there were times when, when they said, they wouldn't let me do it.  They would say no.  I had home boys.  Even when I was tempted to do some stuff, home boys in my neighborhood [Acres Homes, Houston, Texas] would say to others who would push me to do some stuff and to me, "No, don't, don't include Sylvester [HistoryMaker Sylvester Turner] in there."  And they would say, "Sylvester can make it, so don't include him, no."
Story_ID: 633079
Speaker 1: This is something that I've heard before that the people, and you are blessed in that regard that older people, and even peers that recognize a quality--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --and nurture it.
Speaker 2: I've been very blessed.
Speaker 1: Your dad [Eddie Turner] made you the, the clerk for the business--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --on the road, you know, Mr. Jennings [ph.] recognized you.
Speaker 2: Pushed me hard.
Speaker 1: Reverend Dudley [W.H. Dudley]?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And then you say, now your peers are saying, "Hey, don't get him involved in no mess 'cause he can go somewhere."
Speaker 2: And, literally, even when I was inclined and wanted to, my home boys stepped in and said, "No, don't, don't, leave him alone.  And, Sylvester [HistoryMaker Sylvester Turner], no."
Speaker 1: Now, what did that kind of attention do to you, psychologically, in terms of your pursuit of your studies and--
Speaker 2: Hey, man, it, it--I pushed, I pushed even harder, you know--
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, okay.
Speaker 1: I, I pushed, I pushed even harder because for, for me, when you look at the family background, and I normally may be pushing them ahead of time, the first part of the Turners, for example, didn't go to college.  I come in the second half that did.  So, first part, first, my brothers went to the [U.S. military] service because they couldn't afford it.  You know, a lot of, a lot of my peers, some, you know, didn't go, didn't go off to college, and took, took a different path.  But they were protective, they were protective of, of me.  You know, so my, my life is--I guess you can say that, you know, I'm running a race, not just for myself, but I'm running a race for a lot of people from different walks of life, different age groups that made an investment.  And, you know, you just can't forget that.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Now, you were valedictorian and senior class president--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --when you graduated [from Klein High School, Klein, Texas].  What was your speech as valedictorian about?
Speaker 1: The, or was it, the changes, the change, you know: the choice is yours.  That was the speech, the choice is yours.  I, I wrote the first draft and, and I can't remember what I put in it, but apparently, you know, they didn't approve the first draft.  Then I wrote another draft they approved, but I read the first draft.
Speaker 2: Okay, (laughter).
Speaker 1: My (unclear), once I got up there, who was gonna turn off the mic? So I--
Speaker 2: That's right, you, you graduated now so--
Speaker 1: But, you know, the choice is yours.  That was, that was the title of the speech that I gave.
Speaker 2: And you made the choice (laughter) of reading your first draft (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And I made. I made the choice, yeah, I, I--
Speaker 2: Was there some controversy here?
Speaker 1: I don't know what it was that I wanted, you know, but, but it was, you know, even then for me, it's about choices.  We made good choices.  We made bad choices.  We've reached that, we've reached this point, and the whole notion was, we're at the point now where we have to decide which road we want to take. I would say to my classmates and others, "We've got, we've, we, we have choices, and we've got to make some good ones.  And the choice is, the choice is yours."
Story_ID: 633080
Speaker 1: Nineteen seventy-three [1973], the country was still in Vietnam--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --just getting ready to get out of it--
Speaker 2: Correct.
Speaker 1: --but still in it.  Nixon [President Richard Milhous Nixon] was the president, getting ready to get out of it.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: So, it was like a time of a lot of change.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: 'Cause I didn't think about it before, but did your father [Eddie Turner] pass the same year that Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] was assassinated?
Speaker 2: Was in '68 [1968]?
Speaker 1: Sixty-eight [1968], yeah.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Yeah, it just, I was just doing the calculation looking at the dates here.
Speaker 2: Sixty-eight [1968]--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --sixty-eight [1968], he passed, had his funeral at New Bethel [Bethel Baptist Church; Bethel Institutional Missionary Baptist Church], and then we caravanned back to Chappell Hill [Texas].  I was, I was a kid that was first--I want to, it was a memorable time 'cause when we got to, got to Chappell Hill, we'd already had the funeral at New Bethel in Houston [Texas], got to Chappell Hill, went down this gravel road.  And then, so all of these people, and the church was far too small.  So, they opened the casket on the outside and it was just--I mean, just people, people, people, and then we buried him in the cemetery that, next to the, next to the church.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: You know, and that's, and, and as a kid, I said, you know, and I didn't know my dad knew all these people.  But that's when you, that's when I really saw the, the connect- the connection between Houston and Chappell Hill, in my mind, then all came together.
Story_ID: 633081
Speaker 1: Nineteen seventy-three [1973], you graduated?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Now, how did you make your decision about college?
Speaker 2: I'd done very well in the debate program.  I applied to many schools.  I didn't get much help, you know, at that time from Klein [Klein High School, Klein, Texas] in terms of scholarships and everything.  Even though I graduated as valedictorian, I still didn't get much help, but the debate program was important.  U of H at that time was a--had a major debate program they were in the top ten in the country.  My mom [Ruby Mae Turner], you know, I didn't want to go too far from my mom.  And, and then, cost wise, it was just, it just made more sense, so I chose University of Houston [Houston, Texas].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And then went and participated in the debate program.
Speaker 1: All right.  So, okay, University of Houston, in mid-'70s [1970s].
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: I seem to remember there was a big football star, a black football star there, played quarterback at there at that time, I can't think---
Speaker 2: Davis [Danny Davis]?
Speaker 1: Huh?
Speaker 2: Davis, oh, what's his name?  There's a big quarterback that went that played in the University of Houston, who's now pastor in, at Jordan Grove Missionary Baptist Church [Houston, Texas]--
Speaker 1: Yeah, I think he set some NCAA [National Collegiate Athletic Association] records--
Speaker 2: Yeah, he's going to come to me.
Speaker 1: Yeah. But he was there when you were there.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right, and so, that's why I knew black folks were there 'cause we (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And I think Slap Jack, Sla- Jama- what's, what's the--
Speaker 1: Phi Slama Jama. Now, those guys, they were playing for the championship of the NCAA--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --in the mid-'80s [1980s], '84 [1984], '85 [1985], right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, but that was, that was, but like, but Otis Birdsong--
Speaker 1: Oh, yeah.
Speaker 2: And, see, I was there when Otis Bird- we, 'cause we all stayed the same floor in the dorm, dorm over there.
Speaker 1: Yeah, so they had a good team even then.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I heard Otis Birdsong was a good guard.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So, well, University of Houston, so you were on the debate team and that provide, did that provide you a scholarship there?
Speaker 2: Not the scholarship, but I mean it's--I wanted to pursue it.  It was a strong interest.  And what it did, it provided me an opportunity to travel all over the country.  And I learned a great deal and from that program and, and did pretty good.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, did you get any kind of a scholarship?
Speaker 2: Very, it was not very much, man, it was not very--I was, everybody was surprised.  I didn't (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) You, you were valedictorian, the president of the class, the, one of the top five in the--
Speaker 2: I graduated number one.
Speaker 1: Number one, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, by the time, everybody was surprised, but I got some, but not very much.  And what was important to me, what helped me out was the--remember the B-E-O-G, Basic Educational Opportunity Grant [Federal Pell Grant], and the social security benefits, 'cause my dad [Eddie Turner] had died, and got them until I was twenty-two.  That's why for anybody who talks about cutting off social security benefits for kids, when their parents are deceased, you know, I'd vote against you in a minute because that's how, that's how I made it through.  I end up working part time.  At that time, Southwestern Bell [Southwestern Bell Telephone Company; SBC Communications Inc.], you know, so, you know, I pieced it through.
Story_ID: 633082
Speaker 1: University of Houston [Houston, Texas]--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --and, okay, now, what was your major?
Speaker 2: Political science was my major, minored in speech.
Speaker 1: Now, did you have a career goal?  Yeah, did you have a career goal?  I know Dr.--I mean, Reverend Dudley [W.H. Dudley] was trying to get you involved into the ministry.
Speaker 2: Yeah, was trying to get me into the ministry, man.  He wanted me to, he wanted me to be a preacher, but I always wanted to be a lawyer--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --since the age of six.
Speaker 1: Now, now where did you get the idea at the age of six?  Did you get it from--
Speaker 2: You know, your parents, during those Kennedy-Nixon debates.  And, when--sit the kids down in front of the television, black and white, in the living room and, and my parents [Ruby Mae Turner and Eddie Turner] would say, "Now, Kennedy [John Fitzgerald Kennedy] is for the people, and Nixon [Richard Milhous Nixon] is for everybody else," (laughter).  That's how they explained  it explained it man, and when we were all sitting there (laughter), we were all kids, just sitting in front of the television.  And, and I saw these two guys behind the podium, and I don't know where the lawyer, at some point, the lawyer came in.  And I, I said, "That's, that's what I, that's what I want to do."  And then, I saw some lawyers on television and, and I was impressed.  And so, in the back, in the back of my mind, it was, it was, like the lawyer, public official role is what I--it's, it's what I wanted, okay.  And that's where the debate, you know, standing behind the podium, that's why.  And, and just, just as soon as high school came around, and the debate program, and I saw, I saw the podium.  I gravitated to the podium because in, in my mind, it was the Kennedy-Nixon deal.  And, and I thought that was cool, and that's why, that's--
Speaker 1: Now, did you know any of the black lawyers in Houston [Texas] or--
Speaker 2: The only, the only time I met a black lawyer in Houston is when, later on, when I was in high school [Klein High School, Klein, Texas], and my mom had a lawyer, a black lawyer. He has since passed, but it's his name, as much as I met him and saw him and stuff, and he was very active.  And he, and he'll come to me in a little bit.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But he was the only one, he was the only one that I met and knew in person.  Everybody else were television folk.
Speaker 1: Okay.  You know the reputations of some of the lawyers, the black lawyers in town, or hear their names, or any black judges or around the--
Speaker 2: I mean, in terms of reputation, you know, you have the Matthew Plummers [Matthew W. Plummer], the Marty Wickliffs [Aloysius Martin Wickliff, Sr.]--all these are older lawyers that I are standing representations.  Formerly, they're still a judge.  Gabrielle McDonald [HistoryMaker Gabrielle Kirk McDonald], for example, federal judge, now on the world's court [Iran - United States Claims Tribunal].  I was going to clerk with her so, you know, there are a number, number of lawyers, at later on, that I, that I came to know, and, and, of course, you know, many of them right now.  But as coming up from--through, let's say, junior high, high school, college, I didn't know a lot of them.
Speaker 1: So, Gabrielle McDonald is now with the world court.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.  That's somebody we probably should try to interview.
Speaker 2: Oh, absolutely, yeah.  She was a federal judge, and then to the world court, and she practiced law here.  She was the one who, she started off at a large law firm, Baker and Botts [Baker Botts LLP, Houston, Texas], and then was on federal court [U.S. District Court for the Southern District of Texas].  I mean, I kind of followed, followed her, and was impressed by her, and that provided added motivation.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, this is something that just popped into my head, too, that, now 'cause you worked for the law firm of Fulbright and Jaworski [Fulbright and Jaworski LLP].
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Jaworski made his national splash during the--
Speaker 2: Watergate.
Speaker 1: --Watergate hearings--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --on television.  They were on television in 1973, '74 [1974].
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Right?
Speaker 2: Right.  And I, I met, and I met him on an elevator at the law firm when I was clerking.  And he had on, what you call that blue and white seersucker suit, and, and I introduced myself.  And he told me who he was.  And I said, you know, wow, you know, in my mind, I said, you know, damn.  You know, Turner [HistoryMaker Sylvester Turner], you come a long way--that's what I was saying in, in my own mind.
Speaker 1: What's his first name?
Speaker 2: Leon (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (simultaneous) Leon, Leon Jaworski, right, right--
Speaker 2: --Leon Jaworski.
Speaker 1: --Leon Jaworski, right, that's right.  Just as soon as I asked you, I thought (laughter)--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: That's funny how that works.
Story_ID: 633083
Speaker 1: So who were some of your mentors at the University of Houston [Houston, Texas]?
Speaker 2: I had two political science professors that were kind of--I won't say, took me under their wing, but they were very supportive.  Professor Rodgers [Harrell Rodgers], and Professor Carp, C-A-R-P [Robert Carp].  They were both political science professors, and they was, they were, they left a good positive impression.  In fact, when I, you know, I wasn't going to Harvard [Harvard Law School, Cambridge, Massachusetts].  I was, I was going to go to the University of Texas law school [University of Texas at Austin School of Law, Austin, Texas].  And they found out that I got admitted.  And then, they got with me, and asked me, "Why, you know, why are you, why are you choosing UT over, over Harvard?"  And I told them, "Look, I'm, I'm planning on remaining in Texas and going to UT.  Many of the people at UT are going to be lawyers in Texas, so I may as well get to meet right now."  And these were white professors, and they told me, they said, you know, "Sylvester [HistoryMaker Sylvester Turner], if you got the opportunity to go to Harvard, especially as an African American, you know, you really need to take advantage of it.  You know, it, it will, it will, it'll open a lot more doors, even though, you know, UT is a great school, you might want to reconsider."  And, and I did.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  So, you've been accepted to Harvard?
Speaker 2: I've been accepted to Harvard, but I said no (laughter).  And, and I (laughter), then what, bear in mind, I mean, I'd never been on Harvard's campus.  I knew of the reputation, but I knew UT more.
Speaker 1: Now, yours are one of about four stories I've heard in the last two months about people who were accepted at Harvard that decided they were going to some place else.  Then, the people had to turn them around and say, "Go to Harvard," you know.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I mean, you know, nowadays, we, we talk about the parents taking your kids and, and going and taking them to look at universities and colleges and law schools, and all of that.  Well, I didn't have that, you know.  Pretty much, I was, you know, now kind of doing things pretty much on my, on my own.  And if you didn't have some good counselors, or advisors, teachers, professors, or just friends, so I knew Harvard was a, was a, a great law school, enough for me to apply, and everything.  But I had my roommate, I was going to room with Frank Medina [Francisco G. Medina], and I were good friends, University of Houston.  We were both going to the University of Texas and I said, Frank and I said, hey, we're going, we're going to dorm together.  And it was not until Professor Rodgers and Carp sat me down and said, "Look, you need to, you need to re- rethink this decision."  And then, I called Harvard and I said, "Can I still come?"  And they said to me, you know, "You can still come, but we don't have any dormitory space.  You'll have to stay off campus," and I said, "Cool."  And, and then, for the first, 'cause they didn't have, even a roommate for me, even off campus initially.  And I end up rooming with Diana Escobedo [ph.] (ph.), who was over the women's--she was director of the women's student program on the campus, University of Houston.  And she was marrying, she had just married a guy who was in the undergraduate program at Harvard, and they were staying in an apartment with two cats and until I could--Harvard could give me a name of a person I could room with in an apartment--I end up staying with them for two, for two and a half weeks.
Story_ID: 633084
Speaker 1: Did the University of Houston [Houston, Texas] have a black student organization?
Speaker 2: They have a Black Student Union.  I was very active with them, very active.  And then, I was, I debated for two years, and then decided I wanted to do some other things.  Then, I got involved with, like the Black Student Union, and then I got involved with the student association politics, but through the Black Student Union, they then pushed me to be speaker of the, of the student association, of the senate.  And so, I became speaker of the, of the senate of the student association.  And that paid a stipend, which was great, and so, I did that.  And then, that kind of rounded, kind of rounded out my stay at U of H.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Okay, I just wondered.  I don't, I had left that out now.  I had to go back and correct myself on that, but okay.  At Harvard, all right, so you're at Harvard University [Harvard Law School, Cambridge, Massachusetts]--
Speaker 2: Seventy-seven [1977].
Speaker 1: Nineteen seventy-seven [1977]--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --and I hear you were great friends with a man named Leroy Hassell [Leroy R. Hassell, Sr.].
Speaker 2: Leroy Hassell.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Leroy Hassell and I were--we were roommates for the second and third year.  And then, we, of course, met in the first year.  He's from Virginia.  He was a Que, Omega Psi Phi [Omega Psi Phi Fraternity], and, you know, Leroy was--how could I describe Leroy?  Leroy was just as country as I was, you know, so to speak, you know, but a very, a very down to earth brother.  Personality wise, we just, we, we hit it off.  He talk about me being country, coming from Houston, Acres Home [Acres Homes, Houston, Texas], not knowing anything, you know, he was smart.  Everybody there was, you know, smart.  But we hit it off.  And so, after the first year, we decided--oh, then he, he interned after the first year in Houston [Texas].  And we really got to know each other, and decided we were going to be roommates, and then so, for the second and the third year, we became roommates.  And then, during the summer, we decided I was going to run for the president of the black student union [Harvard Black Law Students Association], and not wait for the third year.  We were going, we were going to take it over in the second year, and he was going to be, be the treasurer, and that happened.  So, that was a good thing.  And then, we became like, we became like brothers.  I mean, it was not just two law students, one coming from Virginia, one coming from Houston.  Where you saw one, you saw the other.  And, yeah, very close, went to church together, Union, Union Baptist in Central Square in Cambridge [Massachusetts] every Sunday, every Sunday.  And you could tell when, when Leroy would do some stuff at night that he shouldn't have been doing, no matter what time he would come, come back to the apartment, apartment, he would turn on the stereo, and play this gospel song, 'I've Been Out in the Storm Too Long' ['I've Been in the Storm Too Long'] (laughter).  I said, I said, "Oh, Lord, have mercy."  I said, "Man, if you know you're going to mess up," you know, and he go, "Sly [HistoryMaker Sylvester Turner].  I wake up to, 'I've Been Out in the Storm Too Long.'"  I said, "Lord, have mercy."  But no matter what time we got back at night, no matter what time we got in on a night on a Saturday, in law school, no matter how much snow, he and I would get up, and we will make our way to Union Baptist Church in Central Square.
Speaker 1: Okay, that's a fu- (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And, and then, we discovered, because there were these two brothers coming to church every Sunday, we sit in the same section, pretty much on the same pew.  The older sisters took a liking to us, and would invite us to, to their home, you know, with their husbands.  Then, here's these poor law school students who are churchgoing, God fearing, and they would invite us to their homes for, for Sunday dinner.  And then, would give us some food to take back and, you know, it was, it was a, you know, the good, it was a good experience.  It was positive.  And he became the best man at my wedding, and I was scheduled to be the best man in his wedding, but my brother was getting married on the same day, but I flew there the night before, and then came back.  So, but, yeah, that's true, he, yeah.
Speaker 1: Now, he, he went on to become the chief justice of the Virginia supreme court [Supreme Court of Virginia].
Speaker 2: In, in Virginia, and served for--I think each one of those terms, like twelve years, so Leroy served for about, about twenty years as chief justice.  And, of course, last year, February, he passed.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And died, he, he died of cancer.
Story_ID: 633085
Speaker 1: Now this is the era of--I remember the--all I knew about law school--a lot of people know Harvard Law School [Cambridge, Massachusetts] from a movie called the 'The Paper Chase'--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --where John, what's his name, John [John Houseman]?  Anyway, he's, he's an actor, and he--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --and he says, "Look around you.  One of you--look next to you, and one of you is not going to be here"--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --and that sort of thing, and he's very, you know.  So, what was it like?  What was Harvard Law School like?  Was it like that, like that movie or what?
Speaker 2: In, in part.  It was a, yeah, bear in mind it was a different experience for me.  My mom [Ruby Mae Turner] loaded up everything that she thought I needed in a foot locker.  And she and my brothers took me to the airport, one way ticket.  So, none, none of my family members came to Harvard Law School, but me.  When I showed up, I showed up on my, on my own.  And so, it was, it was different, and I would sit in class and kind of like, you know, all I knew was, you know, people here.  I, I wanted to see whether or not I fitted in--I mean, to be honest with you.  So, I listened and, and looked.  It was a competitive environment.  Met some fantastic folk, people.  It was hard working, it was hard, but, you know, they, they talked about it, they talked about changing the world, and I liked that.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I met people, like Julieanna Richardson, who was crazy and wild, and, you know, laughed loud and, you know, had a very distinctive walk, you know.  I remember Julieanna (laughter), you know, Leroy [Leroy R. Hassell, Sr.] and I talked about Julieanna all the time, you know, but anyway--
Speaker 1: How does she walk?  I want to know now.
Speaker 2: Julieanna had a very, a very sexy, sort of a walk, you know, (laughter).  She was, she was, she was always a bit, gregarious, in many ways did not fit what I, what Leroy and I considered to be the typical Harvard model, you know.  She wasn't stuck up, you know, very much approachable, smart, but very much of a person, you know.  You know, for some people, you get the sense of their humanity, their soul.  She falls in that category.  Leroy, for me, fell in that category.  Everybody there, smart, but not a lot of people in the sense where you felt, you felt their humanity.  You, you had a sense of them recognizing that it was, that our presence there was bigger than ourselves.  And we had a purpose, you know, and there was something more.  And if, so, I, I met some good people, and there's some great people there.  And the dividends have just continued to, to flow.  So, it was, it was a good environment for me, it was different, but challenging.  And, and it opened up, it opened up another part of the world that, otherwise, I would not have, I would not have seen, coming from where I started.  Okay.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: So, for me, it was, it was, it was another, another leg on the journey.
Story_ID: 633086
Speaker 1: I have to ask you about one of the great professors of law in the country that--pa- he passed away last year, Derrick Bell [HistoryMaker Derrick A. Bell, Jr.].
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Now, he was a professor there in Harvard Law School (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Civil rights--
Speaker 1: --first, first black professor--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --in Harvard Law School [Cambridge, Massachusetts].  What are your remembrances of Derrick Bell?
Speaker 2: Smart, smart guy, stately, seemed, Professor Bell seemed like he always, just always had it together, you know, very, a lot of poise.  In many ways, he kind of, he kind of reminded me, he kind of reminded me of my dad [Eddie Turner], you know, never ruffles, so to speak, someone that, you may not necessarily feel like you, you, you can openly embrace, but someone in the sense that you kind of, you, you just kind of admired, you know.  And, and many of us just tried to emulate in, in many ways his, his style.  Even, even to this day, I mean I, I can, you, you can just kind of see him.  I can visualize him.
Speaker 1: Was he a special mentor for you all as black law students?
Speaker 2: I think for, for all African American students, and not just African Americans, but let's say something in this case, African Americans, yes.  I mean, look, it just makes a difference to see somebody that looks like you, there, and, and a professor, and the caliber of professor that, that he was.  He knew his stuff.  He knew his material.  He was an excellent professor.  I mean, that, it's always important to have someone in a position that will point you higher, that you can, that you're always, you're inspired to kind of reach where they are and, and he represented that for, for all of us as African Americans, and not just of Harvard, but across, but across the country.
Speaker 1: And did, do you think that he, in terms of his ideological position, do you think he stretched the, the--I guess, the boundaries that people have when they got to Harvard, when, you know, around the guy's a progressive thinking, like Derrick Bell?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I, I think not only, look, not only was he an inspiration, a benefit to African American students, but because where he was and, and being a professor of whites and Hispanics, people from all walks of life, from all socioeconomic backgrounds.  And many of these people were going to be on, were going to be judges or they were going to be in Corporate America.  He influenced their thinking as well because now, you know, here we are, we are at Harvard.  This is a professor at Harvard, and he's teaching everybody and challenging everybody's frame of reference or your thinking, so we certainly were inspired by the fact that he was African American.  But everybody that walked into his class and walked out of it, I think, walked out better for having, for having been under his teaching.
Story_ID: 633087
Speaker 1: Who else was there that influenced you, who (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, I can tell you, just, just another, a contemporary of mine, couple of years older, for example, like [HistoryMaker] Charles Ogletree.  We called him Tree, you know.  I have, I have the utmost respect for Tree, for Professor Ogletree.  For me, he is president of the black, Black Law Students Association [Harvard Black Law Students Association].  He's one of the reasons why I wanted to be president of the Black Law Students Association because of his leadership.  His love for the clinical programs, and providing legal services for those who couldn't afford it.  You know, I, I watched him, as a student, then I watched him later on.  And, and then, I was seeing the work that he's done, witnessed the work that he's done--the utmost respect for him.  And, and then, he's still at the institution, in many ways, like Professor--picked up the mantle from a Derrick Bell [HistoryMaker Derrick A. Bell, Jr.], so to speak, and the baton is now being carried by a person, like, like Charles Ogletree.  David Wilkins [HistoryMaker David B. Wilkins], who's still at, at the law school who was a classmate of ours, you know, and he's still there [Harvard Law School, Cambridge, Massachusetts].  So, and to see those individuals--
Speaker 1: Isn't a [HistoryMaker] Randall Kennedy that's there now, too?  Yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah, Professor Kennedy.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: And then, one, I think he's passed now--Professor Ferguson [Clarence Clyde Ferguson, Jr.] who taught me civil procedure, African American, tough, sharp, articulate.  So, I mean, to be a part of that, and to see the caliber of these individuals and their excellence in their own fields, can't, could, can only help to motivate your mind.  And when I look back, you know, those, those are memories that just kind of propels you forward.
Speaker 1: Now, was there--what course did you find the most challenging?
Speaker 2: I think it was civil procedure, by Professor Ferguson, a brother, he was, he was tough, and I, I thought that was--for me, I thought that was a tough course.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And which one did you, you know, gravitate towards?  I mean, which one did you find the most exciting (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I liked torts 'cause that's still dealing with like, with personal injuries and all--and that's what I do to this day, you know.  I'm a plaintiff's--I guess you can just call me a plaintiff's lawyer, but enjoy, enjoy torts.  Constitutional law, I, I loved, you know, Professor Tribe [Laurence Tribe].  Professor Dershowitz taught criminal law to me.
Speaker 1: What's his--yeah, Alan Dershowitz.
Speaker 2: Alan Dershowitz, I know for, I know, I attempted to practice criminal law when I was in law school, and did it as an intern with the Suffolk County DA's Office [Suffolk County District Attorney's Office] as an intern, student intern.  The judge told me to try another field, you know, because I was a prosecutor.  And there were these two brothers, kids, who had robbed some place.  And I was talking to the attorney, and talking to, to them, and they were giving me all these stories about, you know, they had a hard life and da da da da da, and I'm listening.  And I'm, you know, I was moved by what I was hearing, and then, I recommended a plea that was really watered down.  And we stood before the judge with the plea.  And the judge essentially must have turned his position, a recommendation, and, and I said, "Yes."  And he said, "Tell me why."  And I, and I started mouthing what, you know, they had told me, you know (laughter).  He said, "Well, did you look at their sheet?" (Laughter) And so, he, he said, you know, afterwards, when it was all over, you know, 'cause I was an intern, he said, "Mr. Turner [HistoryMaker Sylvester Turner], this may not be--being a prosecutor, may not be for you." You know (laughter).  I said to myself, "You might- you mighty right about that." You know, so that, the criminal aspect, you know, that's, that's not my cup of tea.
Speaker 1: Now, I wondered myself how some of the prosecutors actually do it, you know, what, and, you know, I mean, there are criminals who need to be (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Without question, and everybody has to--you have to know your purpose and your place, you know, and that's, that's not, that wasn't for me.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So, so, I've stayed pretty much on the, on the civil corporate side.
Story_ID: 633088
Speaker 1: Before we get you too far away from Harvard [Harvard Law School, Cambridge, University], I was, I was told to ask you about the Black Plague [ph.].
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Yeah, the, like the athletic football program stuff, yeah, yeah, the women love the, those affiliated with the Black Plague, man.  Competitive, you know, guys get out there, and I think some people have the misnomer about people like at, at Harvard, that we are nerds, and not athletic, or can't party with the best--quite contrary to the truth.  People get out there, play sports, football, basketball, just like anybody else.  Talk noise, just like anybody else.  Party, just like anybody else.  Yeah, you know, I'm sure, you know, people like Julieanna [Julieanna Richardson] and all of them, they love the people with Black Plague, you know.
Speaker 1: And how was your touch football team, I guess?
Speaker 2: Touch football?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --very competitive.
Speaker 1: Did you all win a title or anything or--
Speaker 2: It's pretty much amongst ourselves.
Speaker 1: Oh, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  But very competitive, very competitive and what else?  There was something else I was going to mention.  It'll come, it'll come to, I know similar to the Black Plague.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well, how did you all come up with the name--the Black Plague?
Speaker 2: Hey, you, you put, you--more than one together (laughter).  You know, what they say, put two or three together, there's a plague going on (laughter).  (Unclear).  Sometimes you fall into the stereotypes that other people have of you, yeah (laughter).  Even when you--
Speaker 1: That's funny, I don't think I've laughed so hard (laughter).
Speaker 2: --even when you're smarter, you know better, hey, man.
Story_ID: 633089
Speaker 1: Did you have any, much interaction with the African American studies department [Department of Afro-American Studies; Department of African and African Americans Studies] over there?  I know Ewart Guinier, I think, was the head then, I think, and that's before Skip Gates [HistoryMaker Henry Louis "Skip" Gates, Jr.] and--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --and his, wasn't his daughter [HistoryMaker Lani Guinier] in school at Harvard [Radcliffe College, Cambridge, Massachusetts] there with you all or, or around the same time?
Speaker 2: I, I can't, I can't recall.
Speaker 1: (Unclear), yeah.
Speaker 2: I, I can't recall.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I know it was, I know we started there, I don't think it started with us, but the conferences where you were bringing black students and alumni back, that has really mushroomed from, from where it was when, when I was there.  I do know at, at Harvard [Harvard Law School, Cambridge, Massachusetts], Harvard was the first time really that I had any interaction with female preachers, man, 'cause, you know, I, I came up in the traditional Baptist environment, and no preachers allowed in the pulpit.
Speaker 1: No women allowed in the (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, no women allowed--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --in, in the pulpit.  And then, one of my closest friends, Gina Tillman [Gina Tillman Young], who was in law school was called to the ministry. And that's, that was, it was at that point, I had to confront my own beliefs.  You know, here's, here's a good friend.  She says, she's been called into the ministry.  We were part of, like bible study groups, so to speak.  And then, all of the sudden, here she comes, and she then becomes--and it's a joint program with the Divinity School [Harvard Divinity School, Cambridge, Massachusetts].  And she was at Union Baptist [Union Baptist Church, Cambridge, Massachusetts], and she was going to be preaching.  And then, at Union Baptist, they had women in the, in the pulpit.  And I was saying, "Wow, oh, feeling, what's--where is this world coming to?"  And (laughter), and now, now, I started hearing her preach.  And it was during, during my, during my stay at Harvard that, that my mind kind of opened up to that aspect.
Story_ID: 633090
Speaker 1: Who did you intern with when you were at Harvard [Harvard Law School, Cambridge, Massachusetts] in the summers?
Speaker 2: I interned with Fulbright and Jaworski [Fulbright and Jaworski LLP].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: After my first year, I came, and interned at Fulbright and Jaworski in Houston [Texas].  And I, then after the, at the end of the summer, a couple of partners took me out to dinner, and told me they liked what I did, and offered me, offered me a job two years later.  I mean, basically, they, they said, at the end of that first summer, my first year, you know, "Sylvester [HistoryMaker Sylvester Turner], we're, we're extending you a permanent offer now." And I still had two years of school to go.  And so, it just made it when you can come back to, to law school for your second year, knowing that you have a job ready for you when you graduate, you know, two years from now.  And then, the second summer, I interned with them again.  And then, when I graduated, I, I went to work for them.
Speaker 1: Now, were you tempted to, to live in the East or--
Speaker 2: I was--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --I was tempted to go to, to D.C [Washington, D.C.].  I mean, many, many of my close friends were living, were going to New York [New York], D.C., and of course, my best friend [Leroy R. Hassell, Sr.] was going to Richmond [Virginia].  And so, I was tempted to go to D.C.  I was looking to go into a firm like Steptoe and Johnson [Steptoe and Johnson LLP].  But my family connection was so strong, and my mom [Ruby Mae Turner] still in Houston, my brothers and sisters, the woman I've been dating for a long time, back there in Houston.  And because of everything that my mom had done, 'cause it was my mom who signed the loan papers to get me there, I felt I needed to go back and, and help out.  So, I came back.  In fact, the only, the only plane ride that my mom has ever taken in her life, was that plane ride to attend the graduation with my sister, and then to come back.  She isn't, she was, she had never been on the plane before.  She had never been on the plane since.  So, that was, yeah, for me--I, I needed to go back.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So, now is the Fulbright, with Fulbright and Jaworski, related to J. William Fulbright that--
Speaker 2: From, from Arkansas?
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: No, that I don't know--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --that I don't know.
Speaker 1: All right.  So, Fulbright and Jaworski, now, what did you do there?  I mean, what kind of cases did you handle?
Speaker 2: I was, I was a trial attorney, defense trial attorney representing a lot of insurance companies, a lot of corporate entities, PI case, personal injury cases, and commercial cases, representing the defendant, from the defendant's point of view, and did that for three and a half years or so.
Story_ID: 633091
Speaker 1: Now, is there a memorable case from that period of time that you can tell us about?
Speaker 2: I guess it's, it's one in particular.  The plaintiff was a guy by the name of Willie Harris [ph.].  I guess it is memorable since I still remember it, and that's been years ago.  But, anyway, Willie was an entrepreneur, African American, and he was in his company's truck, and he was coming over the Ship, Ship Channel Bridge [Sam Houston Tollway Ship Channel Bridge, Houston, Texas].  And this 18-wheeler hit him, and he was seriously injured, and he sued the 18-wheeler.  I represented the company.  And, and I made him an offer through his attorney, and he did not, he did not accept the offer to settle.  It end up--it went to trial.  I made him another offer, and his attorney did not accept it.  And, quite frankly, you know, I had, I had much more to give, okay.  And, but, and so, we went to trial.  During the trial, I made him another offer, attorney didn't accept it.  And then, the attorney came to me during the trial, and asked me, was the offer still on the table?  And I said, "Well, if you accept it now."  Now, mind you, I had a lot more to give.  And in many ways, I said to myself, the attorney is crazy as hell (unclear) to be accepting--I mean, I represent my client, so if, you know, and so, I say, "Yeah, if you, if you accept it now, it's on the table."  This is during the course of trial.  And he went over and talked to Willie, and I could, and I could kind of hear and see the exchange, where Willie was not liking the offer.  And his attorney kept talking to him, kept talking to him, kept talking.  And Willie finally relented and said, "Okay."  And the attorney came to me and said, "We'll accept."  And in my mind, I was saying, "You're crazy as hell but, okay, no problem."  So, when he stood before the judge to announce that the case had settled, and the judge said, "All parties in agreement?"  I said, you know, "It's the best terms for the defendant, judge, yes, I'm in agreement."  Asked the other attorney, the attorney said, "Yes."  And the judge asked Willie Harris.  "Mr. Harris, are you in agreement with the settlement?"  And he kind of said, "Oh, well," and said, "You should, well, you don't have to--are you in agreement with it?"  And attorney, his attorney looked at him, and he finally said, "Yeah, yeah."  And she said, "Okay, all parties in agreement.  This case is dismissed."  It's over.  So, I was packing up, and Willie comes over to me.  And he said, "Mr.," he said, "Mr. Turner [HistoryMaker Sylvester Turner], you know, I'm hurt, you know, I'm hurt, and this does not cover me for my injuries," and stuff like that.  And I said, I said, "Mr. Harris, I'm not your attorney.  I represent, I represent my client, and I did my job."  And he said, "But, brother, you know, I'm--," he said, "Brother, you know, I'm hurt."  I said, "Mr. Harris, I'm not your attorney.  I represent my client.  I did my job."  And, and my client and I got up, and we walked out.  That one, that one stands out because it's one of those deals that, yeah, you know, he had a poor lawyer.  Had a poor lawyer, but it's not a case where I can be the lawyer for my client, and be the lawyer for his client as well.  Okay.  Now, subsequently, a few years later, I'm no longer at Fulbright [Fulbright and Jaworski LLP], and now I'm in my own shop [Barnes and Turner LLP; Barry Barnes and Associates PLLC, Houston, Texas].  Willie comes to me, and became my client, you know, but that one stands out.  And, and, and because it's nothing like having a good lawyer.  It's nothing like having somebody that's going to advocate for you, and fight for you, and get everything that's on the--that's potentially is on the table for you.  Nothing like having a good lawyer.  And in his case, his lawyer fell short, and he paid the price.
Speaker 1: I heard such cases before when cold--cold aspects of law sometimes, you know, the people don't know.  They--
Speaker 2: You know--
Speaker 1: --don't give, give a thing (unclear).
Speaker 2: Right, but you can't be, you know, the way the system is designed, you know, I can't be the lawyer for my client, and be the lawyer for you at the same time.  And my job is, as a lawyer is to represent my client, and represent my client zealously, and do the best I can, so but it points out the importance of having quality representation, and not only quality representation, you've got to have people who are willing to advocate for you.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And if you don't have that, you'll fall short.
Story_ID: 633092
Speaker 1: All right, so, you graduated from Harvard in '80 [1980], started working with Fulbright and Jaworski [Fulbright and Jaworski LLP] in '80 [1980]--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --but, and, and we just talked about one of the memorable cases.  But in '83 [1983], you founded your own law firm with Barry M. Barnes.
Speaker 2: In fact, initially, it was Barnes, Morse and Turner.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And, initially, it did subsequently become Barnes and Turner [Barnes and Turner LLP; Barry Barnes and Associates PLLC, Houston, Texas], but Rosemarie Morse was also a classmate from, from Harvard.  She was a year ahead.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Marsh, M-A-R-S-H?
Speaker 2: M- I'm sorry, M-O, Morse, M-O-R-S-E,
Speaker 1: Okay, Morse, okay.
Speaker 2: And then, she, in, was it '80 [1980], and then, like in '87 [1987], '88 [1988], she end up leaving Houston [Texas] and, and she moved back to Georgia.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So, so, okay now, you had a nice, prestigious law firm, now why would you leave and (laughter)--
Speaker 2: The training was excellent.  I enjoyed it, but it never was going to say, Fulbright, Jaworski, and Turner, you know.  I've always had the desire of having something of my own.  I wanted to be able to hire my own lawyers, hire my own secretaries, be in business for myself.  And at the same time, you know, I wanted something that would afford me the flexibility where I could be the lawyer, and also if I wanted to engage in, in a political arena, I could do that.  At Fulbright, it's one thing to be on the bar association or to participate on some board.  It's another thing to run for a political office.  It's very difficult.  I did that.  I ran for county commissioner in '84 [1984] while I was still at Fulbright, and didn't win, but that's very, very difficult to do.  And it, and it seldom happens.  So, I decided, and we'd been--there was a group of black lawyers that were meeting downtown in downtown Houston periodically, and we were talking about opening up shops, you know.  Then they were, we know, we were different law firms corporation and then, Barry, and Rosemarie, and another attorney by the name of Deborah Post, who's also Harvard Law School [Cambridge, Massachusetts] alum, decided, "Hey, we're going to do this." And then, I joined them later.
Story_ID: 633093
Speaker 1: Now, tell us about the run for county commissioner.
Speaker 2: That, that was my first race after I came out of, came out of law school, while I was still at Fulbright [Fulbright and Jaworski LLP].
Speaker 1: You, you, okay, so this is in, what's the name, Harris County [Texas]?
Speaker 2: Harris County Commissioners Court.  That was in, that race was in, in '84 [1984].  Yeah, it had a lot to do with mental health, mental services, you know.  One of my, one of my brothers, suffered from some mental disabilities.  And, and I can recall my mom [Ruby Mae Turner] going to the County Hospital [Jefferson Davis Hospital, Houston, Texas] trying to get assistance, and running into a stone, a brick wall.  And so, I said, if I ever got an opportunity to have an impact on the system, that I would do my best.  Harris County Commissioners Court was an open seat.  They did have oversight, on the mental health, mental retardation services, and I ran.  And I did, did not, did not win it.  I learned a great deal.  A guy who was a state representative at the time, who decided he wanted to run for county commissioner, end up winning it.  And I ran into, I ran into the black power establishment--fifth, when we talk about the Fifth Ward [Houston, Texas] and the south side, I'm a northwest sider and, and the two, the, the two, the third one of Fifth Ward I kind of--that's where the power was.  And I was, and I, in many ways, I represented--that was the campaign in which I, I was even criticized for going to Harvard [Harvard Law School, Cambridge, Massachusetts], you know.  I, I, I was not in this--someone tried to portray me as not having been home grown, you know.  I was the, I guess, the blue blood.  I was the Harvard, Fulbright and Jaworski person.  They kind of discounted Acres Home [Acres Homes, Houston, Texas].  They didn't know what my politics was.  Here I am, Fulbright and Jaworski corporate lawyer representing insurance companies and stuff.  So, I got, I got a little bit of that.  And then, I was green, and I didn't have the support of people who had been around for, for some time, so I fell short in that race.
Speaker 1: So, you lost to El Franco Lee?
Speaker 2: El Franco Lee.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: He was a former state representative.  And, in fact, El Franco's been in that position ever since that election.
Story_ID: 633094
Speaker 1: But the next item here we have is 1988, you were elected to the Texas House of Representatives.  Now, tell us, you know, how you or why you decided to run for the Texas House and how you won the election.
Speaker 2: Quite frankly, I didn't decide.  I was at reception for Lloyd Bentsen, Senator Lloyd Bentsen, at the time.  And some people came up to me and said, "We wish you well."  I didn't know what they were talking about.  And I ran into some other people.  They said, "We would--," you know, "Hope you're successful." Still didn't know what they were talking about.  And then, I ran into a, a woman who was a political stalwart in the community out of the heart of Acres Home [Acres Homes, Houston, Texas], Beulah Shepard.  She was older.  She had not been with me when I ran in '84 [1984].  She was with El Franco Lee.  And she came with me and she said, "Sylvester [HistoryMaker Sylvester Turner]," she said, no--she said (pronunciation), "Sylvester," she pronounced all of it, "Sylvester, Clint Hackney, who's the state representative for our area, is not running.  And I am telling people you are running."  So, I said, I told her, I said, "Ms. Shepard" And she's a much older lady--I said, "Ms. Shepard, I have no interest in being a state, a state legislator."  And she looked at me, and she said, "Sylvester, you don't know what you want.  I am telling people you are running for the state legislature.  And until you decide otherwise, you're running."  And I, I went back and I, I thought about it, and I said okay.  It, too, you know, dealt with like, health services.  And that was a interest of mine and I decided to run.  It was a national district [Texas House District 139], the district that was about 60 to 65 percent white.  She was a stalwart of the political environment in Houston [Texas], and particularly, she comes out of Acres Home.  I knew her, I've known her for a long time.  I went to her when I ran for county commissioner.  She told me no.  And I said, "Okay." And she said, "You could win this."  She said, "The people, the people on the north side of town can support you, they can support you."  And then, I decided I'd talk with a couple friends of mine.  I didn't have to take on the black political elite.  They didn't fall in that area.  This is a district where there were--no African American had won before.  And so, I ran, I ran in the Democratic primary.  Labor did not support me.  Same reason, Fulbright [Fulbright and Jaworski LLP], Harvard [Harvard Law School, Cambridge, Massachusetts], there were a couple of other people in the race who are Democrats that they wan- that they wanted.  But police and fire, the majority groups, police and fire supported me.  They were the only labor who supported me.  And end up, in with the primary, won without a runoff, about 60, 65 percent of the vote.  Then, I faced the Republican challenger and, same, about 65 percent of the vote, and, and the rest of it is history.
Story_ID: 633095
Speaker 1: So, the district [Texas House District 139] is heavily Democratic, I take it then.  And you could bring a black block of votes, plus the white Democrats, which outvoted the white Republicans.
Speaker 2: Back then, yeah, it was the African Americans represented a significant chunk, didn't represent the majority, but when you combine the African Americans with the white Democrats, yeah, you had, you had a strong contingency and--
Speaker 1: And neither one can win without the other in the--
Speaker 2: Right.  And, and the key was to--if you had a win--that won in the primary, then pretty much, I was a lock for the rest of the way.  And, and, you know, things just fell right.  I know, now the first time when in the campaign, when I was sending out literature, I didn't include my picture.  I just put the bio.  I just, I highlighted Klein, valedictorian, Mr. Klein High School, president of the student body (laughter).
Speaker 1: So, a lot of them thought you were white?
Speaker 2: Hey, man, you know, Sylvester Stallone, [HistoryMaker] Sylvester Turner, you know, hey, so, but we highlighted valedictorian, Klein High School [Klein, Texas], Mr. Klein High School, debate champ, da da da da, University of Houston [Houston, Texas], Harvard [Harvard Law School, Cambridge, Massachusetts], Fulbright and Jaworski [Fulbright and Jaworski LLP].  Mail that out, and then, after people saw the bio, without the picture, then we came back and put everything--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But it was important, it was important for, for people to get to meet, to see the, to read the bio, before just seeing a picture, and not going any further.
Speaker 1: Yeah, 'cause you suspect that some, that if they just saw the picture, they just toss it.
Speaker 2: They wouldn't go any further.
Speaker 1: They wouldn't go any further.
Speaker 2: So, it was important for people to read, see what's there, and then introduce me in, in its entirety.  And then, and, and it worked.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So, you're elected in 1988.  And so, so what was it like, serving in the Texas House [Texas House of Representatives]?  Now, do you get, do they pay you for serving in the Texas House?
Speaker 2: They pay us very well.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: They pay us six hundred dollars a month before taxes (laughter).  We get, so we get sev--
Speaker 1: So, you have a full time job, is it (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) yeah, we get seventy-two hundred dollars a year.  It is a, it is a, it's, it's designed to be a part time legislature, but full time functions.  But, yeah, I, I take home $324 a month.  You know, so you're not doing for the pay.  But at the same time, I mean, there are a lot of other benefits that come up, come with the job, but I, you know, the main one is that I have the privilege of representing a district that includes areas, which I was born and reared, and still live, you know.  So, you can't get, can't get too much better than that.
Story_ID: 633096
Speaker 1: Well what were some of the--you said there was health issues at stake--
Speaker 2: Right--
Speaker 1: --in the--
Speaker 2: Healthcare has always been major for me.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I mean, you know, we didn't, we didn't have Blue--we didn't have Blue Cross Blue Shield [Blue Cross Blue Shield Association].  You know, my dad died of cancer.  And, and my dad had, we know, we had no private health insurance.  So, and my dad elected not to do, to go into the hospital, to do all the chemo, and all of that.  And one, didn't have it, couldn't afford it.  And so, but the doctor gave my dad prescriptions for these, for this big bottle of pain medicine.  And I never, I'll never forget my sister, and I would ride with her, we'd go to the local pharmacy, Garno's Pharmacy [ph.], Pharmacy, and the pharmacist knew.  I mean, a lot of you know, a lot of stuff we learned after my dad died.  And we--I kept wondering, you know, why he would just give out these, these two big bottles of pain, of the medicine, was for my dad.  See, we didn't know my dad had cancer.  So, when we out there cutting, cutting grass, periodically, you know, we would see my dad falling to the ground.  And he pulled himself back up, and he'd tell us, go on our, go on about his business.  He just, he just slipped.  And then, around the house, you know, see my dad fall, and he'd grab a piece of furniture.  And my mom [Ruby Mae Turner] would tell us, you know, "Leave your daddy alone," you know, "he just--." My mom said, "He's just getting old," you know.  And we went on about our business.  So, we didn't, we didn't know my dad had cancer.  And then, one, one night, my dad kind of was out of it.  And next thing I know, my mom came back and said, you know, "Eddie [Eddie Turner] won't be coming, Eddie won't be coming back, your dad won't be coming home."  So, it was only after the fact that we, that my mom told us.  And, and so, the pharmacist knew.  They were just pain, pain killers that he was taking.  But, you know, my dad's view was, he had kids that he had to feed, he had to work.  He had to be out there.  He worked at Continental Emsco [Continental Emsco Company] for thirty-one years as a painter.  And then on weekends, he was, you know, we were cutting people's grass.  And he didn't want to, he didn't want to stop.  And so, his, his notion was, when the Lord got ready to call him home, the Lord is going to call him home.  Until then, he was going to do what he needed to do to feed this family.  So, that's always been a driver, you know, for me.  It's the healthcare side.  I mean, I have, like most people like myself, I, I grew up in, in the ER [emergency room], you know.  My, you know, we would take two buses to the Ben Taub county hospital [Ben Taub Hospital, Houston, Texas] and then we'll be, we'll be there all day long, man you know, hell, I, I saw people walking in the ER with, with an ice pick in they chest as a kid.  So, I'm, I'm, you know, I'm witnessing all of this with my mom.  I'm ashamed of going to, to the Jefferson Davis Hospital [Houston, Texas] with my brother.  And they're telling my mom, "We don't have enough beds for your son, but if he becomes a danger to you or somebody else, bring him back."  And my mom pleading with them, and still no response, so we get back on the bus, and we're heading back home.  So, all of this is, is the--and, you know, I'm processing all this as a, as a kid, you know.  And so, you know, when law school [Harvard Law School, Cambridge, Massachusetts] was over, and I'm back out here, and now, all of a sudden, a county commissioner spot opens up [on the Harris County Commissioners Court], and I'm hearing mental health services, healthcare, I'm interested.  Legislature would (unclear), everything, healthcare, so, that's, that's a passion.
Story_ID: 633097
Speaker 1: Now, in 1989, you sued Phillips Petroleum [Phillips Petroleum Company; Phillips 66].  That's when the big Phillips plant explosion--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --okay, that's the Phillips plant explosion case.  Tell us about that.
Speaker 2: (Cough) I represented Janet Little.  She was an employee at Phillips Petroleum.  Interesting story on how we met--I was speaking at a, at a church association banquet in--I want to say, in Sealy, Texas.  And she and her parents were in the audience.  Later, goes the Phillips Petroleum explos- explosion.  And her mom calls me here at the firm and says--she introduced herself, Ms. Foy, and she says, "My daughter has been seriously burnt.  And there are a lot of lawyers that are around here at (unclear). But she asked me to call you because she wanted, she wanted the lawyer that spoke at the banquet, and that was you."  And then, we--I met with them and signed on, and represented her, and I had a very favorable outcome.  She's been a client with this firm ever since.  From the proceeds, her father [Charles H. Foy] was a pastor in Dickinson, Texas.  And from part of the proceeds, she, she built, she constructed a new church in Dickinson [Mount Carmel Missionary Baptist Church] and paid for it herself, which is one of the, one of the largest churches now in Dickinson, Texas.  You know, it was, it was, it just started the ball, the ball just--things just started changing in the, in the life of the firm.
Speaker 1: So, the plant was caused by some negligence of Phillips?
Speaker 2: Yeah, they were, they were negligent and then caused the explosion.  And I represent Anna Brooks [ph.] and her, and a couple of other people.  Ironically, the people that were defending, the lawyers that were defending Phillips came from Fulbright and Jaworski [Fulbright and Jaworski LLP].  And one of, and one of my mentors, Blake Tartt, was the lead attorney.
Speaker 1: That's, that's interesting.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  And we were in, we were in a conference room which it was a settlement meeting.  And we were talking and, you know, and Blake says, "Sylvester [HistoryMaker Sylvester Turner], are we going to get this case settled?"  And I said, "I hope so, Mr. Tartt."  He would call me Sylvester and I called him Mr. Tartt 'cause I'd looked up to him.  And then, he asked me, how much was I asking for.  And I, I wrote him a note on a sheet, on a sheet of paper, and I forwarded it to him.  And he crossed it out, and sent a note back and, and I told him, I said, "If I accepted this, you would, you would lose all respect for me, and I would not be the, the student that you had taught well."  So, I crossed it out, and sent him another note.  And he said, "Done."
Story_ID: 633098
Speaker 1: Now did you stay in the state legislature for--are you still in the state--
Speaker 2: I am currently--
Speaker 1: --you're still, okay.
Speaker 2: I'm currently in the Texas House [Texas House of Representatives].
Speaker 1: That's what, that's what I thought.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Did, but you left briefly at one time, right?
Speaker 2: Unh-uh.
Speaker 1: Oh, you never did?
Speaker 2: I ran for mayor [of Houston, Texas] in '91 [1991]--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --didn't win, but I, I stayed in the Texas House.  And then, I ran for mayor in 2003 again, didn't win, but I continued to remain in the Texas House.  So, I've been in the Texas House continuously for twenty-three years.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, all right, that's good, all right.  Also, now, you, while you were at, as a House member, as a practicing lawyer, you also were adjunct professor, Thurgood Marshall School of Law, right, at Texas Southern [Texas Southern University, Houston, Texas]?
Speaker 2: Right, seventeen years.
Speaker 1: Okay.  A seminar lecturer at South Texas College of Law [South Texas College of Law Houston, Houston, Texas].
Speaker 2: Yeah, did that for many years.
Speaker 1: And seminar lecturer at the University of Houston law school's Continuing Legal Education Program [University of Houston Law Center, Houston, Texas].
Speaker 2: Did that for several years.
Speaker 1: Is there any more (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) (Laughter) Naw, that's enough--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --that's enough.
Speaker 1: All right.  So, let's talk about the mayoral run in 1991.
Speaker 2: Ninety-one [1991].
Speaker 1: So, did you, you ran against Bob Lanier, right?
Speaker 2: Bob Lanier and Kathy Whitmire [Kathryn J. Whitmire].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Kathy Whitmire has been an accountant for ten years. All three of us in the race.  I'd only been in the Texas House for a year and a half, and decided to run.  Thought the timing, you know, was right for me.  And I did, and got into the runoff, beat out the incumbent, and so it was probably he and myself.  And, you know, up to that time, people were saying bright, articulate, rising star, just can't win.  And then, when I got into the runoff--bright, articulate, bright star, just can't win.  And then, two weeks out, a poll came out, and showed that I was either even, or leading, or surging, and especially amongst white voters.  Their opponent was getting about 40 percent of the white voters.  And that's when the consultant told me--Hank Sheinkopf, out of New York [New York], told me, "Sylvester [HistoryMaker Sylvester Turner] hang on you're, you're about to be in for the, the run of your life."
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, just for the record, this is not the black Bob Lanier, right, the--
Speaker 2: No, no, no.
Speaker 1: The NBA [National Basketball Association] basketball player (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, no, no, this is, this is--
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: --no.
Speaker 1: That's the famous Bob Lanier, and I just thought I would make sure we, you know, it's not him?
Speaker 2: Right--no, no, no.
Speaker 1: Okay.  This is a white Bob Lanier?
Speaker 2: This is white Bob Lanier who lived in, in River Oaks [Houston, Texas], been around a long time.  At that time, he was probably in his late sixties.  So, he was in his late sixties, and I'm in my mid-thirties.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, what, okay, so the race got nasty is what I hear.  Yeah.
Speaker 2: In the last, within the last ten days.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: What ended up happening is that, of course, the polls coming out, and now saying that I can win it.  And then seven days out, the television station ran a story trying to tie me to an insurance scandal of a client that I had several years ago where I did the will for, and then, to finding out that the guy supposedly went overboard in Galveston [Texas], and died, but he didn't die.  He was still alive, but he was already in, in prison already.  And they ran the story as if they had just, in a sense, just found him, and, and tried to, you know, represent, "Representative Turner knew him, what did he know, when did he know it?"  And, and they led off the news with it.  And can you imagine, you know, the leading television station, news, leading that story out seven days before the election?  It, it was a bombshell.
Speaker 1: This is KTRK Channel 13 [KTRK-TV, Houston, Texas]?
Speaker 2: Yep, that's, that's the one.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And, then, on that same night, that was on a Sunday night, when they aired it.  I pulled together the judge, who presided over the will situation, the lawyer representing the insurance company, all came to my conference room at a television conference to stand beside me to say this is, this is crazy.  But the story was so potent that it was not enough to bring back supporters who jettisoned, and end up losing I think something like, 52 to 48 percent.
Story_ID: 633099
Speaker 1: Now you sued the television station [KTRK-TV, Houston, Texas]?
Speaker 2: I sued, I sued the station.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Sued the station, and the jury came back and found the story libelous, and they awarded something like $3.4 million, or something like that.
Speaker 1: I guess, 5.55 (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Five, right, right.  They awarded that, and then went up--it went all the way to the supreme court.  They appealed it all the way up to the supreme court and, ultimately, what the supreme court did or said, story is libelous, but not, but didn't view it as being malicious.
Speaker 1: If libel is not malicious--what was it?  I, you know, it makes you--
Speaker 2: They say, they said it was libelous.  They said that the reporter was, took things out of con- well, they said it was libelous, said it was false--no, they said, the story was false, but they conclude that it was not malicious, you know.
Speaker 1: So, it has to be malicious to be libelous, is that what you--
Speaker 2: Well, they said that it can be a story, a story against, against a public official, can be false. It just cannot be aired with a reckless disregard for the truth.  And so, the jury found the story false, and then it was done with a reckless disregard for the truth.  On--the Texas Supreme Court concluded the story was false, well but the reporter didn't do it in a, with a reckless disregard, subjective however you want to look at it subjective call, but anyway, that's how that ended.
Speaker 1: You--um-hm.
Speaker 2: And I stay with the legislature and continued to serve there [Texas House of Representatives].
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, this, this lawsuit is in nineteen ninety--I guess '1 [1991] or '2 [1992], I guess, right?
Speaker 2: I filed it, I think, like in '92 [1992].  And the decision did not come back until I think, like '95 [1995], '96 [1996].
Story_ID: 633100
Speaker 1: When did [HistoryMaker] Lee P. Brown run for mayor?
Speaker 2: Lee P. Brown ran in '97 [1997].
Speaker 1: Ninety-seven [1997], okay.
Speaker 2: Right.  And he won in '97 [1997].
Speaker 1: Okay.  But before that time, was Bob Lanier the mayor?
Speaker 2: Bob Lanier was the mayor up until--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --Lee P. Brown came in.
Speaker 1: I mean, now, we've interviewed Lee P. Brown here in Houston [Texas], and he talks somewhat about that.  He had a lot to say about that on election.  I can't remember all of it now, but yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I'm trying to think--he was in that race with, was it Rob Mosbacher [Robert Mosbacher]?  I can't, I can't remember who he was in the race with in '97 [1997].
Speaker 1: Yeah.  But the curious thing, now, in Houston, what I learned from him is that the mayoral term is only two years, so that keeps--I mean, how do people, how does anybody, as a mayor, function running every two years?
Speaker 2: Well, it's difficult.  It's three two-year terms, so it's difficult.  The odds are when a person wins the first term, the odds are the person will be there for the entire six years 'cause, you know, you finish the first term, then, if you are challenging, why would you want to challenge somebody in the second term when you only got another term to go, so it, it makes it difficult to govern.  And, hopefully, at some point in time, we'll change it--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --to at least two four-year terms.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, did you support Lee P. Brown when he ran for mayor (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes.
Story_ID: 633101
Speaker 1: What were some of the issues in the '90s [1990s]?
Speaker 2: You mean, when I ran for mayor?
Speaker 1: Well, just, you know, in the state legislature [Texas Legislature] and I know that this is--well, let me just frame like this.  Texas plays nationally--I mean, it's viewed nationally as a home of Lyndon B. Johnson [President Lyndon Baines Johnson]. We got people like, mentioned--
Speaker 2: Barbara Jordan.
Speaker 1: Yeah, Barbara Jordan, you know--
Speaker 2: Lloyd Bentsen--
Speaker 1: Um-hm, Bentsen, who--
Speaker 2: --right.
Speaker 1: --told vice president candidate--
Speaker 2: You know, "You're no"--
Speaker 1: Yeah, "Jack Kennedy [President John Fitzgerald Kennedy]," (laughter).
Speaker 2: Right, yeah.
Speaker 1: He's famous for that line from--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --he'll be famous for that line from now on, home of John Connally, different people--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --politicians who were like remnants of the FDR [President Franklin Delano Roosevelt] surge and--
Speaker 2: Mickey Leland.
Speaker 1: Mickey Leland, yeah, the great, great politician.
Speaker 2: We've had some, we've had some flamboyant elected officials.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Now, Sheila Jackson Lee was congresswoman but, you know, the issues, you know, education has always been the first and foremost as an issue.  It's a priority.  Healthcare, when it comes to healthcare, mental healthcare services, children's healthcare.  Unfortunately, in Texas, it's always lagged in the, in, in the bottom, in the bottom ten of the states.  I mean, so we're, we're not any shining example of how to take care of, of children, and seniors, and those who are with mental disabilities unfortunately.  But in the '90s [1990s], the legislature, for example, telecommunication, and deregulation was major.  I sit on the committee, state affairs [Texas House of Representatives State Affairs Committee] that has overseen the evolution of deregulation of telecommunication, electric utilities.  That's my area of expertise, so to speak, in the legislature.  So, a lot of things have happened there.  The criminal justice system has been major--I mean, in the early '90s [1990s], even under, under Ann Richards, Democrat governor, who went on a massive building program.  We spend billions of dollars in building prisons.  We have one of the largest prison systems in the North America continent.  But in recent years, we've also started engaging in more diversionary programs, substance abuse, alcohol.  And as a result, our numbers have started to go down a little bit, which is good, 'cause we just recently did enter into some diverse new programs.  So, there are a lot of major issues that have taken place in the state in the legislature, you know, since the '90s [1990s], even in, even to where we are today.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, in the '90s [1990s], 1994, so the Republican Revolution sort of took place.  Newt Gingrich in [U.S.] Congress, but his two closest allies, so two of his closest allies--they were Tom DeLay of Texas and Dick Armey.
Speaker 2: All from Texas--
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 2: --and, yeah.
Speaker 1: And the political strategist, for George Bush [President George Walker Bush], what's his name, Karl Rove, another Texan.
Speaker 2: Well, in the early '90s [1990s], the politics in Texas certainly changed.  Up until the early '90s [1990s], Texas was a Democratic state, although it may have been, it may have been led by conservative Democrats, it was still a Democratic state.  Ann Richards was the last Democratic governor.  Since then, it's been George Bush or Rick Perry.
Speaker 1: Now, she was, interestingly enough, she was one of the first female governors in the country.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Ann Richards, and a strong one.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And, and now, it just doesn't seem like the same Texas.
Speaker 2: You know, it's not the same Texas right now.  Things have, things, things have changed dramatically.  The politics has changed.  It's a much more conservative state.
Speaker 1: Now, we asked [HistoryMaker] Eddie Bernice Johnson this question, and I guess we're asking you, too, like what happened here that made it so, that changed it so much?
Speaker 2: Well, I think what, what end up happening is that you had a lot of, you had--the Democratic Party, up until the early '90s [1990s], had people from--there were progressives, there were moderates, there were conservatives, all on the Democratic label, many of your conservative Democrats became Republicans.  Okay?  And we've not been able to, in a sense, to bring them back into, bring them back.  We still have a lot of, a lot of Texas, rural Texas, in a large part.  That's, that's Republican areas where your, where your Democrats are in a large part in your urban centers: Dallas [Texas], Houston [Texas], San Antonio [Texas], Austin [Texas].  But it's, it's, we are a, we are a conservative state.  And we, in our ideology, and we'll be one of the last states where you'll see that evolution changing, but things will change.  The demographics of this state are changing.  This state is now majority minority, so the poli- the politics will change.  It's just going to take time, but it's only a matter of time, it will--give it, I would say, you know, four to six years, and I think you're going to see a, a changing, this, you'll start to see the change of the guard, so to speak.
Story_ID: 633102
Speaker 1: I know, interestingly, it seems as though in the case of Tom DeLay, and all, he's a person, his string ran out after--I mean, he's, he had a lot of latitude, and ended up--
Speaker 2: Well, and plus redistricting--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --you know, when you're able to pack people in, in the, in the fewer districts, or put them in districts where they both will be diluted.  That plays a big role.  So, we'd just have, from a Democratic point of view, we just had some back luck in 2008.  And the legislature, for example, in the Texas House [Texas House of Representatives], there were seventy-six Republicans and seventy-four Democrats.  Redistricting took place in 2011, where after the 2010 race, when many Democrats stayed at home, and many Tea Partiers and Republicans came to the polls.  In 2011, in the Texas Legislature, it end up being one hundred and one Republicans and forty-nine Democrats in a redistricting year. It was the worst time for people to go--not to go to the polls.  After the election of [HistoryMaker] President Barack Obama, it was as if people went to the polls and elected President Barack Obama, and people said, "Okay, I guess we made it to the promised land, so we can kind of settle down."  And the very next election cycle was critical, and here comes redistricting, and the numbers are very one sided.  If it's, you got to stay in the battle, you got to, you have to stay engaged.  It's a continuous battle, can't take a break.
Speaker 1: How are the media oriented in Texas for the most part?  I mean, are the papers very conservative of the news, like the TV stations and--
Speaker 2: Pretty much.  I mean, Texas is a--in comparison, Texas is a conservative state.  And you're going to see that expressed in almost every fabric in people's lives.  But, you know, again, we're, we're in, we're in transition.  And, and you see it in, you see it all over.  So, but for now, for now, if the politics is tough, it, depending if you're representing people that I represent, and redistricting has, has hurt us badly, but you still have to be effective.  You know, my attitude is regardless of what the numbers are, the people don't send me to Austin [Texas] to say to them, I'm sorry, I cannot help you because the numbers are not here.  They want me to find a way to be effective, even when the numbers may not appear to be on, on our side.  And that's, and that's my task is to try to work around those numbers, and you find a way to be effective.
Story_ID: 633103
Speaker 1: As a legislator, what are the, I guess, milestones in terms of accomplishments that you are really proudest of?
Speaker 2: You know, I'm, I'm vice chair of the appropriations committee [Texas House of Representatives Committee on Appropriations] right now.  I've been the legislator for twenty-three years.  I've been on the appropriations committee probably for fourteen or fifteen of those twenty-three years.  I've been on the conference committee to write the budget eight of those years--five from the House [Texas House of Representatives], five from the Senate [Texas Senate], whether it was a Republican administration or Democratic administration.  And so, I think I've been very helpful in protecting institutions or supporting institutions.  Like Texas Southern [Texas Southern University, Houston, Texas], like Prairie View [Prairie View A&M University, Prairie View, Texas], many of our universities and schools, you know, I passed the bill, for example, to provide more insurance for, for our kids, on the Children's Health Insurance Program, that end up putting probably another hundred and, let's say, forty thousand kids with insurance that didn't have it before.  I'm very proud of stuff like that.  I've been very active on the, with telecommunication and electric utility industry.  And I'm going to keep bills low and provide suitable protection or a safety net for many poor people and seniors.  So, we created what we call the System Benefit Fund that provides a discount on people's electricity bills.  I helped to craft that.  On the criminal justice side, helping to provide, recognizing that a significant portion of our kids are suffering from mental problems and, and same thing on the adult system, so you just can't have them go through the system, and then not attend to their issues because they'll just come right back into the system.  So, we, we worked to address, we worked to address that.  And then, you know, in Texas, we let out seventy thousand people every month, out of the criminal justice system, adult system.  They're coming back into our neighborhoods.  And so, we need a reentry program, so that before they come out, try to make sure to provide them with their papers, so they need identification, driver's license, help to this, additional skills, so that they can integrate back into our society, so I passed a bill dealing with that.  So, I mean, a number, a number of things--
Speaker 1: That's a critical issue in all the black communities in the country.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, I, you know, so I, I enjoy the legislative process, and many of these things you can do, regardless of whether it's a Republican leadership or a Democratic leadership.  You just have to be able to understand the process and how to work the system.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I think the State of Texas, one that executes more criminals and then--I mean, incarcerate people of any state (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Any state--
Speaker 1: --in the union, right?
Speaker 2: That is true, that is true.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: That is true.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  I mean, disproportionate to the population and everything.
Speaker 2: And that is true.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  So, do you have a position on capital punishment?
Speaker 2: Well, I mean, things, the evidence has indicated that, you know, that we made some mistakes with this system.  I'm not one who, in this sense favors capital punishment if the system is inherently flawed, okay.  It's one thing if the system, if everything is equal, but everything is not equal.  And sometimes, there are mistakes.  And, and I think we need to be cognizant of that and sensitive to it.  Life without parole, I think, serves the same purpose.  Achieves the same purpose and it's not as fatal.  So, I'm not someone who advocates putting in a permanent sort of mechanism, like the death penalty, in a system where there are flaws.
Story_ID: 633104
Speaker 1: Now, in 2000, 2002, the--now this, like, I have a note here, and I guess this is for here in Texas.  The Republicans take control of the House of Rep- the Texas House [Texas House of Representatives]?
Speaker 2: They took--the election was 2002.  The session didn't start until 2003.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So, once again, this conservative, conservative are marshalling their forces on--
Speaker 2: It was the first time, it was the first time the Republicans took over the Texas House--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --in 150 years.  We elected our first Republican speaker in 2003.  And, ironically, he chose me to be the speaker pro temp [speaker pro tempore], the second highest ranking position in the Texas House.  And I--
Speaker 1: Could he have chosen anyone he wanted?
Speaker 2: He could have chosen a Republican, yeah, he could have chosen a Republican.  People were a little bit surprised.  I mean, you know, he's a conservative and, you know, and I come from urban Texas.  But I served as speaker pro temp for the next six years, and while he was speaker, and served on the conference committee of the budget for those, for those six years while I was there on the budget.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, 2003, you ran for mayor again [of Houston, Texas].  Now, this is, this time, you lost to Bill White.
Speaker 2: I lost to Bill White.  Bill end up--Bill and I know each other.  He used to live in my legislative district [Texas House District 139].  I've known him for a long time.  Bill spent, spent more money than it's ever been raised and spent for a mayor's race.  Bill spent, on a race, spent about $10 million.  Normally, the amount for administration was somewhere between three and four.  I raised a little over three.  Bill got off to an early start.  He, he ran like a year before, and I didn't start campaigning until after the legislative session in, in, started in June, and it was--Billy was out there.  And I simply couldn't catch up.  He was spending money, spending money, so it just wasn't my time.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  But this time there just wasn't, there weren't any, there weren't any dirty tricks or anything, I guess--
Speaker 2: No, no, no.
Story_ID: 633105
Speaker 1: Two thousand seven [2007], you passed House Bill 109 [Texas House Bill 109] and that's significant.
Speaker 2: That's the Children's Health Insurance Program--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --the CHIP bill.  That's where somewhere in between 140,000 kids were added to the insurance roll.
Speaker 1: Now, you were able to get this passed despite the fact there's a Republican majority in the House [Texas House of Representatives]?
Speaker 2: That's because of my alliance with the Republican speaker [Tom Craddick].  When he became speaker, he and I had a conversation--in fact, right in this conference room at this law firm, in which I told him, you know, I knew he, he had not forgotten that he was Republican, and I, and I was not forgetting that I was a Democrat, and certain priorities are important to me.  This one happened to be one.  And even though he did not support it, I asked him to have his lieutenants stand down, and give me an opportunity to run with it.  He said, he told me, "It would never pass."  And I said, "Fine, I'm just asking you, have your--don't block it.  Allow me to get it to the floor and then, let's see what happens."  And he did, it got to the floor.  And the agreement that I worked out with some Republicans is that I would not accept any amendments from Democratic members who wanted to add more people to it, and they would fight off any members coming from Republicans who wanted to carve it, carve it down.  And that held, and I think it--we have something like, I can't recall.  There were like sixty-three Republicans voting for it, and some sixty something, seventy Democrats.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  So, this is a significant victory, you know, situation where--I mean, nationally, we don't see this kind of cooperation.
Speaker 2: It was, yeah, it was, it was--and you're talking about the spirit of bipartisanship, yeah, it worked.  And the argument I used when people on the floor said, you can't sacrifice the good for the perfect.  It's not perfect, but it's good.  And to some of my more liberal colleagues of mine, who said, "Sylvester [HistoryMaker Sylvester Turner], we can do more."  And when I said, "I want to do more, but we're not going to get more with the politics that's on this floor."  And to the Republican conservatives, you know, I simply said, "Hey, you may not like it, but, but it's a good step forward, for the state."  So, yeah, it worked, but I also discovered it's hard for people to vote against you, if they know you. It's more easy to vote against you if they don't know you so.
Speaker 1: Okay.  [HistoryMaker] Eddie Bernice Johnson even spoke about the, kind of collegial relationship she had with Tom DeLay and Dick Armey--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --in spite, she didn't like their politics, but they were very friendly guys and--
Speaker 2: Hey, man, they're good people.  Politics may be messed up, but still good folk.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, in 2008 and 2010, you got in some trouble.  They were charging you with conflict of interest.  And I think you even were fined by the Texas, the Texas Ethics Commission for political contribution reports.  What's that about?
Speaker 2: That was in, in the State of Texas, if you file, if you file a campaign report and you don't include telephone numbers, street address, occupation, a lot of, a lot of what I call, if, if you, if you send in a check, and you don't have your telephone number, and if somebody objects to it, yeah, you can get hit for it.  I mean, it's, it's a system that which we designed that many of us believe it really does a disservice to all of us, but it is what it is.
Story_ID: 633106
Speaker 1: Sort of tell us what, what's going on now in the Texas House [Texas House of Representatives] and--
Speaker 2: House--well, right now, it's all about the budget.  In the last session, 2011, we faced a $27 billion shortfall.  When the balance in the budget, new cuts, that's the man- mantra these days, just cut.  And this upcoming legislative session, we'll be facing another budgetary shortfall.  And even though fin- economically, things are looking better, but still, the mindset is to cut.  And so, you know, hopefully, we'll be able to balance the budget to a more balanced approach, but everything in the legislature right now in Texas [Texas Legislature] is about the budget, the budget, the budget.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I, you know, I'm still vice chair of appropriations [Texas House of Representatives Committee on Appropriations] and, and, you know, that's why, that's why I'm spending most of my time.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  Now, are you still thinking about running for mayor again at some point?
Speaker 2: I don't know, I don't know what--I don't know.  I've, I've indicated to some people in my, in my legislative district [Texas House District 139] that this may be my last session in the, in the Texas House.  I've been there for twenty-three years.  I'm not interested, I'm not interested in retiring from public service.  I, you know, there may be something else out there.  We will wait and see, but I don't know, I don't know which, which direction that, that I intend to go.  All I know is that I believe that the season of me being in the Texas House is coming to an end.  And, and another door will open, but I can't tell you, I can't tell you where that door is.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, were you involved in the Barack Obama [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama] campaign in 2007, 2008?
Speaker 2: I was, yeah, I was involved, participated in it, attended the convention, national convention last time [2008 Democratic National Convention, Denver, Colorado], and will attend the convention in this time [2012 Democratic National Convention, Charlotte, North Carolina].  Initially, was a part of Mark Warner, Senator Mark Warner, who thought about running.  We were classmates, and I was with him in Virginia when he was doing his exploratory.  He decided not to, you know--join on with the Barack Obama campaign.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, President Obama came to Harvard right after you, to Harvard Law School [Cambridge, Massachusetts], I think, right?
Speaker 2: Yes, he--yes, several years behind--I graduated in 1980.  I think the president was there, maybe '85 [1985]?
Speaker 1: Yeah, I--okay, yeah.
Speaker 2: Somewhere around in there, you know, but, but he's bright, Harvard Law Review, you know, constitutional scholar, you know, well prepared.
Speaker 1: Were you surprised when he won the election?  I mean, you know--
Speaker 2: No, not really.  I, I met him initially in, at the all black class reunion in 2000 at Harvard, and when he was a state senator.  That's when we met the first time.  And then, we met again in 2004 after he spoke at the Democratic National Convention [2004 Democratic National Convention, Boston, Massachusetts].  There was a fundraiser in San Antonio [Texas].  And then, I was there when he gave that speech in 2004 at the Democratic National Convention.  He hit it out the ballpark, you know, so, look, in, in politics, opportunity and timing are critically important, and when they come together at the same time, you get a positive outcome.  And for him, opportunity and timing came together at the right time, and he's the president of the United States.  And I believe that his window to serve, he's still operating within that window, and look forward to him being president for another four years.
Story_ID: 633107
Speaker 1: What are some are your hopes and concerns for the African American community today?
Speaker 2: I, I hope that our yesterdays will not eclipse our todays and tomorrow.  And what I mean by that is that, you know, our parents and grandparents, those before, made tremendous strides in getting us to where we are.  I mean, from, from coloreds to Negroes to Afri- blacks to African Americans, we look at the achievements that they made with the odds that were stacked against them.  I mean, man, there were some hell of a trailblazers.  Business, education, health, you--I mean they, across the board.  I am hopeful that, that drive that they possess will be carried on in this generation, and the next to come.  That's, that's a concern of mine that we, that, hopefully, you know, our, our generation, our kids won't lower the expectations, will not be as competitive, will still want to be entrepreneurs, will still want to push beyond.  That's, that's my concern when I, I see our young guys walking around with their pants on their tail, that concerns me.  I don't know where that takes you, you know.  No, no, that drive, you know, you know, that, that concerns me.  So, that's, that's my, that's my fear, and I think that's what, that's the challenge that people in my generation face is to, is to do everything that we can to inspire, to motivate, just like our parents, and others motivated us to be where we are today.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Is there anything that you, if you were in a position to do almost anything you wanted to do at this point, in terms of leadership or anything in terms of continuing the leadership that you started, like years ago, what would you do, what would you aim for (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, and, may we--I think we all have an obligation to continue to build that sense of community.  Individually, we can do a great deal.  Collectively, we can do even more.  That sense of pride, and it's not about being anti anybody.  It's about being pro you.  And I think that's where we got to, you know, "Say it loud--I'm black and I'm proud."  I mean, that was--hey, man, that, that meant a lot during, during our time.  It was a sense of pride of who you are.  It's not being anti anybody else.  It's being, being proud of who you are.  And that becomes a motivator.  That's, that's an internal fire that generates a return.  And it's not destructive.  And it's about being concerned with, with, with what's sort of, what's the product that you're producing or conveying.  If I, if I had, if I had the, the ability to collect- to collectively pull us together and, and say, "Hey, Larry [Larry Crowe], you, you can be that entrepreneur.  It's all in you--hey, unleash it, you know, don't be afraid of it, don't be paralyzed by the fear of the unknown.  You can do it, you're, you're a writer, express it."  There's nothing wrong with that.  You know, you can be a educator, public servant, you know.  My, my fear is that there's a lot of talent that lies within us that, if we're not careful, will remain dormant.  And, and so, I think we're all struggling to, to try to motivate people to reach, to realize their full potential.
Story_ID: 633108
Speaker 1: Now, are you, are you involved in programs that, back in the, in the 44 that--
Speaker 2: Acres Home [Acres Homes, Houston, Texas]?
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Yeah.
Speaker 2: Every, look, I'm, I'm doing all I can to build that sense of community.  For the last five years, I hold what I call my Family, Family Day [Family Day in the Park] at the park that bears my name [Sylvester Turner Park, Houston, Texas].  You know, twenty years ago, there was a park where there was, there was nothing there at all, the West Little York Park.  It was a city park, but nothing--weeds and trees.  I went to the mayor [Bill White], and asked him to build it out, and basically said that we got, we got Toyota park [Toyota Center, Houston, Texas], and Minute Maid [Minute Maid Park, Houston, Texas], and Reliant [Reliant Stadium; NRG Stadium, Houston, Texas].  And many people in my district [Texas House District 139] can't afford the tickets, or a hot dog, or a hamburger, or the drinks, or the fries.  So, we need facilities in, in the neighborhood and the hood for them, so didn't afford, couldn't afford it.  And so, I said, "Look, if I raise the money and build it, will the city at least maintain it?"  And he said, "If you raise it, we'll maintain it, okay."  So, I got a black architect, had him meet out at the park.  We walked it, twenty-nine acres, and I told him, "I want you to design me a park, and let's make them (unclear) baseball. Build me some baseball fields, put a jogging trail around it, bleachers.  Make a park, and make it as nice as if it was on the other side of town, and put, and cost it out for me."  He did, 2.6 mil [$2.6 million], and I went about raising money for it, had it in blueprint, took it where--with me wherever I went.  And long story, short, we raised the money, designed it, built it out.  The west and, and it's, it has changed that whole part of town.  And then a friend of mine from law school, [HistoryMaker] Jimmie Lee Solomon, Julieanna [Julieanna Richardson] knows him--was (unclear) Major League Baseball, he was building this Urban Youth Academy [Major League Baseball Urban Youth Academy] in Compton [California] to be that pipeline to professional baseball.  And I asked Jimmie Lee about building an academy in Acres Home in my district.  And he came, we walked it, the infrastructure was already, in large part, there.  He agreed.  They built another NCAA [National Collegiate Athletic Association] baseball field there as well, and long story short, it's, it's now the second Astros Major League urban youth baseball academy [Houston Astros Major League Baseball Urban Youth Academy] in the 44.  And for the last five years, I host my Family Day.  The first year, we started out with thirty-five hundred people.  April of 2012, according to the cops, we had close to fifteen thousand people out there.  I raised the money to feed them all--doesn't cost anybody anything.  The whole notion is to bring generations together, so you got, you got seniors, you got kids, everybody in between.  It's bringing that sense of community together.  I think that works.  People look forward to it.  The Juneteenth stuff, great.  I now coordinate that, bringing that back to--in--reflective of that Carver parade that I talked about earlier.
Speaker 1: Now, did Juneteenth go away at some point?
Speaker 2: It, it, it never really was on, on, in, on, in the 44, so to speak.  You had it downtown, but now, I tell you, the one in the 44, now eclipsed, any in the city.  And people come out, you know, the horses and everything else, and it has gotten bigger and bigger.  And, again, people are reflecting, but the older generation will reflect on the George Washington Carver parade. And what we are now saying is that as our generation was driven that we came to create memories for this younger generation because in creating memories for them, you also instill within them a sense of community and that pride, 'cause you got to give them something that they can talk about down the road that's positive.  So, we're doing that type of stuff.  You know, I got my Labor Day firework show that's coming up on September 1 where people don't have to go downtown to watch it.  I got some of my friends from, from Austin [Texas] who are bringing in their fireworks trucks into my district.  And we're going to light up the skies in the hood, so you don't have to go outside--I'm bringing it right to you.  Look, for me, this is what the 44 is all about, you know, this is the pride, this is, this is what we do, this is how we do it, so doing other type of stuff.  We're rebuilding homes, getting seniors out of homes that are falling down and dilapidated, not fit for animals, so we're working to change that environment.  Helping others, community development, non-profit corporations, help to provide them with the funding that they need to meet the needs of the kids in their community so, you know, we're doing stuff like that.  So, it's, for me, it's not just enough to vote on a bill in Austin, Texas.  It's building the sense of community in the district that carries even more weight to the folk who vote on me every day.
Story_ID: 633109
Speaker 1: Now, when you look back at everything you've done to this point, what, today, would you consider to be your legacy?
Speaker 2: I don't know.  I mean, from a visual point of view, certainly, the, the Urban Youth Academy [Houston Astros Major League Baseball Urban Youth Academy] and the park [Sylvester Turner Park, Houston, Texas].  I mean, that's, you know, the folk pass that every day.  And they--it epitomizes something that didn't exist at all, and now something that exists that has been transformed.  It is a, it is a public visual manifestation of revitalizing, or what revitalizing the community is all about.  And we're now building around that 'cause now, the Lone, the Lone Star community college [Lone Star College System, Houston, Texas] has been built right down the street.  We got a grocery store that's been built right up the street from that.  So, you know, that's one of those things that people can see, feel, touch, be a part of.  You see seniors walking around in the morning and in the evenings, families in there all the time, little kids playing baseball in Acres Homes [Houston, Texas].  People didn't talk about baseball leagues and all that, 'cause it didn't exist.  There was no place to play.  That's one of those things that you say, okay, you know, there's a difference that's been made in, in the lives of people here.
Story_ID: 633110
Speaker 1: Tell us some- something about your family.  Now, are, did you get married at some point (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Got married--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --I was married for eleven years, got divorced.  Cheryl [Cheryl Turner] and I had, we have one child, Ashley [Ashley Paige Turner], who's incredible.  She's now twenty-five.  Ashley went to University of Texas, San Antonio [University of Texas at San Antonio, San Antonio, Texas], majored in biology, went straight through in four years, then decided she was going to go straight through to get a master's in public health, public health administration, from Texas Woman's University [Denton, Texas].  She went straight through, and now is working in human resource at the Legacy Community Health clinic.  Healthcare, children happen to be her passion.  I mean, she's been, she's been an incredible person, still likes traveling with her old man, you know, just got back from Turkey this year and a cruise just a week ago.  When she was thirteen, with me being so much involved in the legislature [Texas Legislature] and teaching, it seems like it wasn't enough time.  And one of my colleagues suggested, said, "Why don't you take your daughter on a cruise, and pull you away from stuff, your beepers and all that, and papers."  And I did, with, with my goddaughters, and their parents.  That's when she was thirteen--she's now twenty-five.  We've done it ever- I'm taking her some place every single year.  Then, of course, my mom [Ruby Mae Turner]--my mom is still alive.  She just celebrated her eighty-eighth birthday on, on August 12th.  She has Alzheimer's.  The incredible story about my--my mom is an incredible person, that's number one, you know, she raised all of us.  But five years ago, the doctor told us that they put my mom in hospice.  And we know--my mom is very independent.  My mom--put her in a nursing home--hell, no, that, that, she's always been at 3005 Stallings [3005 Stallings Drive, Houston, Texas] since my dad [Eddie Turner] purchased that home in 1954.  And that's where she would want to be, so we took her home.  That was five years ago.  My mom's still here, you know, so, but she's very connected to my brothers who are still there.  My mom would not visit your house, you know.  All us kids--my mom, you didn't have to worry about my mom coming to your house--ain't happening, but you all, you had to come to 3005, so Easter, Mother's Day, Thanksgiving, Christmas, all the major holidays, no matter what your plans for--you had to come by 3005--didn't have to stay long, but you had to come by 3005.  That's, that has been the cornerstone of the Turner family.  And, in large part, I think that's why the good Lord still has her here today.
Story_ID: 633111
Speaker 1: When you look back on everything you've done to this point, is there any major thing that you would do differently if you could, or something you would change?
Speaker 2: No, you know, it's about, 'cause things happen for a reason, things happen for a purpose.  No--made some mistakes, learned from them.  It's part of it.  I keep going forward.  No use of me, no use of me turning back when I still got a lot before me, so no, no.  I'm here and I'm, I'm going forward.
Story_ID: 633112
Speaker 1: Is there anything I haven't asked you about that we need to discuss before I ask my last question?
Speaker 2: I can't, I can't think of anything right now, Larry [Larry Crowe].  Yeah, you know, you've been fairly thorough.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well, the last question is similar to legacy.  It's almost the same, but a little bit different.  Sir, how would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: Hm, hey, man.  I think, you know, more, but we all want to, we all want to feel as though we've made life better, okay, that if I entered into your world, I made things better.  You know, maybe, and, and maybe in just, in simple terms, we're all following somebody else's footprints.  But between you and me, life has a way of blowing in sand that will cover the footprints that I followed.  So, for the next person, you got to create footprints for the person to follow you and, hopefully, hopefully, I've created some footprints for some other people to follow, that've helped them to find their way.  And, and then, secondarily, hopefully, and one of the reasons why I agreed to do this, hopefully, my life and my story will help to encourage and motivate somebody else because the reality is we are all motivated and encouraged by somebody, you know.  And, and if you don't tell the story, people don't know, you know.  People, people assume, by looking at many of us, that it just, it just happened.  You didn't do what I did.  Your, your life was not as hard as mine.  Well, hell, you'd be so mistaken, you know, so, like my mama [Ruby Mae Turner] used to say to us all the time, "Nobody knows what's happening within these walls unless you go out and tell them."  Nobody knows that, you know, you're eating beans and rice, and beans and rice and chicken, and over and over, and over and over and over again, unless you tell the story.  Nobody knows about the syrup sandwiches, you know, unless you go and tell them.  So, we all have had our struggles and continue to have them.  We've all had our temptations, and sometime we've yielded to the temptations, you know, but, but it's through God's grace and Him touching other people around us, like our home boys that were willing to protect us when we were not willing to protect ourselves.  So, you know, how to be remembered, you know, hey, man, you just try to be the best servant you can.
