Story_ID: 485524
Speaker 1: I'm going to start by slating.  My name is Evelyn Pounds and I am the interviewer, and Corey Ball is the videographer.  Please state and spell your full name.
Speaker 2: My current full name?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: My name is Linda Torrence Phillips [HistoryMaker Linda Torrence].  First name is Linda with an I.  Torrence is T-O-R-R-E-N-C-E and Phillips is P-H-I-L-L-I-P-S.
Speaker 1: Would you state your date of birth and the location of your birth?
Speaker 2: My date of birth is November 23, 1944.
Speaker 1: And the location?
Speaker 2: Little Rock, Arkansas.
Speaker 1: Today's date?
Speaker 2: Today's date is Saturday, February 18, 2006.
Speaker 1: And the location of this interview?  If you don't want to give your home address, you can just say it's in my home (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) This interview is taking place in, in my home in Stone Mountain, Georgia.
Story_ID: 485525
Speaker 1: Now, I'm going to ask you just a few People magazine-ish type questions--
Speaker 2: All right.
Speaker 1: --so bear with me.  What is your favorite food?
Speaker 2: Oh, gosh, I guess my favorite food will probably be any kind of vegetable basically.  I love vegetables.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Winter.
Speaker 1: Color?
Speaker 2: My favorite color is black and brown.
Speaker 1: Vacation destination?
Speaker 2: I would say, I don't travel a lot, but when I do travel, I like to be somewhere near a, a large body of water.
Speaker 1: And what is your favorite phrase or saying?  Do you have one?
Speaker 2: Let's see.  My favorite, hm, I don't know if I have one.  I'm sure, I'm sure I do, but I just--nothing comes to mind right now.
Speaker 1: All right, we can talk about that one, that one later (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay, okay.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 485526
Speaker 1: Now, tell us something about your mother.  What type of person was she?  What's her name, where was she born, and when was she born?
Speaker 2: My mother name was Mary Artea [ph.] Jackson [Mary Jackson].  She was born in Little Rock, Arkansas.  She was an only child.  She was born to Mattie Williamson [Mattie Rembert Williamson] and her, her father's name was Roscoe Jackson.  They called him Roscoe.  My mother was--I think I may have said she was an only child.  When she was, when she grew up, obviously, like most only child, children, the only child in the family, rather, she was spoiled.  She was a very attractive woman.  My mother had a positive attitude.  She was never a negative person at all.  I found out later, long after she had passed away, that she liked to dance.  And I didn't realize until much later that, that's probably why I loved dancing so much when I was young.  And I also found out later that my mother was often--had a nickname and her name was Rick [ph.].  And I found out the reason they called her Rick was because she was fair-skinned and looked very much like a Puerto Rican.  And I was one of ten children.  Her, one of her children died, was still-born.  I'm the third--fourth child in, in that lineage.  I was very close to my mother.  We had a very special relationship.
Speaker 1: And when was she born?
Speaker 2: She was born in December 28, 1916.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Did she, do you remember her telling you any stories about her growing up days in Little Rock?
Speaker 2: The thing that I can remember most about my mother, she was telling me that she dropped out of school when she was in the sixth grade, and the reason she dropped out of school was because she had to work.  She had to get a job and help my, my grandmother, her mother.  But then when I told my grandmother the story, my grandmother said, that's not right.  She dropped out of school because she didn't want to go to school, but that's the story that I remember about my mother and her being in school.  But my mother and I shared a lot.  She was just a fun, loving person.  The thing that I remember also about my mother is when I graduated from high school [Wrightsville High School, Wrightsville, Arkansas], my mother really didn't understand, I don't believe, the value of an education, because when I graduated from high school, we lived in this little town called College Station [Arkansas].  My high school was probably about, I'm going to say, maybe twenty-five miles away, maybe thirty.  And I had to literally thumb a ride to attend my own graduation and my mother didn't go with me.  She sat on the porch while I went to my graduation, but I didn't, I didn't get mad at, at her.  And I didn't hold that against her because I knew that she really didn't know any better.  And, but I always loved my mother dearly, just like most children do.
Story_ID: 485527
Speaker 1: Tell us about your father.  What is his name?  Where was he born?
Speaker 2: My mother [Mary Jackson] was not married to my father, so I don't know a lot about my father's background.  I, I--my first recollection of my father was when I was probably about six or seven years old.  And my father took me out to lunch one day and it was the first time I'd had a barbecue sandwich and--
Speaker 1: Was this in Little Rock [Arkansas]?
Speaker 2: It was in Little Rock.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: My father was one, among the first black police officers in Little Rock.  He resigned the police force in Little Rock because at that time, a black police officer could not arrest a white man.  So, he had some sort of encounter with a white man, and the man was very disrespectful to him, and he decided that day that he was not going to tolerate that, and as a result, he turned his badge in and just resigned.  But the other thing that I found out about my father that he also took some law courses.  I think he had aspirations to be an attorney.  I know very little about my father's background although I did meet some of his siblings, but I don't know much, very much about him (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And what is his name?
Speaker 2: His name is Samuel Hudson.
Speaker 1: And he was, he lived in Little Rock--
Speaker 2: He lives in Little Rock.
Speaker 1: --and he was more than likely born in Little Rock?
Speaker 2: Either Little Rock or some other little town.  There was a town in Little Rock that was called Beebe, Arkansas.
Speaker 1: Just the (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I should say there was a town in Arkansas that was called Beebe, Arkansas.  I think that's where he was from, but I'm not really sure.
Speaker 1: Just the, the letters B and then B or was it like B-E-E.
Speaker 2: I think it's the letter B [sic.].
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what--he was born around the same time as your mother, at time as your mother?
Speaker 2: They were about the same age.  He may have been a couple of years older, but not much more than that.
Speaker 1: Okay. Now, your mother liked to dance.  Did you know, did you learn anything about some of your father's likes were?
Speaker 2: The only thing that--no, I don't know anything about his likes or dislikes, but I can tell you this.  I am, in talking with some of his close relatives, I was always told that my father was a very intelligent man.  He was very extremely smart.  He was very handsome and had lots of girlfriends, and that's really about all I can remember about my father.
Story_ID: 485528
Speaker 1: Tell us about your mother's [Mary Jackson] side of the family, her mother, and her father.  What were their names, and if you can remember, when and where they were born?
Speaker 2: My mother's mother was Mattie Williamson [Mattie Rembert Williamson].  She was born in Fordyce, Arkansas.  She was the daughter of Adeline Rembert from the Rembert family.  I think my grandmother had a brother, so my mother had--let's see here--my grandmother had a brother, so they were from, just two, two children in that particular family.  My grandmother was born in eighteen-, goodness, I, I think she was, 1898, I believe.
Speaker 1: In--
Speaker 2: What was your other question?
Speaker 1: --in Fordyce?
Speaker 2: In Fordyce, um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And her husband, your mother's father?
Speaker 2: My mother, my mother's father was Roscoe Jackson.  He was her mother's first husband.  Roscoe was from Detroit, Michigan, and I don't know what year they got married, but my mother, of course, was born to that union.  My grandmother ultimately got a divorce from my mother's father because he was, he was a very active and very handsome young man at the time, so they divorced.  My grandmother subsequently remarried and married a minister whose name was Archie Charles Williamson [Archie Williamson].
Speaker 1: Hence, the Mattie Williamson--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --but she was a Rembert?
Speaker 2: She was a Rembert--
Speaker 1: Okay, before--
Speaker 2: --before that.  I should say a Rembert Jackson, then Williamson.
Speaker 1: And she married a Will- a Jackson, then she married a Williamson.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And do you remember any stories being handed down about when she was a little girl?
Speaker 2: Actually, I don't.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Now--
Speaker 2: Let me say this.  I can say that I do know this.  My mother--my grandmother's mother, which would have been my mother's grandmother, apparently owned quite a bit of land (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now, that was Adeline?
Speaker 2: Adeline, that was Adeline Rembert, owned quite a bit of land in this place that I grew up in called College Station [Arkansas], which is about five miles from the city limits of Little Rock, Arkansas.  In fact, she owned so much land she deeded a lot of that land to my mother.  My mother, because she, we were poor, found that there were times when she needed to sell some of the land that she had, and I can recall she sold one lot for twenty-five dollars.  It was truly amazing but I, I (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) About how old were you then?  Were you--
Speaker 2: I, I'm going to say, I was probably maybe eight or nine.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, did any of the land stay in the family, do you know?
Speaker 2: We still own some land, as a matter of fact.  My sisters and I still own some property there.  It is our intent to not sell it and just keep it in the family.  We own several parcels of land in that little town called College Station.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, was this land on the outskirts of town or (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes.
Speaker 1: --or was it on the in, inside the city limits?
Speaker 2: It was on the outskirts of town.  And right now, it's really a couple of miles from the Little Rock, Arkansas' airport [Bill and Hillary Clinton National Airport, Little Rock, Arkansas].  It's a major airport.  It's only a few miles from there.
Speaker 1: Is there in this area, are there any plans to expand the airport or will it expand onto your properties, do you think, or what?
Speaker 2: I don't know if there's any plan to expand the airport, but I can tell you this--that, that's been some development around that area because there's a Holiday Inn [Holiday Inn Express Little Rock-Airport, Little Rock, Arkansas] that's a stone's throw away from the, from the airport.  And I can walk from that Holiday Inn to one of our pieces of land.
Story_ID: 485529
Speaker 1: Your mother's father [Roscoe Jackson], tell us about him, his name, and, you know, and anything that you remember about him.
Speaker 2: Frankly, I don't know much about him, but what I do know about him is that we--my sisters and brothers and I always referred to him as Papa.  I remember Papa as being a very tall man, fair skin, with straight hair.  I have to tell you this that it, it said in my family that Papa was a rolling stone.  I think that's probably the reason why my grandmother [Mattie Rembert Williamson] divorced him.  But I really don't know, didn't know a lot about Papa, but I do know that at one time, my current youngest brother went to live with my grandfather.  And I think I must have been about eight or nine years old at the time, and he was about four--my brother, Marv [Marv Jackson (ph.)].  Papa, at that time, was living in Detroit [Michigan], and I cried every single night.  And every night I cried, I missed my brother so much.  And my mother [Mary Jackson] finally had to call her father and say, "Please bring him back because I'm really tired of Linda [HistoryMaker Linda Torrence] crying every night."
Speaker 1: Your really missed him and really loved your brother (laughter)?
Speaker 2: I loved him, love him tremendously.
Speaker 1: And still today?
Speaker 2: To, even to this day, and I still tell him that I love him and he's fifty-five years old.
Story_ID: 485530
Speaker 1: Let's talk about your early childhood.  What is your earliest memory from childhood?
Speaker 2: Well, my, my earliest memory is that, first of all, you know, I, I'm one of those ones that I never forget from whence I came.  I grew up in a very poor family.  My mother [Mary Jackson] was a single mother.  She was on welfare.  As I said earlier, she had ten kids.  One child died before I was born so, therefore, being in a single parent household, I ended up having to care for my younger siblings.  I didn't spend much time with my two older sisters or my older brother because they left home when they were much, much younger as teenagers.  I remember very well being on welfare.  I remember when we used to get the government cheese--you may have heard of the government cheese, but I remember seeing that huge block of cheese.  I also can remember doing, during Christmastime, my mother, because she didn't have a job sometimes, and she was, for the most part, on welfare when I was growing up.  We used to get one of those Christmas boxes that she used to refer to as--the Salvation Army used to put, and they still do it today--boxes with food in them and everything on them, and there would be a toy or two in those boxes.  Well, my mother would sign up every year for a box, and that box was from the Salvation Army.  I went to grade school [College Station Elementary School, College Station, Arkansas] in that little town, little, small grade school in College Station [Arkansas].  I could remember, and I always, I don't tell this story too often, but I can remember the time when we were so poor, in two, two instances, three instances, we were so poor.  I can remember when I had holes in my shoes.  I had to put a cardboard box in my shoes in order to keep my feet from getting wet.  And some people will probably ask, "Well, now, Linda [HistoryMaker Linda Torrence], why would you want to tell that story?"  I just think it's significant, you know.  It's, it's a part of who I am.  It's a part of my, my growing up.  I can always also remember that we were so poor, I used to say to myself, I wish we could move in a projects.  I think if we'd been able to move in the project, I would have felt middle class (laughter).
Story_ID: 485531
Speaker 1: Well, first, give us your siblings' name in order of birth--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --with you included in that.
Speaker 2: All right.  You want first and last names or just first names?
Speaker 1: Well, just the--
Speaker 2: First name?
Speaker 1: --do first and last names, yes.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Lena Daniels, Frank Medlock [ph.], Alice Blanton [ph.], and then there is me, my brother, Marv Jackson [ph.], Denise Smith [ph.], Sylvia Murdock [ph.], and Brenda Bohner [ph.].  Those are my siblings.
Speaker 1: All right.  Now, a lot of children do not know some of the hard times that families and this could be black families and any families, white families, Hispanic families, Asian families.  They don't understand what cardboard in the shoe means.  Now, is this cardboard from the back of a pad of paper or is this cardboard from the corrugated boxes or just--what do you mean by you had cardboard (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It's cardboard from a corrugated box.  That's, that's where it was from primarily, primarily because it was stronger.  It was a stronger piece of material.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But I think the other part of it, too, is my [maternal] grandmother [Mattie Rembert Williamson]--I spent a good deal of time with my grandmother.  My grandmother was a very stately woman.  She was the kind of woman--she, when I call recall, when she, especially when she married my step-grandfather [Archie Williamson], who was a minister.  When my grandmother would go to church with my grandfather, she would wear white gloves.  And she would always dress very nicely, and she was just a very stately woman.  I remember her telling me that because you were poor didn't mean that you have to be dirty.  And I can remember going to my grandmother's house because she worked all the time, I would go and mop her entire house on weekends.  I would iron my grandfather's shirts.  I, I couldn't iron them very well, but I did because he was a minister, and I ironed all of his white shirts, and I would cook for them.  And all of the time that I spent with my grandmother was a time that she was teaching me all of these things.  My mother [Mary Jackson] really never taught me an awful lot because I think at the time when I was growing up, my mother was still busy having fun, living her own life.  And still, at some point, having, having children, so I spent a good deal of time with my grandmother, and I think it was my grandmother that really shaped my values.
Speaker 1: Okay.  But you all lived in the same area with your grandmother?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, like was it down the street or--
Speaker 2: No, as a matter of fact, when I would go to my grandmother's house and do chores for her and my grandfather on weekends, I walked.  I, and I think that walk was probably every bit of seven to--seven miles.
Speaker 1: People did a lot of walking, yeah.
Speaker 2: Yes, they did,
Speaker 1: Did--
Speaker 2: --but I did, I mean I was a young girl.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: And I didn't mind doing it.  I'd see, I would see my friends along the way, and I'd skip along the way and we talked and sing and play, but so at seven miles didn't seem that far.
Speaker 1: And we're talking early '50s [1950s]?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And a lot of families, a lot of black families did not have cars--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --during those days.  So, not only did the young people walk, but the older people walked, too.
Speaker 2: That's right--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --that's exactly right.
Speaker 1: And, and people weren't as heavy as they are today because they did a lot of walking.
Speaker 2: That's right (laughter).
Speaker 1: (Laughter) And, and they did a lot of eating, too--
Speaker 2: That's--
Speaker 1: --because they ate three meals a day.  And we're talking about full meals, not hamburgers and hot dogs and that.  We're talking about what, a three or four-course meal.  We're talking about greens and--
Speaker 2: And they were not always the foods that were necessarily good for us, you know, like a pork, and a lot of fat because my mother actually had a very poor diet which really contributed to her heart attack.  My mother actually died of heart problems.  And she, I can recall when she would cook her food, she would use the pure, pure fat.  We, back in those days, when I was a little girl, we used to call it lard, but it was just pure fat, and she used that to cook with for years.
Story_ID: 485532
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, when you were growing up, just tell us, like where, where did you live?  What, in, in Little Rock [Arkansas], were they, did you live in a block, you know, in a neighborhood that had paved street, sidewalks--
Speaker 2: No--
Speaker 1: --or just, do you live outside of town and just tell us what (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) We lived on the outskirts of, of Little Rock on the city limits of Little Rock in this little town called College Station [Arkansas], and College Station, it was a very, very poor community.  There were no sidewalks.  There was only one paved street, and that was the main street of the main thoroughfare.  I can remember, at one time, we, we didn't have public transportation.  They used what was called the jitney service.  I think that's what it's referred to, where you, someone would use their own personal car and shuttle people back and forth to Little Rock to jobs, whether they were maids in hotels or janitors or whatever.  So, you know, if, if a person owned, owned the car, they would charge somebody five dollars a week to take them to work.  We didn't have public transportation, but we had schools.  We had an elementary school [College Station Elementary School, College Station, Arkansas] there and we had a high school [Wrightsville High School, Wrightsville, Arkansas] there, and that's where I attended school.  I attended school and I attended church there, grew, just grew up there until I became a young adult, but it was a just very, very poor part of town.  In fact, there was a section of the town, it was so bad.  Every weekend we could expect somebody to either get shot or killed, and that was the nature of that, that town that I grew up.  It was, it was a pretty rough, rough area.
Speaker 1: Now, if, if, if there was a shooting or a stabbing or a killing, was this because of alcohol?  You know, was there same kind of club near, or was this just the people in disagreement for some particular reason?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, it was a club.  It was a couple of night spots down there and people would go down there and, of course, because, you know, alcoholism tend to be very rampant in poor neighborhoods anyway.  And so, people would get drunk and get into fights, and next thing you know, somebody was pulling a gun and shooting somebody or killing somebody.  And the reputation was so bad.  If you lived in Little Rock, if you lived in the city of Little Rock, they will tell you, the last place you want to go is College Station unless you want to get bushwhacked.  It, it reminded us of the Wild West--it was just that bad.
Speaker 1: Oh, boy.  Oh, was this moonshine liquor that they had, or was this liquor that was purchased from some of the store (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I think it was legitimate liquor that they purchased.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I don't, I don't think it was moonshine (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) It was moonshine (laughter), all righty.
Story_ID: 485533
Speaker 1: What are some of the other memories that you have of growing up, you know, like your early, early days as a child?  Let's say, before school started, before you were in elementary school [College Station Elementary School, College Station, Arkansas]?
Speaker 2: Well, I, I, I think before I was in elementary school, as I was entering elementary school, I used to love to play.  I mean, I just, just like most kids, loved to play.  And at that time (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What games did you play?  What did you, how do you entertain?
Speaker 2: Well, we used to play hide-and-seek and we used to play hopscotch.  We used to play jump rope.  We used to play, I don't know what, what it's called--you'd have a board.  Was it jump board where one person would be at one end--
Speaker 1: Oh, seesaw.
Speaker 2: --and one person would be at the other?
Speaker 1: Oh, seesaw.
Speaker 2: You'd bounce each other in the air.
Speaker 1: Seesaw--I think that was it.
Speaker 2: No, we actually jumped on the board.  You'd jump on one end, and the other person would fly up in the sky, and they'd come down and you'd go up.  It was like that and I used to love that, but, and we used to roll, what I call roll tires.  We used to love to do that.  You'd get an old car tire and you just roll it (laughter).  I can remember when my brother got--my, my mother [Mary Jackson] brought, bought my brother a bike for Christmas.  Remember now, we only had one paved street.  And she bought my brother this bike and it was the bike, was a, first time, the bikes came out with the skinny tires?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: And you should have seen him trying to ride that tire on the rocks because our, our yard was nothing but rocks.
Speaker 1: Right, right.
Speaker 2: And he had a hard time, he had a hard time with that.
Story_ID: 485534
Speaker 1: The other thing that I can remember, and I haven't said anything to you yet about my faith.  And it's very important that I share this with you because my faith is really very, very strong.  And, and it, it has been since I was a child.  I can remember as far back is when my--I used to visit with my [maternal] grandmother [Mattie Rembert Williamson] and my grandfather [Archie Williamson], the, the minister, my step-grandfather really.  And we used to get around the table and before we ate, my, my grandfather used to bless the food and sometimes my grandmother would.  Well, my grandmother would, would bless the food for about ten minutes.  And I tell you, I will never forget, I couldn't understand why she had to go so long.  I was ready to eat.  And my grandfather, when he would bless the food, he would have tears in his eyes.  I never could understand.  I would look up in his face and I, I would say to myself, why is dad crying?  I never could understand why dad would cry.
Speaker 2: Was is it during the time that your grandmother (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) No, it was during the time then when he was saying--
Speaker 2: --was saying grace or after when his time turned around?
Speaker 1: --when he, when his turn came to say grace.
Speaker 2: Now, was his as long or was his basically--
Speaker 1: Almost as long.
Speaker 2: Oh, boy, that was--
Speaker 1: I don't know if they were just trying to outdo each other or what, but I can remember also when my grandfather and my oldest brother [Frank Medlock (ph.)] were building my mother [Mary Jackson] a house.  And one day, I was in, in the back of this house.  This house didn't have any windows in it because it was still in process of being built.  The frame was there.  I was in the back of that house and I was in the back of that house, and I was--I guess I must have been preaching. I don't, I--that's the only thing that I--
Speaker 2: Were you playing?  I mean, was this like play time?
Speaker 1: No, I, no, no, I was very serious.   I cannot tell you what I was saying.  I was in that house alone.
Speaker 2: Oh, no--
Speaker 1: What prompted me to go there and to say what I said, but I was talking to, to God.  And we had some neighbors right next door to us and this was a white family.  I looked around and this man was handing me a basket of apples and oranges.  And he said, "You know, I've been listening to you and you are right."  I had no idea that anybody heard me.  I was so embarrassed, I had no idea, but that was the first time that I can remember that I made a connection with God.  And I had to have been eight or nine years old.  And I, I remembered that day as if it was yesterday.  And it's, it's been the most amazing thing for me, and I think the thing that has, has kept me, and has motivated me and has given me strength, has been my faith.  And I think the other thing is that I've always been one who sort of fought for the underdog.  And even growing up poor, for some reason or another, I always knew that I wasn't born to be poor, that I didn't have to be poor all my life.  And, and I think because of my belief, that I was able to work my way out of that community because it was, for the average child, there was no way that you could dream of being anything or going anywhere.  It was just, it was not a very good environment.
Story_ID: 485535
Speaker 1: --That's even when you're a child.  I want to ask you about holidays, like Easter and all of that, you know, like, that was an occasion.  That was a, it's almost like rites of passage (laughter) when we were, during those days.
Speaker 2: Oh, yes, absolutely.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: You want me to talk about holidays?
Speaker 1: Oh, yes, yes--
Speaker 2: Okay, well--
Speaker 1: --this is history because--
Speaker 2: Holidays--
Speaker 1: --these children don't know anything about that (laughter).
Speaker 2: No.  Holidays were big time occasions for us, whether it was Christmas, Thanksgiving or Easter.  Now, those were the--and 4th of July--those were the big holidays.  At Christmastime, they would cook a lot of food.  My mother [Mary Jackson] would cook all, all kinds of cakes and pies for Christmas, and at Thanksgiving, the same thing.  And at Easter, we had to have a new dress and some new shoes--
Speaker 1: See, and, and that's it.
Speaker 2: --new everything for Easter, and go to church.  Now, there--
Speaker 1: Get your hair done (laughter).
Speaker 2: And get my hair done.
Speaker 1: Get your hair fixed, when in, in Louisiana, Mansfield, well, get your hair fixed.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And there was always a lady who did the hair just like (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right.
Story_ID: 485536
Speaker 1: There was--I mean also in the black community, it was still a community regardless of what the houses looked like, or the land looked like, or the streets looked like.  It was a community.  And there was one person who specialized in this.  And I don't know if it was like this way you lived, but it was like, when we ate, everybody ate--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --because they had gardens.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And if Miss Sang [ph.] had some greens, we had some greens.  Hog-killing time, everybody got a part of it.  You know, it was like, and that's just the way that it was--
Speaker 2: Absolutely.
Speaker 1: --you know, then.
Speaker 2: We all ate together.
Speaker 1: And like, if there was, there was one cleaners.  It was a black man who had a cleaners, you know.  We didn't have any doctors.  You all might have had some black doctors, either in Little Rock [Arkansas]--
Speaker 2: Speaking of black doctors, I can remember, in speaking of houses, going back to houses, my grandmother [Mattie Rembert Williamson], my mother's mother, and her sister [Susie Rembert] owned a house together.  I don't know how they come about owning this house, but they owned the house together.  And there were actually two families living in this same house--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --my grandmother, and my mother [Mary Jackson] and me, and my, one of my sisters, and then one of my grandmother's sisters, and like five or six of her kids.  So, we all lived in this, this same house.  It was just amazing that--and we got along.  And, and that was the most, the other most amazing thing about that.
Speaker 1: That's it and, and, and, too, we laugh.  I lived in Dallas [Texas] for a long period of time.  We used to laugh about the Mexicans, the Hispanics.  This friend of mine, he was from Dallas.  He said, "Now, Evelyn [Evelyn Pounds]," he said, "Stay and watch this car," you know, before anybody was in it.  And we was watching the Mexicans get in the car, and they would get in and, and look, if, if the car was built for four, they'd get ten people in.  The car would be just hanging, you know, just (unclear), (laughter) almost touching the ground.  And that was it, but that was family, and they still do that.  And that's the way it was when we were growing up.  We--everybody didn't own a car, but my uncle owned a car.  That was the whole family's car.  His, his other brothers and sisters, and their children, if we saw that car move to go downtown, it was like we, as children, it couldn't move without us going.  He could take his children, but it's like, his nieces and nephews had to go when that car moved.  And we would all just be sitting on each other's laps, hanging out the window, you know, but that was family.
Speaker 2: Yes, it was.
Speaker 1: It was family and that's just the way life was.  We shared everything.
Speaker 2: Yeah, and wore each other's clothes.
Speaker 1: That's it, the hand-me-downs--
Speaker 2: Used to, used to--
Speaker 1: --hated those, oh, I hated those.
Speaker 2: And we used to go to rummage sales.  We looked forward to going to a rummage sale because we knew that if we could get to a rummage sale that we were going to have something new to wear.
Speaker 1: Exactly, see.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Story_ID: 485537
Speaker 1: Just tell us a little bit more about growing up in College Station [Arkansas] and building the house, a house that you said you had your, like my daughter calls them, epiphanies, yeah.  And let, let's talk about house building time and what it was, what the occasion was like or what that whole situation was like.
Speaker 2: Well, from, from us, my mother [Mary Jackson]--my brother at the time, my oldest brother [Frank Medlock (ph.)] at the time, was in the [U.S.] Army.  And he worked with my [maternal] grandfather [Archie Williamson], my step-grandfather now, and the two of them, along with some other kinfolk together, were the primary builders of this house for my mother.  It had two bedrooms, it had a kitchen, and, no, it had three bedrooms, and a kitchen.  One of the bedrooms was used for a living room, but they built that house with their own hands.
Speaker 1: Like we would say, from the ground up.
Speaker 2: From the ground up, they certainly did.  And, unfortunately, some years later, my, one of my sisters, younger sister's son, set the house on fire.  He was a kid playing with matches, and the house burned up.  But, we did own a home.  In fact, we owned several--that house and, and the house that my grandmother [Mattie Rembert Williamson] and her sister [Susie Rembert] owned that was their house.  How they came about getting that house, I don't know, but we always had houses.  We had homes that were ours, and we had land that was ours.
Speaker 1: Even if it was a lot.  When I say a lot, that's a house with a small amount of land attached to it, but it was still the family's lot.
Speaker 2: And my grandmother owned her own home--she and my grandfather.  And they owned the lot right next, they owned two lots right next to them, so she had that land.  And my mother, when she, when they built her house, she actually owned four other lots surrounding that house.  So, it's really amazing that even though I say that I came from a poor family, when I really think about it, I wasn't as poor as I thought I was because as a kid, you know, you see folk with other things, and you think you don't have those things.  But I never thought in terms of our having our own home, owning our own home, having land there, I just never thought of that so.
Speaker 1: And what, these were mainly wood homes, wooden homes?
Speaker 2: Wooden homes.
Speaker 1: And they were painted white (laughter), or were they different colors or were there, was there a different texture?  Were some of them brick?
Speaker 2: Well, this, this house was the imitation brick, and I, I don't remember now what they called that.  It's a--
Speaker 1: It was like a tar.  It, it was, almost like a (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It, it had the fake brick look.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: It looked like brick, but it really wasn't brick.
Speaker 1: And there might be another architectural name for it, but we, yes, in our hometown, we called it imitation brick because from the distance, it looked like brick.  But when you got close, it was like the, the--what is this--sketch of the brick etched into that tar with the red color--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --on, on top of it?  Right.
Speaker 2: That's exactly right.
Speaker 1: And what kind of top did it have?  Did it have a tin top?
Speaker 2: No, no, it had a regular, a regular roof.
Speaker 1: Okay.  See, that's it.  And that varies 'cause a lot of them did have tin tops on that, the regular roofs.  It just varies.
Speaker 2: But I can tell you this--whatever that, that material was made out of, it wasn't long, it didn't last very long because I can remember when it would rain, our house would leak.  And we would have pots and pans and bottles all over the place trying to catch the leak.  And to this day, my brother tells me, he said, "Linda [HistoryMaker Linda Torrence]," he said, "I cannot tell you how good it feels to be, to be able to sit in the house and look outside, and see the rain, and not having rained on me."  He said, "I still can't get over that."  He's fifty years old and, in fact, still can't get over that, but it's so true, but that's the way it was.  And we had, when we had a window that was broken, we couldn't afford to fix it, so we'd stick a rag in the window to keep the wind out.  But, you know, you did what you had to do.
Story_ID: 485538
Speaker 1: And I can remember one, going into grade school [College Station Elementary School, College Station, Arkansas], I had some teachers that were--two of my favorite teachers when I was in high school [Wrightsville High School, Wrightsville, Arkansas]--grade school, I'm sorry--was a male, male teacher.  And at that time, teachers were allowed to spank you, I guess.  And I remember, I didn't get spanked, but we would get licks in our hands if we missed a word when doing spelling (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) With the ruler or with the, with the pencil?
Speaker 1: With a belt.
Speaker 2: Okay, with a belt.
Speaker 1: This was like a belt.  It was one of those belts that they used, the men used to use to, to sharpen their razors.
Speaker 2: Um-hm, a razor strap.
Speaker 1: A razor strap.  And if you missed a word, then he would, you'd get a lick in your, in your hand for each word, spelling word that you missed.  But he was a great teacher.  He cared about us and his name was David Lyons [David L. Lyons, Sr.].  I can remember that man's name to this day.  I think he was like my fourth grade teacher.  And you think that he cared for you because it was important to him that you, that you learned everything that you were supposed to learn in his class.  And my second favorite teacher was my second grade teacher and, believe it or not, she's the mayor of the City of Wrightsville, Arkansas to this day.  And her name, her name is Lorraine Smith [Lorraine D. Smith], and she was very influential in terms of ensuring that we learned as much as we could possibly learn while we were in school.  And after grade school, of course, I went to high school in this, this town called Wrightsville, Arkansas, which is where she lives, and graduated from that high school there.  But I remember at the time when integration, school integration first began, you know, it all started in Little Rock, Arkansas.  And I can remember, as a teenager in high school, having all of those new kids that we were going to school with because they all, they shut schools down in the City of Little Rock, and all of those kids had, had to go to county schools.  And my school was a county school because if you didn't live in the city, you had to go to a county school.  And I can recall when all of these kids came to our school, and I was excited to have some new friends to go to school with us.  But I can't remember many of the, my high school teachers interested--yes, I, I can remember two, but my grade school teachers and my elementary school teachers were really most influential in terms of shaping my values.
Story_ID: 485539
Speaker 1: Now, tell me what were holidays like when you were small?  How did, how was Easter?  How was Thanksgiving?  What did the family do?  What did, what was that occasion (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, Easter, I loved Easter because I could always look forward to getting, getting something new, that my [maternal] grandmother [Mattie Rembert Williamson] would buy me a new dress, and she would get my hair fixed.  That's what they call it.  And we always went to church.  And, at that time, when you were in church, you always had an Easter speech.  And I can remember before Easter, we would all get our speeches in advance and we would practice our Easter speech.  And we always looked forward to that because it was a big deal for us to go to church on Easter Sunday and sit up there, and say our speeches in front of all of those adults sitting in the church.  And we would, just felt so good about that, knowing that we knew everything, every line, every word in your heart, Easter speech.  And on, on holidays, Christmas was a bit dismal for, for, for me growing up because we didn't have much and so, I didn't have many toys to look forward to.  But one thing we did have, my mother [Mary Jackson] made sure that we had a lot food, and she would fix a big Christmas dinner and lots of cakes and pies.  And for the 4th of July, that was the fun holiday.  We would always try to get a new outfit for the 4th of June, July.  It's not that we had some place to go because we couldn't afford to go anywhere.  We didn't have a car, but we wanted some new clothes.  So, we got some new shorts, maybe a pair of new shorts and a new blouse or maybe a complete short set, and we really looked forward to that and playing with other kids.  And everybody was looking to see who had something new on for the 4th of July.  But holidays (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Were there--
Speaker 2: --were always a big deal.
Speaker 1: Well, were there activities in town [College Station, Arkansas] for the 4th of July?
Speaker 2: Somehow or another people found money somewhere to get firecrackers and sparkles, sparkles.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: But, and I remember that very well, but I don't recall ever--
Speaker 1: But it was in the neighborhood that you all actually (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, it was in the neighborhood.
Speaker 1: --did the firecrackers and the--
Speaker 2: Um-hm, um-hm.
Speaker 1: --the different fireworks?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Story_ID: 485540
Speaker 1: What was the mix of the neighborhood?  This was pre-segregation, so in College Station [Arkansas], where did the blacks live, and where did the whites live?
Speaker 2: You know, I'm going to tell you something.  My sister reminds me to this day--she said, "Linda [HistoryMaker Linda Torrence], if you, when you really think about it, we've always had white friends, and we've always lived in an integrated neighborhood," because right down the hill from where we lived, was a white family and we played with those kids.  And even when, where my [maternal] grandmother [Mattie Rembert Williamson] lived, there was a, there was a house next to hers and then the house right next to that one, was a white family.  And everybody knew everybody, and we just--I, I never knew really about real segregation when I was growing up as little child, as a little girl because we all lived in the same neighborhood.  And it was my sister that reminded me of that.  There wasn't--College Station was predominantly black, and it still is today, but there were definitely white families.  For an example, the, the grocery store was owned by a white family and they knew all of us.  We'd walk in the store and they'd greet us by our first name.  There was a liquor store on one end of the street and, interestingly enough, the liquor store was owned by an Asian--no, he was actually Chinese.  And then, there was another grocery store quite a ways up the street from, from where we lived that had a service station.  That was owned by a white family.  And then, the store next to that was, was an odds-and-ends kind of a place.  It was owned by a white family, so, and there was never, to my knowledge, and I don't know of any inci- incidents where there were racial, there were racial overtones.  And to be honest with you, it is amazing that I'm just now thinking about that, but I just don't recall ever there being any.
Story_ID: 485541
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, was there a downtown section to College Station [Arkansas]--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: --that was separated from, you know, the neighborhoods?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, all, everything was kind of a part of the, the neighborhood?
Speaker 2: Right.  The schools were on one end of the main thoroughfare, and the liquor store was on--and the juke joint, joints were on the opposite end.  And the houses were all around and in between.  And there was a very large company there that was there, the Minnesota Mining Company [Minnesota Mining and Manufacturing Company; 3M].  I think it's--I, I'm sure it probably still exists today in some form, but that was huge.  It was a huge manufacturing company there.
Speaker 1: Is this where most of the people were employed?
Speaker 2: No, they didn't actually employ a lot of people there--some, but not very many, surprisingly, and I don't know why.
Speaker 1: Now, was this on the end with the grocery store or was this on the end with the schools or--
Speaker 2: It was farther to the east going into the city, headed toward the City of Little Rock [Arkansas].  It was a mining company.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, how were the people employed?  Was it College Station (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Most of them did domestic work, you know, they did work in the hotels in Little Rock.  My mother [Mary Jackson] used to work in a laundry.  My [maternal] grandmother [Mattie Rembert Williamson] worked in a laundry, so it was mostly that kind of work.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: And when I was--I'm trying to remember.  It seems to me when I was in high school [Wrightsville High School, Wrightsville, Arkansas], Timex [United States Time Corporation; Timex Group USA, Inc.] had a, a manufacturing company just right at the outskirts of the city limits and there were some people that worked at that company as well.  But early on, as a child, it was primarily domestic.
Story_ID: 485542
Speaker 1: So, did you all ever go into Little Rock [Arkansas] when you were growing up as a small child or not?
Speaker 2: I can remember when we had to go to the theater, the theater was on this street.  Now, remember this was at a time when you couldn't go--blacks couldn't go into white theaters.  In order for us to go to the theater, there was a theater that was on this street in Little Rock, this main street that was called 9th Street, and it was predominantly black, all black street.  On the street was a theater.  We used to walk from College Station [Arkansas] to the theater and I will be willing to bet you that had to have been twenty-five miles.  We had to walk to the theater.
Speaker 1: It was just a group of children then?
Speaker 2: A group of us, um-hm.  We'd walk to the theater and walk back.  I remember that so well.
Speaker 1: See, and in a lot of southern small towns which were located outside of larger cities, then when you walked in groups, and that's the way you mainly always had to travel--the, the younger children, you usually had the older ones to accompany the younger ones.  It was always a good mix because the older ones were to protect the younger ones.  And they were, the older ones were in charge.  So, is that the way that you all did--were your older brothers or sisters or older children (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, there were always old-, yes, there were, there were always older kids.  And after a period of time, we did have a bus service.  There was a gentleman there that finally got a bus service that he owned and he would--we would catch the bus and, and go to Little Rock.  And the bus would park at a certain location in downtown Little Rock.  And we used to go to the department stores, and do what little shopping we had to do, and catch the bus and go back to College Station.  The bus did not run on weekends.  There was, there was no service on weekends.  It was only during the week that we had bus service.
Speaker 1: And was this a school bus that he had that he converted to a transportation bus?
Speaker 2: Um-hm, um-hm, it certainly was.
Speaker 1: And what fare, do you remember what you all had to pay him to ride the bus?
Speaker 2: It seems to me it was twenty-five cents.
Speaker 1: So, older people and younger people, just anybody who had to go into the City of Little Rock would just--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --would just ride this bus?
Speaker 2: Um-hm, um-hm.
Speaker 1: That's interesting.  You know, in visiting African countries, even say, just and with today in 2006 and 1999, 2000, that's still the way that they communicate to the, from the small towns or the outside the villages or outside of the major cities, they still communicate like that.  And even if you go to the Caribbean, like if you're going from Miami [Florida] to some parts of the Caribbean, they still commute by air or by water, you know, just pay a fare to go to the major city to, to shop.
Story_ID: 485543
Speaker 1: Well what elementary school, what was the name of the elementary school that you attended?
Speaker 2: College Station Elementary [College Station Elementary School, College Station, Arkansas].
Speaker 1: And was this an all-black school?
Speaker 2: Oh, yes, we didn't have any white kids in our school.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, what school did the white kids go to?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, I don't know because I don't remember ever seeing any white kids in my class.  I don't know where they went to school.  Surely, they must have gone to that school or, or they must have, but I don't recall any in my class.  And I certainly didn't have any white teachers--not any when I was in elementary school or middle school, and I don't think I had any white teachers even in high school [Wrightsville High School, Wrightsville, Arkansas].
Speaker 1: That's interesting and there was no white school in College Station [Arkansas]?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: No school for white children?
Speaker 2: Unh-uh.  I only knew that, those, the College Station Elementary and the middle school.
Speaker 1: As it, normally when a school is named after--
Speaker 2: A high--
Speaker 1: --a particular town, then that's the school where the white children went, and the, the black school would have an alternative name, like a county or a parish name.  But you had, your school had the name for the city.  That's (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Um-hm.  Now, College Station was a town, not a city.
Speaker 1: Yeah, that's what I said but it was still--
Speaker 2: It was a town.
Speaker 1: --okay, and what county?
Speaker 2: Pulaski County [Arkansas].
Speaker 1: Pulaski County.  Now, was there a Pulaski school for the white children?  Did they have a county school, the school with the county's name?  Do you remember that?
Speaker 2: I'm sure there was a Pulaski county school, but I, and they may very well had gone to College Station Elementary, but I don't remember seeing white kids at all in that school--
Speaker 1: That's--
Speaker 2: --when I was going to school.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: They must have gone someplace else--
Speaker 1: And you--
Speaker 2: --'cause schools were certainly segregated then.
Speaker 1: So, you said that David Lyons [David L. Lyons, Sr.] was the teacher who influenced you, you most.  He was a disciplinarian.  And tell us some more about elementary, that you might remember about growing up in College Station, and the elementary school, some of your experiences.  What classes, you know, how, how the class size, what the school looked like, just any memories that you might have of the elementary school?
Speaker 2: I--what I remember about the school is that the cafeteria was in a separate little building.  It was like a one long little, what they call a shotgun-looking house.  So, the, the, the cafeteria was in a separate building altogether.  And I remember that the schools were heated with coal.  It was the first time I'd seen actual coal.  And I remember also that we were in separate buildings.  We didn't have much playground equipment.  I think we had a swing and a merry-go-round, and that was really about it.  That's, that's about all we had.  I remember the principal of the school.  His name was Mr. Walker [ph.] and my mother [Mary Jackson] used to call him Professor Walker.  He and his family lived sort of across the street from the school.  And they also owned--they sold ice cream.  So, we would go to their--out of their home.  They had this little room that you could walk up to the window and purchase ice cream out of that window.
Speaker 1: And was this homemade ice cream or was this ice cream out of the stores that you, those bought from store (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I think it was ice cream out of the stores.  I don't think they actually made the ice cream.
Speaker 1: Made the ice cream--
Speaker 2: I think they just bought it and, and sold it.
Speaker 1: That's a little different for the principal to, to sell ice cream out of his home.
Speaker 2: And he did, he did.  I remember that very well.  I think and, and also when I was in grade school, history was my favorite subject.  I don't know, I guess I've always, was always an inquisitive child, and my basic nature is to understand why, 'cause I've always felt that if I knew why, that I'd get the rest of the picture.  I remember once when I was in one of my history classes, I was reciting something by Henry Lee [Henry Lee III].  And all of the other kids were reciting it, and it was so boring, and I put so much life into it.  And I remember the teacher telling me--she said, "Now, you all see how Linda [HistoryMaker Linda Torrence] said that, don't you know that, that he was passionate about what he was talking about?  That's what he sounded like," or something like that.  But, anyway, I just loved history and always made exceptional grades in history.  I was never in trouble when I was in school.  I was always a good kid, loved school, absolutely loved school.  And I can recall one of my best friends used to played hooky all the time.
Speaker 1: In elementary?
Speaker 2: In grade school.
Speaker 1: Yeah?
Speaker 2: Yeah, she played hooky a lot, and I was too chicken to play hooky.  I was afraid that I might get caught, but not only that, I just loved school.  I don't recall ever playing hooky and missing a day from school unless I was sick.
Story_ID: 485544
Speaker 1: Do you remember who--a description of Professor Walker [ph.], what he looked like?
Speaker 2: He was a tall, dark-skinned man, and I may be wrong, but it seems to me he had a gold tooth--
Speaker 1: Interesting--
Speaker 2: --a, a gold on, a piece of gold on one of his teeth, and I could be wrong, but it seems to me he did.  But he was a, he was a handsome man and he was tall.  I don't remember what his wife looks like--looked like, rather--but he was, because he was a principal, he was a, you know, he was very influential in terms of my remembering who he was.  And he was a very, he was, he was a good man and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And he was the elementary school [College Station Elementary School, College Station, Arkansas]--
Speaker 2: --obviously cared about children, um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Now, the reason I asked that was because in a lot of schools, most of the times, the principal was usually a light complexion--
Speaker 2: Oh, no--
Speaker 1: --because those were the ones who mainly got educations during those days.
Speaker 2: --not this man.  This man was dark-skinned.  In fact, most of my teachers were not fair-skinned people.  Maybe one teacher that I can recall who was a Mrs. Gates [ph.] was a fair-skinned person, but the others were not.
Speaker 1: Do you know if any of your teachers or the principal were from College Station [Arkansas]--
Speaker 2: None of them were--
Speaker 1: --or if they were from Little Rock [Arkansas] or--
Speaker 2: --except for the, except for the principal, none of the others lived there in College Station.  They lived in Little Rock.
Speaker 1: Oh, and they would commute to College Station to teach?
Speaker 2: Um-hm, um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.  That's, that's, that's very interesting.  You know, that was a habit of calling principals and even some teachers, professor, but mainly, the principal.  I remember my mother's, the principal of our school was called professor, and it was like, if a black person got a degree, they came back or even worked at the school.  He had--be--you know, he had earned that title of, of professor.  Now, in junior high, what was the name of the middle school or the junior high school?
Speaker 2: It was a junior high and high, all one school, and it was, it was called Wrightsville, W-R-I-G-H-T-S-V-I-L-L-E, Wrightsville High School, and it was located in Wrightsville, Arkansas.
Speaker 1: So, this way, you went to, to school outside of College Station then?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Now, how did you get to there?
Speaker 2: Oh, we had a bus.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: They bused us there.
Speaker 1: And this was another black school--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --predominantly all black?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: All right.  Now, your teacher there was, you said, Lorraine Smith [Lorraine D. Smith]?
Speaker 2: Actually, Lorraine was my elementary school teacher.
Speaker 1: All right.  And she is--
Speaker 2: She is now mayor of Wrightsville--
Speaker 1: That's interesting.
Speaker 2: --even to this day.
Speaker 1: About how old is she now?
Speaker 2: You know, that's a great question (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Is she in her eighties or nineties?
Speaker 2: --because Lorraine, Lorraine has to be seventy, seventy, seventy-five.  She was in, profiled in some magazine recently and I can't recall the name of the magazine.  But, oh, I know what it is, and I don't know if I have it with me.  There's a magazine that has who's who of mayors and who's who of black mayors.  She's in that publication that just came out late year,last year.
Story_ID: 485545
Speaker 1: You went to Wrightsville High School [Wrightsville, Arkansas] and things changed.  Instead of walking to school, now we're, you're riding the bus.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: So, how was that experience?
Speaker 2: It was fun.  We loved riding the bus.  It's a, probably our only opportunity to get to ride on a frequent basis because we didn't have a car.  And I could remember, we had to go up this, this, this huge--for me, at the time, it was a huge hill that the bus had to climb.  And our driver was an old man, and I remember one day the bus flipped over into the ditch, and so we had an accident.  And nobody was killed, but several kids were injured.  I wasn't really injured.  I faked an injury so I, I could get out of school, going to school that day, but and what, I just, I just, I just didn't want to go.  I wanted to go to, just so I have some time to play, but it was, it was an experience and I enjoyed it, riding the bus, it was great.
Speaker 1: So, when you all, okay, you have to stand outside, wait 'til the bus comes on rainy days, cold days.  Even though you didn't have snow in Arkansas, did y'all have ice days sometimes?
Speaker 2: And then, periodically, we would have snow.
Speaker 1: Oh, really?
Speaker 2: It didn't last very long, but sure, it, we got snow sometimes, not very often and, and even when it did, it didn't, you know, it melted very quickly.
Speaker 1: So, how was waiting at the stop for the bus--
Speaker 2: Fun, fun.  We, we were kids and we passed the time away doing all kinds of crazy things that kids would normally do.  It was just fun.  School for me was fun (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) See nowadays the children are having a lot of pressure as they wait for the stops.  They, at the bus stops, parents have to stand and wait with them until the bus comes but--
Speaker 2: No, we had none of that.  I don't recall seeing an, seeing a single adult waiting with us to catch the bus.  And believe it or not, there were very little fighting on the bus at the time.  Kids just didn't fight like that, like they do today.  And, you know, if the driver said, "Well, I'm going to tell, I'm going to report this to the teacher," you knew that if it was reported that once you got home, you were in deep trouble because parents really, really paid attention to what their kids did.
Story_ID: 485546
Speaker 1: Now, what were some of the subjects that you had in high school [Wrightsville High School, Wrightsville, Arkansas], if you can remember just a few of them.  And did you change classes and, if so, just how was high school?
Speaker 2: High school was fun.  We just had the regular classes.  I don't recall anything any different, you know, basic classes--English, history, math.  And I should tell you, and I forgot to tell you, I played basketball when I was in high school.  My mother [Mary Jackson] played basketball and it is truly amazing.  I, I don't think I played basketball because I knew she did.  I, I played briefly, but for the most part, I was a cheerleader.  I didn't play for very long and--
Speaker 1: What position did you play?  Do you remember what position you played?
Speaker 2: I think I was a forward.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I was real skinny as when I was in high school.  And I was very--I used to be embarrassed about my legs because my legs were so skinny.  You know, at that time, you wanted to have pretty legs when you were a girl, but my legs were so skinny.  My knees were bony.  But I played basketball for a while and after I start, stopped playing basketball, I was a cheerleader and that was a lot of fun.  So, we got a chance to travel with the boys when the boys would go to their games and as a cheerleader, we would travel with them to other schools.
Speaker 1: So, how were tryouts for a cheerleader?  Did you have a lot of work to prepare to--
Speaker 2: Not really.
Speaker 1: Did you, did you have to audition for cheerleading or did you--
Speaker 2: We tried out for them--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --and I was always very, very outgoing.  I'm, I'm a typical Sagittarian [Sagittarius], very outgoing, loved to be involved.  I used to sing in the high, high school choir.
Speaker 1: What did you sing?  What, what--
Speaker 2: Soprano.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And was just outgoing, and so as a cheerleader, they look for people that are outgoing.  And so that's why I was chosen.  And I could dance real well, so I had the moves down pat.  I--the moves were not a problem for me (laughter).
Speaker 1: So, what, what schools did you visit when you all were traveling with the team?
Speaker 2: I don't remember those schools.
Speaker 1: But it was in the school district for--
Speaker 2: It was in the school district--
Speaker 1: --the high school district for Wrightsville [Arkansas]?
Speaker 2: --which was fairly large, um-hm.
Speaker 1: So, but you still had a lot of late nights away, did you not, when you would go for the games, or was it Friday nights when most of the games--
Speaker 2: Most of them, yes, were Friday nights, yes, they, they were, but it was, it wasn't a problem for us.  Well, it was fun, it was our opportunity to go somewhere different because we didn't have very, very many opportunities to go to, to visit other schools.  I mean, we didn't do many, as kids do today, field trips.  We just never did many field trips, so that was an opportunity for us to go and see what other schools were like.
Speaker 1: Are any of the, the--well, young men who played on the football team, did any of those go on to pursue careers and, you know, outside of high school (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Not that I, I don't know, I don't think so.
Speaker 1: They, they didn't--
Speaker 2: Not that I know of at least anyway.
Speaker 1: Okay, none of them that's, that actually--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --that actually stand out.  I wanted to ask, did you, did you participate in, well, did you do any other activities in, in, in high school?
Speaker 2: No, that, that was (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Not that you weren't busy enough.
Speaker 2: (Laughter)  No, that was pretty much all I did.  Those were my activities when I was in high school (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay. Now at--
Story_ID: 485547
Speaker 1: At that time, were you thinking about what it was that you wanted to pursue as a career?
Speaker 2: I'm trying to remember when I was in high school [Wrightsville High School, Wrightsville, Arkansas], I don't recall--I was always ambitious.  I always had dreams, but I don't recall specifically at the time that I wanted to be, what I wanted to be in particular, but I knew that I wanted to be somebody and I wanted to do something that was outstanding, that I do know.  But I didn't have anything at the time in mind that I can think of.  I may have probably wanted to be a business owner, but one thing I did know--whatever it was going to take to get me out of poverty, that's what I wanted to do.  I wanted to get out of College Station [Arkansas] because I knew that other people lived different lives than the people that I grew up with.  And I knew that I didn't want my destiny to be a continuous, living in continuous poverty.  I didn't want that.  So, whatever it was going to take for me to get out of school and be successful, that's what I wanted to do.
Speaker 1: You sound like Bill Cosby in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] when he was looking at the side the black people lived on, and the side the white people lived on.  He knew that he wanted to be on the other side (laughter).  He didn't want to continue.
Speaker 2: Absolutely--makes you work a lot harder.
Speaker 1: (Laughter)  So, did you still have your love for history?  Was your love for history still alive in, in high school--
Speaker 2: Oh, yes--
Speaker 1: --like it was in the earlier, in the earlier phase?
Speaker 2: --very much so.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Did you always know that you would want to go to college?
Speaker 2: Oh, yes, definitely.  I, I always knew that I wanted to go to college because I always knew that education was so important if I was going to get myself out of the, that poverty-stricken community that I grew up in.  But, unfortunately, I had my first child [Tasha Torrence] the same year that I graduated from high school.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And so, in terms of my going off to college, it was not the, the traditional way because I had a child.  Once I graduated from high school, I had a child.  I was pregnant while in high school.  I graduated in May, and my baby was born in October.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So, as I entered school, I had to take care of a child, I had to work, and go to college [Arkansas Baptist College, Little Rock, Arkansas] at the same time.
Speaker 1: At the same time.
Story_ID: 485548
Speaker 1: Now, was this one of the football players that, that was the father of the child [Torrence's oldest daughter, Tasha Torrence] (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, no, no, unh-uh.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So, it wasn't cheerleading, huh, that--
Speaker 2: No, no (laughter)--
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: --no, not at all.  In fact, we didn't even have a football team.  We just had a basketball team.
Speaker 1: So, you were cheerleading for the basketball team?
Speaker 2: Um-hm, for the basketball team.
Speaker 1: Now, that's a little different.
Speaker 2: For the, them, boys basketball team.
Speaker 1: Right, for the boys basketball team.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Now, that's a little difference 'cause most of the times, the cheerleaders with, with the football players.
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, but we didn't have a football team.
Speaker 1: So, it was basketball?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: All right.  So--
Speaker 2: You know, in order to have a football team, you had to have a, you had to have a stadium.  You have to have land and--
Speaker 1: And Wrightsville [Wrightsville High School, Wrightsville, Arkansas] didn't have that?
Speaker 2: Unh-uh.
Speaker 1: So, did you have a baseball diamond?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: So, you had the gym?
Speaker 2: Just the gym, um-hm.
Speaker 1: Now, that's a little, that's a little difference.  So, was the school large or was it medium or--
Speaker 2: It was a medium-size school.
Speaker 1: And like, do you remember how many was in your graduating class from high school approximately?
Speaker 2: I'm going to say probably, I'm going to say, maybe eighty kids.
Speaker 1: Okay.  That's fairly, that's, that's fairly large class.
Story_ID: 485549
Speaker 1: So, you became a mother.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: You graduated--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --you became a mother, and then you still decided that you were going to go to college.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Like Malcolm [Malcolm X] would say, "By any means necessary."
Speaker 2: "By any means necessary."
Speaker 1: All right.  So, did you leave home to go to college, or was college in the same area where you grew up?
Speaker 2: Well, I wanted so badly--after my baby [Torrence's oldest daughter, Tasha Torrence] was born, my sister [Alice Blanton (ph.)], one of my sisters, the one that I'm next to in age, moved to Berkeley, California.  And at the time, [HistoryMaker] Angela Davis was very active on the campus [of the University of California, Berkeley] in Berkeley and in California.  I wanted so badly to go to California and go to school.  My sister said, "Well, Linda [HistoryMaker Linda Torrence], if you come to California, you can go to school here, and you could probably get a part-time job while in college to pay for your college at the telephone company that I work for."  And I asked my mother [Mary Jackson] if she would keep my baby so that I could go to school.  She refused to do it.  She would not keep her so that I could go to California to go to college and get a job and go to college.  And, again, I wanted to go out there because Angela Davis was an activist, and that was my spirit at the, at the time.  And I wanted to be involved on that college campus, but my mother wouldn't let me go.  So, as it turned out, I had to stay in Little Rock [Arkansas] to go to school.  And I never, I never went to Berkeley.
Speaker 1: And so, what school did you enter for college?
Speaker 2: I went to the Arkansas Baptist College [Little Rock, Arkansas].  And my entire college career, with exception of when I, either when I took a, the, a course at the University of Arkansas [University of Arkansas at Little Rock, Little Rock, Arkansas], I went at night because I had this child that I had to take care of.  And at the time, I was living with my mother, so it made sense for me to stay with her, so that I'd have somebody to keep the baby while I worked during the day, and I went to school at night.  And so, I recall, I mean, it take, it took me eight years to graduate, but I would work all day and then go to school at night.  And, that's how I was able to get through, through school.
Speaker 1: So, how did, now, back in, what was it, '62 [1962], '63 [1963], when you graduated from, from high school [Wrightsville High School, Wrightsville, Arkansas] (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Um-hm, from high school.
Speaker 1: To be an expectant mother and to graduate from high school, did you still attend classes or did you take, did you have to take other classes?
Speaker 2: No, I still attended classes because when I graduated, I wasn't showing very much, so you couldn't tell that I was pregnant.  You just, you just couldn't.  And so, again, my baby wasn't born until October.
Speaker 1: Right, okay.
Speaker 2: So, I, I attended regular classes just like all of the other kids did.
Speaker 1: So, nobody knew hardly that you were expecting?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: The teachers didn't know.  The--
Speaker 2: I don't think they knew.
Speaker 1: They didn't know, okay, 'cause it was a stigma attached to young ladies at that time.  And even now, a lot of white families sent their daughters away when they were expecting before, so a lot of them had abortions.  And even some black families, some well-to-do black families did the same thing.  They sent them away to have abortions and didn't let them return, you know, to the town, or they would return, but the child didn't.  And some cases, the child, the, you know, the chil- the child had the baby and another relative raised the child, but you stayed and you kept the baby and you worked--
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.
Speaker 1: --and, and went to school.
Speaker 2: Absolutely.
Speaker 1: So, this was a little different.  This was a different experience to--
Speaker 2: Well, I was determined to, to go to school.  And once my first, once my daughter was born, a year later, I had another child.  I had a son [Kirk Torrence] and so now, I am, I, I have two kids.  And I'm still working.  I'm still going to school.  And then, five years later--I think there's a difference of five years between my son and my youngest daughter [Elana Torrence]--I had another child.  I can remember when my youngest child was probably two years old, one or two years old, which means that I had three kids.  I had a full time job that I worked every day.  I went to school, Arkansas Baptist, every single night of the week, five nights a week.  And on the weekends, I had a part-time job.
Story_ID: 485550
Speaker 1: All right.  So, what did you do?  What, what work did you do during the day (laughter) in order to support the family, and also to support yourself during college [Arkansas Baptist College, Little Rock, Arkansas] because you did pay tuition, right?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: So--
Speaker 2: It wasn't a lot, but I did.  I took as many classes as I could.
Speaker 1: So, what did you during the day?  What occupation--
Speaker 2: I worked at a bank.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I worked at First National Bank in Little Rock [Arkansas].
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what did you do with--at the bank?
Speaker 2: And before that, I don't, I just had some odds and ends jobs before I started working at the bank.  I--what was your question again?
Speaker 1: Okay.  You said that you worked at the bank.  What was your position at the bank?
Speaker 2: Teller.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: In fact, I was the first black teller in any bank in Little Rock, Arkansas.
Speaker 1: During that time, you were probably one of the first black tellers in, in just about any city hardly, in any state in the United States 'cause there just weren't very many black tellers--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --at that particular time.
Speaker 2: Well, I was there for about five years and I was never promoted.  I stayed in that, and people, they promoted white tellers beyond me and, but they never promoted me.  In fact, I remember my, one of my supervisors who was a white female.  Somebody had written a book about how to work with black folk.  I, I couldn't--she literally had that book in her hand on how to supervise, or how to manage black folk or something like that.  I saw her with that book.  And, finally, one day, there was this black attorney that would come into the bank all the time.  And he said, "Linda [HistoryMaker Linda Torrence], they haven't promoted you yet?"  And I said, "No."  And he said, "Well, it's time for you to file a suit against this bank, isn't it?"  I said, "Well, I don't know."  So, he kept, he kept asking me.  So, finally, I said, you know what, I've had it.  I'm going to file a lawsuit against this bank.  And I did.  And my, my attorney was a Harvard graduate.  He graduated from Harvard Law School [Cambridge, Massachusetts].  And we ended up filing the largest lawsuit against any bank in the Southeast.  And, at that time, and this was--let me see, I want to say '67 [1967], I may be wrong.
Speaker 1: That was--you, you said you graduated by '62 [1962], '60-, in 1962?
Speaker 2: No, that's high school [Wrightsville High School, Wrightsville, Arkansas].
Speaker 1: High school?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: So, like five years later.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah, that was about '67 [1967].
Speaker 2: It--we filed a lawsuit for $1.5 million.  I need to calculate what $1.5 million trans-, what, what that is today, but that's what that lawsuit was.  It was a class action lawsuit and we were in litigation for seven years.  And there was a white woman that had worked at that bank for forty-two years--I think it was forty-two years.  No, I may be--no, I take that back.  I don't know, she had been in that bank for a long time, and she had worked herself up to a manager position or somewhere near the mid-management level, let me say.  And once we, once that lawsuit was concluded, I think she got forty-two thousand dollars.  And because it was a class action lawsuit, they, the dollars were dispersed among the affected classes which were women and minorities because banks years and years ago were--women worked in, all over the bank, but they didn't have management positions.  They wouldn't promote women to management positions.  So, as a result of that, I think she got about forty-two thousand dollars, and I got all of somewhere between five and seven or something like that.  But and then--
Speaker 1: Wait a minute. You filed, you filed $1.5 million lawsuit, but the settlement was seven thousand [dollars]--
Speaker 2: For me--
Speaker 1: --five thousand [dollars]?
Speaker 2: --but, you know, when you file a law school--lawsuit of any kind like that, the attorneys get most of the money.  But it wasn't the money.  The money was not the important thing.  It was the fact that this large institution, this bank had discriminated against women and minorities for so many years, and there I was, a, a teller and, in fact--well, I won't go into all details, but that was the essence of that.
Story_ID: 485551
Speaker 1: All right, so he was a black attorney out of Little Rock [Arkansas]?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: And he was Harvard-trained [Harvard Law School, Cambridge, Massachusetts]?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: But he had gone to Little Rock to, to practice?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Was he a civil rights attorney at that particular time?
Speaker 2: Not--no, I don't think he labeled himself as a civil rights attorney.
Speaker 1: And you're in litigation for seven years?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: So, on top (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) In fact--
Speaker 1: Um-hm?
Speaker 2: --in fact, I'd even moved away from Little Rock once the lawsuit was settled.  I wasn't even living there anymore.
Speaker 1: So, you were raising a family.  You still worked at the bank [First National Bank] during the time that you were filing the suit, and still going to school [Arkansas Baptist College, Little Rock, Arkansas], so you had court case, court appearances, right?
Speaker 2: No, I never went to court.
Speaker 1: You didn't have to go to court?
Speaker 2: Unh-uh, unh-uh.  They settled out of court.
Speaker 1: So--
Speaker 2: It was a settlement.
Speaker 1: --what, this had to have been a lot of pressure on you at that particular time?
Speaker 2: Not really because part of it is I, I left the bank shortly thereafter.  I didn't, I didn't work there much longer once the lawsuit was filed.
Speaker 1: And then, everybody who worked there was white except for you?
Speaker 2: Well, they had a guy who, it seems to me they had--I remember two African American men.  One worked in the vault, and I think the other one must have done some sort of maintenance work.  Those are the two I can remember.
Speaker 1: And then, you were the teller.
Speaker 2: And there was, there was another, there was an African American lady there and she did, she was like the housekeeper, she did housekeeping essentially.
Speaker 1: So, when you filed, did, you filed in Little Rock?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: And you worked in Little Rock?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: So, how did the town take this?  How did the--
Speaker 2: I, I--
Speaker 1: --people you worked with, family, friends, you know, and just acquaintances?
Speaker 2: Well, for years, I mean, for, I would say for a few years, you know, was, except for the initial announcement that the lawsuit has, had been filed, there was not much else in the news about it.  So, there, there was very little reaction, and I left shortly thereafter.  I think I left Little Rock in '71 [1971] or '72 [1972].
Story_ID: 485552
Speaker 1: Okay.  And then, what did you do?  When you left Little Rock [Arkansas], where did you go and, you know, what did you do?  Did you take the children with you or did you (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, very much so, yeah, I, I left.  I left Little Rock because I, first of all, I knew that I didn't work at the bank [First National Bank] any longer.  And the part-time job that I did was just a minimum--I, I may have made twenty-five dollars for the weekend, not very much money at all.  I managed a credit union.  It was the first, I was the first manager of that College Station Community Credit Union [College Station, Arkansas].  And I think that credit union now has been in existence probably about thirty-eight years now.  It, it still exists, but I was its first manager.  And as a result of that, I was able to get a lot of experience and manage.  I had to balance the book just like any other finance manager would.  But, I, I quit that job, and I left and moved to, to Michigan.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, when you left Little Rock, you went back to College Station [Arkansas] to manage the College Station--
Speaker 2: No, I, no, I was, no, I, I drove to College Station every weekend to do that job.  I, I would go there, like two days a week and then on weekends.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But I, I was living in Little Rock.  I subsequently moved to Little Rock, but I would travel back to College Station--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --to, to work that part-time job as a credit union manager.
Speaker 1: Now, tell us something about the, the credit union, the College Station United Credit Union [sic.].  Just give us a little information about it.
Speaker 2: Well, just real quickly.  Because College Station was such a poor community, people couldn't go to a traditional bank and get a bank loan because they didn't make much money.  And banks just simply would not loan money to poor people who had nothing.  They had no, they had nothing.  So, this group of people in the community decided that they would try and form a credit union, and they did.  They, somehow or another, they got twenty-five dollars together, bought a, got a, applied for a federal charter and we became a federally, a, a federal credit union.  And some members of the community bought shares in the credit union.  They were five dollars a share and it started from there.  And I can recall when I made my first loan as the officer of the credit union, made it to a white female who wanted to, some money to repair her house.  I think she wanted to repair her roof.  Somebody said it was thirty-five dollars that we loaned her, but I want to say it was one hundred twenty-five dollars of that she borrowed.  And really, it was the first time that many people in that community had a legitimate vehicle that they could go to, to borrow whether it was twenty-five dollars to get a set of tires, or whether it was fifty dollars to, to, to pay a bill or whatever.  It, the loans were very, very small loans at the time, but that's what that credit union had.  Now, I think it's probably over, it has assets over $3 million now, still in this little impoverished, impoverished community because it's still a very poor community.  I think the average house value in College Station today is probably not more than forty thousand [dollars].
Speaker 1: Now, in order to borrow from the credit union, did you not have to be a member of the credit union?
Speaker 2: You did.
Speaker 1: So, you had all members, so, so you say you had more than black members of this credit union?
Speaker 2: Oh, yes.
Speaker 1: So, it was for the town of College Station?
Speaker 2: It was for the entire community of College Station.
Speaker 1: But it was ran by blacks?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Started by blacks, ran by blacks--
Speaker 2: Um-hm, um-hm.
Speaker 1: --but it was open and others in the community did join.
Speaker 2: Sure--
Speaker 1: Now, that's--
Speaker 2: --absolutely.  And I have a newspaper article somewhere with my picture and this lady's picture and, hopefully, I can find that. I'd love to be able to find (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Of the first person who made the loan you had (laughter).
Speaker 2: It was history making.
Story_ID: 485553
Speaker 1: That most certainly is a historical moment that--so after you managed the credit union [College Station Community Credit Union, College Station, Arkansas] and you quit that job and you, where'd you go next?
Speaker 2: We moved to Flint, we moved to Flint, Michigan, and lived there for a while.
Speaker 1: So, we're around what, 1973, '74 [1974]?
Speaker 2: Um-hm, somewhere there about.
Speaker 1: So, why Flint?
Speaker 2: Well, at the time, you know, I was still a very young woman.  I, I should, I need to back up.  I married my kids' father and he, he passed away.  And when he passed away, I started dating someone else, and this person got a job in Michigan, so I followed him to Michigan.  That's how I ended up in, my kids and I ended up in Michigan.  And in Michigan, I managed a newspaper there, a black newspaper.  And I also worked for the Urban League [Urban League of Flint, Flint, Michigan] for a while.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, you managed, well, do you remember the name of the black paper?
Speaker 2: The Flint Spokesman.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well, so tell us--
Speaker 2: I need to back up and tell you that, for your records, the name, Torrence, came from my, my married name and, of course, my, because I married, married again,  But Torrence was my fath- was my kids' father, so that's how I came about the name, Torrence.  And so, I'm now married to Phillips [Joseph Phillips].
Speaker 1: Phillips, okay, all right.
Speaker 2: I didn't get that.  I, I, when we were talking about my having the children, I failed to tell you that at some point in time, in between, I did get married.  That's, that's important for you to know.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION).
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So, you moved to Flint, Michigan, and you managed the Flint--the paper again was--
Speaker 2: Flint Spokesman, black newspaper.
Speaker 1: And what all did that entail?  What type of newspaper was this?  Was it a local (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It was just a news--yeah, it was a local newspaper that, typically, your typical black newspaper that was geared toward the black community.  And I just managed the daily affairs of the newspaper basically.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, how did you get this job?  I mean, you just--just tell us what the process was like 'cause you relocate to a new area and then, you become a manager of, of a newspaper.  You were in the bank, and now you moved to newspaper management, so how did, you ended up, how did you end up getting this job?
Speaker 2: You know, I, I don't remem- remember specifically, but I do know is because I must have known somebody, as it is true for most jobs that you had, you know somebody.  And this older gentleman told me that somebody had talked to him about me, and he was looking for somebody to manage the paper for him.  He called it the paper because he wanted to be able to go out and sell advertising and now that, in and of itself, was a full time job.  So, to manage the paper and to go out and sell ads was, you know, that's a, that's, that's, that's an unsurmountable task for one person.  So, that's how I ended up with that job.
Speaker 1: Well, there were some qualifications that you had that really impressed him, so was it your outgoingness, was your, your managerial skills that you picked up from the bank?  Was it--
Speaker 2: I think it was the management skills that I had demonstrated by managing the credit union basically.
Story_ID: 485554
Speaker 1: You worked for the newspaper, The Flint Spokesman also, and you also worked for the Urban League [Urban League of Flint, Flint, Michigan].  And what did you do for the Urban League?  You said you worked with that?
Speaker 2: It seems to me I had some sort of administrative position.  It wasn't any position of any real significance.  I just don't remember what it was now, but it was very, very (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Urban League?
Speaker 2: --yes, very.
Speaker 1: Time with the paper?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Now, do you remember what the circulation was for the paper?
Speaker 2: I don't.  It was--I know that it was small.
Speaker 1: It was small circulation?
Speaker 2: Um-hm, um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And so, had you gotten your degree, had you finished your degree, and what was that in when you were going to the (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Business.
Speaker 1: --to the Baptist college [Arkansas Baptist College, Little Rock, Arkansas]?
Speaker 2: Business.
Speaker 1: All right.  So, did you finish that in Flint [Michigan] or did you--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, you took what, so what school did you get--
Speaker 2: I just did a correspondent course.  They just told me that--they coupled it with some work experience that I had, and it was just lacking one other course, and that was it.  And, amazingly, although I didn't really finalize it until I went to Rochester, New York, but, and that's when it was final.  It, it took me a long time, seemingly forever.
Speaker 1: So, all total, what did you say it was--about seven years, five years, seven?
Speaker 2: It took me about eight years.
Speaker 1: Eight years, okay, but you still--
Speaker 2: I hung in there.
Speaker 1: Until you, 'til you, 'til you got it.
Story_ID: 485555
Speaker 1: And then, when I, when I left Michigan--are you ready--
Speaker 2: Um-hm, so, when you (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) When I left Michigan, I moved to Rochester, New York.  And, again, with the, the man that I was engaged to, or going to be engaged to at the time.  And when I, when we moved to Rochester, I started working for the Urban League [Urban League of Rochester, Rochester, New York] full time.  And when I worked for the Urban League in Rochester, I was, I taught adult education.  And after I worked for the Urban League for a while, I had this desire to work in television because before I left Little Rock [Arkansas], I was offered a job by the manager of the ABC television station.  He literally offered me a job to host the Sunday afternoon public affairs show, and to head that department, the public affairs department.  I couldn't take it because we were just in the process of leaving Little Rock.  We had arranged for the moving van to come, and we were packed up, and I could not go.  I could not take the job, rather, but it was not something that I was competing with other folk for.  It was just a job that happened to fall in my lap because I, I used to assist this man when he would come into the bank [First National Bank].  He would come to me all the time as his teller and then, finally, one day, I, yeah, I said to him, I said, "You know, I think I would like to work in television."  And he said, "You know, I was going to ask you if you wanted to work in television, but you seem as if you were so happy here."  I said, "I, I like what I'm doing, but I think I want to work in TV."  So, when he made me the offer, I couldn't take it.  So, I, I left Little Rock and, ultimately, ended up in Rochester, still had a strong desire to work in television.  So, while I was working at the Urban League in Rochester, the receptionist's boyfriend was from that area.  He had lived there for a long time.  And I said to her one day, I said, "You know, why don't you see if he knows someone in television because I really want to work in television."  She asked him.  Ironically, the CBS television station there had an opening for someone in public affairs.  And I asked him, I said, "Would you be, would you be kind enough, would you find out who I can get an interview with?  Would you mind making a contact for me?"  He did.  He made the contact.  I went in for the interview.  I think I interviewed twice and, ultimately got the job.  And so, I was the public affairs director for WHEC-TV in Rochester, New York.  So, I left the Urban League to do that.
Speaker 2: Now, we got to go on.  We've, we've got to talk about this (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: The desire was initiated before you left Arkansas?
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: Now, there had to be something that was either going on in your life, or your personality, or some facet of your personality, or some training, or something that, that I might have missed that actually led you into that, you know, that area or that field to get into television.  Was it the looks?  Was it the personality?  Was it a deep desire just--I'm, I'm trying to find out what it is that actually caused you to get into the television film field (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Well, I think--
Speaker 2: --and for someone to look at you and, and say, you know, like you should be interested in television.
Speaker 1: I think it's probably a combination of a couple of things.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Story_ID: 485556
Speaker 1: When I was in Little Rock [Arkansas], I was somewhat involved in politics.  I, at one time, was the first African American woman to represent the State of Arkansas, if--well, I shouldn't say at one time, I was the first African American woman to represent the State of Arkansas in the 1972 Democratic Convention [1972 Democratic National Convention, Miami, Florida].
Speaker 2: All right, so how did that come about?
Speaker 1: I was very actively involved in, in--first of all, I was very active in the young Democrats club.  And at the time that I got involved, I was the only African American person that was an officer of the young Democrats club.  I was the secretary for the young Democrats club.
Speaker 2: Now, was this attached to the school [Arkansas Baptist College, Little Rock, Arkansas], or was this just in the city (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Oh, no, this was, no, this was, this was a political organization of young people involved in the political process.  And the other people were, were not people of color, so I was very active with them.  I also was active in my, in my community, in terms of trying to work with the community to bring about change.  For example, I told you that there was a lot of violence in College Station [Arkansas].  I remember a group of people in College Station got together and they called the sheriff down to talk about all of the violence and the killings.  And as a result of that then, you know, my name was in the newspaper, like along with some other folk that were involved.  And that was really the beginning of my political process.  And as I grew older and left College Station and moved to Little Rock, I was still politically active.  And, in fact, at one time, believe it or not, I was very seriously thinking about running for the state legislature.  And my attorney told me at the time, the same guy that represented me in the lawsuit, that he said, "Linda [HistoryMaker Linda Torrence], you may not be as effective as a single woman," because at the time, I was single.  And, but I did go on to the '72 [1972] Democratic Convention representing the State of Arkansas, and had a tremendous experience.  It was in Miami, Florida that year.  And that was also the first year that the Democratic Party decided that it would change its rules to include people under thirty, blacks, and people, and women, so I fit all three categories.  I was under thirty, I was African American, and I happened to be a female.  And so, that's exactly what they were looking for in terms of getting more into the democratic process, as far as the, the convention was concerned.  So, I went to the convention representing the State of Arkansas.
Speaker 2: So--
Speaker 1: And I'm sure the man at the television station, having known me from working in the bank [First National Bank], having been aware, especially being in the media, that I was involved in politics.  I'm sure, probably from his perspective, I would have been a good candidate that they could take a chance on at this television station.  So, I, I would guess that, that was part of what fueled his desire, or his interest in me, in terms of working in that, in that television station.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And, oh, I, I guess the other part of it, I've always had a very outgoing personality, always been a people person all of my life, love people, love working, interacting with people.  So, I'm sure he saw that.  And, of course, when you're, when you're hosting a television show, you want somebody that has, that had personality, and I think that's what I had.  And so, I would imagine that he was looking at those things.
Speaker 2: And then, you were groomed immaculately also, right?  You said your [maternal] grandmother [Mattie Rembert Williamson] always had your hair done.
Speaker 1: Oh, yeah.
Speaker 2: You always kept your hair in place and, you know, done--
Speaker 1: Oh, yeah.
Speaker 2: --really nice and then you, you actually looked the part.  I want to ask, did the, did your involvement in the young Democratic club help to bring about the changes in the rules that the Democratic National Convention had, as regard to blacks, women, and people under thirty?
Speaker 1: You know, I really can't say that.  I think that was just something that the Democratic Party overall was looking at.  And I'm sure there were probably similar clubs like the one that we formed in Arkansas and other states.  And that is not to say that they didn't have an impact, but I can't say that our particular group had an impact.  We were probably a part, a small part of a, of a, an entire process.
Story_ID: 485557
Speaker 1: Well, what made you become interested in this young Democrats club?  I know it was your interest in, in politics, but what made you gravitate toward, toward politics?  Was it something that--well, I know you, we talked off tape about the sit-ins in the Central High School in Little Rock [Arkansas].  And you were about what grade then, you were, there was in, was that the '60s [1960s], early, late--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --okay.
Speaker 2: Early '60s [1960s], late '50s [1950s] during the sit-ins.  I just saw politics as a way to change things.  And I just felt that the only way things were going to change is that people had to be involved.  And I wanted to, I wanted to help to change things.  And, again, coming from my humble beginnings in College Station [Arkansas], a poor little girl with very little.  And then, I saw people that were being beaten by police, whether it was in Alabama or other places, people that couldn't go to the lunch counters and eat, just all kinds of things, school segregation.  And I just thought that I needed to be a part of that process to make things better, not just for me, but for my children and for other folk.  And I was just interested in the process.
Speaker 1: And do you think your visit, your proposed visit, or almost stay in Berkeley, California, where [HistoryMaker] Angela Davis was so active (laughter) around the, the '60s [1960s], do you think that there might have had a bearing on it, on it, too?
Speaker 2: I'm sure it had something to do with it, absolutely.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, let's go back and revisit the late '50s [1950s], early '60s [1960s], and the environment in Arkansas when you were growing up and the students integrating the schools.  Tell us about what was going on in your head and, you know, and how you felt about what was in the media.
Speaker 2: Well, you know, in, in the early '50s [1950s], I would say, like '55 [1955], I was ten.  I was just hearing all of these things on the radio that, that were, was going on.  And I could remember the sit-in actually occurred at this Woolworths [F.W. Woolworth Company] in downtown Little Rock.  There were a group of young people at--Woolworths was a pharmacy, but inside of that pharmacy, you know, they had a fountain with, where you could go and buy coffee or ice cream, and you sat around the counter.  Well, they wouldn't let these young people sit at the counter at Woolworths.  And I, I remember hearing this on the radio.  I also remember hearing on the radio about the dogs that were being trained, turned on the people in, in Alabama during the time of the, the busing situation.  And, you know, you just know, you know, even as a young person, you know that there is something instinctively wrong with that.  There's something wrong with that.  I mean, you just don't turn a dog on a human being.  You just don't do that.  And, again, I was very young and I, I heard it, but I didn't, I didn't know what I could do at the time, but I just knew it was wrong.  And I knew from growing up in College Station that what little I could do, even at the meeting with the sheriff talking about the violence in my own community, if nothing more, I could speak up, and that's really what inspired me.  And I felt that I, I could communicate.  I could empathize with people that were being affected by those things, and I was indirectly.  And I wasn't really willing to sit on the sideline and just be a casual observer.  I wanted to be engaged in that process.  And so, I think that was really the beginnings of my political interest really.
Story_ID: 485558
Speaker 1: When you were involved in the community with the violence that was, you know, going on, trying to curb community violence, and make a safer and more calmer environment in College Station [Arkansas], plus you were involved with the office, the young Democrats, then you were still a mother at this particular time?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: And you were still balancing the college load, the workload, and the political load, and you had--your plate was really full.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: But you still saw time--
Speaker 2: Yes.  It was very, very full.  And when I look back on it, I really don't, I really don't know how I was able to work all of that, all of that into my life.  I remember my youngest sister [Brenda Bohner (ph.)] lived with me.  She would come and babysit for me.  I would get off from work at the bank [First National Bank].  And the school, my, the college [Arkansas Baptist College, Little Rock, Arkansas] was not very far from where I lived.  And she would babysit for me while, while I was in school every night.  And she would also keep them for me on weekends when I worked at the credit union [College Station Community Credit Union, College Station, Arkansas] or, for the most part, I took them with me because my mother [Mary Jackson] actually lived in College Station still.  And I would leave the kids at my mother's house while I went down the street to manage the credit union.  I could remember once, at one time in Little Rock [Arkansas], the banks used to, on Fridays, they used to close at two o'clock and reopen at four.  And the reason they closed, it gave the tellers an opportunity to balance their till at, for that, for that day, and they would reopen at four, and whatever transaction occurred at four went on to the Monday's receipts.  So, I would, in between two o'clock and four o'clock on Fridays, I would go and pick up my kids from school.  They were, at that time, they were, like first and second grade in Catholic schools because the Catholic school is just right up the street from where we lived.  I would go and pick them up from school and then take them home, so that my sister could babysit them.  One Friday, I got so involved with my job as a tailor--a teller, I forgot to go and pick my daughter up from school.  And she said to me that all the kids were leaving the school grounds, and she remembered one of the nuns saw her.  She was by herself on the school ground, saw her, and took her into the convent because I'd just completely forgot to go get her (laughter).  So, and that, again, that was part of my trying to juggle going to college at night, going to work every day, and trying to manage these three kids that I had.  It was, it was a task.
Speaker 1: So, we know by this time, you had a car?
Speaker 2: Yes, I did, I had a car (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay, all right.  But still, we're looking at family.  We still have family to depend on.  Now, if you had been in Flint, Michigan or Rochester [New York], or one of the places where you moved to where there was no family around, then that would have been even more difficult with the (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It would have been very difficult.
Speaker 1: --with the children.
Speaker 2: My--I never had an outside babysitter for my kids.  They were never babysat by a stranger.  It was always a family member.
Speaker 1: And they were never latchkey kids--
Speaker 2: Never.
Speaker 1: --because they had the family support--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --to, to help out.  And that says a lot because that's not always true today.
Speaker 2: That's true.
Speaker 1: That is definitely not always true today.  And not only today, but even in, during the time that you were raising your children in the '60s [1960s] and even in the, this--I mean, I'm sorry, in the '70s [1970s] and in the, the early '80s [1980s].
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: That's, that shows how American life is--has actually changed and how it changed, you know, over the, over the years.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Story_ID: 485559
Speaker 1: What did you do, okay, you have your talk show with, I'm sorry, you're with public affairs with CBS television [WHEC-TV] in Rochester, New York.  What were some of your, your duties?
Speaker 2: Basically, I was responsible for the stations working with primarily non-profit organizations, helping non-profit organizations to primarily fundraise.  I also was responsible for assisting and putting public service announcements on the air.  That's basically what I did.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Would, how, what, just tell me basically what a typical day was like.  You get into the office--
Speaker 2: A typical day was like getting into the office, basically just plotting out my day, meeting with people, lots of people because, you know, generally, there's always a need in the community of some kind, whether it's Easterseals or whether it's Cancer Society [American Cancer Society].  Everybody, all of those organizations could use some media support, so I would meet with those groups of people whenever I could and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Is this in your office or going out to their offices?
Speaker 2: Going out to the community for the most part.  And then, I would help produce public service announcements, you know, things that says, you know, support your local heart association or something like that.  I also wrote, had some responsibility for writing promos for the station.  Promos are basically when, let's say, you know, Simon [Simon Cowell] on 'American Idol' would say something like, "Watch Fox 5 television tonight, the 'American Idol'."  I would, I would write promos like that.  And I remember writing one for, oh, I can't remember, 'Tony Orlando and Dawn.'  Does that sound familiar to you (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yes, I remember them.
Speaker 2: I wrote a promo and when I, when you write it, you have to send it off to the agency.  And the agency, whether it was in New York or in California, then they would get the, these, these personalities to, to, to voice the promos.  I remember very well--I wrote a promo for 'Tony Orlando and Dawn,' and they didn't change a thing.  Usually when you send a script off, it's called a script, when you send the script off, they will always, invariably, change the script, but they didn't change the script for me.  And that was one of my biggest highlights in that job, but it wasn't, that was not entirely public service, but that was another part of my job.
Speaker 1: Now, there were two words that you used that we want to just go in a little bit in-depth with.  You said you produced, you did some producing for the public service announcements.  Now, what did that entail?
Speaker 2: Well, when I was in Rochester, I didn't actually produce the public service announcements.  I sort of wrote the public service announcements.  I wrote the script for them.  Somebody else actually put the pictures together.  I wrote the script.  They, they put the pictures to the script.
Speaker 1: So, this would be the graphic artist, too?
Speaker 2: It would be the producer.
Speaker 1: The producer would put the script together?
Speaker 2: I would--
Speaker 1: You wrote it?
Speaker 2: --I would write the script.  And the producer would actually get the talent, the person to, to voice whatever the script was, and go outside and take some, some shots of some scenes or something like that.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So, they would put all that together after I had written a script.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, 'cause a lot of people who are listening to this tape who--they could be in television.  Then, again, they might not, so we want to just get the whole picture together (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Sure, right--
Speaker 1: --so we can see behind the scenes what's happening before it actually flashes across, across the screen.
Speaker 2: --right.
Story_ID: 485560
Speaker 1: Now I want to go back again to when you were in College Station [Arkansas], ten years old.  You, you made the statement that you heard over the radio what was going on in Alabama, and other parts of Arkansas, dealing with the Civil Rights Movement.  That denotes to me that you all did not have a television at that particular time.  Is that correct?
Speaker 2: That's absolutely correct.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: We didn't have a TV.
Speaker 1: All right, but so, a lot of people in, in small towns, and this was after television had actually hit some of the homes.  They were in the homes 'cause it was around the '50s [1950s], I think, when, it was early '50s [1950s] or somewhere around in there where television actually--
Speaker 2: When tele- yeah okay--
Speaker 1: --when people actually started getting them into their homes.  I think it was, like '50 [1950], '54 [1954] (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, I can exactly remember when I first saw my first television.  I--it was at the, the minister's house.  The minister lived right next to the church and they had a TV, and I was just absolutely fascinated by that television.  It was a summer evening and I remember I was sitting on their porch and, you know, I will never forget this as long as I live.  I don't know how old I was.  I must have been maybe nine or twelve or something like that.  They didn't even invite me into their house to watch TV.  They let me sit on the porch and just watch it.  And I--
Speaker 1: Through, through the window or through the door?
Speaker 2: Through the win- through the, through the door.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: And I, I thought, I, I will never forget that.  I thought that was kind of mean-spirited.
Speaker 1: Were there other children there with you watching?
Speaker 2: They had children.
Speaker 1: And the children, their children were inside?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay, and you were outside, but were there other children outside with you?
Speaker 2: I think it was probably me and one other kid, and I don't remember who that was right now.
Speaker 1: Right.  And that, that was kind of common, but still, that did seem a little mean-spirited (laughter) to, to have that happen.  Yeah, it seemed like it was around '54 [1954] or something like that when, you know, we got our first television, yeah.
Speaker 2: Um-hm, yeah, I was about ten.
Speaker 1: So, all right. Yeah, but, but listening to radio was a pastime--
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, most definitely.
Speaker 1: --in communities.
Speaker 2: We used to listen to a lot of radio all the time.  I was, loved music, so I was always listening to the radio and, of course, when you listen to music, they always have the news breaks and you listen to the news.  And I can remember very well listening to those stories about what was going on in Birmingham, Alabama.
Speaker 1: It's kind of hard for children to imagine that now, but (laughter)--
Speaker 2: In fact, I, I should tell you this, I'll tell you real quickly.  My youngest brother [Marv Jackson (ph.)], who no longer lives, he died when he was seventeen, but he and I were listening.  He was standing somewhere nearby when we were listening at the radio.  And they were talking about Negroes in Birmingham and he said, "Negro, what are those things?  I'm scared of those things (laughter)."  He had never heard, he had never heard--it's his first time hearing the word, Negro, so he didn't know what it was (laughter).  Oh, that was funny.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Yeah, that is funny, that is funny.
Story_ID: 485561
Speaker 1: Let's just find out a little bit more.  Tell us a little bit more about what your job entailed with your first job with, with CBS [WHEC-TV, Rochester, New York].  Did you continue, you know, when you left CBS, were you still doing the same thing that you started out in public affairs (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Actually, when I left that television station, I left there and moved to Portland, Oregon.
Speaker 1: All right, okay.
Speaker 2: And when I moved to Portland, Oregon, I--my first job in Portland, I had a part-time job, and I worked for Continental Airlines.  I was a ticket agent for, for, for--it was a summer job, I believe.  I was lucky enough to get that job during the summer, but I was trying to get in television.  And before I left Rochester [New York], I found out the name of this television station.  I used to call the HR [human resources] director at this television station about once a month, and she was actually the daughter of the governor, former governor of the State of Oregon.  His name was Tom McCall.  And I can't remember her first name right now, but I used to call her--I mean, once a month at least.  And she finally said to me, she said, "Linda [HistoryMaker Linda Torrence], whenever you get to Portland, Oregon, I will find you a job at this television station."  And she finally, she, she hired me, gave me a job.  I worked at--it was a NBC television station.  The station was KGW [KGW-TV, Portland, Oregon].  It was owned by King Broadcasting [King Broadcasting Company, Seattle, Washington].
Speaker 1: And this was in Portland, Oregon?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Story_ID: 485562
Speaker 1: --Tom McCall's daughter--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --yes.  And you have, what is it, you bugged her, you called her, you've been persistent.  That's, that's what it's all about, isn't it?
Speaker 2: Pardon me?
Speaker 1: You've been persistent?
Speaker 2: Oh, yes, absolutely (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) You've been persistent there 'cause that's how deals are made.  That's how people get ahead.  That's how you get what you want.
Speaker 2: Absolutely.
Speaker 1: That's how you, you have to dig away for yourself so tell us--
Speaker 2: See, I think there's a fine line between being persistent and being a pest.
Speaker 1: All right (laughter).
Speaker 2: And you just have to know where that line is.  And, but you have to be really nice about it, and she was just very nice.  I mean, I would call her frequently, and she told me, she said, "Linda [HistoryMaker Linda Torrence], when I get a job, I'm going to send a taxi to get you."  And--
Speaker 1: So, Linda, tell us what you, how, how, your phone call went when you would call her, 'cause some people think that if you just call somebody, let's say, you want a job, and you're ready for a break during your career, and you want a job with one of the top whatever.  And you call them up and you just keep calling them up, it's, it's a difference between having method to your madness, and just being mad would make a call, so what do, what was the gist of your conversations with her?
Speaker 2: I always personalize my conversation.  When people talk to me, I talk to them as if I know them.  And I, I'm trying to remember her first name, I cannot remember her first name right now.  But I would call, and I'd say, "This is Linda," and I said, "I just want you to know my plans are still to be there in August, and I just want to stay in touch with you to let you know I am still interested in working with KGW [KGW-TV, Portland, Oregon].  And if you don't mind, I want to give you a call as soon as I get to Portland, Oregon," and something like that.  And she was never irritated, but I mean, I didn't--she wouldn't, didn't appear to be irritated at all.  And I think she was impressed by the fact that here was a person coming from one end of the country to the other (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Definitely.
Speaker 2: --from New York to Oregon.  And I think she knew by my infrequent calls, or frequent calls, however one would perceive that to be, that I was very serious and that I really did want to work, not only in television, but I wanted to work at her station.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, how did you, but (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And so, she had to have impressed by that.
Speaker 1: --but how did you get through to her?  How did you make the initial contact 'cause I'm sure she had someone screening calls?  Didn't she have a secretary, or were you able to just get through to her directly on the first call?
Speaker 2: I think I may have just gotten to her directly on the first call.  She may have had a secretary, but I don't recall her screening my calls.  But I was always able to talk to her.  I don't recall talking to a secretary actually.
Speaker 1: You used the element of surprise, and that sometimes works when you call at the right time.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.  And she probably said, I can't believe this lady is still calling me, my good- if she's calling me this often from New York, I can't imagine how often she's going to call once she gets here so (laughter), so it worked out really well.
Story_ID: 485563
Speaker 1: One thing I wanted to ask was about the change in environment.  You left the South, and went north, so to speak, and the temperatures, the temperatures drastically changed 'cause you went from almost no snow to snow.  So, how did you adjust in Flint [Michigan] 'cause they have cold winters, then Rochester [New York], of all places, and then, now Oregon, so how, how did you adjust to these cold environments?
Speaker 2: Well, you know what?  You, whenever you're determined, you do whatever it is, whatever is necessary that you need to do, you just make that adjustment.  And I had never seen that much snow before in my entire life, and especially when I'm at, went to Rochester, I recall it snowed in May.  I called my best friend in Arkansas, and I said, "Have you ever seen it snow in May?"  She used a bit of profanity, I won't tell you what she said, but she said, "No, and don't want to."  I had never seen it snow in May.  I remember when I first moved to Rochester, all of my shoes were open toe shoes.  And people said, "Linda [HistoryMaker Linda Torrence], you're going to have to change your shoes."  And I said, "Why," and they said, "You'll see."  And, surely, I did, and I remember one day, it snowed all day.  We had friends over--they literally couldn't go home.
Speaker 1: They had to spend the night almost.
Speaker 2: We had a little Volkswagen.  It was almost covered with snow, but you know, I make the adjustment.  You just do what you have to do.
Speaker 1: Now, not only do you have to contend with the weather, but I've always felt that northerners, people who grow up in snow, and when you live in these cold climates, that they're a little bit cold.  Also, their personalities are not as friendly as the people in the South, so how did you adjust to this East Coast, North, wherever Michigan is?  That's not Northwest yet, but you're going to go to Oregon, and that's going to be Northwest, how did you just, adjust to these different personalities?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, when I moved to New York, I really thought New Yorkers were cool.  I love the way they dance and, you know, where I was, they just had so much class.  I can remember, I was going to a neighborhood precinct meeting for the Democrat- for the Democratic Party in New York.  I show up and for the meeting, and the lady said, she introduced herself and she said, "And you are a guest of," and I said, "I'm not a guest of anybody.  I just came."  Well, in New York, you don't just do that.  And somebody have to literally invite you to those kinds of meetings.  I didn't know that.  But I also think that when you, if you're going to be successful in my view, you have to be adaptable.  You have to be willing to change.  You have to be willing to break out of your, your little own personal cocoon and sort of get with the program.  If not, you're never going to be as successful as perhaps you could be if you're not adaptable.  And I saw, I always thought that I was, I could adapt to change.  It was difficult for me to--the most difficult thing for me to do was to leave my friends, people that I have known for years, and go to a place where I knew no one.
Speaker 1: And this is from Arkansas to Michigan?
Speaker 2: From Arkansas to Michigan to New York.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I had to make new friends all over again.  And, and I'd lived in Little Rock [Arkansas] all of my life, but at the, at the time, I was willing, I wanted to leave Little Rock because I wanted to see what the rest of the world was like.  I really did not want to grow old and die in Little Rock.  I was, I just wanted to see more of, of the, of other parts of the country (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So, this, so that adventuresome spirit did help also with the adjusting.
Speaker 2: Oh, um-hm, oh, absolutely.
Speaker 1: But you had left your mom [Mary Jackson] behind (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I left my mother--
Speaker 1: --and sisters--
Speaker 2: --my sisters, all my friends.
Speaker 1: --and everybody?  Did they come up to visit you?
Speaker 2: My youngest sister [Brenda Bohner (ph.)] came to visit me in, in Rochester.  And I think it was several, my, two of my sisters came to visit me in Rochester, and I remember my youngest sister came to visit me.  And she looked around and she said, "Linda, where are all the black people (laughter)?"  I, I thought it was funny (laughter) because where she's from, she was seeing, so used to seeing so many more black folk, but where we lived, and we lived in the suburbs of Rochester.  And there just weren't that many African Americans in the suburbs of Rochester.  In fact, we lived right around the, the University of Rochester [Rochester, New York].
Speaker 1: So, how did the children adjust?
Speaker 2: Oh, you know, kids adjust real easy.  It's, it's just another town, another city.  Once they, once they find out who the neighborhood kids are, it doesn't matter.  They adjusted really well.  They didn't have a problem at all.
Story_ID: 485564
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, now, you're with CBS [sic. NBC], and you're in Portland, Portland, Oregon.  Now, this is, like you said, from one end of the country, one from west, almost east--well, it is the East Coast to West Coast.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: That was a trek across the, the United States.  So, you get the job with--what was the radio--I mean, the television station?
Speaker 2: KGW [KGW-TV, Portland, Oregon] (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) KGW?
Speaker 2: Um-hm--
Speaker 1: And--
Speaker 2: --which was an NBC station.
Speaker 1: Affiliate?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: So, you, what was your title there?  What was your job title?
Speaker 2: I was the assistant to the senior account executive in sales.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what did you do?  Tell us about that one.
Speaker 2: Basically, we handled commercials.  That's really what it was, did all of the--if he went out and sold a thirty second spot to Carnation, I was responsible for making sure that the paperwork, that it was written up properly, and that it got on the air at the time that it was supposed to get on the air.  So, I was just basically his assistant.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, it was a little traffic involved in that, too, right?
Speaker 2: Um-hm, very much so.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  And would you just explain what traffic means?  I know you've already said it, but there's a kind of, what would you want to say, a time layout, as it relates to television (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, right.  For broadcasting, traffic is basically the handling and scheduling of commercials.  That's really essentially what it is and there are a lot of them.
Speaker 1: You know, I hate commercial.
Speaker 2: I didn't--
Speaker 1: I hated, look, I hated them when my daughter was little, especially because she had a good memory and as most children do.  And she could remember everything that was for a child that came across for sale and she wanted that, so what's the importance of commercials to a station (laughter)?
Speaker 2: Are you asking me the question?
Speaker 1: Yes, yes.
Speaker 2: Oh the importance of commercials to a station is a station couldn't exist without commercials.  It's, it's its bread and butter.  That's how it makes its money.  And if it weren't for commercials, you wouldn't have any programs.  No one would have a job.  The station wouldn't even exist.  And so, you write, I didn't like traffic either.  Traffic to me was very boring, but it was for me, at the time, it was a job, and it was a job in television, and that was the most important thing to me at, at the time.
Speaker 1: So, how long did you stay as the assistant to the senior account executive in sales?
Speaker 2: I don't remember exactly how many years I worked there, but it was a few years that I worked there.
Speaker 1: So, did you, how long did you, did you stay with KGW, or did you go to another station?
Speaker 2: No, I didn't go to another station.  After I left KGW, I went to work for the American Red Cross as their assistant director for operations for Oregon.
Story_ID: 485565
Speaker 1: Now, what did you do outside of work?  You did some community involvement.  Were you still involved with the Democratic National, with the Democratic Party?
Speaker 2: You're not going to believe this, but at one time, when I lived in Oregon, I don't know if I should say this, I actually registered as a Republican.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Now, how'd you go from being a Democrat to a Republican (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Because I--well, because I didn't think that the Democratic candidate was the candidate of choice for me at the time.  But it was only for that one time, and I switched back to a Democrat (laughter), but I sure did.  But, no, I was not, I was not politically involved in Oregon at all, but I was involved with the community in Oregon.  I've always been involved with any community, no matter where I lived, I've always been involved in some way with the community.  So, I got involved with the community in Oregon and did a number of things.  For an example, I--Multnomah County [Oregon] is the largest county in the State of Oregon.
Speaker 1: Spell that for us, that county?
Speaker 2: M-U-L-T-N-O-M-A-H, Multnomah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It's the largest county in the State of Oregon.  I got involved.  One of the things that I did I thought was really significant for me, as a community person doing volunteer work, the--there was a commission that was set up to evaluate the salaries for Multnomah County commissioners.  And I was one of the persons that was on that salary commission and, to me, that was a significant piece of work that I did in the State of Oregon.  And the other, the other, I did a number of things actually when I--Oregon was good to me in terms of the, the kinds of things that I did.  I remember the--I sat on the Civil Service Board [Portland Custodians' Civil Service Board] for the Portland Public Schools.  And at, and I chaired that, a, an effort to, what were, we were, we were changing the civil service rules for Portland Public Schools.  And it could have been a fairly ugly process, but as it turned out, we achieved what we wanted to achieve.  And I, if I can recall, I think I chaired that process.  And those rules hadn't been changed since the '40s [1940s], and it worked really well, but Portland [Oregon] was the kind of community where, if you wanted to get involved and, and be active and engage in good community work, it was really a very open community, much like Atlanta [Georgia].  So, I did a number of things in that regard (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now, when you say you changed the civil service rules, were these for the schools, for the Portland Public Schools?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Now, was this as it--explain that a little bit more.  Was it related, this, this on the student level, or is this for like, the overall running of the school board?
Speaker 2: Overall running of the school system itself.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So civil service rules, are those going to--what would that be relating to?  How would it filter down to the students or did it filter down to the students at all (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It didn't, it didn't affect the students at all.  It was strictly for the administration of the school system.  It had nothing to do with the students.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, okay.
Speaker 2: I think, now I have to think very carefully, I, I think it had more to do with the maintenance workers' contract than anything else, but it's been such a long time ago, I can't remember all the details of that (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay.
Story_ID: 485566
Speaker 1: Okay, what else did you do then?  You--these are all your community involvements--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --your, okay, you evaluated salaries.
Speaker 2: I also, I was appointed to serve on a commission to study the--what do they call that department?  The police department [Portland Police Bureau], when, when you file a complaint against the police department, what is that department called that where you file a complaint?
Speaker 1: I'm not sure.
Speaker 2: I want to say, I forgot what it's called, but the police commissioner formed the commission to look into that particular department.  And I was one of the persons that was selected to serve on that commission.  And we made some changes as it, as it related to people reporting abuses by police officers.  And that, to me, was a very engaging, a very interesting process as well.
Speaker 1: That was.  Were they getting a lot of complaints from the community as it related to (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I think they were getting more than what they, they should have been getting at the time.
Speaker 1: So, did it also, did, did your work on this committee help to come up with rules for punishment for the officers, or just for making an easier, making it easier for someone to issue a complaint against an officer?
Speaker 2: I think some of the rules were--I don't remember specifically what all, all of the rules that were changed, but they were modified.  I do know that, but I can't remember specifically what they were.  But we met for well over a year.  The police commissioner [HistoryMaker Charles B. Jordan] at the time was an African American male, believe it or not.  Portland [Oregon] is a very unique city.  At least, it was during the time that I was living there.  They had African Americans in very unique positions in the City of Portland, and in the State of Oregon for that matter, but primarily in the City of Portland.  And so, the African, the, the police commissioner was African American.  And another thing that I did was I sat on the--while I was there, Portland got its first cable franchise.  And I was a part of the cable commission. And we worked with the company [Rogers Cable Systems] to hammer out some of the details for the franchise.  Once the franchise was in place we--there was still work to be done.  And I was a cable commissioner for a couple of years while there.
Story_ID: 485567
Speaker 1: So, did you live in the black community in Portland [Oregon] or, or not?
Speaker 2: There's really not a black community in Portland.  At least, I don't perceive it as being a black community per se because the minority, the African American population in Portland at the time was very small.  I think they were--the African American constituted about 1 percent of the state.  And in Portland, it was about somewhere between 8 and 12 percent of the city's population.  There were parts of the city where, that had more African Americans than other parts of the city.  But I, I, I wouldn't consider myself, I didn't consider myself living in an African American community.
Speaker 1: 'Cause it's pretty well mixed.
Speaker 2: Oh, yes, very--
Speaker 1: Yes, just like a lot of, a lot of the major cities are.
Story_ID: 485568
Speaker 1: What did you do at the American Red Cross?  You were assistant to the--
Speaker 2: I was assistant director for the donor resources department.  And, basically, what we did, I was assistant director for operations for the donor resources department for blood services.  And, basically, what I did was responsible for managing the operations for blood collections.  And I think it was fifty, it was either thirty or fifty-two counties--I can't remember how many there were now.
Speaker 1: And were you, did you have any fundraising responsibilities?
Speaker 2: No, no.
Speaker 1: Not in this one with the Red, with the American Red Cross.  So, you directed the different centers.  Was this all for Portland [Oregon] and Multnomah County [Oregon], or was this for surrounding cities also?  Did you have to work--
Speaker 2: It, it was, it was for counties.  It was, like I said, it was either thirty or fifty some counties.  I can't remember--
Speaker 1: Thirty or fifty something counties?
Speaker 2: --I can't remember.  It was at least thirty counties, I believe, and some of those counties even stretched, a few of them stretched into the State of Washington because I remember going to--oh, I can't remember the city in Washington where we would have a blood drive, but it was for blood drives.  So, I had to manage the blood drive operations for those areas.
Speaker 1: Now, did you have managers in those particular counties, counties that were reported to you (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, there were blood, there were Red Cross blood centers.  No, they didn't report to me.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, they were the centers themselves that you were over?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Okay, for the collection of blood?
Speaker 2: Yes, I wasn't over the centers.  I actually managed the, the collection in terms of scheduling the blood drives, working with those groups to schedule blood drives, making sure the trucks showed up in the particular areas that they were scheduled.  In other words, we had a, we had a specific number of units of blood that we needed to collect.  And we knew about where we could get that blood based on the size of the counties and the history of the participation levels of blood donors in that particular area.  So, and I don't remember what that was now, in terms of, of like, we call it units of blood that we needed to collect.
Speaker 1: Did that involve travel or--
Speaker 2: I traveled some, um-hm, I sure did.
Speaker 1: Mostly in the State of Oregon, right, and some (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Mostly in the State of Oregon, but some in the couple of counties that we operated from in Washington, in the State of Washington.
Story_ID: 485569
Speaker 1: Some of the positions that you had, like with the American Red Cross, KGW [KGW-TV, Portland, Oregon], and with CBS [WHEC-TV, Rochester, New York]--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --were there many African Americans who had these same types of position at all in other parts of the United States?
Speaker 2: (Shakes head) No, and, and I have to tell you that, interesting enough, almost throughout my professional working career, I was the first black in most of the positions that I held.  That's just the way it was.
Speaker 1: Now, do you, I don't know if you visited any of the places that you previously, where a door opened, but do you know if African Americans started to filter into some of those positions, like you had trail blazed afterwards (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, let me give you an example.  When I filed a lawsuit against the bank [First National Bank] in Little Rock [Arkansas], after that lawsuit was settled, they hired their first African American branch manager.
Speaker 1: Oh.
Speaker 2: Had it not been for that lawsuit, it would probably have taken years.  I wouldn't say that it would never have happened, but it probably would have taken still years, some additional years for them to put a black person in a branch manager position.  I'm sure, you know, when you, when you go into those positions, and you're the only, you're the first African American, it's--I don't see it as a trailblazer, but I think that's probably what a lot of people refer to it as.  And it was always important to me, for me personally, to do a good job.  But I also knew that they were going to use my, my work history as setting the standards for those who came after me.  And I, I knew that, so it was always important for me to do a job, and do it well.  That was always very, very important to me.  I, I didn't have a lot of problems in most of the jobs.  There were some difficulties there, you know, being an African American, you, you just can't go into a job and not have some difficulties.  That's not even reality, but there were not, the difficulties were not insurmountable.  For an example, when I left the American Red Cross, before I left there, I had some problems because the director of the department left.  I was the assistant director, but they didn't want to promote me to that position, so I didn't get that job.  And as a result, I left, and after I left--in fact, I'm trying to remember, at the time, I was the only African American in that department (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) That's what I gonna asked.
Speaker 2: In fact, there was, there's a young lady in that department, I just really liked her.  She was just a wonderful person.  She said to me one time, she said, "Linda [HistoryMaker Linda Torrence], I've never met a black person like you before."  I said, "Well, what, what do you mean?"  And she said, "Well, you just seem to be so, you're so proud of the fact that, that you're black."  And I said, "I don't know any other color to be, I've always been black.  I don't know how else to act," but she was very sincere when she said that to me.  And I appreciated the fact that she even felt comfortable enough saying that to me.  And it was the oddest thing, but I'll never forget that.  It was just so odd (laughter).  I never heard anybody, had anybody say that to me like that.  But, again, Oregon, because there's not a lot of black folk in Oregon, it was probably the only time that she'd ever met a black person possibly.  But, again, you know, because I always have a positive attitude.  I'm very people-oriented, and I guess her image of blacks were, were, were--what's the word that I'm looking for--
Speaker 1: Well, there was, it was a stereotype (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Confron- confrontational that she didn't see that in me.
Story_ID: 485570
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So, when I left the Red Cross [American Red Cross], I, I went to work for the, the cable company [Rogers Cable Systems].
Speaker 2: Oh, the commission that you had served on, the cable commission, was that--it was in Portland [Oregon], right?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And how I ended up with that company is a friend of mine and I started our own business.  I had always wanted to have my business.  I'd always said that by the time I got to be thirty, I was going to have my own business.  I didn't make it to--it was, I was, I think I was thirty-two or thirty-four before I actually had my own business.  And when I left the Red Cross, actually before I actually left the Red Cross, I formed a company called Belcher-Torrence [Portland, Oregon].
Speaker 2: Spell that one for us.
Speaker 1: Belcher is B-E-L-C-H-E-R, Torrence (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Your last name.
Speaker 1: And it was a, it was actually a human resources firm.  And what we did was, we wrote policies and procedures and affirmative action plans for companies.  And I remember one of our largest client was a savings and loans bank.  And the--my partner was already in HR [human resources], but because I had a lot of management experience, she and I just decided to partner, and so, we formed the, formed the company.  And as a result of that, I left the American Red Cross, and started running the business out of my home.  And we would do benefit studies.  If a company, for an example, if you had a business and you had 125 employees, and you wanted to know if, if your benefits package was comparable to whatever was out there for a comparable size company, we would do the study to see, to make sure that you were offering your employees the right mix of benefits, or you were getting it at the right price based on what the market would, would bear.  So, we did that and--
Speaker 2: And what year was this?
Speaker 1: Goodness--
Speaker 2: This was after Red Cross, right?
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Right, immediately after Red Cross?
Speaker 1: Um-hm.  We actually formed the company while I was with the American Red Cross.
Speaker 2: Okay, all right.  So, are we '80s [1980s]?
Speaker 1: Yeah, '80s [1980s], um-hm.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Let's see, let me see, let me think for a moment, yeah, I think so.
Speaker 2: May be mid-'80s [1980s], you think, mid-'80s [1980s]?
Speaker 1: No, because I was with the, it was maybe '79 [1979], '78 [1978], '80 [1980], somewhere there about because I started with the cable company--the franchise for Portland and Multnomah County [Oregon] was a dual franchise, and it was awarded to a Canadian-owned company which was the largest cable company in Canada.
Story_ID: 485571
Speaker 1: So, you were--while you were with the Red Cross [American Red Cross], you felt, you formed Belcher-Torrence [Portland, Oregon] with a friend.  Okay, and it was a human resource, human resource form, firm, company, okay.  And you were telling us what you did at Belcher-Torrence, but you were still working with the Red Cross.  You hadn't left the Red Cross yet when you formed?
Speaker 2: Not when we initial- initially formed the company.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: I left shortly thereafter.
Speaker 1: All right.  And you said you made your break with the Red Cross for what reasons?
Speaker 2: Because I didn't get the job that I thought that I should have gotten.
Speaker 1: And you were the only black in the office at the Red Cross in--
Speaker 2: In that department.
Speaker 1: --in that department, but there were other blacks in other departments?
Speaker 2: There were a few other blacks, not a lot but--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: There may have been one or two others.
Speaker 1: So, how long did you work with Belcher-Torrence?  How long did you and your friend keep the company?
Speaker 2: I think we had the company for about three years.
Speaker 1: And was it lucrative?
Speaker 2: Oh well, it's just like any other startup.  We, you know, you don't make a lot of money when you start a company up initially.  You know, it takes time sometimes for you to make a lot of money unless you're going to manufacture something like a TiVo [TiVo Corporation] where you can zap the commercials (laughter).  I was thinking about that when you were talking about commercials.  Or if you go out and find a Pet Rock and you sell those.  Whoever found out you can make money selling a rock?  But, typically, when you're starting a business, you don't make much money, but we did make some money, and each contract we had, we made money on it.
Speaker 1: So, we were able to get contracts with the S?
Speaker 2: Oh, yes, definitely--
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, exactly.
Speaker 2: --absolutely.
Speaker 1: I had a friend once, a business guy who--I, I started a business.  He was saying, "Well, you know, for African American businesses, if you make it through the first year, then you might be able to make it, okay."  I made it through the first year.  Now, the real thing, the real kicker is to make through five years.  If you make through the first five, you got it made through the first five, I said, "Okay, what comes next (laughter)?"  He said, so it's like, there are--what do you call it, years, how do they grade you in years as to rates of business?  All right, so were you so with Belcher-Torrence after you left the Red Cross, and for how long were you with Belcher-Torrence?
Speaker 2: Well, we, we were, we kept the company for about three years.
Story_ID: 485572
Speaker 1: While I had the company [Belcher-Torrence, Portland, Oregon], this cable company [Rogers Cable Systems] came into Portland [Oregon] because they bidded on the franchise.  And the way it works generally, companies will bid for a franchise.  And the successful bidder to provide cable services to the City of Portland and Multnomah County [Oregon] was a Canadian-owned firm and they got the bid.  Well, of course, once they got the bid, then that meant that they were going to have to hire people to work in this cable company.  And because of the business that I had, which was HR [human resources] for the most part, the only thing that we didn't do, was we didn't recruit people for jobs, you know, like we weren't an employment agency, I guess, is really what I'm saying.  And they needed--the company, the cable company that won the franchise, needed an HR director.  And somebody, I found out about it and somebody contacted me.  And I went through the process of applying for the job, and I was its initial regional director of human resources.  And as a result, I hired over--oh, it was pretty close to two hundred people with exception, I hired everybody except for nine people.
Speaker 2: So, when the company started up, you were, you had the responsibility of hiring most of the other employees.  And is that of all the employees (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Oh, absolute, all of them, except for nine people.
Speaker 2: Oh, you were one of the first ones that they hired?
Speaker 1: Yes.  I didn't, there were, the, the other nine people were actually department heads.  They were responsible for running their respective departments, but, and so, I was in HR, we had an engineer.  We had a program director.  We had a head of finance.  Those people were hired by the corporate entity.
Speaker 2: All right.
Speaker 1: And as I, as I was.  And so, once I came on board, then I was responsible for hiring the rest of the staff.
Speaker 2: All right, okay.  Now, after you got up and running, then how did, how did you do?  What, what did you do next?  What did you do as director of human resources?  Did your company have any interplay, you know, from a contract position with the business (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Well, interesting enough, Portland had a very, some very ambitious goals for that company, that they had to meet in terms of hiring African Americans.  Now, even though Portland, the African American community was only about 12 percent, somewhere between 8 and 12 percent, they had a mandate if, and, and I hope I'm not wrong, I think they had a mandate that 18 percent of their workforce had to be minorities.  And that was a major goal that I had to ensure that, that company reached, and that was a, a focus of mine.  It was not my entire focus because I was responsible for hiring across the spectrum for the entire company.  And we met those goals.  There was no problem.  We met those goals.
Speaker 2: So, how did you fill those quotas?  Did you fill them with African Americans only, with other nationalities (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) No, no, we, we had, we had other nationalities, but they just said minorities, not African Americans, all African Americans--
Speaker 2: I'm sorry.
Speaker 1: --though the bulk of them were African Americans, but they're not, they were not all African Americans.  And, of course, as any HR person, I was responsible for writing policies and procedures, doing management and supervisory training, as well as recruiting and, and hiring.  One of the things that was important to me is that because Oregon is so close to California, California was a unionized state.  Unions ran the State of California when it came to broadcast TV, cable TV.  Oregon was not a unionized state.  And so, when I constructed HR policies, because our corporate office was a Canadian company, our rules and regulations in the states were very different from those in Canada.  And in, in actuality, Canada's HR policies were a lot more flexible and they're a lot, they were a lot more oriented toward the, the individual.  We were more regulated because of the country, because of, you know, labor laws in this country.  But I always, I always fashioned our policies and procedures after those of California, but with a bit toward being a bit more liberal because the last thing you want to happen is to have a union to come over, come in, and take over your shop.  That never, never happened.
Story_ID: 485573
Speaker 1: While I was there, one of the program directors, one of the producers, rather, came up to me one day because I had interviewed her for a job.  And she said, she said, "Linda [HistoryMaker Linda Torrence], you do an excellent job of interviewing."  She said, "I thought you asked some great questions when you were interviewing me for this job."  She said, "I think we ought to do a television show, and have you host it."  And I said, "Oh, really," I said--she said--I said, "I, I would like to do that."  And so, she developed a show, and it was a show that was geared toward women.  And the name of the show was 'Women in Focus' with Linda Torrence, and I did that show for about--I don't know, three or four years.  I didn't get extra pay for it, but I just did it because I thought it would be a fun thing to do.
Speaker 2: Good for the resume, too.
Speaker 1: Absolutely.  And I should tell you, one of the persons that I hired in that company was Dan Rather's daughter.  Her name was Robin Rather.  I have no idea where Robin is right now.  I have not seen or heard from her since I left that station but, yeah, I hired Dan Rather's daughter.  She was a producer.
Speaker 2: Oh, my, okay.  I wanted to ask a quick question here.  Was it about around this time that human resources started that, that was a name for, you know, that department in corporations, so before that, it was called something else.
Speaker 1: Personnel.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: No, it was still personnel at the time because my title was director of personnel.
Speaker 2: Okay, all right, 'cause it was what, during the--well, sometime afterwards that it became human, the human resource department?  Okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Right, right, right, exactly.
Speaker 2: Duties didn't change, but the name changed?
Speaker 1: Right, right.
Speaker 2: And I think that change was just to make it--well, make it appear or to have it more people-oriented?
Speaker 1: Um-hm, um-hm.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Now, how long did the show run, you say, human, 'Women in Focus'?
Speaker 1: I think I did that show probably for about three years.
Speaker 2: And it was on the cable station--
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: --that you, that you had?
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: And what type of, it was 'Women in Focus,' but some of the photos we saw, we saw a lot of men on the show (laughter).
Speaker 1: Well, some of the shows that we did were men who had women bosses.  I mean, how do you, how do you--we would ask, you know, part of the show would be--well, as a man, how do you feel reporting to a woman?  One of the shows we did were women who were, who had their first child at age forty.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: You know, things like that.
Speaker 2: All right.  And how long did you stay with--what was the name of the company?  We just said a cable company (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) At the time, it was called Rogers Cable Systems.
Speaker 2: Okay.  So, how long did you stay with Rogers (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I think I was there for about six years.
Story_ID: 485574
Speaker 1: Did 'Women in Focus' set the stage for what was about to happen next in your career, or did human resource position lead you or, you know, lead you into what you would do next?  Were those stepping stones for leading you into what you would do next?
Speaker 2: Well, the next job I had really, excuse me, it had really not much to do with either one of those jobs actually (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I was, I think I mentioned that I've always been involved in the community.  Consequently, I've always sat on boards of organizations--I shouldn't say always, but I've sat on boards of non-profits since I was about nineteen years of age.  And at the time that I was at the cable company [Rogers Cable Systems], I was on the board of directors for the--what was then called the Private Industry Council [Portland Private Industry Council, Portland, Oregon], and I had just reached a point in time in my career.  I was just so tired of writing policies and procedures.  I mean, I, I didn't realize it until later, though I was tired, I still enjoyed it.  But it was time, you know, you, you, you have times in your career where you, you know, you want to change jobs.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: So, while I was sitting on the board of directors for the Private Industry Council, they were going through some changes, and they were having some difficulties in the community.  And I was on the marketing communications committee for the Private Industry Council.  And the, the chair of the Private Industry Council was a businessman, and his wife was a state senator.  And this man and I, after a while, I became vice chair of the board of directors.  And he and I--he's not African American, but he and I worked very well together.  We just got along, and we worked very closely together as chair and vice chair.  And one day, he, because of the problems that they were having, he asked me if I, he suggested that I take a position in the Private Industry Council.  And I resisted at first and I told him, I don't think that would be a good move for me.  And he ultimately convinced me that it was going to be a good move for me.  So, as it turned out, I went to work for the Private Industry Council as the vice president of marketing and communications.
Story_ID: 485575
Speaker 1: Okay.  And tell us what your responsibilities were there.
Speaker 2: I was basically responsible for developing marketing strategies.  At the time, they, they had a marketing manager, but there was no marketing plan.  And my, my charge, initial charge was to go in and develop a marketing pan--plan, and write the strategies, basically, to work more effectively with the business community because it was a government entity.  Our relationship with business was, oh, was kind of strained at times because we didn't speak the same lingo.  And my job was to go in there and change that.  In addition to that, there were factions in the area of the community where a lot of minorities were.  They were concerned that the organization wasn't meeting their needs.  And so, I had to, I was expected to act as a spokesperson for the organization, in terms of working out the communications with the community and, and the business community.  So that, that was my real charge as vice president of marketing communications.  And as a result of that, I was able to convince the board of directors, after doing some research that we needed to put an office, a training facility in the heart of the community where most of the African Americans were living and working.
Speaker 1: Now what training facility was this?  This is going to be, just explain that a little bit.
Speaker 2: The Private Industry Council [Portland Private Industry Council, Portland, Oregon] basically provided training for skilled, low-skilled and people with no skills--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --to get them job ready.  That's essentially what the purpose of it was, and to also, to place displaced workers.  A displaced worker is a person, for an example, that was a mechanic for thirty years.  The plant shuts down and so, you've got a skill that you can't use any place else, so you train, you retrain this person to do another job.  Many of the--there was concerns in the black community that this organization wasn't meeting their needs, so at my suggestion and working with the management team and the board, we put a, an office in the heart of that community.  And it sort of--well, let me say this, it worked very well in terms of strengthening relationships between that community and the, and the Private Industry Council.
Story_ID: 485576
Speaker 1: So, did you have--just tell us a little bit more.  I want to ask this when I say that.  Did you--you were vice president of marketing.  Who did you report directly to?
Speaker 2: I reported to the executive director of the organization.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And again, you're the only black in upper management.
Speaker 2: I was the only black in, in upper management, yes.
Speaker 1: But there were other blacks on the council [Portland Private Industry Council, Portland, Oregon] or working there?
Speaker 2: There were, yes, there were a few other blacks, maybe one or two.  Yeah, and you're talking about Portland, Oregon.  You're not going to have a lot (laughter), but I was the highest ranking African American in the organization at the time.  And I had, all of my staff were not people of color.  I didn't have any other because I, I, I--that staff was already in place when I took the job.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But I do recall I needed a marketing, I need a marketing person to develop a marketing plan for me.  And my two top candidate--one was a white male, and one was a white female.  And the white male ultimately took a job in Washington, D.C., but I always will feel that he didn't want to work with me.  But then, the, the white female said--I had to literally convince her to take that job.  And she said to me, she said, "Linda [HistoryMaker Linda Torrence], I'm going to be honest with you."  She said, "First of all, I've never worked with a woman, I've never worked for a woman," because she worked for a company that made overhead bins for airplanes.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: And, and she said, "Secondly, I've never worked for a black person before."  And I said, "Well, you know what, this is going to be a tremendous experience for you (laughter)."  And I said, "I want you to do this job because I know that you can do it, and I want you to work with me, to develop this plan."  She took the job.  We worked very well together.  When I left the organization, she assumed my position.  They promoted her to my position.  Isn't that great?
Speaker 1: That is.  That was, that was a good move on her part, too.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Story_ID: 485577
Speaker 1: Well, let me ask, money-wise.  How is the dollars shaping up 'cause you're moving from newspaper management [at The Flint Spokesman]--well, we can say, credit union [College Station Community Credit Union, College Station, Arkansas], bank manager, and now, you're vice president of marketing and communications for a company [Portland Private Industry Council, Portland, Oregon].  So, how is salary?  How has your, your money changed, your salary changed (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, the salary, it crept up with each, with each job.
Speaker 1: Well, this is a slow creep or was this a--
Speaker 2: I've never made, yeah, it was, it was a slow creep.  You--
Speaker 1: Was it making big leaps, medium leaps, small leaps (laughter)?
Speaker 2: I would say medium leaps, medium to small leaps.  I've never made, I've never made a lot of money, but each job, I made more money.  And, you know, that, that was just the way it was, but they were all building, they were all career, career builders for me.  At each single job, I was building on my career.  I think, you know, because I struggled so much when I was in high school [Wrightsville High School, Wrightsville, Arkansas].  And, yeah, I told you that my mother [Mary Jackson] didn't go to my graduation when I could finally got my college degree [from Arkansas Baptist College, Little Rock, Arkansas].  It was sort of anti-climatic, but most of my fun was when I was actually climbing in my career.  Also, while I was with this cable company [Rogers Cable Systems], I formed an organization that was called the Walker Institute [Portland, Oregon].  And the, the Walker Institute was an organization that was designed to facilitate the professional development of African American women in particular, but women of color in general, but African American women in particular.  And the reason I did that was because when I left New York and moved to Oregon, I didn't have the network, professional network, that I had been so accustomed to when I moved to Oregon.  And I knew that, as an African American woman, there were other people that were having problems in their careers as I was.  And, you know, there's always nuances in the workplace where you're going to have--if you're a person of color, you're going to have some difficulty.  There is no doubt about it.  It's not always going to be easy.  And I went to a seminar that was put on by Portland State University [Portland, Oregon].  There was a professor that had this organization.  It was called the professional woman something.  I went there and I thought the, I thought it was really good, but what I found missing was information that addressed my particular needs as a woman of color.  And so, I decided I need to, I need to change this because we face, as African American women in particular, there are certain things that we face in the workplace that other women don't have to deal with.  So, consequently, I selected four women that I handpicked and they were women that I knew.  One was my, one was my closest friend and she is not a joiner.  She does not, she considers herself not to be a joiner, so I asked her--I gave her the concept and she said, "Linda [HistoryMaker Linda Torrence], I would love to be a part of that."  So, the four of us--we, we came up with the concept in terms of what we would do, how we would put these seminars together.  We would get speakers from all the country to come in and talk to these women about their professional development.  And we named it the Walker Institute after Madam C.J. Walker.  And the reason we named it after Madam C.J. Walker is because, of course, she was a woman who happen to have been African American and, more importantly, she was a philanthropist.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: And she gave back to her community.  We wanted to give back to the community, so we thought it was very appropriate that we name the, the organization after her.  And our first out inaugural speaker was Earl Graves [HistoryMaker Earl G. Graves, Sr.] who was the owner of Black Enterprise magazine and it was not a membership organization.  And after we became known as the Walker Institute, women would begin to call and ask us if they could join, join the organization.  And we, of course, we had to say no because it was not a membership organization.  And I don't think it exists right now, I don't think they're doing anything with it.  It sort of--they continued it after I left because even when I moved to Atlanta [Georgia], we had an annual meeting of the Walker Institute here in, in Atlanta.  But some years later, I, I, I don't think they continued the organization.
Story_ID: 485578
Speaker 1: So, after you left the Private Industry Council [Portland Private Industry Council, Portland, Oregon], after working for them, what did you do?  Is that when you moved to Atlanta [Georgia]?
Speaker 2: Yes, it sure is.
Speaker 1: So were at like early '90s [1990s]?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I, I came to Atlanta in 1990.
Speaker 1: And what did you do?  How did you get set up in the Atlanta community?  Is this--what did you do next?
Speaker 2: I didn't have a job when I came here.  Remember when I told you my faith is strong?
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: I left Oregon without a job.  And I drove the entire three thousand miles up into the snow-covered mountains, coming through Arizona in the snow-covered mountains, and Oregon and Arizona with my car in tow, driving a moving van--Georgia bound.  I didn't have a job when I moved here.  I, I literally stepped out on faith.  And I prayed about it before I left Oregon, and came here and started doing some consulting work with the Private Industry Council here [Atlanta Private Industry Council, Atlanta, Georgia].  But in the meantime, I was sort of job hunting, and met a lady at the company that I work for now.  I was trying to get some public service announcements done for the Private Industry Council by this television station.  And in the course of the conversation, I said to the lady, I said, "You know, I'm really interested in working in television again."  And she said to me, she said, "Linda [HistoryMaker Linda Torrence], we have a position that's open, and if you like, I will be more than happy to give your resume to the lady that's doing the hiring."  And I said, "Would you really?"  She said, "Yes, I'd, I'd be happy to do that."  And she said, "But I want you to know that I've applied for the job myself."
Speaker 1: She had applied?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Amazing.
Speaker 2: And she was a producer, and I gave her my resume and put in my application for the job, and I was hired.  And the hiring lady told me they had two hundred applications for this job.  It is highly unusual to go into a position like this as community affairs in a city.  Generally, you need to know something about the city.
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: You need to have some understanding of the city.  I, I didn't know Atlanta that well at all, but I think, though, the station [WAGA-TV, Atlanta, Georgia] really wanted somebody fresh, somebody with some new ideas, and in their infinite wisdom, they offered me the job, and I took it.
Speaker 1: And you've been with them ever since?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Story_ID: 485589
Speaker 1: All right.  So, you interviewed--one out of two hundred, and you get the job [community relations director at WAGA-TV, Atlanta, Georgia].  What did they contribute that to--the interviewer?  What did the interviewer have to say as to why he or she chose you out of all the other applicants (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, I think, I think it was part of what I, I mentioned to you.  They were probably looking for somebody fresh, somebody that didn't have any allegiance to the community.  Therefore, you didn't have to worry about paying back favors.  I think, I think the other part of it had to do with--I had some outstanding references when I came here from people back in, in Oregon--the city commissioner, county executive.  People like that wrote me, wrote glowing references for me.  And they had personal knowledge, personal experience and, and they knew me, so I think that was the other part of it as, as well.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, I want to ask, what is it that keeps you rolling because you still have that same attitude.  And it seem like you had it in '90 [1990], that you had when you started out in Little Rock [Arkansas].  You just keep on moving and moving and moving, and with a smile.  And you still got that same energy level, that same desire to do a job, tackle a job, do a good job, and then move on, do another good job.  What do you attribute that to?  Where do you get it from, you know, what's inside that keeps you moving and rolling and--
Speaker 2: I think it's probably the number one, the desire to do something different, desire to better myself personally and professionally.  And I think there is a bit of adventuresome in me, certainly a lot of curiosity.  And I just, I like learning new things, doing, doing things that are different and just sheer determination to, to do something different and do it well.  And the other part of it, too, is that, you know, I had three kids and, again, my husband was dead.  And I was a mother of three children and so, it was always important for me to always have a job.  So, I was always in search for a job or making sure that I had some form of employment.  And I always wanted to build my career, I always wanted to do better, but I guess it's a combination of all of those things.
Story_ID: 485590
Speaker 1: So, you're leaving the cold climate and you're coming back south again?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Now, how was that change (laughter)?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Well, you know, I had, being a child of the South, and most of my family lived in the South, I always knew that eventually I was going to relocate back in the South.  I didn't have any desire to go to Little Rock [Arkansas].  Little Rock was a smaller town, a smaller city, and I personally don't like small cities.  I, I look for cities, I look for, I like a, a lifestyle that's vibrant.  It has, it has synergy.  There's a lot of activity.  There's things to do.  That's what I look for because that's the kind of person that I am.  And at, when I was leaving Oregon, I had thought about moving to either Dallas [Texas] or Virginia.  And what I was trying to figure out is where I could maximize my efforts, and I thought that I would look at economic growth.  So, Atlanta [Georgia] seemed to have been the place, that it was growing, and I had a few friends here.  My brother lived here, my youngest brother lived here.  My youngest sister [Brenda Bohner (ph.)] lived here at the time.  And so, I just--and I've, I'd been coming to Atlanta prior to moving here on vacations and liked Atlanta.  And so, I decided that I would move to Atlanta, and that's really what brought me here.
Speaker 1: So, is your mother [Mary Jackson] still alive now?
Speaker 2: Oh, no, my mother's dead.
Speaker 1: When did she pass--no, I mean, back in, in 1990 when you came to Atlanta (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, my mother is still alive at the time.  And, and that's another reason why I wanted to leave Oregon because Oregon, to me, people don't stop off to visit you in Oregon because--
Speaker 1: Way up there--
Speaker 2: --there's no stopping off place.  I mean, you, when you go to Oregon, you're going to Oregon unless you're going to Seattle [Washington].  The--it's not like Atlanta--well, I'm flying through Atlanta on my way to Washington, D.C. or New York [New York].  That's not the case in Oregon.  And I felt, I felt that Oregon was so remote.  And I felt like the rest of the world was east.  And I was kind of, I didn't want to grow old in Portland [Oregon] because I felt too isolated there.  Although I had some tremendous opportunities, some great jobs, I just did not want to grow old in Oregon.  And, again, I'm a widow, and I didn't want to--I, I had said that if I was going to remain widowed, I wanted to go to a place where there were lots of things to do.  And because in Oregon, you're really, it's really confining in terms of the, the activities.  So, my mother still lived in Arkansas, and I knew that if I wanted to Georgia, I would be closer to her and she was getting older, and it wouldn't have taken a, it wouldn't have been a major undertaking for me to go and visit her.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So, that was the motivation for moving to Georgia.
Speaker 1: Now, what about the children?
Speaker 2: My children were all out of high school at the time.  And my daughter [Tasha Torrence], my oldest daughter had graduated from college.  My son [Kirk Torrence] had--I think he was out of the [U.S.] military at the time.  And they were pretty much on their own doing their own thing and I knew that, that was a good time for me to leave.  And the day I left was the day after Thanksgiving.  It was a cold November day.  I can remember so well the three of them standing on the porch waving me goodbye, and I'm saying to myself as a mother, I cannot believe I'm leaving my children.  And my daughter said to me, she said, "Mom, we're not children, we're grown.  Go on with the rest of your life," but it was very, very difficult for me to do that.  So, I left them there and, but I knew that I was on a mission, and I knew that I needed to continue this mission.
Story_ID: 485591
Speaker 1: So, you start up as community affairs director.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: And tell us about that position and what you started out doing and what you're doing now, how it's changed.
Speaker 2: Community, I, I was hired as a community affairs director and it's, it's--the title is community, director of community affairs and public service.  And, basically, what it means is, as community relations, I said community affairs--my correct title is community relations.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Typically, in television, they call it community affairs, but the community relation aspect means that I am the station's liaison to the community.  And as any broadcast station, you, via a license, you got to do a certain amount work in the community.  And the public service part of it meant that I would work very closely with non-profit organizations to provide some sort of public service to those non-profits from a station per- perspective.  So, essentially, I manage all of the station's community projects, whether it's working with the American Heart Association doing Heart Walk [Metro Atlanta Heart Walk], or the American Cancer Society on Breast Cancer Walk [Making Strides], or March of Dimes [March of Dimes Foundation], or what have you.  All of those projects are managed out of my department.  The only thing that has really changed with that has been I am now responsible for producing the oldest political talk show on television in Georgia and it's called 'The Georgia Gang.'  And that's a weekly show that is aired on Fox [WAGA-TV, Atlanta, Georgia] every Sunday morning.  And I've been doing that now for three years, going into my fourth year.  And in the process of doing that, as a representative for the television station, I also sit on a number of boards for a number of non-profit organizations.  For example, I'm on the board of directors for the Boys and Girls Clubs of Metro Atlanta [Atlanta, Georgia].  I used to be on the board of directors for the American Heart Association, the Chamber of Commerce [DeKalb Chamber of Commerce] for DeKalb County [Georgia].  I also serve on the Emory University Hospital Rollins School of Public Health [Atlanta, Georgia].  I'll get these for you.  I'll write them down for you.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I chair the foundation [Grady Health Foundation] for Grady Hospital [Grady Memorial Hospital, Atlanta, Georgia], and Grady is the largest public hospital in Georgia.  And I chair the foundation that is responsible for raising funds to support the hospital.  And that's essentially what I do and my current--and I've been now for fifteen years.
Story_ID: 485592
Speaker 1: Now, I wanted--just tell us what a typical day, tell us, well, how many people are you actually, are directly under you, or in your department [at WAGA-TV, Atlanta, Georgia] or that you have, you know, working for you?
Speaker 2: You're looking now at the entire department.
Speaker 1: Okay, so--
Speaker 2: At one time, I had a full time person, but I don't have anybody that is, that reports to me.  Television stations typically have changed in that they, they operate pretty lean and mean for the most part, so I run the entire department myself.  And, basically, what a typical day consists of is my interacting with a lot of non-profit organizations, coordinating and managing all of the projects for the station.  For an example, if we sponsor, if we're the sponsor for the Breast Cancer Walk [Making Strides], I meet with the representatives from the American Cancer Society, work with them on the logistics in terms of what we will do as a television station, getting public service announcements produced that sort of promotes the walk, and to let the community know that this walk is going to happen at this day at this place, working with the news department if we want to get our anchor people involved or our reporters involved.  I work with the news department in helping them, helping to decide which people we want to get involved.  Working, I work with all facets of the television station, news, primarily news and sales and promotions and programming.  But my day is filled, every single day and interfacing, interacting with non-profit organizations.  And I review a lot of proposals because whenever a non-profit wants this television station to be its sponsor, I review the proposals, and make a determination as to whether or not it's something our station should be involved with.
Speaker 1: Okay--
Speaker 2: And then, the other part of my day, I attend a lot of meetings.  I go to a lot of functions representing the station.  And so, that's, that's basically what the job consists of.  And in terms of the boards of directors that I serve on, usually, I'm usually doing marketing and communications for the most part, helping non-profits to understand how to better develop their marketing and communication strategies, and certainly in terms of working with the media, but more directly with marketing and communications on the boards that I serve on.
Story_ID: 485593
Speaker 1: I have some last legacy questions that I ask at this particular time, but I want to ask, is there anything that I might have missed that you would like to say at this particular time?
Speaker 2: Well, you had mentioned earlier--we didn't talk a lot about my children, but I had--my youngest daughter passed away.  It will be three years ago this year, Joe [Joseph Phillips]--two years, two years this year, three years?  I forget, but it seems like yesterday, but I have a very close relationship with my children, have always had a close relationship with my children.
Speaker 1: Would you give us their names and their order of birth, including your daughter?
Speaker 2: Okay.  My oldest daughter is Tasha [Tasha Torrence].  My son is Kirk [Kirk Torrence].  He still lives in Portland, Oregon and he's married with two sons.  He actually has three sons--he's on his second marriage, so I have three grandsons.  And my oldest daughter, Tasha, lives here.  And Elana [Elana Torrence] was my youngest daughter who passed away from difficulties resulting from brain surgery.  And, but I can say, as a single parent, because I raised them almost single-handedly for the, for most of their lives because their father passed when they were very small, but they turned out to be really good kids.  My focus was not only on my, my, my work, but my focus was also on my children.  I spent a lot of time with my children.  Even as a single parent at the time, I spent a tremendous amount of time with my kids.  Our relationship was, was never strained at any time, and I'm very, very proud of that.  I cannot tell you how proud I am of that because it takes a lot of time--
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: --to raise kids if you're going to raise them right.  It just does, and there was never a time when my kids, I don't believe, felt that I was never there for them.  And I'm just real happy about that.
Story_ID: 485594
Speaker 1: I don't know if you want to talk about my marriage now to Joe [Joseph Phillips] or--
Speaker 2: Yes, we want to talk about Joe.
Speaker 1: Okay.  I, I (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) How did you all meet?
Speaker 1: Joe and I met--Joe, I met Joe at the television station [WAGA-TV, Atlanta, Georgia] that I work for, and we became friends.  And out of that friendship, of course, we, we started dating, and I think we dated for a year or two at the most.  And he proposed to me, and he told me that I didn't have to give him an answer for two years.  And I had never heard of a proposal like that, and I think part of the reason was is because he was new here from Los Angeles [California], and he really didn't know if he was going to stay in Atlanta [Georgia], so it was really for him, and not for me, but I, I got that.  He didn't realize that I knew that's what he was at, what he was getting at but, so Joe and I got married and--
Speaker 2: When did you all get married?  Did you--was that (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) We got married in '98 [1998].
Speaker 2: Okay.  And would you just give Joe's full name?
Speaker 1: His name, his name is Joseph Lewis Phillips.
Speaker 2: And what does Joe do?
Speaker 1: Joe is the general manager for the--what do you call it--educational television system for DeKalb County schools [DeKalb County School District].  And he's a wonderful husband.  I, I just cannot even imagine being married to anybody else and, here again, getting back to my faith, I prayed that God would send somebody into my life.  I didn't ask that he, that he would be tall, short, rich, or poor, but I knew that if, if he was God-sent, whatever it was, whether he was short or tall, rich or poor, it was for me.  And I have (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And Joe is all of that.  He's tall and he's rich, he's not short, and he's not poor (laughter).
Speaker 1: (Laughter)  I can tell you this.  You know, they, they always say that, that God has a sense of humor, but I had, had this running joke with God.  I would ask God, I said, "Now, Father, I thought that I was your, I thought that I was your special child, so why did You give Oprah [Oprah Winfrey] all the money?"  And then, I got this message back--but I gave you a husband.  Not only did I give you a husband, but I gave you a husband that can cook.  And he can really cook--everybody loves his cooking.  And for Thanksgiving, my daughter, my daughter asked me last Thanksgiving about getting together.  I said, "Tasha [Tasha Torrence], I am just too tired."  She said--I said, I don't feel--she said, "I don't think anybody asked you to cook (laughter)."  But he's a wonderful man.  I have five sisters and I think that if it weren't a shame and a pity if I weren't around, they'd marry him themselves.  They absolutely love him.  And it's, it's just been, it's a tremendous marriage, and I'm just, I'm a happy camper in that regard.  And so, my life in that regard has, has really been truly fulfilled.  I miss my daughter [Elana Torrence] but, you know, that through my faith, I've been able to get through that.  Joe has, Joe has been a rock in that regard and I'm just grateful.  I don't know if you've missed anything else, to be honest with you, I can't think of anything else that, that you've missed.
Story_ID: 485595
Speaker 1: Why did you feel that, why did you want to tell your story?
Speaker 2: Well, when I was talking to Julieanne [sic. Julieanna Richardson], she was telling me the purpose for this project and I said, you know, I think that's great.  And she said, "Linda [HistoryMaker Linda Torrence], we're not just talking about these known entities that everybody knows like, like, say your, Martin, Dr. Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] type, or your Jesse Jackson [HistoryMaker Reverend Jesse L. Jackson] type, type."  She said, "There are other people that are making history, and that have made history.  We want to capture their lives as well."  And I didn't say, oh, well that will be me.  I--not--that's not me.  I said something to her during the course of our conversation.  She said, "Well, we really ought to do you," and I said, "Well, I don't know about that."  She said, "Oh, yeah, really, we should really do you."  And I guess when I thought about it, I think about the children.  It is so important that they know our history.  I think that's part of the problem with some of the kids today.  They really don't know our history.  At the television station that I work for [WAGA-TV, Atlanta, Georgia], I was responsible for, and still am, black history.  And one of the things that I try to do is create a, s series of black history vignettes during February that these kids can relate to.  These are people that are living, breathing today, and I see this project as doing the same thing.  So, as far as I'm concerned, it's really for our children and for the future.  There are lots of people that have done far more exciting things than, than what I have done, but I want my kids to also know my history.  They know my history, but they will not have, they will not know it as succinctly, once they get this tape that you're producing today.  But it's really for the children (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Thank you, that's true.
Speaker 2: --and that's really why I wanted to do it.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And, and I guess the other thing is that it's, it's important that there may be some little African American girl in the tenth grade who's living in some community that's very similar to mine.  She needs to understand that because of where your life is now doesn't mean that you can't achieve--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --because you don't have everything that you want right now doesn't mean that you can't have it.  We--me and people like me, need to be living, breathing examples of what these kids can aspire to.  And I would love to have somebody look at me and say, "You know, I can't believe she had holes in her shoes, and now look at all the things that she, she did.  She went to school five nights a week.  I don't know how she did that," but it can be done, and there are people that are doing great things every day.  But I just think it's important that the kids are able to see that.
Story_ID: 485596
Speaker 1: How do you feel about the way that you have lived your life, and what is important to you?
Speaker 2: First of all, you know, I can remember the time when I was a wild teenager, just like every other teenager.  I did the same thing that other teenagers did, but one thing about when I grew up as a child, I grew up in a family, I grew up in the church.  I used to sing in my church choir.  I have always, as I'd gotten older, my faith got stronger.  I think one of the reasons why I was able to do all the things that I've been able to do is because of my faith.  My faith has been very strong.  I, I care about people.  I, I remember my step-daughter, Joseph's [Joseph Phillips] daughter, asked me--she said, she asked me one day, she said, "Well, Linda [HistoryMaker Linda Torrence], what is your passion?"  And I said, "My passion is helping people."  I love to help.  That's the heart that God gave me.  And as a result of helping others, I have benefitted tremendously from that.  You know, I look at serving on boards of directors, volunteering on these boards, and the hours that I spend, whether they were job-related or not, long before I started doing this for this television station [WAGA-TV, Atlanta, Georgia], I was a volunteer.  Many of those people would never know the extent of my participation as a volunteer, but I knew.  I've always wanted to give back to the community.  If I can make this world a better for somebody else, why not?  And I think because of that, part of my blessing comes from that.  I don't know if that answers your question or not.  Did that get at your question (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) That, that does, okay.
Story_ID: 485597
Speaker 1: How do you want to be remembered?
Speaker 2: Hm, that's a great, I think I want to be remembered--well, I know I want to be remembered, I want to be remembered first and foremost as someone who, from very humble beginnings, someone who truly loves her entire family, my sisters, my brothers, and I want to cry.  (Crying) I, and I really do, and I have a great relationship with my family, my sisters and brothers, and they know that I love them.  I've raised three wonderful children for the most part by myself.
Speaker 1: That's fine.
Speaker 2: And now, I have a wonderful husband that I love a lot, and I just want to be known, remembered as someone who gave as much as I could possibly give without the expectation of expecting anything in return.  I just think that, that's--I hope that I am fulfilling the purpose that God put me here for, and that's the most important thing for me.
Speaker 1: And I think that, that is what has come across from our whole interview that, that is, I think that stands out, like, like graffiti on a wall (laughter), if you want to say it that way because just the whole interview has, has exemplified that.  Well, we want to thank you, and thank you for being so gracious with your time.  And thank you and Joe [Joseph Phillips] for feeding us, putting up with our invasion, not only of your home, but of your privacy, and of your refrigerator and your coffee (laughter), and we just want to thank you for being you.
Speaker 2: Well, I, I, I appreciate it.  I appreciate you taking the time.  I hope that you feel that it was, was worth it.  I don't think what I've done has been that extraordinary, but if you feel that it was worthwhile, and maybe some kid will benefit from something that I've said, it's, it's worth it, and I appreciate you all taking the time to do it and give (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) No life is lived in vain and yours is definitely, you know, it, it's a testimony, and that's why we record the first person African American stories for historians, researchers.  We take you into the schools and we introduce The HistoryMakers to the students.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Story_ID: 485598
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Mrs. Torrence [HistoryMaker Linda Torrence], thank you for your patience and we can start with the description of this first photo.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Just watch and see how the process goes.
Speaker 2: What did you say that was--'82 [1982]?
Speaker 1: Eighty-two [1982] family reunion.
Speaker 2: Okay.  You want me to tell you now?  Ready?
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):   Yes, please, go ahead.
Speaker 2: That's a picture of my mother and me during a family reunion in 1982.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, I'm sorry, excuse me.  Now, what your interviewer [Evelyn Pounds] is doing is making sure that they keep the photo in the same position, centered--she's a little off center, but that's okay, small has been in there.  And go ahead with the description, please.
Speaker 2: This is picture of the house that I lived in as a baby when my mother, right after I was born, brought home from the hospital.  This is the house that I lived in.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Right.  Next photo--
Speaker 2: That's me as a baby, and I guess I was probably about six months old or six to nine months old there.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Great, next.
Speaker 2: That's me and my sister, Alice [Alice Blanton (ph.)].  I'm the, the small one, and that was probably taken when I was about four years old, so that would have been 1940--what, '49 [1949].
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Cool, great photos, okay, next.
Speaker 2: That's me accepting an award from Dr. (unclear) with the Centers for Disease Control [Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Atlanta, Georgia] as being a friend of children.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, next, please.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: That's me accepting an award for the television station [WAGA-TV, Atlanta, Georgia] that I work for from the American Heart Association as being a television sponsor.  And that was probably in 1995.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Very good.  Next--
Speaker 2: That's a picture of me and the state attorney general [HistoryMaker Thurbert Baker] for the State of Georgia, and that was taken in nineteen-, excuse me, that was taken in 2000-, probably in 2000.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, next.
Speaker 2: That's a picture of me--
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, go ahead.
Speaker 1: --that's a picture of me and Muhammad Ali.  We were at a fundraiser for children's agency and that was taken probably in 1997.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, next.
Speaker 1: That's a picture of me and my panelists for the television show that I produced called 'The Georgia Gang' and that was taken in 2005.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Hold on please.  Good, next.
Speaker 1: I am, in this picture, I'm accepting an award from the, the Mental Health Association of Greater Atlanta [sic. Mental Health Association of Metropolitan Atlanta; Mental Health America of Georgia, Atlanta, Georgia] from the executive director of that agency.  And that was taken probably in 1993.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, next.
Speaker 1: This is a picture of me and the former governor of State of Georgia, Governor Roy Barnes [Roy E. Barnes], where we were--I was being congratulated as one of the most influential black women in Atlanta [Georgia].  And that was taken probably in 2002.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, next.
Speaker 1: That's a, that's another picture of 'The Georgia Gang' panelists of the television show called 'The Georgia Gang' of which I'm a producer.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Hold on please, one second. Let me check something. Okay, good, next.
Speaker 2: It's a picture of my husband and me where we are going to a theater in New York City [New York, New York].  And that was taken in, in probably 2000.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, next.
Speaker 2: That's a picture of my husband, Joseph [Joseph Phillips], and me as we were attending a non-profit event.  It's not actually a cover of a magazine--it's just a fake front cover.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Cool, okay, next.
Speaker 2: That's a picture of my grandfather and his second wife, Valerie [Valerie Jackson].
Speaker 1: And his name--
Speaker 2: His name was Roscoe Jackson.
Speaker 1: On your mother's or father's [Samuel Hudson] (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That's my mother's father.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):   Okay.
Speaker 2: This is a picture of my grandmother and her husband, my grandmother, Mattie Williamson [Mattie Rembert Williamson], her husband, Rev. A.C. Williamson [Archie Williamson], and my little nephew, Larry Daniels [ph.].
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Good--
Speaker 2: And that's my mother on, that's my mother's mother.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Next one, please.
Speaker 2: That's just a picture of me that was taken as a media shot for when I accepted the job in Rochester, New York for WHEC-TV in '73 [1973], I think it was.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, very good.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, we can work for that.
Speaker 2: That's a picture of me and my daughter who is now deceased, Elana [Elana Torrence], and that was taken probably in 1996.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, next.
Speaker 2: This is a picture of my mother, Mary Jackson, and she was probably about nineteen years of age there.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, go ahead.
Speaker 1: That's a picture of me in my, when I was in elementary school [College Station Elementary School, College Station, Arkansas] in 1950.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  (Unclear) your description.
Speaker 2: Okay.  That's a picture of me and President Carter [President James Earl "Jimmy" Carter, Jr.] taken at The Carter Center [Atlanta, Georgia] in 1996.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  (Unclear).
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  This is a picture of me and President Clinton [President William Jefferson "Bill" Clinton] during the year that he was elected president.
Story_ID: 485599
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) This is a picture of me and Mrs. Coretta Scott King, the widow of Dr. Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.], and his sister, [HistoryMaker] Christine King Farris.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Year?
Speaker 1: That was taken in nineteen- that was taken in 2001.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.  Any special occasion or place?
Speaker 1: At The King Center [Martin Luther King, Jr. Center for Nonviolent Social Change, Atlanta, Georgia].
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, great.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: That's a picture of me and my husband, Joseph Phillips, taken in 2003.
Speaker 1: Is that here or--
Speaker 2: In Atlanta [Georgia].
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: Homecoming for Arkansas graduates.
Speaker 1: So, that was a class reunion?
Speaker 2: No, actually, no, but that was (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) That's for all of them?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.  Black college reunion or something like that.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: This is a picture of my mother and her Sunday, Sunday school classmates when my mother was about six years old, taken in Little Rock, Arkansas at the A.M.E. [African Methodist Episcopal] church.
Speaker 1: And she's on the--officially where, she's on the front row.
Speaker 2: She's on the front row and she's the third from the left.  This is a picture of me and the former speaker of the house in Georgia, Tom Murphy [Tom B. Murphy], and State Representative Nan Orr [sic. Nan Orrock], taken in the State Capitol [George State Capitol] in Atlanta, Georgia in, in 2000, in 2000.  This is another picture of my mother, Mary Jackson, take-, taken in a photo studio in Little Rock, Arkansas.  She was probably about twenty-four years old there, or not, maybe more like thirty-two.
Speaker 1: Yeah, maybe--
Speaker 2: I think she's about thirty-two.
Speaker 1: Yeah, 'cause here, she's, she's in her twenties.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Go ahead, description.
Speaker 2: Oh, this is just a picture of President Carter [President James Earl "Jimmy" Carter, Jr.] announcing the America's Youth Passport, which was one of the most important initiatives that was undertaken by President Carter regarding The Atlanta Project in Atlanta, Georgia.  And that was taken probably in nineteen-, probably 1992.  I don't remember the date.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  (Unclear).
Speaker 2: No, it wasn't '92 [1992].  It was probably '97 [1997].
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 1: This is, this is the America's Youth Passport, and this was initiated through my office as, as director of community affairs for President Carter's youth programs in Atlanta, Georgia under The Atlanta Project initiative, and that was in 1997.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: This is a picture of me featured in Southern Flair magazine that talks about my role as director of community relation, the Fox 5 television [WAGA-TV, Atlanta, Georgia].  Our, our promotion tag line was: dedicated, determined, and dependable, and that was taken in 1999.
Speaker 2: And the magazine issue.
Speaker 1: The magazine, Southern Flair.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: This one (unclear), 2005.
Speaker 2: This is a picture of me featured in the nineteen-, 2005 edition of 'Who's Who in Black Atlanta.'  And I'm listed here as one of the most influentials in black Atlanta, black Atlanta, Georgia.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: That's what it says.  I think, didn't I say 'Who's Who in Black America'--Black Atlanta--'Who's Who in in Black Atlanta.'  That's the name of the book.
Speaker 1: ATL [Atlanta, Georgia], that's it.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: This is the first, this is a brochure of the inaugural event for the Walker Institute [Portland, Oregon] featuring Earl Graves [HistoryMaker Earl G. Graves, Sr.] as the keynote speaker, and that was taken in 1989 in Portland, Oregon.
Story_ID: 485600
Speaker 1: This is a picture of my, my son, Kirk [Kirk Torrence], oh, picture of me and my son, Kirk, taken in Portland, Oregon in 1986.  This is a picture of me and my daughter, Tasha [Tasha Torrence], taken in Portland, Oregon in 1986.
Speaker 2: How old was she then about?
Speaker 1: I don't know.  Tasha was probably about twenty-three, twenty-five, somewhere thereabout.
