Story_ID: 14081
Speaker 1: State your name and spell it for us.
Speaker 2: My name is Eddie Thomas, E-D-D-I-E T-H-O-M-A-S.
Speaker 1: And your profession?
Speaker 2: Retired promotion man, manager, publicist, et cetera.
Speaker 1: And I'd like to ask you what your favorite food is?
Speaker 2: I'm a vegetarian, vegetables, plenty of cauliflower, all kind of vegetables.  I love it.
Speaker 1: That's interesting.  [unclear]  How long have you been a vegetarian?
Speaker 2: 'Bout ten years.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: What's your favorite color?
Speaker 1: Blue.  That's my school colors, blue and white.
Speaker 2: Favorite time of year?
Speaker 1: Any time of year.  I'm as--I believe in all year around.  I like its changes.
Speaker 2: Vacation destination?
Speaker 1: I think we've been to Las Vegas [Nevada].  That's been our high spot more than any other place.
Speaker 2: And favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 1: "Keep on pushin'."
Story_ID: 14082
Speaker 1: You were born [November 5, 1931] here in Chicago [Illinois], right?
Speaker 2: Yes, native Chicagoan.
Speaker 1: What--can you share with us some of your early--earliest memories?
Speaker 2: Of what?
Speaker 1: Of growing up.
Speaker 2: Oh, boy.  Well, I grew up in the neighborhood of 47th Street, Calumet, South Parkway.  I went to Frances E. Willard Elementary School [Chicago, Illinois] and then graduated '45 [1945], and I wanted to go to Tilden Tech [Edward Tilden Technical High School] because I wanted to get a technical trade so I snuck over to Tilden Tech, and after about a month, they found out where I live, and they told me I had to leave.  Unfortunately I was scheduled to go to DuSable [High School] because I was--that was the area that I lived in, but DuSable's filled up so I had to go down, and I went to Wendell Phillips [High School].  I was a lonely soldier when I stepped in Wendell Phillips, you know.  I didn't know anyone.  My class was all at DuSable, and I started from zero.  I stayed there four years, graduated, and ended up doing very well.  I loved it.
Speaker 1: Okay, I want--but you were the only child?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Story_ID: 14083
Speaker 1: Your mother's name.
Speaker 2: Lucille Merriweather.
Speaker 1: And what do you know about her background?  Was she born in Chicago [Illinois]?
Speaker 2: No, she was born down South.
Speaker 1: Do you know where?
Speaker 2: She came up here from the south in Tennessee.  She labored.  She was asthmatic.  She really suffered a lot.  I always had so much compassion for her, for what she was trying to do in the midst of suffering, and how I remember is that, mostly about her, is that she was a compassionate person.  Guess that's where I got my--inherited that.  She was always giving and doing something.  In fact, her last moments before she passed, she was in Oak Park out at--south out there in Cicero [Chicago, Illinois], and she was helping, you know, the patients there.  She was sicker there herself, being ill, but she was always getting up out of the bed trying to help someone else, you know.  She passed in '69 [1969], and, that was--you know, it took a big lump out of me.
Speaker 1: Now, when you--what--did you know anything about her, your grandparents on her side?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: You didn't.
Speaker 2: No, no.
Speaker 1: Did you ever go--you said she was from Tennessee.  Do you know where in Tennessee?
Speaker 2: No, I don't remember.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I'm sorry.
Speaker 1: Do you know what the circumstances of her coming to Chicago were?
Speaker 2: I think for employment and to upgrade her condition.  That's when she met my father [Edward E. Thomas, Sr.] here in Chicago.
Speaker 1: Did she ever talk with you about growing up, her growing up, or share anything that you remember?
Speaker 2: You know, my mother--I guess I was--she taught me a sense of--gave me a foundation of, of trying to make it, trying to do good, trying to help others.  That was so basically what she taught me, but she was not educated, and she just told me to try and get all I could do.  She just stayed behind me, saw that I was studying, that I was trying to do the right things, and I came up.  She put me in the Cub Scouts, you know.  She wanted me to get in the Cub Scouts, and I became the Boy Scouts, and I was always on the right side so I could get the right training from others who, who had the [unclear] information so I think that was my biggest help, you know, being in the Boy Scouts and the Cub Scouts and going through that and then later on school ROTC so I got, I got a military training, you know, from the other side of the fence so it helped her a lot plus I took heed to what I was being taught, and so that made it easy for her, you know.  She wouldn't have any problems at all with me.
Story_ID: 14084
Speaker 1: And your father--your father--you said, you know, that you hadn't--you weren't around your father that much.
Speaker 2: No, no.
Speaker 1: Okay, but let's talk about him.  His name?
Speaker 2: Edward E. Thomas, Senior.  He was a prize fighter.  I remember that much, and he lost his eye in one of his fights, and so he took up radio technology, became a radio repairman, and I do remember he had a store called Mister Fix-It at 41st [Street] and State [Street, Chicago, Illinois], right across the street from the Salvation Army, and the only thing there now currently is the Pekin Cleaners [Pekin Uniform Rental Company].  I remembered it so well 'cause the time that I was with him is only maybe four or five months, and he would take me across the street, and we'd spend fifty cents, and I'd get a whole suit, shoes, and everything from the Salvation Army, and then people would give me money, you know.  Being such a little kid, they'd give me quarters and a dime, and he'd take it.  He told me that he was saving it for my college 'cause he wanted me to go to Notre Dame College [sic, University, South Bend, Indiana], but I didn't know that Notre Dame College was the liquor store across the street.  That's where, that's where all my quarters were being deposited to.  Well, you know, so--but that was brief, my brief stay with him, and I came back and stayed with my mom [Lucille Merriweather].  In latter years I would always go visit him, and when he lost his sight, I'd try to help him and, of course, take him grocery shopping, and I was always compassionate with him 'cause I knew he needed so much help.  Then after a certain point I, I put him in a nursing home, and so I could--so have some help in looking after him.
Speaker 1: Did he ever share with you--I know the time was brief, but do you know--what type of person was he, would you say?
Speaker 2: Ah, my father--he was not a father per se, whereas raising and doing.  He, he never needed a child at all 'cause unfortunately he was alcoholic, and he's drowning all the time in half a pint, pint, all the time.  I know the time that I was with him, you know, he would forget to bring coal 'cause we had coal to keep us warm and coal to heat our food--you know, pork and beans and hot dogs.  He seemed to forget that, and he would be so intoxicated.  It was rough.  I'd sleep in my clothes I had on, you know--had some rough times so I, I decided I'd better stay with my mom and just visit him occasionally.
Speaker 1: Now your mother got remarried?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.  She married a gentleman out of Detroit [Michigan], and he was a blues singer, believe it or not.  His name was Maceo Merriweather, and they called him Big Maceo.  I guess maybe selling music rubbed off on me to the--that degree in the beginning because--I never forget he had one record that was just outstanding, man--blues called Worried Life Blues.  Later in years Ray Charles [Robinson] re-recorded it himself, but Worried Life Blues--that was his big record, and he was playing all over the west side, north side, he and Tampa Red, Big Bill [Broonzy].  I remember all those guys, you know.
Speaker 1: And now how old were you when she remarried him?
Speaker 2: I, I'd say I was about nine, eight or nine years old when she remarried Big Maceo.  I was enough to know what he was doing, and, you know, I knew that he loved her and would have taken care of her, do the best to take care of both of us so we had a, had a nice, had a nice, nice family.
Story_ID: 14085
Speaker 1: Now you say that, that the music--you think that that may have been the start--do you think.
Speaker 2: Well, it, it could have been.  It didn't hurt none because, after he [his stepfather, bluesman Big Maceo Merriweather] passed that summer that I was--I just graduated from high school, and I got my appointment to go to West Point Military Academy [United States Military Academy at West Point, New York], and after his passing I decided not to go because I couldn't leave my mother [Lucille Merriweather] alone.  I wanted to stay and take care of her so I said, well, high school graduate, what'll I do?  So I went to the post office and got a job at United States Post Office.  In the nighttime I would park cars.  I got a job at nighttime parking cars down at Chez Paree [nightclub, Chicago, Illinois].  That's where I met a lot of other entertainers--Sammy Davis Jr, Will Mastin Trio--coming in, a lot of big stars, and in that area, that's how I ran into a group called the Medallionaires.  They came to me as I was parking cars at the Chez Paree and wanted to know how they could get on the show.  They were from Cabrini-Green [Homes, Chicago, Illinois].  I told them that, you know, they were too young for that, but they kept coming back and wanted me to help 'em, you know, so I went to one of their meetings over in Cabrini-Green, and they wanted a manager, and so I decided to manage 'em.  Being zero in the business, not knowing anything, I studied the books, see where I could take 'em to so I ended up taking them downtown to Mercury Records, and believe it or not, we got a contract with Mercury Records, did one record.  It didn't do anything, but in that vicinity, in that location where they were living at, there was another group that, that were looking for a manager.  They were looking for someone 'cause their manager that they had presently was--was--owned a record shop, and I guess they weren't satisfied with what he was doing for them.  They heard that I was managing the Medallionaires, and they needed the help.  They were calling themselves the Roosters at that time so they asked me to come to--they were going to be in a talent show at Washburne Trade School at [South] Wells [Street] and Orleans [Street].  Later it became the Washburnes, changed names several times, Cooley High [School], but at that time it was Washburn Trade School [now Washburne Trade School of Kennedy-King College].  I went to see them perform.  I was very impressed with them, and later I went to their rehearsal 'cause we were all in the same area.  They rehearsed at Cabrini-Green, and they sung for me one of their tunes.  They did Sweet Was the Wine.  I liked that, a couple other tunes, but the tune that I really felt was outstanding--that was a tune called For Your Precious Love, and now I gotta start walking the pavements, trying get them a recording contract.  I went to King Records.  At that time it was at 13th [Street] and Wabash [Avenue].  Ralph Bass was the A and R [Artists and Repertoire] man.  He didn't care for the group so Record Row--next stop was Chess.  I went over to Chess Records.  They had Billy Stewart and a couple of guys.  You know, they were doing well with the Dells so they weren't interested in another group so I said well, let me go across the street.  Across the street was Vee-Jay Records, and Mister Calvin Carter was A and R man.  He listened to the group.  We were, we were holding back a little For Your Precious Love for some reason.  We were scared a little bit of doing that 'cause we felt that was really a monster, monster tune, and we did Sweet Was the Wine.  We did several other tunes for him.  He--well, he heehawed little bit, and I told the guys well, go ahead.  Let him--let him hear the--the blockbuster, and when we did For Your Precious Love, that was it.  We were signing a contract.  Within hours we were under contract, and that was the beginning.
Story_ID: 14086
Speaker 1: I wanna go back to your youth a little bit, and I wanna know what the young Eddie Thomas was like because you seem to be--
Speaker 2: Okay, okay, okay.  I was always a hustler, always trying to make some money.  I would sell the Chicago Defender [newspaper].  At that time they were located at--they had a branch at 46th [Street] and Indiana [Avenue, Chicago, Illinois].  I would go down there and, and get papers on a Thursday, and we made a four-cent profit.  You know, we'd wrap--buying the paper for six cents, sold it for a dime, make a four-cent profit.  Well, at that time, four cents would go a long way when you sold a lot of papers, and in the course of a day I'd sell maybe thirty, forty, fifty papers so I made myself a little plan, change, and weekends I would shine shoes on the corner of 47th and Indiana, 47th and Michigan [Avenue].  I'd shine shoes, and in the course of some weeks I would help the guy in the vegetable truck.  We'd go up and down the alley selling peaches and apples and--you know, it was very common to see, walking down the alley with two pails on either arm hollering "Peaches for sale", you know, freestone peaches, apples.  People call you up, and, and you'd sell a pail of apples, you'd sell a pail of peaches, but these were ways of making money, and that's--that was--I knew I could help 'cause my mom [Lucille Merriweather] was very--you know, she didn't have much to give me.  I knew I had to make it for myself plus I wanted to help her.  I could give her something so in coming up, that was my forte.
Speaker 1: And did you have any--you would say you're a hustler, but how would you describe yourself?  Were you a quiet person?  You strike me as a quiet person.
Speaker 2: Yes, yes, yes.  I was that because there were--there were what you call gangs in my area.  I'll never forget the Bucket of Blood and Green Dolphins or whatever the name was, and they'd asked me to join, and I didn't wanna be bothered with the gangs plus I was dedicated to my mom.  I loved her and worshipped her, and you know, seeing her suffer so much, you know.  At that time they didn't have the proper medicine that they have now.  She had an inhaler that she had to press, a little rubber inhaler, asthma--epinephrine she would take and pour it in.  She'd puff every time she'd get her chest would get tight so I, I was just so much into my mother that I wanted do all I can or could to help her and assist her, and I avoided the gangs and all that activity.  I found myself involved with the Cub Scouts, which I liked very much, and I really fell in love with the Boy Scouts 'cause they really gave me a lot, you know.  I can never forget trustworthy, loyal, helpful, friendly, courteous, kind, obedient, cheerful, thrifty, brave, clean, whatever.  I'll never forget that.  Today it's in my mind, imbedded in my mind, and that meant a lot to me and carried me through, and then we were very, very active in church, in the choir.  I'd go to church and be in the choir, and I had enough activity going between that and trying to make the dimes and go to school.
Speaker 1: So what church were you involved with?  Did you go--did you go to one.
Speaker 2: Tabernacle [Missionary Baptist Church], the Reverend Dr. [Louis] Rawls.
Speaker 1: And do you--so you were--you know, 'cause I'm always interested in what sort of makes, you know, a person.
Speaker 2: Oh, sure.  Oh, sure.  Thank you.
Speaker 1: You, you, you were quiet, but you were introverted but also very attached to your mother, as you said.
Speaker 2: Yes, absolutely.
Speaker 1: Now, did you have any dreams, you know, as a young person, about what you wanted to be?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: You know, always [unclear].
Speaker 2: Yeah, I aspired to a military career.  I guess I admired the [United States Military Academy at] West Point [New York] cadets.  I watched them on--in the movies and the TV, and I knew there were a few blacks going there, just a few, and I admired that, and I knew that that was a free ticket, that my mother wouldn't have to pay a dime.  You know, if I could study hard enough and pass that entrance examination, I could go to the Hudson Bay, New York, and become a West Point cadet and make her proud of me at the same time.  That was what I was aspiring for so that's why I dedicated myself to school, to ROTC [Reserve Officers' Training Corps], and studies, and you know, I really got as much as I could out of there, even though I still knew that--I realized I didn't have enough 'cause at that time the preparatory test--I needed to take that so that I'll give myself more knowledge because let's face it.  The public schools just don't offer enough for you to go in there and compete on a level with the other kids, white kids from the other schools who had that high-class training, and they have the best of everything so I was prepared to take the test.  I went to preparatory school, and I was all set to go.  I was gung ho.  I loved it.
Speaker 1: And you were telling the story earlier before we were taping that someone approached, you know, [William Levi] Dawson on your behalf, whether your mother approached--'cause he was the--he was sort of the person that people went to, right?
Speaker 2: Yes, my, my teacher, the dean of Wendell Phillips [High School], Clarius Mosby.  I don't know if you've heard her name, and (unclear) Bausfield was the principal, but she was the Dean of the--Dean, and she told me that she was gonna speak to Dawson about me because she figured that I would be--represent--be outstanding, and she spoke to him, and he came over, and he read my, went over my records and saw when I was in ROTC and outstanding.  My grades were excellent, and I got the appointment to go.  It was no problem.  I was in the Pittsburgh Courier.  I had the big front page of the Pittsburgh Courier, appointed to West Point, you know.  I was really gung-ho.  I had a whole new career ahead of me, and after my stepfather [Big Maceo Merriweather] passed that summer, I didn't go to take the test 'cause I had to stay and take care of my mom.  She was my life, my whole world [unclear].  I just--she was so compassionate, so giving.  She would--at that time we were living at 207 East 47th Street, right there on 47th and Indiana [Avenue].  She would bring the wine guys out of the alley and feed 'em and give 'em something to eat, you know.  She was that--just that warm and compassionate, you know.  She had a heart was big as--bigger than she was, and it's rubbed off on me.
Speaker 1: Right.  I was going to say [unclear].
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.
Speaker 1: You know that the fruit doesn't fall too far from the tree.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That gave me some direction, and I was just relentless in my efforts to try and do well.
Story_ID: 14087
Speaker 1: And at Wendell Phillips [High School, Chicago, Illinois], did you like it there?  I remember when you were--
Speaker 2: Initially my first year was very difficult for me because I was lonely.  I was lonesome.  You know, I didn't have any friends.  That's the only--I think only one member of my class from elementary school came down there, but I came in and didn't know anybody.  I was just a [unclear] a blank.  [unclear] like unknown.  After my first year I got over that and got myself on track, made some friends, and the ROTC [Reserve Officers' Training Corps] came that second year.  They began the ROTC at the beginning of it, and I joined that ROTC, and it really got me on--got me on the right track, and I start realizing [unclear] ROTC.  I wanted to be, be the head of ROTC.  I don't wanna be just a corporal, a cadet, a captain.  I wanna be in charge so I had a goal and being--having a goal in mind, I realized I had to keep my studies up because it would be embarrassing to be a captain in ROTC and be making zeros and be either not making the proper score in your other tests, you know, at other schools, your biology, your math, etcetera, so it--one helped the other one, you know.  They both--they went together so that gave me the proper balance I needed to go up.
Speaker 1: And now, now this is what I'm wondering so was there any interest of your part in music at that point?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Was it?
Speaker 2: No, no, no.
Speaker 1: So it was strictly the military?
Speaker 2: No, absolutely.  I was totally 100 percent and then some more.  That's what I wanted to do.  I was just wrapped up in that--wanted to be, wanted to be Lieutenant Edward E. Thomas, you know, United States, and graduated from the [United States Military] Academy [at West Point, New York], you know.  I felt that--well, the school would have been proud, and my mom [Lucille Merriweather] would been proud, you know, but things don't work that way.  I got detoured.
Speaker 1: So now at that time that you got detoured, you--the most, most pressing thing on your mind was really taking care of your mother.
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.  Oh, yeah, definitely.  She was--you say love?  It was beyond love.  I worshiped her.  She was just a person that--her heart was bigger than she was, you know, and I, I couldn't, you know?  When I think about her, it just--my heart saddens to think about her, what she would do and how she would struggle just to take care of me, you know, and do for me.
Speaker 1: Now so this, this happens.  You stay back.  You were at a point where, you know, things are changing.  You get a job, right, to, to help, to help support and take care of your mother.
Speaker 2: Absolutely.  I got a job at the post office.  That's when the post office was downtown on Van Buren [Street].  It was on Jackson [Boulevard] at the time.  That's right, Jackson, Jackson and Dearborn [Street].  It was called the main post office.  I got a job at the post office as a carrier, sub-carrier.  You start like a sub-carrier, and I worked there and was doing okay.  [unclear] I wanted something else to do because I was always a person wanted to be doing something, and if I could earn, another way I could earn a couple of extra dollars, I got a job parking cars at the Chez Paree at nighttime.  That's where I met all the movie stars and big stars coming in, you know, there.  I said wow, ended up where I met the manager, the temporary manager of the Medallionaires, and he coerced me into working with him, becoming the manager, and that's how my music career started.
Story_ID: 14088
Speaker 1: Tell us about what the Chez Paree was for Chicago [Illinois] at that time.
Speaker 2: Oh, Chez Paree was the utopia of all the places.  They had the Club DeLisa on the South Side, Rhumboogie, but the Chez Paree was where the whites and the blacks would go.  It was just the place, you know.  All your big stars, Sammy Davis, Jr. was there often, and Tony Bennett, all the big stars, big names, so I got a chance to see 'em go by.
Speaker 1: And so you get to know this--what was his name?
Speaker 2: Well, the assistant manager of the group [the Medallionaires] was a young kid named Woody Anderson.  He was--now, talk about someone being relentless, he wanted that group to make it, and he made sure.  He'd come back to me.  He called me.  He called me day and night.  He stayed on me about taking over that group, helping them 'cause he figured I was there at Chez Paree, had all the contacts.  I could do more than what he thought I could do.  He had high hopes on me so I decided to manage the group, not knowing anything about management or music or anything.  I managed the group, and I listened to them.  They had a couple good songs.  We made a tape.  I went to the studio and made a recording tape so--a demo.  I took it to Mercury Records, and the guy there was Chuck Singer.  I think it was his name, the A and R [Artists and Repertoire] man.  The tune was called Magic Moonlight, and he said okay, we'll give it a shot, you know, and a shot means they put it in Chicago.  They didn't--they didn't do a nationwide distribution on it.  He said well, we'll see what happens locally, and locally it didn't do anything, but in the course of that, of them having a record out, they were bragging it all over the projects at Cabrini-Green [Homes] that they had a record out, and I was the manager so that's when the Roosters heard of me, being their manager, and they wanted assistance also.  They said well, you can manage, you can manage both groups, you know.
Speaker 1: So how did that--how did you find that experience 'cause your,  your whole experience--I mean, exposure to music was limited.
Speaker 2: Well, you know, it was different.  It was different, and me having a stepfather [Big Maceo Merriweather] who was a musician, and I got a taste of music, you know, as sort of like started me on another direction, completely going north instead of south, and I say well, if we get a hit record, we could do this, and I see where I could make some money, and I could help my mom [Lucille Merriweather].  I can get myself back on my feet, and then later on I'd go back to college so that was my intentions, hoping that I--that we could go that far 'cause I knew that you could become a star and the group could become--could become a star if I could be--persevere and get them started.
Speaker 1: And the first time that you went into a recording studio--I know this is all old now, but wasn't that--I mean, had you been to the recording studio?
Speaker 2: No, no.  That was an experience for me, too.  I'd never been to the studio.  At that time it was two tracks, you know.  They've grown far beyond two tracks now, but it was a two track studio, went in a two track studio and recorded a demo, and that was the beginning.  I sort of liked it, all the gadgets, the dials, the boards, you know.  It was very intriguing, you know, a whole new different world for me, and I guess I just took a hold to it, you know, and never let go.
Speaker 1: And so as their manager, what, what did you see your role as?  I mean, you were--I know you were listening to them, but what, what were you doing?
Speaker 2: Initially I sold at ten percent of whatever they made so the more I can make for them, the more I could make, you know, on ten percent.  I said well, ten percent of this here, I'll--great, okay, so we get 'em shows, and we get a hit record, you know, royalties, so you know, it was fair on both sides.  It was fair to me.  It was fair to them, but in reality it was unfair because I think I became their father, too, you know, not just the manage--the manager became--well, I need phones cut off, you know, so we gotta go for that.  We need, you know, we need something.  We wanna go here.  You end up going in your pocket for this guy.  This guy's got problems because you've got four or five personal problems to deal with as opposed to just, just one person, you know, so I said wow, I'm--I got a lot--I'm gonna be way behind the eight ball if I don't--if I don't make something good with these guys, you know, and I found myself--my car, wear and tear on my car going back and forth and taking them around.  It was an ordeal, you know, being a manager, very, very, very difficult.  Actually, I knew it was gonna take a long time before I see any dividends on this deal, but I was in it, and I wasn't gonna give up, you know.  I just got my feet wet, and I was gonna stay with it.
Speaker 1: So the guy who first approached you, wasn't he their manager?  You took over 'cause he thought you could be more helpful.  Was he?
Speaker 2: He was a young--he was a youngster.  Woody Anderson was a teenager.  He was like, I would say, their road manager, if you wanna classify it better, their road manager.  He wasn't the manager per se, the contracts, etcetera.  He didn't have a contract with them, but he was--he lived in Cabrini-Green and, you know, he loved the group.  He was just that kind of a guy, and he was pushing 'em, you know.  At that time they welcomed any kind of help they could get, you know, assistance they could get.  It's always difficult until the money comes in.  Then things change once the money comes in, but during the early stage when there was no money, then they needed the help so I was ending up being the manager, the father, uncle, all in one bag.
Speaker 1: And during that time, so what were your plans for them?  You know, here you are.  You said you were rehearsing at Washburn Trade School [of Kennedy-King College, Chicago, Illinois] and--
Speaker 2: No, no, no.
Speaker 1: Oh, this was.
Speaker 2: No, we were first at Cabrini-Green.
Speaker 1: Cabrini-Green.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  We called it Seward Park.  There was a room over there, and we were--we all rehearsed there, you know.  Different groups would come and rehearse there.  That, that's where we rehearsed at.  Even the Roosters, that's where they rehearsed at.  Yeah, Cabrini-Green.  That's why it's so famous.  Like today, I think they still have that Cabrini-Green, even though the change they've made.  As of right now, we still have the Cabrini-Green, the section there devoted to that, you know, Seward Park, yeah, as of today, right now, but that's where we practiced at.  I spent a lot of gas going back and forth over there working with those guys, and I got a chance to listen to material, listen to songs.  My ear became sharpened up.  As the more I listened to it, the more I got into it.  You know, I was able to hear the messages they're trying to give and what they're trying to get across, the love stories, etcetera, so I was, I was learning.
Speaker 1: In the group did--was there--was someone who was the writer and the lyricist or were they being presented material?
Speaker 2: They were--we were all contributing.  All members were trying--we were trying to write songs.  At that time I wasn't into writing.  I was just doing the, the cheerleading for them, but they were writers themselves.  They weren't--they hadn't made anything big or doing anything, but they were trying, you know.  They were trying at that time, but the writers--really, the writers were the other group.  That--those were the writers.  When I met the Roosters, they had Arthur Brooks, Richard Brooks, Samuel Gooden, Curtis Mayfield, and Jerry Butler.  That was the original Roosters, all five original.
Story_ID: 14089
Speaker 1: You got introduced to the Roosters when?
Speaker 2: Okay, okay, let's go back.  I managed--I was manager of the [vocal group] Medallionaires.  The Roosters [later the Impressions] had heard about me 'cause we all lived--they lived in the same area, Cabrini-Green [Homes, Chicago, Illinois], and they wanted a manager.  The gentleman that was handling them at that time [Woody Anderson] owned a record store, and he was--he couldn't get out from the store.  He wasn't active so they want somebody to get out and, and move for 'em, hustle for 'em so they asked me to come to their talent show.  They were having a talent show at Washburne Trade School [of Kennedy-King College], and that's where I went and saw them perform officially, first time, and when I saw them, they did 'For Your Precious Love', and when I heard that great song, as inexperienced as I was, I felt that was a great song.  It just hit me right dead in the center, you know, and the way they had it arranged with the background high voices, you know, and Jerry Butler doing the Roy Hamilton type.  I said, oh, this is, this is a group to be reckoned with.
Speaker 1: So were they students at Washburne at the time or they were just--it was at talent show there that was (unclear)?
Speaker 2: No, they just--no, they weren't students.  They just lived in the area.  See, Arthur Brooks, Richard Brooks' brother, and Sam Gooden came from Chattanooga, Tennessee, so they were like transplants.  They come up here, you know, and they met Curtis [Mayfield] and Jerry, and they just hooked up together and became the Roosters, and Jerry Butler lived 1117 off (unclear).  I'll never forget his address--brainwashed, 1117 North Cleveland [Avenue], never forget that.  Curtis lived 966 North Hudson [Avenue], right around the corner, and that's the area Major Lance came from.  Major Lance lived in the area also, and he became successful, a singer later on, but Curtis Mayfield, I felt, was a talent, and as I spent a lot of time with him, his writing.  He was always writing, playing his guitar.  He's creative.  He seemed such a creative person.  I said, boy, this, this boy is gonna go someplace, you know.  I really felt strong about him.  The other writers were--you know, they contributed, but he was the main stem.
Speaker 1: So at this time were you still working with the Medallionaires?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, you were working with both.
Speaker 2: Exactly.
Speaker 1: Now are you still working at the post office during the day?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yes, and parking cars at night.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, my whole life was dedicated, you know.  I was doing something.  I got a couple hours sleep in between time.  Yeah.
Speaker 1: And so, okay--at--now, what years are we talking about?
Speaker 2: Well, '50s [1950s], '57 is when this started, 1957.
Speaker 1: And '57 is when you said you met Herb.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I met Herb Kent [Chicago radio personality].  I met Herb in the earlier part, latter part of '57.  I met the group in the earlier part, and that's when we got started, you know.
Speaker 1: And so tell--so tell--let me--I want you to lead me into the story.  So you're working with, you're working with both of them.  You're trying to get them gigs, you know.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: You, you see that this one group, you know, the Roosters are more.
Speaker 2: Yeah, absolutely.  They're, they're like ten yards ahead of the Medallionaires, and after our record of the Medallionaires didn't do too well, I was putting more energy behind the Roosters because I really thought that they were a group to be reckoned with, and that's when I tried to get a recording contract with them so I just went down Record Row over to King Records.  Ralph Bass interviewed us.  He didn't particularly care for the sound.  Then I went to Chess Records.  They had Billy Stewart and a couple of other artists there, the Dells, and so they were pretty well set so they turned us down so I went across--my last stop was across the street to Vee-Jay Records, and that's where I met Calvin Carter.  He was in charge of A and R [Artists and Repertoire], and we auditioned for him, but we didn't include our blockbuster For Your Precious Love.  Sweet Was the Wine--he said that's very good, but give me something else, give me something else so I gave the green light, and we did For Your Precious Love, and he just--he was very excited about that.  Within a matter of a couple of hours, he had a contract ready for us to sign.
Speaker 1: You know, that's what I wanna ask.  So you're down on Record Row.  Were those the three main people down on Record Row?  Was that it, and why did you end up going to Vee-Jay (unclear)?
Speaker 2: King, King Records was 13th [Street] and Wabash, and Chess was at 2120 South Michigan [Avenue], and Vee-Jay was across the street there on Michigan Avenue.
Speaker 1: And so what were the different personalities?  I mean, you know, what were the--why did you go the--you know.
Speaker 2: Well, okay.  King Records--they had James Brown, okay, and I don't think they felt they needed anybody else.  James Brown was the king at that time.  Everything he touched was selling records, and they didn't have--I don't think they had a group on their King label so they weren't ready to take one.  Ralph Bass was a little hesitant about it.  He thought we had some potential, but, you know, he passed on us.  Chess Records--they knew we were good, but they had the Dells, and I don't think they wanted anyone competing with the Dells at that time.  The Dells is an outstanding group, too, so I can understand it, his viewpoint, so across the street now, we went over there at Vee-Jay Records.  They had some good groups--the Spaniels, the El Dorados.  They were loaded down, too, and I thought that--well, I had nothing to lose at this point, but Calvin Carter--we had one song, and I knew--I just knew it--that he would like that, and he did.  He saw sales.  He saw cash money.  He saw everything coming when he heard that song, and within a matter of three weeks we were in the studio recording 'For Your Precious Love,' and I think the next month, three weeks, we were in the studio.  It was released immediately, and it started playing in Gary [Indiana], and that's where Vivian [Carter], the owner [of Vee-Jay], had a--she was on a station there [WWCA], and we started.  She started playing it there, and it took off in Gary, then Chicago, and guys like Herb Kent and other guys who loved the record start playing it, and it just picked up, and it was gone.  I mean, it was gone like a rocket ship, and our, our success--shoop--right away.  Now we missed one thing.  When you--I know when I spoke to you about the Washburne Trade School, and I met the group, and I went to the rehearsal, one thing I didn't like about them--their name.  I, I couldn't see 'Roosters' in a spotlight.  I look around and see wow.  At Regal Theater--that was the big theater at that time, the Regal Theater--The Roosters were appearing, and I couldn't--I just couldn't deal with it.  I said we gotta change your name.  Since when I met you, I was impressed--I mean, I really was impressed with you.  How about the Impressions, and they said yeah, yeah.  Curtis would call me Tom.  I would call him Curt.  That's how later on we formed our company Curtom Records.  Yeah, Tom, that sounds great, great--the Impressions.  That's how we got our name so we went to Vee-Jay Records.  We went there.  We were The Impressions.
Story_ID: 14090
Speaker 1: We were not Jerry Butler and the Impressions.  We were the Impressions.  Now after the first go-around, and they [Vee-Jay Records] saw the potential of this record, but even more so they saw the potential of a young Jerry Butler.  They put him on the same level as a Roy Hamilton.  They said well, if we can get this guy, you know, so I didn't have a contract.  I didn't have a contract, and I was--hands shaking there at the time.  I was new, zero, zero, zero.  I was learning all the way, hard knocks school, so later on after the first 100,000 records, they pressed the next set.  They put on the label in huge letters--you could see it across the street--Jerry Butler, and in magnifying letters that you couldn't see with a magnifying glass, the Impressions.  Now that's how--later on the jocks across the country began to say that was tune number four by Jerry Butler, For Your Precious Love.  They couldn't see the Impressions on there.  The record never should have been--For Your Precious Love never should have been Jerry Butler and the Impressions.  It should have been the Impressions only, completely, but that's how they would single out and build Jerry up to the point that they called him in the office and say well, look, I tell you what.  Now let's close your eyes and imagine.  Here's a kid, staying in Cabrini-Green [Homes, Chicago, Illinois].  They're gonna give him $2000 cash.  That's like a million dollars, and a brand-new 1957 white Mercury, okay?  Just say goodbye to the Impressions.  We'll keep the group on for a couple of records, and then, you know--but meanwhile, we're gonna take--we're gonna make you a big star.  What could he say?  I understand.  He made his move.
Speaker 2: So let me ask you this.  Who, who wrote, who wrote For Your Precious Love?
Speaker 1: Okay.  For Your Precious Love was written by Jerry Butler, Arthur Brooks, and Richard Brooks, the Brooks brothers, the three, but you have to credit Curtis Mayfield--even though he didn't write the lyrics of this one song--with the background, arranging the background.  You know, Arthur had a high voice, Richard had a very high voice, and Curtis had a very high falsetto, and the three of them put that background together which made it sound like a different sound, completely different from anything else, and with Jerry coming in, for your precious love, and they go up in that background, it was a knock-out so it was a really overall team, teamwork on that song.  Everybody had contributions to it, but the lyrics--Arthur and Richard Brooks and Jerry Butler wrote the lyrics.
Speaker 2: So I wanna understand the dynamics.  So Vee-Jay Records was basically taking Jerry Butler, right?
Speaker 1: Exactly that.
Speaker 2: And they're saying we're gonna make you a star.
Speaker 1: Exact, exact.
Speaker 2: Now this was--this is at the beginning when they decide that the first 100,000 are sold, right?
Speaker 1: Absolutely.  They know that--they know they've got a star on their hands.  They can build somebody, make 'em bigger 'cause they didn't have a male vocalist, a single male--solo male vocalist that could be the equivalent of Jerry Butler at that time so this was perfect for them.
Speaker 2: And so what were the dynamics happening in the group and amongst the (unclear)?
Speaker 1: Well, well, Jerry left.  They gave us a couple of records.  We did a couple of tunes that were successful in Chicago only because--and I hate to mention this guy's name again, but Herb Kent did a tune called At the County Fair, hey, senorita, you know, I love you, you know, never got out of Chicago, and so we were on our way out.  We made our exit at Vee-Jay Records, you know.  We're stumbling around the streets now, you know.  Jerry Butler's on his own doing well, and we're, we're back at zero, and that's what happened, but the only mistake they made is that they overlooked the cream of the crop, Curtis Mayfield.  I knew it, but they didn't catch it because Curtis hadn't, hadn't started his writing spree at that time, you know, but especially the fact that he wasn't a writer on For Your Precious Love so they thought they had it made, but they let the greatest songwriter of our time go and--
Speaker 2: So, so you--when.
Speaker 1: They paid for it, too.
Speaker 2: But did you--was there any, like, bad feelings between anyone or--I mean, there'd have to be.
Speaker 1: Well, you have to be realistic and understand the hard times.  People struggling, and you're living in Cabrini-Green, living in projects over there.  You can understand Jerry's position.  I understand it very well.  I knew he'd have to take care of his family.  He's gotta feed and etecetera.  He's gotta make progress.  He wants to be a star, too, so it was understandable.  I took it as always--they say God sees, He knows, and He cares--that we're gonna make it anyway.  We're still gonna make it sooner or later.  It may take us awhile to regroup, but we're gonna make it, you know, so we did--went back in the woodshed and, you know, we starved a couple of years, and later on Jerry's guitar player was named Phillip Upchurch, and Vee-Jay Records had a top star at that time.  They had a headline act.  His name was Dee Clark, Delecta Clark.  Again, my friend was to discover him, Herb Kent again.  He was responsible for Dee Clark.  He may not tell you that, but he's the man behind Dee Clark.  Anyway, Dee Clark needed a guitar player.  Phil Upchurch wanted to move up the ladder, too, since Jerry wasn't, as big as Dee Clark.  Dee Clark was a headliner, big time, so Phillip went to Dee Clark.  Now Jerry's without a guitar player so then I--Jerry came to me, he said well, you know what?  I'm going on the road.  Would you like to go out with us, you know, and be my valet?  You know, I'm gonna need a valet, and somebody to help me drive, so I went on the road with Jerry and helped him drive, and he was using some guitar players, but nobody worked out for him so I told Jerry--I said you know, there's a guitar player that you're missing.  You're missing the light.  He's right here with us.  He--I said Curtis.  He said you think Curtis wouldn't mind coming on?  I said no, he wouldn't mind doing that, so Jerry asked Curtis to come on the road with him as guitar player.  He did so Curtis was--and I--were with Jerry.  I was the valet, chauffeur, and Curtis was the guitar player.
Story_ID: 14091
Speaker 1: [Eddie Thomas is explaining about why he had agreed to Jerry Butler's suggestion to come on tour with him shortly after Butler left the Impressions, the group Thomas managed.] My motive for going with Jerry [Butler]--I had to--I had--look up--I had a perspective--I would say to myself, now if I go on the road with Jerry, he's traveling on the road, I can go to radio stations and meet disc jockeys everywhere I go.  Even though I would say well, Jerry says hello, and he thanks you for his record, I'll be also introducing myself to them.  Every market I went into--I mean, every market I went into, I met deejays.  I had their names, phone numbers, everywhere, and after a couple of years, Curtis [Mayfield, of the Impressions] and I saved our money together, and we decided to--we came back to Chicago [Illinois], to go into Universal Studios and make a demo.  Curtis had written a song called Gypsy Woman.  It was so far out, you know.  I couldn't imagine a black kid from Cabrini-Green [Homes] writing about a gypsy woman.  I mean, it was far out, but it was so great, and we had the beat and everything and the background and the music, and I said wow.  I said, yeah, this is--I could, I could taste it.  I said, yeah, we got a hit, and when we went to New York [New York], Jerry was appearing at the Apollo Theater, and I took the demo tape with me.  Now I can get out, shop around in New York City 'cause there's nothing in Chicago.  I went to RCA [Radio Corporation of America] Victor Records.  Ray Ellis was the A and R [Artists and Repertoire] man at the time.  He said well, but I can't imagine it's a black group singing about a gypsy woman.  He couldn't conceive that so I went to another company, got thrown outta there.  Then I went to 1501 Broadway, never forget it, ABC Paramount Records, and at that time they had a--they had the young man who was there.  He's managing Creed Taylor at that time.  He was a jazz artist.  His name was Clarence Avant, and that's how I met Clarence Avant, another life, lifeline, long friend, Clarence Avant, great man, great man, and Clarence said Eddie, he's got a good record, a good record.  I said well, Clarence, tell 'em to put it out.  He said well, I'll tell you what.  I'll get 'em to help you put it out, but they won't give you any advance money.  We had spent over $4000, you know, of our money on the record, you know, and we looked to get it back off the top.  He said naw, they won't do that, so I said yeah, they're gonna take the record for free and throw it up against the wall, and if it sticks, fine.  If it don't, we're out of--we're out, but I had one thing going for me.  I had met all those deejays--Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], Baltimore [Maryland], Washington [D.C.], New York.  I knew 'em all very good, and I spent a lot of time with them so when the record came out, they released it.  I went to Baltimore, WHAT, Georgia Woods, went to WDAS, all the guys there, went to, went to Philadelphia, Baltimore, Washington, and these guys, said look, I said, this is me, man.  This is for me.  I need to get out of this job.  I wanna--you know, I wanna make this group a hit, and they said well, we'll give you a shot, man.  You know we'll take care of you.  You've been nice to us, you know.  You're really our friend.  That's the only way I could make it with a guy.  You had to be a true friend because I didn't have any money to give or anything else.  They played it for me religiously.  I don't mean one time a week.  They played it every day, and all of a sudden that record took off in Philadelphia, became bigger than bubble gum, spread to Baltimore, spread to Washington, and just went across, and they picked it up everywhere.  They started picking it up, Gypsy Woman.  The company was so elated over the progress of the record, they called me in.  They said you know, we just signed Ray Charles [Robinson] and got B. B. King.  How would you like to work for us doing promotions, and that's how I got the job, promotion man, first R & B [rhythm and blues] promotion man they ever had.  They never had one before for ABC Paramount Records, and Jerry was appearing at the Apollo Theater, and I went in and told him I was leaving.  I said well, I'm turning in my guns now.  I says you'll be by yourself now.  I'm gonna do promotion for ABC Paramount Records.  I didn't realize at that time that they were gonna handicap me with no credit cards, no air travel.  They told me we'll give you some gas and said that's it, but you've gotta drive everywhere you go, and at that time I was desperate to do something.  I wanted to make a move.  I wanted to leave 'cause I felt it was time for me to do my own thing so I drove.  I'd leave New York and go to Houston [Texas], go to New Orleans [Louisiana].  I'd go down the Carolinas.  I drove everywhere, and finally in Birmingham, Alabama, I met a kid named John White who wanted to be in the music business so, so I asked him do you want to work for me so he became my co-pilot.  He drove with me, helped me to drive 'cause the driving was rough, you know, going in different markets so that's how I stayed.
Speaker 2: I wanna go back 'cause, I mean, this may sound like a (unclear) question, but for both of those songs--you know, a lot of times songs would have, you know--sometimes (unclear) developed (unclear).  Are you saying Gypsy Woman, it was just, it was all done the way it was done at the beginning?
Speaker 1: That's correct.  That's correct.
Speaker 2: It was all.
Speaker 1: Exactly.
Speaker 2: (unclear).
Speaker 1: Not, not anything altered or added.  That's just the way it was done, and I gotta give credit to the arranger because I don't wanna forget Johnny Pate.  Johnny Pate--this is why I've been in Las Vegas [Nevada] so much.  It's one of my favorite places because he's been a resident about 20 years now.  Every time I go out there, I visit him, but Johnny Pate was our arranger on a lot of our hits, a lot of our greater hits at that time.  Johnny Pate--he deserves that much credit, and he arranged it, and it was just--the arranger, the arranger knocks it down for you, you're home free.  What else can you do?  He had the drums going.  He had that sound, gypsy sound, and it was just on the money.
Speaker 2: So when Curtis came up with--how did he--how--I mean, what, what was the inspiration for that song?
Speaker 1: You know what?  Let me say this to you.  Curtis Mayfield is a genius.  I felt it at that time.  It took years before it caught up with him and caught up with the public that he was one of the greatest songwriters that ever lived, but I felt it 'cause this kid could come up with some lyrics.  I couldn't imagine where--how do you do that because he's living in the projects [Cabrini-Green, Chicago, Illinois].  He's starving and struggling.  How can he write about a gypsy woman?  He just had a knack for songwriting.  He was a natural songwriter.  I mean, he was a Motown all by himself as a songwriter, just a genius.  You have to take hats off to him.  That's why I know that Vee-Jay missed a record when they--when they let--let him go, but they paid for it because we had so many hit records after that.  When we started with ABC Paramount, we were running down the line Keep on Pushing, We're a Winner, I'm So Proud, You Must Believe Me, Amen, and I mean we were rocking and rolling in hit records.
Story_ID: 14092
Speaker 1: We started Curtom Records after ABC [Paramount].  We ran our course there.  We wanted to have our own label there.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And they, they couldn't conceive, you know, at that time giving a label, an extra label for us.  Our contract was just about up.  They couldn't see that.
Speaker 2: Okay, now between you--when you went to--first of all, Clarence [Avant]--that was an unusual position for a black person, right?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: To have--and how did--do you know how Clarence got that or.
Speaker 1: No, no.  Clarence was just--he was, he was a genius when it come to business knowhow, knowledge-wise.  He knew the music business backwards and forwards.  He was totally into it.  I mean, he knew all--he could read a contract and tell you right away what's happening with it, you know.  He was just that outstanding, great man, great man, and he gave me a shot, you know.  He said I'm gonna give you a shot, and he said I like you, too.  I'm gonna give you a shot.
Speaker 2: So what do you think you had learned at this point?  I mean, you already had your experience with Vee-Jay [Records], you know, and you had your experience with Jerry Butler where you would have the handshake so at what--you know, were you?
Speaker 1: Well, I finally realized that I had--I needed a recording management contract.  I got a management contract with the Impressions so I was secure.  I was secure, and then Curtis [Mayfield] and I were very close related.  We were like almost married to each other because we lived together so long and so much time I spent with him so everything was working very well for us.  We didn't have any problems.  Our problem only came when ABC wouldn't give us the label.  We wanted to have our own label so--and our contract was running out with them so they didn't give us a label, refused, so Curtis and I said well, we'll start our own company, and we came up with the name--since, since we had--
Speaker 2: First, I wanna know what year is this.  You approached Clarence in what year?  Do you remember?  You approached him at--do you know what year that was?  Was it 1960 something?
Speaker 1: I'm trying to think now.  When it come to dates.
Speaker 2: 'Gypsy--'--well, in 1961 you (unclear) and recorded 'Gypsy Woman' in '61.
Speaker 1: So was it.
Speaker 2: So you think 1961 was when you?
Speaker 1: No, it would be after that.
Speaker 2: It would be after that.
Speaker 1: It'd be safe to say 1964.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: It was a three-year contract, '64 [when The Impressions signed a second three-year contract with ABC Paramount], somewhere like that in the ballpark.
Speaker 2: Okay, so your contract with Paramount, ABC Paramount--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Was for three years?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Okay, and that was typical.
Speaker 1: Right, exactly, a three-year contract. [The Impressions .]
Speaker 2: And so were you making a lot of money at this time?  That's what I--it doesn't--was he making--who was making money?  That's what I'm trying to figure out.
Speaker 1: We were making, all making money 'cause we were--we had, we had so many hit records.  They were just running over each other.  We were all--we were traveling.  We had dates up and down the highway.  We were, we were really on a roll.  We were all making money, did very well.  I was sending my mother [Lucille Merriweather] checks every--every week I'd send her back a bundle of money, you know, couple of hundred dollars, you know, keep my expenses low because I was very--Curtis and I, one thing I gave him credit.  We lived very low on the totem pole, you know.  We, we went to a hotel.  We shared rooms together so we split the bill, and we didn't eat high on the hog, you know.  We lived very moderately so we were able to save a lot 'cause that's what helped us to begin was saving our money, pooling the money together, so when we got ready to form a company, we had already had--formed a publishing company called Curtom Publishing Company, Curtis and I, so we said well, we'll just make it Curtom Records because we already got a publishing company, and Curtom means Curt--I used to call him Curt, and he'd call me Tom, Tom, okay, so [in 1968] we put it together, Curtom Records so we looked for an office to start our company in.  We went out on Stony Island [Chicago, Illinois] since I lived in Pill Hill at the time.  Curtis lived close by, and we had moved up the ladder now so we found this building, and Edward R. Vrdolyak owned the building that we bought.  8543 Stony Island--that was their law firm there, and he was selling it so we made a contract deal with Edward R. Vrdolyak and bought that building from him, and that's where we started our company, Curtom Records, and so now we got to get a distribution deal because we're not strong enough to do it ourselves so we flew back to New York, and we made a deal with a company called Buddah Records.  Neil Bogart was the president of the company, and he loved Curtis.  We were coming in with a track record so he had no problem so that was our distributor so it was Curtom Records distributed by Buddah Records nationwide.
Speaker 2: So how did that relationship?
Speaker 1: It worked well.
Story_ID: 14093
Speaker 1: You got along fine until you founded your own company, that you and Curtis [Mayfield] had this great relationship.
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, we had a great relationship, and our separation came later on.  Curtis had met a gentleman named Marv Stuart, and Marv Stuart and Curtis became very tight.  Marv lived up north [the North Side of Chicago], and I guess Marv wanted to tie in with Curtis, and Curtis said well, I think I'm gonna go up north with Curtom Records.  I didn't wanna go north.  I didn't want to move up north, and since Curtis was the main stockholder, we just sat down and went over our deal together, and he paid me so much to buy the, buy the stock out so he went north.  He bought a building up at 5915 North Lincoln [Avenue, Chicago, Illinois], wanted to stay up there so I decided to form my own label, Thomas Records, and I formed Thomas Associates, and I formed Thomas Independent Promotion Company so I opened the doors, a lot of doors, so I can keep on rolling, and later on I got me another group.  I call my second 'I' because the Impressions were the first 'I,' later became the Independents, and I got that name because I was doing independent promotion for a lot of companies.  My doors are open to it all so I called the group the Independents and Chuck Jackson and Marvin Yancy--I saw great, great talent in both of them as songwriters.  I thought wow, these guys just came right out of nowhere.  They were just great together, but together they were great 'cause Marvin played the piano and gave the melody, and then Jackson had the lyrics together.  Teamed together, they were dynamite, and we came up, came up with a song called Leaving Me, Can't Be What You're Telling Me and went to New York [New York], made a deal with Scepter Records who I thought was a great company, had Dionne Warwick, B. J. Thomas.  They were--I can't lose with this company, and they loved the record, took it coming out, and they sold a million copies, doing great, made an album after that.  It was doing great.  Come royalty time, though, they decided to go bankruptcy.  It was out of left field.  This was right in the middle of us dealing with Natalie Cole who was just starting out and Brenda Lee Hager.  We were trying to help her, but we had these two girls that we were dealing with, that we could have gotten deals with, you know, but they owed us about three hundred some odd thousand dollars, and by them filing bankruptcy, we didn't get a dime so the producers--Chuck and Marvin were my producers.  I couldn't pay them.  I didn't have any money 'cause they had taken all from there and definitely didn't have enough to deal with, you know, what we wanted to do with Natalie Cole so she went to Capitol Records because her father [Nat King Cole] had had strong roots there so Chuck and Marvin produced her, you know.  They went on the town--This Will Be, going, you know, a number of hits, Inseparable--but I could see all that, and I was--I'd die every time, but that's happened, you know.  That happens.
Story_ID: 14094
Speaker 1: I'd like you to share some of--some, some Curtis Mayfield or your times together or just some stories I'd like you to share.
Speaker 2: I think--
Speaker 1: (unclear)
Speaker 2: Oh, wow.  You know, we were into our music so much.  There are things we did socially I don't want to talk about 'cause we were bad boys.
Speaker 1: You were bad boys?  You seem like such a good little boy.
Speaker 2: Yeah, well, well, we were on the road, and you know how that goes, you know?
Speaker 1: (unclear) you were going to say that--
Speaker 2: You know, you're on the road, you know.
Speaker 1: Why?  You can add a little spice.
Speaker 2: But we were on the road, so--
Speaker 1: (unclear) story too much.
Speaker 2: But you were never into drugs or anything.
Speaker 1: No, no, no.
Speaker 2: There were just dumb things.  They were--like young kids into women.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Women?
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, yeah.
Speaker 2: Oh, that's (unclear).
Speaker 1: That was the only habit, you know, and, and the girls were there.  I mean, they were there by the fortress--you know, I mean dozens and dozens and dozens, but specifically on Curtis.  All I can really say is that I loved to be with Curtis when he's writing 'cause he'll ask me "What do you think about this?"  You know, "What do you think about this, Tom?", and I'd say, "Yeah, well--" And sometimes, you know, in my life I'd say, "You know, I should have got credit for a couple of  those things I injected there, Curtis." Or a couple of words or a couple of lyrics like, like "we're a winner."  That was my idea, the title of the song 'We're A Winner', you know.  I should have gotten credit for that, but you know, I said well, I'm doing great.  We're all making money, you know, and let things go, you know, but I spent most of my time with Curtis in his creative, creative--other than that, we were on the road traveling, you know, this town and this town, and it was nothing special.  We all had our--the group [The Impressions] had Corvettes.  Fred [Cash] and Sam [Gooden] had cars, sports cars.  I had a Cadillac, 1964 I think, a green Cadillac.  I had another car.  I had about three cars.  We were doing well.  We were doing great.
Speaker 2: You say--well how much money were you making?
Speaker 1: Oh I'd say about a hundred thousand and I'd say per year over a year, yep.  That's because I was very conservative and I saved.  You know I wasn't--believe me I didn't show it on the surface.  You know if you'd see me you you wouldn't see this guy (unclear) down in riches.  You know I was very conservative you know.  We learned to stay right on the edge.  Don't show what you have.  You have it put it in the bank and let the bank do the results but you don't try to show off and I always preached that to the group too.  We were all good at that.  We were very low-key.  I would also teach them to--instruct them and breathe hard on them to treat everybody right the fat girls ugly girls 'cause they all buy records.  That was my motto.  I'd say don't you ever ignore them.  Don't take--don't--do not be too busy to take time out to autograph something or to talk to them, I'd say, because somewhere down the road it'll catch up with you.  They'll be the ones--they're the ones that'll keep you going when the hit records go.  They'll come out to see you and spend money to come to clubs to see you.  I expressed that to them very strongly, and they, they took ahold of that.  They always did that, you know.  They were always good.  That's why people loved the Impressions.  They loved the group, you know, 'cause they were always--thought they were all part of the family.  You know, we were everybody's family.  We were everybody's sweetheart.  That worked very well for us, very well, so I was saying Curtis--we just had so many experiences together.  In the studio--I'll never forget in New York--maybe this is memorable.  When we did the album There's A Hell Below, We're All Gonna Go [sic, the song '(Don't Worry) If There's a Hell Below, We're All Going to Go' was included on an Mayfield's first solo album, entitled 'Curtis', 1970.]  we stayed in the studio two days, 24 hours, back to back, finishing this album up because we had a time deadline on it, and it was interesting 'cause I was sleepy a couple of times.  I woke up a couple of times, you know, because Curtis--I was like his, like his liaison.  What do you think, Tom?  What do you think we should do with this, and I said, "Well, we should bring the horns down a little bit here.  We should go up here, and we really collaborated together totally on that, that album, There's A Hell Below, We're All Gonna Go. What was the name of that album? I forget the name of that album  Gosh, it leaves me.  Anyway, that's the one where he sings 'Mighty, Mighty (Spade and Whitey)', you know. ['Mighty, Mighty (Spade and Whitey)' was on the Impressions' 1969 album 'The Young Mod's Forgotten Story'.] He really got--he really gotten down, you know, and the people loved that, especially at that time during the era that we were struggling.  The blacks needed some hope, and they needed some inspiration, and this album and this song served as a great inspiration to keep them from looking down but look up.  You can make it if you try.  You know what I mean?  We're a winner.  You know what I mean? Mighty mighty, you know--we can do a lot of things and--
Speaker 2: It hit all the college campuses.
Speaker 1: They loved it, and they loved it.
Speaker 2: Now with--he was like a brother that--you never had a brother.
Speaker 1: No.
Speaker 2: So was he almost like the brother you never had in some respects or was it that close?
Speaker 1: I think, I think I was like his father 'cause I was older, and he looked up to me, and I think I was like his father 'cause his father--you know, he's not much of a father, and his mother was outstanding.  She works at the post office.  She still--just retired recently.  She's a great person, great person.  Would you believe his mother likes country and western?  She does not care for anything else.  Now you talk to his mother anytime.  Her name is Marian Jackson, but you talk to Marian anytime, she'll tell you anything about country and western you want to know, all the hit songs.  She never cared for our music.  That's right.  Now (unclear) if I had to go on a talent show or a contest and it's going to be on country and western, I'd go get her in a heartbeat and take her with me 'cause she is just so tough on country and western music.  Can you believe that?  Country and western, that's it.  That's his mother.  She loves it as of today, and I talk to her just about--I went to visit her about a month and a half ago and she loves her country and western, absolutely.
Speaker 2: So at this time--I mean, a hundred thousand was a lot of money back then.
Speaker 1: Oh, absolutely, absolutely.  Oh, no question about it.  We were, we were very comfortable financially.  As I say, we kept building.  We were trying to construct things, do things, you know?  After Curtis decided to go up north [Chicago's North Side] and I stayed down south [on the South Side], I started to buy some limousines and open up--I was trying to open up several other things built, built to stand on, you know?  I bought several, three limousines.  I bought a Rolls Royce, you know, so I was always trying to move up, do something else, you know.  You know, I had the accounts [as an independent record promoter].  At that time I represented Avco Records which had the Stylistics.  I had Barry White, Nancy Wilson, just a number of independent accounts.  I had all the best accounts.  We were--in fact, I had several people working for me who later on became top promotional people, you know, absolutely.  Maurice White, the brother, the son of Granville White, worked for me.  In fact, he, he would rather work for me than work for his dad, you know, so--
Speaker 2: So what do you think you learned about management at this point in your time?  I mean, you had started out.
Speaker 1: I, I'll tell, I'll tell you a thing that I learned, most importantly: you're not a father.  You're not a mother.  You're not a brother.  You're just a manager.  You pay for what they do.  Their advance--they want an advance--they come to you--they pay it back.  You don't start dishing in your pocket, giving out food money or pay phone bills.  That's what I learned because in the early years I did a lot of  that.  A lot of my paychecks from the post office, you know, went to help, help one of the guys.  They were behind in their rent, the phone was gonna get cut off, and you wanted to try and keep this group together so you had to make sure you kept the individuals together and keep them intact, and they didn't have any decent jobs per se, and a couple of them weren't working so you became more than the manager, much more, but I learned later on you stay a manager, keep your spot, keep your distance.  When it comes to handouts--no, I don't do that because it will kill you in the long run, believe me.  They will bleed you--no, no, no end to it.
Story_ID: 14095
Speaker 1: Well, promotion--promotion to me meant to get as close to a deejay as you could, and if he would let you be his friend, that would even be better, and I was able to make a friendship with a lot of deejays.  I don't know whether or not--whether they felt sorry for me because initially I think one of the things that when I started working for ABC Paramount and they did not give me a credit card, they did not give me any, any perks at all to go on the road with, I think a lot of the deejays felt sorry for me, and so they were compassionate and said well, they didn't give you anything and sent you out here?  You know, man, come on over to my house.  I'll feed you or whatever it is, you know, so I got in closer than I would normally with the guys plus I was on the road traveling by car so I could spend some time in the market.  I didn't have to go meet the airport deadline or leave the plane and get out of there.  I stayed over at a guy's house, Al Jefferson, a deejay in Washington DC.  I went to church with him and his family and his kids, you know.  Ken Hawkins in Cleveland, Ohio, same thing with him, I know his wife, family, and kids.  I got very close to most of the jocks that I dealt with in in regards to them and their families also so it was even closer, easier for me overall to continue and to get results from them and yet not let them know that I'm using them just for that, you know, but they--I just want to say I became friends with them so I had a lot of friends, genuine friends as to opposed to--'cause no, you don't have to give me anything.  I'd take them to dinner or something on my own and that's what I would do, but Herb Kent in Chicago [Illinois], I would call him up.  Well, I guess I sort of abused him a little bit.  I would call him up at 2:00 in the morning and tell him if I had something that I was excited about--'cause if I was excited about a record, I would call him up and I would do that, you know, wake him up in the middle of the night.  In fact, one of the records that I really was crazy about wasn't our record in particular.  Believe it or not, it was a record that I was promoting by Van McCoy.  It was called The Hustle, and I was--I thought that was the greatest record I'd ever heard.  I mean, I was really personally strung out on it, and I called Herb Kent up.  I called all the guys up, you know.  I said here's a smash.  You play it a week, and it's gone, you know, and they, they believed it, and they worked with it, and they liked the record, too, you know.  They have to like it, too, you know.  They can't play a dog, you know, not continually.  They'll do you a couple of times with a dog, but they won't be faithful with you on that, but if it was a good record, they'll stay with you on it, and they were good, though.  They were good guys.  They were good guys, you know.
Speaker 2: This--this is--now were any--were there any competitors, people you kept kept coming up head to head with that was also promoters?  I mean, what was the industry 'cause this is.
Speaker 1: Oh, sure.  Oh, sure.  We had one--one of the best top promotion men, Granville White, just passed some years ago.  Granville White was top PR [public relations] man for Columbia Records.  Then we had just a number of other promotion individual, independent promotion men for labels, etcetera.  I mean, the radio station was crowded with PR people there trying to get their records played.  I mean, it was a line.  It wasn't an easy job, but again your relationship paid off plus if you knew your product well enough to know that you really had something because you wouldn't take a dog.  I wouldn't ask my friends to play something for me that I I didn't particularly care for--that I didn't think it was--had anything in the grooves.  Plus the companies that I represented, I wouldn't--I wouldn't promote that.  I'd tell them no, I can't handle this here.  I would take records that I believed in because if I believed in them, even if it did fail, I knew I'd at least get a shot.  That's where the term, I guess, 'turntable hits' came in existence, by records that don't sell, but they're played a lot because they sound good, and they are good, but they just probably don't buy them, you know, called 'turntable hits' so I would do that, but I was very fortunate, though.  I had a lot of friends.  A lot of guys supported me, and they still do.  I can't tell you how my life has been so fulfilled, right?  I see guys today, you know, that remember me and always reached out, reached out.  The love is there.  Love for the business is there, and I'll never leave out this world loving this business and loving the music.
Speaker 2: And why do you love the business?
Speaker 1: Oh, I love it because it's like raising a baby.  You have a child come into the world, zero zero zero, and you watch it develop, watch it grow up, and all of a sudden it becomes a man.  A song is written, lyrics, and the melody is put together with it.  Then it goes in a studio, and you give it to an arranger, and you hope that he can deal with it the way you want to.  Okay, now it's done.  It's completed.  Now it comes out on wax, and you hear it.  Now you've got to get it played.  You got to promote it, and that doesn't mean that it's going to sell and become a hit, but you've got--it's gone through all these steps--the writer, the tune, the lyrics, the melody, the final product.  Then the PR comes in.  Then the promotion comes in so you take it to the deejay, and you hope that he'll like it and he'll play it, but if it hits and if it's a success, then you've seen the baby grown.  It's like now it's wow--'Amen'  number 2, 'I'm So Proud', number 5 [both were 1964 hits by the Impressions].  You know, you see these things really happening and develop, but you were there in the early stages of it when it was zero zero zero, just born, you know, just came in, you see.  That's, that's the happiness.  You see the bonus you get in seeing that your product goes all the way, you know, and then also I get a lot joy out of people calling me for assistance and advice because I can relate to what the help, what their needs are because I had those needs, and unfortunately I didn't have no one to go to during my time in the era I came up, but now I can tell a guy man, get your lawyer.  Don't touch anything without an attorney.  Get everything locked up, squared away so you won't be sorry so it's been great.
Speaker 2: Did you have to get legal assistance after you learned?
Speaker 1: After I learned, yes.  We had, we had a great attorney, attorney Dick Shelton who's down on 79 West Monroe.  He was our attorney.  I was--I'm no problem then.  Everything is coasting.  He was a music lawyer, too.  He knew the music business so that meant a lot, too.  He wasn't just a regular attorney with court cases, civil cases, etcetera.  He knew the music, musical attorney so we were in good shape, and we had no problems after that, but all the money had gone.  All the big money was gone, you know, and then we got that last blow we got with Scepter Records where they went bankruptcy on us, you know, and nothing we could do about that so--but I was on course after that.  I'd graduated from the hard knocks.  They gave my degree.  I was okay.
Story_ID: 14096
Speaker 1: Can you tell us about the reputation Curtis had for being tight with a buck? He was tight.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, you know, you bring something back that--that's Curtis Mayfield without a doubt.  We would play cards or we'd play Scrabble or we'd play anything.  Curtis was--he had to win.  He, he, he was tight, and he was tight with his money, too.  I guess we all were, but I guess, I guess that's why we were such good friends.  Curtis was not--throw any money away, and in fact, he was tighter than I was when it come to money.  I would, I would pay something if it was due you.  He wouldn't do that.  Curtis would hold, would squeeze the last dime.  Unless he had to, he would not give it up.  He was--I guess he loved--you know, there's a love of money to a certain degree, but after a point, you know, you become too far out.  Curtis--come to money, Curtis Mayfield was tight, tight with that dollar, and he squashed it, you know.  I never forget when we decided to sit down and, and divorce, make our divorce.  I think I had made a loan from the First National Bank for something--I think $25,000.  Curtis knew that so he said well, Tom, you going to sell the other part of the publishing company [Curtom Music Publishing] to me?  I said sure.  Let's talk some money. He said how about $25,000 dollars, and he knew that I wanted to sever relations with us.  I wanted to start on my own and let him go north and I stay south.  He hung in for that, and that's, you know--and I was,  I was with a time limit.  I couldn't have--I didn't have but 30 days to deal with this here so I sold it to him.  He squeezed it out of me for $25,000 which meant I got--he gave me a check for $25,000.  I went down to First National Bank and told Russ.  He was the Vice President.  Here's the $25,000 I owe you, case closed, but that's how that worked out whereas normally I--you know, I'd have waited around and said well, no, give me a $100,000, $200,000, but that was Curtis.  That was his way, but I always believe that--I guess I believe in God so much that He hears and He knows and He cares and the good will follow you, you know.  Your blessing will come so many other different ways, you know.  It doesn't have to be money, and I believe that, and as I look back now over at the whole field, I say I've been blessed so much, you know--my family, my wife, my home, my life, you know, here talking to you about it at this point, you know.  There's an old saying--I could've been dead and gone, you know, six feet in my grave, but the Lord has blessed me and keeps me here so that's worth--there's no amount you can describe for your health.  First of all, you know, my health is great, you know.  Cancer is everywhere, everywhere.  So many of my deejay friends have died of cancer.  I remember Baron Taylor who was a friend, friend deejay of mine out of Detroit, Michigan.  He went to CBS and became a big shot at CBS.  He just died here last year of cancer.  He had all the money in the world, you know, but you can't--and money isn't everything so I'm just blessed to be as rich as I am with my health, my strength, my home, my family, my wife, and all my good friends that I have to associate with, and I'm very happy, extremely happy.
Story_ID: 14097
Speaker 1: You know, I want to ask a question about Jews and blacks and American music and your feelings about that.
Speaker 2: Well, music to me has always been ahead of the rest as far as interracial, as far as fairness, as far as people getting along together.  Now I don't know whether the Jews involved were after the money or not, but that could be, but the music business--you can't--you can't go in prejudiced.  You can't say well, I don't like this artist or I don't want this artist 'cause it's about dollar and cents so that's, that's where race did not count.  The only place where race counted was at the turntable during my time.  WLS [radio, Chicago] would not play 'I'm So Proud' or 'Keep On Pushin'' [both songs by The Impressions, 1964] because black music only--they would not play that.  Now it's a difference.  They will play it.  You know, they've changed.  The formula has changed so much at that time, but we had to rely on our guys at our [W]VONs and [W]CHB in Detroit [Michigan], [W]JOB in Detroit, all these other stations, to rely upon them to play our music because it was that's the way it was.  Only a crossover record like a Dee Clark--when he had Raindrops [1960] on VeeJay Records, he crossed over to the white side, you know, and they played it, but they didn't play the Impressions.  They didn't play a lot other records that they had, see, so that's where the prejudice came, is on the turntable, but in the pockets and the checks, the bank book, everything was fine.  Everything was equal, but the music was--definitely you had to cross over.  Otherwise the jocks wouldn't touch you.  They wouldn't play you.  Ed Sullivan Show, they had only the top acts, you know, that music that crossed over to their side of town.  Well, we never made the Ed Sullivan Show, never, never.
Speaker 1: But you--would you consider other music that you--was--you don't consider crossover music?  It wasn't crossover?
Speaker 2: Oh, absolutely.  In fact, it still--it did cross over.  I did, I did a tape here some time ago out of Washington, DC, NAB, National Broadcasting, public broadcasting, and I was surprised on that interview of people that liked some of Curtis' [Curtis Mayfield's] music.  They knew about me--whites only.  They knew about 'I'm So Proud', 'We're A Winner'.  They knew all of his music.  You follow me?  So it did cross over whether they liked it or not.  They spilled over, you see, so--but they wouldn't play it per se, but they heard it.  They heard about it now.
Speaker 1: Well, that's, that's--I have a question there.  Do you think--I mean, at the time that was at WVON's heyday, right?  Okay.  Now you needed the black stat--I mean, who, who was playing the music besides--you weren't--the truly white stations weren't playing that.
Speaker 2: No, they're not going to touch it.
Speaker 1: Okay, but WVON was not known by whites.
Speaker 2: Absolutely, absolutely.
Speaker 1: But I'm just saying so what if that hadn't existed?  Do you think it would have been a whole different story?
Speaker 2: Yes, it would have.  Oh, yeah.  We needed exposure.  No matter how good your music is, you've got to get exposed.  That's the key to it.  Somebody's got to hear it.  John Q. Public can't buy it if you don't hear it and the deejays--the stations here, on R and B--we called rhythm and blues at the time--they were everything to us, our bread and butter.  Without them we couldn't have existed, could never made it, not one step.  They're everything.
Story_ID: 14098
Speaker 1: What do you think about the music industry today?
Speaker 2: Oh, I think it's so computerized and so glamorized that, that the hip-hop has taken over the world.  That's it.  The artists coming out now are very astute in regards to their business, their management, their lawyers, etcetera, which is great and wonderful so you can see a Babyface, or Kenneth Edmonds is his name, become a millionaire 'cause he knows how to handle his funds, his money.  Puff Daddy [Sean 'Puffy' Combs]--another example--you can see they're getting paid.  The money is due and etcetera, you see, but fortunately I guess I'll say in a way we paved the way, opened the doors, and by our sufferings and us getting cut off from our funds, they knew the pitfalls so they didn't step in those holes, and they're doing very well.  Artists nowadays does very well.  Its unfortunate for the, the groups, and the music that we made, you know, is not being made anymore.  Just once in awhile you'll hear a ballad coming out as being a hit and catching on.  It's very hard now 'cause the outlets are not there anymore, you know, but dusties have taken over.  They're still--they're back to our music again.  Maybe we can go back and get our music, and that's what they're living off of.  They're playing our music again.  That's why you turn on a station, you're hearing the dusties.  They're big as bubble gum, and the artists who are still alive and able to perform are still working now.  The Stylistics were here last month because they're personal friends of mine, and I was with them that month at Hawthorne Racetrack [Chicago, Illinois].  They're doing well.  They work and study consistently and singing the same songs, you know, that they did in that era, and that's 31 years they've been doing that so you see us lasting music, the ballads and the good music that lasts.  It's just lasting.  I can't see 20 years from now--in fact, with hip-hop, some of the hip-hop music, I don't understand what they're saying.  You know, you got three guys, two, three guys rapping on a stage.  One guy's saying something.  The other guy--I don't know how do you understand it, but I know it's a fad that's in right now, and I understand that's what's happening so good, great, but still the sustaining power--they don't have the power that we had in our music.  Our music is just there.  You're never gonna forget a 'For Your Precious Love.'  You'll never ever--you'll die, and it will still be making--you'll be able to feel it because the warmth--it does something to you, you know.  It's--I say tell Elijah soul just gives you, you know, a feeling, and that's what music does.  That's when you got music.  That's when you've got music.  That's music that is lasting.  That's what makes it so wonderful.
Story_ID: 14099
Speaker 1: So was there ever a time when you said that I want to get out of this business?  I mean, I know you were always trying to diversify, but it was like--was it after, you know, the bankruptcy did you ever say.
Speaker 2: No, no.  The only time when I wanted to get out this business was when, when I got the record pool.  I formed a record pool called the Dogs of War and organized all the deejays that were spinning records in all the clubs--black, white, you name it, gay, doesn't matter.  I figured that was the last hurrah because of my age.  You know, I wasn't getting any younger, and I said to myself--I promised myself.  I said I'm going to enjoy some of my life, and then I think the key thing that really put me out was that my wife at that time, Audrey Thomas, she had cancer.  She had multiple myeloma, and in the last years I knew she didn't have many more years left [Audrey died in 1996] so I--you know, I'd tried to give all my time and dedicate myself to her because that's what--a caregiver is dedicated totally so that was like the final stage of my music career overall.  There are still bits and pieces.  I've remarried now, and I'm very happy.  The Lord blessed me again.  I say His blessings never cease, blessed me again with a beautiful wife Verlene.  She's just a doll so I still go out and do it.  Once in awhile I'll do something or try to help somebody.  For example, we're doing a fest out in Justice, Illinois.  I got a group that, that I've got appearing out there, and I got the gig out there, and you know--that's once in awhile I dabble here and there, etcetera.  I did a thing with the NBA on a tune called Deejay Keep Dancing.  Last year they wanted it.  They use it on The Sopranos, HBO for background music, you know, so it's a little something here and a little something there just to keep your feet wet.  You know, I've never stopped totally, just cut it off completely, never.
Story_ID: 14100
Speaker 1: So you and Curtis [Mayfield] had this split.  Why did he want to move north [Chicago's North Side]?  You said it was Marvin Stuart.
Speaker 2: Well, Marv Stuart.
Speaker 1: He was, he was a promoter in the south?
Speaker 2: No, Marv Stuart was the manager of a group called Baby Huey and the Babysitters, which was the biggest group up north.  I mean, they were just dynamite.  Marv wanted Curtis to come up north with him because he wanted to do some more things plus Marv had established a strong relationship with Curtis, very strong.  I couldn't figure it out, and I still can't figure it out, but strong relationship and again Curtis--I guess he felt that--well, I always said that maybe he felt that this guy could do something for him or put his career up.
Speaker 1: Was he white?
Speaker 2: Boost his career, yes, boost his career more that he didn't need to.  I told Curtis before we severed our relationship.  I said you know, if we want Marv Stuart in our company, we could put him in here as an advisor, pay him what he earns, and do--and leave it at that point so that we can watch everything that's going down, but Curtis--Marv had really done a job on Curtis, nothing I could say or do to change him so we--I sold my stock to Curtis, and Curtis went north with Marv, and I formed Thomas Associates, and Thomas Associates does everything--a limousine service--I started doing everything, you know, thereafter.
Story_ID: 14101
Speaker 1: Well, let, let me go back a little bit, and give you something that we hadn't talked about because I think a lot of people would want to know.  When Jerry Butler left the group [The Impressions], we needed another member to make up, make up that fifth man so we called upon another Tennessee, Chattanooga, Tennessee, boy named Fred Cash so Fred Cash replaced Jerry Butler not as the lead singer but as the, as another member.  Then Curtis Mayfield took over the lead role, okay, as the lead singer of the group.  That's how you begin to hear Curtis' voice on all the records.  Now after ABC Paramount and we're doing well, then when Curtis and I decided to form the label [Curtom Records], the Brooks brothers [Arthur and Richard] decided to leave and form their own group as Arthur and Richard Brooks.  They left and went back to Chattanooga so therefore there was only a trio left--Curtis Mayfield, Fred Cash, and Samuel Gooden, okay? That's all that was left.  That became the new original Impressions.  As far as the record is concerned, the label's concerned, people seeing a gang of three.  They never any longer saw the five anymore.  The other two groups, the other group went back home.  They never made it.  Arthur and Richard never got, got going with whatever they wanted to do.  They never got going with that, still trying, I guess, today, but they're called the Brooks Brothers, but that was the beginning.  That's the trio, the three Impressions--Curtis, Fred, and Sam--and Curtis was original.  Sam was original.  Fred was a replacement for Jerry Butler.  You see?  Now that was the Impressions.
Speaker 2: Okay, so there weren't two groups of Impressions?
Speaker 1: Well, the other group was unknown.  After, after the other two boys went back, they never, they never could get off the ground.  They never--Arthur and Richard never got it together.  They're still trying today to do some things, you know.
Speaker 2: So they were trying, but who owns the name?
Speaker 1: Well, that was, that was one of the things that--the name Impressions--that I didn't lock up so it became public domain.
Story_ID: 14102
Speaker 1: They [Curtis Mayfield and Marv Stuart] went north [Mayfield bought out Eddie Thomas' shares in Curtom Records, and moved the offices to Chicago's North Side.].  They did very well.  That's when the Superfly--they did Superfly, okay, and Freddie's Dead.  They did a great job up there, okay?  They made a lot of money.  Now what happened, I don't know.  I don't know why they decided to move down to Georgia.  I could never figure that out, what happened, but they sold the building [office of Curtom Records], and Curtis moved to Georgia, and his career seemed to sort of die out a little bit, and then in [August 14,] 1990 he was still making public appearances.  He had this tragic accident where the scaffold fell [during a concert].  The lights kind of fell on his back, on his spine, and he became paralyzed so from 1990 up until 1999 of December he had a very, very painful life, you know, in a wheelchair.  He, he developed diabetes, and he lost his leg.  He just suffered so, so much and then his passing--I think Christmas, December 26th, he finally passed.  He was dead.  His death.
Speaker 2: And did you go to the funeral?
Speaker 1: No, I didn't go to the funeral because I had not gone down to Atlanta [Georgia] to visit.  I talked to Curtis maybe six months before then and told him that I was coming down to visit him because we had finally, you know, got our heads together, and he spoke to me on the phone.  We spoke very well and wanted to see each other, and I was going to go, but I hadn't made it, and once I realized of his passing, I didn't want to come down just for that.  I wanted--if I couldn't see him personally to talk to him, I didn't want to see him after his death, you know.  I'm going to come down just as just a viewer or a spectator.  I didn't feel that it was right to do that so I didn't go, but I, I paid my respects.  I sent flowers and the family, and I also talked to his mother [Marian Jackson] before she went down.  I've spoken to her afterwards.  You know, afterwards she's here at home so I paid my respects.  I spoke to his wife [Altheida Mayfield] here, one here and one there, too.
Speaker 2: So Dave Stuart.
Speaker 1: Marv Stuart.
Speaker 2: Marv Stuart.  (unclear) Marv Stuart, Marv Stuart and he worked together for (unclear) until he had his accident? Then he moved to Georgia?
Speaker 1: Well, Marv didn't.  Marv kept his office here, but Curtis--he moved, put Curtis down in Georgia.  Curtis wanted to go to Georgia, I guess, and Marv--I don't know.  I really can't answer that because I wasn't in that enough to give some correct answers, why he moved, want to move to Georgia or what happened, you know, but it was just--it seemed like things went downhill after that, totally everything.  The building was sold.  His records were not doing well and some seemingly, and then the accident to go with that, you know, just seemingly that that was his career was just on, on a fast way downhill.
Speaker 2: Do you ever, did you ever think about if you, if the two of you had stayed together?
Speaker 1: Yeah, oh, yes.
Speaker 2: What could have been done?
Speaker 1: Yes, I thought about that quite a bit, but again, see, Curtis and I were like two different personalities.  We just didn't mix when it came to business and a lot of business subjects, a lot of business transactions, for example, Donny Hathaway.  I told Curtis I thought Donny Hathaway was a dynamite talent.  We should record him.  We should get whatever he needs.  He's--this boy is dynamite.  Curtis thought he was okay, but Donny Hathaway was such a genius in the studio.  I don't know whether he, he challenged Curtis, his genius.  You know, two geniuses together just couldn't make it.  Anyway, we passed him.  Also another group that came, came into our hands came from Gary, Indiana.  I told Curtis I thought they were dynamite.  I said wow, the Jackson Five, but again Curtis was, was strung out on the Five Stairsteps, you know, and that's where he put his allegiance to so we lost The Jackson Five.  This is some of the things that have happened, you know, that we differed on, you see?  We were totally different, and Curtis being the major stockholder, he was 60 percent owner, and I was 40 percent owner.  He had the last say-so, you know, but that was one of the reasons why we were severed.  I said well, I need to start my own thing because I need the controlling factor, you know, because we lose a lot.  I thought we were, and as we look back, you can see the Jackson Five are still knocking them down.  Donny Hathaway--unfortunate, you know, he committed suicide, but he was worth some records, some gold records before then, you know Roberta [Flack] and Hathaway, you know, Killing Me Softly.  He, he did a lot of great things, you know.
Story_ID: 14103
Speaker 1: Was it common somewhat if they had talent themselves, if they had a group, they would try to fund their own label, and then other groups would come, and,  you know, come to you, but that was all (unclear)?
Speaker 2: Yes, oh yeah, oh yeah, oh yes, yes, yeah.  Once you get the name and the reputation of helping and doing and making records and making artists and making hits, everything flows right into you.  Automatically people came into my office, more so than Curtis [Mayfield] because Curtis was up north.  He was 5915 North Lincoln [Avenue, Chicago, Illinois].  I was right there on Stony Island so it was easy for me.  Then I moved from Stony Island.  I moved down to 323 East 21st Street right next to Sawa's [Old Warsaw] Restaurant.  Paul Serrano and I--I rented the second floor of his place up there, and I made a deal with Paul to use his studios, etcetera, and we sort of hooked up together and worked it out.
Speaker 1: (unclear)
Speaker 2: It makes it so unique, you know, in different fields, you know.  When I was looking at your list of people you've interviewed, I said wow, these are heavy people, ad I never think of myself as being that, but someone else would look at me and say wow, that's a great man, a great person.  When I go to church or visit like [New] Friendship [Baptist] Church out in Harvey [Illinois]--Reverend [Benjamin] Garrett who was a friend of mine and also a schoolmate of mine.  I mean, right away the whole church almost stands up, you know?  He makes you feel like you're somebody.  In fact, sometime I wish I could disappear in the floor, but that's the way people view you as, you know.  You yourself don't feel that way, you know.  You feel you're only doing what you're doing.  You're only helping people because that's what you want to do, and your blessings come from that, you know, but the people that want to acknowledge that, you know--sometimes it's hard to take, you know, because you just--you know, you don't think that much of what you're doing, but other people think wow, you did that, you did this, you did that?
Speaker 1: So now--okay, you, you split with Curtis Mayfield at this point (unclear) and then you are you still owning the building on the South or--?
Speaker 2: No, I sold the building.  We had a building.  After I left Paul Serrano I bought the building at--
Speaker 1: (unclear).
Speaker 2: I bought the building at 2112 South Michigan Avenue, okay?  That belongs to the post office now.  The postal workers have bought it now, but that was my building at 2112 South Michigan.  That's where I had my office and the gold records and the whole bit was just, you know, and we formed Thomas Associates, the limousine service, promotion service.  We had everything going out of there, the Dogs of War record pool.
Speaker 1: Well, let's talk about that time in your life (unclear) because you were it says the top independent record promotion company in the Midwest so, I mean, what was that time like, and this is 19 what? 1970?
Speaker 2: Yeah, it's in the '78 [1978], somewhere in that ballpark, I'm guessing.  Dates leave me faster than anything else, but experiences don't.  I just have to dig them up.
Speaker 1: '74 [1974] you said was when the record you know where that company went bust.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: '72.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: No, you said '72 [1972].
Speaker 2: Yeah, '72, yeah.
Speaker 1: You went bust so do you think it was '78?
Speaker 2: Yeah, it could have been there very easily, but anyway I wanted to start something else.  I felt that--I just felt that I could do anything, you know.  I really, I really out there so after I formed the limousine service because I knew so many artists coming into town back and forth, that was easy for me.  You see, in doing independent promotion I got a chance to represent a lot of the big stars--Barry White, Stylistics, Nancy Wilson, Quincy Jones, just a whole lot of the big stars.  I mean, I really got a chance to meet a lot of people and be around them so just everything offset that, you know.  Record company executives, I knew all of them so when I formed the record pool, it was easy for me to contact them and let them know that I'm doing this promotion.  They all sent me product, you know.  I had product over every company.  I had so much product.  I had a staff of people working for me at the pool.  I had staff, you know, to help me sort the product out for the guys to come and get it each week, and each week the guys would come, and they'd get a stack of records that high, you know, each week, pick up and take it back to their particular places where they spin records at so it was a great time for me.  This point in my life was great, just great.  I had more fun 'cause it was such busy--a lot of activity in the midst of still doing little things like I worked with my label.  Thomas Records had a blues singer named Jesse Anderson, and we lucked out and got a little hit record called--you know, a little tune called I Got A Problem With My Woman, Got A Problem With My Wife, Somebody's Gonna Ruin My Life.  Jesse Anderson, we got him.  We got--Cash McCall was a good artist I had.  I had a song called When You Wake Up, you know, which was very, did very good here in the area.  It hit the top charts of the Billboards so we know we did well.  Jamo Thomas, I Spy For The FBI--that was a great hit, a big hit for us on my own label, Thomas Records, so it was just beautiful.  Things just were beautiful, just beautiful, and it's only later years, and my wife [Audrey Thomas] got sick that I just backed down on everything totally because I needed to.  I just couldn't put the time into it with the time I needed to give her for her illness, but it's just been absolutely fabulous for me, just fantastic.
Speaker 1: And you--the record pool--what--I want to under--what was that, that you were getting product to give to deejays?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: To give to them and that was a service or they put--what was the, what was whole logic behind that?
Speaker 2: Well, the logic behind that was that there was an extra avenue for promotion of a record.  Example one, there's an artist come from Miami, Miami label, named Peter Brown, and he had a disco record called Do You Want To Get Funky With Me.  Now the radio stations, they were hesitant about playing it, especially in this area slow, but I gave a copy to each of my guys.  I had about, had about a hundred and ten members, and each of them got a copy of that Do You Want To Get Funky With Me, and we had our own playlist.  We had our own pick hits just like a radio station so the pick hits--each member was required to play it two or three times a night in his own club so if you went to this club here on the north side, you'd hear Do You Want To Get Funky With Me.  You went on the south side, you'd hear the same tune.  All of a sudden, you know, you got a hundred people or three hundred people asking for this record.  We forced the radio stations to start playing it, and as a consequentce, we got a gold record out of it.  They awarded it to our record pool, a gold record because we were really responsible for it.  That happened because they never touched it, but we could give extra exposure to a record compared to what the stations could give because they were just too bogged down with records that they couldn't get to, couldn't play.  You got to remember that their playlist was only like 45 records, and they were getting two or three hundred records every week to go over so out of only playing 45 records, that made it real tight to get a record on so if there was a method of exposing a record other than the radio stations, it was welcome.
Speaker 1: So did you have any other success?  I know Do You Want To Get Funky With Me.  I mean, do you--did you.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, absolutely, absolutely, absolutely.  If you heard it, it came, it came from us in my record pool.
Speaker 1: Were there other successes you had like that, that you were going to--you said yourself you're too modest.  I got to pull stuff out.
Speaker 2: Oh, oh, well, we had a lot of hits, The Hustle, you know, Van McCoy.  We just went bananas with that record, and stations had to pick up and start playing it, you know, and in fact, I heard it just a couple of weeks ago in a McDonald's commercial or a Burger King commercial, one of those commercials.  I heard The Hustle in the background.  I said I was proud of it, proud of Van McCoy.  I was just so sorry that he didn't get a chance to enjoy all of his success.  He died such--he died about five or six years ago from cancer.  He was a nice artist and a nice person, too, you know.  You meet some of these artists, you get totally wrapped up in them, you know, because they're so beautiful inside and out, you know, but it was just great.  I really--I could go on for the records we did.  I could just list so many records.  I could go on and on and on you know.
Speaker 1: Could you list the names?
Speaker 2: You know, the Stylistics--I mean, You Are Everything, Everything is You, Betcha By Golly, Wow, I'm a Big Girl Now.  Wow, Barry White, when he first came out, we had his records, you know?  I can't think of the name of it, so many records, you know.  I've covered so many records just.
Speaker 1: So you weren't managing them but you were promoting their records?
Speaker 2: Exactly, exactly.
Speaker 1: You moved from the management.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: You said maybe this is not--I don't know what you said.
Speaker 2: Right, right.
Speaker 1: Maybe this is not the way I want to go, you know, try all my.
Speaker 2: Try another outlet, try another outlet, right.
Speaker 1: So I'm, I'm going to promote--these people are going to sign up--how?  What was that whole process?  I don't understand.  I'm just.
Speaker 2: What do you mean?  What do you mean?  The process of signing the deejays up?
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: To the record pool?
Speaker 1: Right.  No, the record pool--well, I like that, but what were these clients--what were you doing?  I mean, did you--
Speaker 2: The clients were getting exposure to their particular product.
Speaker 1: So you're saying here, I can really help promote you.
Speaker 2: Exactly.
Speaker 1: Okay, 'cause I got all these contacts.
Speaker 2: Exactly.  My guys and plus we had our own playlist of records that we were designed to play, that we're going to play, our pick hits, etcetera, so we sent the clients a copy of our playlist, our pick hits.  You know, it was just like a radio station.  We're underground, underground, plus certain records we could play that maybe the stations couldn't play at all--you following me--because of the lyrical content so that was another exposure.  It just worked perfectly, and the companies were very happy about that.  It paid off big time for them, big time.
Speaker 1: And were these--were was this--were you, your main focus on the Midwest or was it all around the country?
Speaker 2: Midwest, Midwest.  I couldn't go nationwide with the--you know, that would be too much time consuming.  Of course, now with computers, you could do it easily now, but at that time the Midwest was enough for me, more than enough to keep the guys going.
Speaker 1: (unclear)
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Now let me ask you about this so okay--so that, that went for about twelve years.  You did that so.
Speaker 2: What, the record pool?  Oh.
Speaker 1: 1978 to 1980, maybe?
Speaker 2: Yeah, you could say that.  You could say that.  Yeah, you could say that very easily.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: 'Cause time left me.  When you're doing so many things, you don't think about time, you know.  Only time is when you promote a record, getting it started, and you see it go, you know, see it happen, you get another record behind it and see it go so time--you lose you lose consciousness of time.  You only realize when you slow down.  Gee whiz, wow, I did all this?  What, what year is it, you know?
Story_ID: 14104
Speaker 1: So, so what do you feel most proud of of that period, of Thomas, Thomas Associates?
Speaker 2: Oh, I feel proud of the success that we had.  I feel proud of the fact that I enlightened so many people who could not have gotten the information they needed about making a mistake or without getting hurt financially.  That's the one thing that I really zeroed in on, get a lawyer, get an attorney, get everything tied up legally.  I made that mistake.  I don't want you to make that mistake.  Get everything down in black and white.  Then start, but don't start until you do that, you know, and I was able to preach that over and over and over again, and I stayed on top of that.  That was one of the biggest things that I really shoved down people's throats, to get the legal things done.  Don't get started without it 'cause you will get wiped out later on.  If you get successful, you spend all this time, you have one big hit and don't get paid for it, you know, because you didn't have your legal things uptight so that was the biggest thing.  Then also those who came in that didn't have anything to offer.  I knew they weren't talented.  I knew their tunes weren't worth anything, but I would give them some hope.  I said you know what?  Go back to your drawing board.  Try something else or I will give them a ray of light and then the fact that a lot of them were glad to see that I would take time with them because they felt I was somebody on a real high ladder, high level.  For me to have them come into my office and sit down and take time with them, they were elated over that.  That made them feel good so you gave them some inspiration.  You gave them some hope, and you never put them down.  I never put anybody down and said well, you don't have it, man.  Just forget about it.  I never said that, never.  I always gave them hope and kept going so it comes back to me today.  I had four guys come in and say man, I'll never forget what you did for me.  You gave me hope, you know.  You really pulled for me, and I really appreciate that so I think that was one of the good things that meant a lot to me.
Story_ID: 14105
Speaker 1: What, what are your thoughts about what's happening, not maybe the type of music but how things are promoted with the--now the entry of the Internet, the whole issue.
Speaker 2: You just said it.  You just answered the question.  You just answered the question.  With the Internet and computers and everything setup, everything is done, fax machines, you know.  A playlist is made up.  I can fax it to you, and you can have it in the next five minutes, you know, from Chicago [Illinois] to New York, you know.  It's just a fast-paced business now, totally fast-paced, and everything is documented.  Everything is recorded.  You have records kept better.  Before years ago when--say you pull out a record and it's doing well, your company could call the pressing plant.  That's when we had pressing plants that the companies controlled, and they had their ties with the pressing plants, and they would tell the company look--especially if they're tight with JoJo--would you press up a hundred thousand extra on this particular record?  I'll send you a check in the mail, but don't put it on the books so now you've got a hundred thousand records, a record that's hot and selling.  The artist never knew about it, what's happening with it, that it's--that hundred thousand goes out the back door instead of the front door, you see, so it's just--that's the one good thing about the way things are done now.  The records are well kept, documented.  It's hard for them to do anything like that like they used to do, but they did that quite often, you know, quite often.  That was, that was the norm, you know.  If you sold--in fact, I'll give you one example.  You won't believe this.  I'll go back to the original record For Your Precious Love [The Impressions, 1958].  It was never certified by the RIAA, the Record Industry Association [of America], as a million seller, as a gold record.  Now you can rest assured between the back door, the front door, and the side door and it's still selling over all these years, that record has sold a million plus, okay?  Gypsy Woman never made a million seller.  Amen was number two in the pop charts--I mean pop charts--never got certified for a million.  See, as long as a company didn't certify a record for you, then you never knew what the count was.  They'd say oh, well, we did 800,000 or whatever they told you.  That's what you had to go by.  It's hard to check the distributors all over nationwide because the distributors are all dealing, wheeling and dealing, too, you know.  The guys are wheeling and dealing because they know they're getting extra side  money on the side from them so you couldn't keep--there's no control that you could keep on that.  There was no lock so you're at their mercy so basically the artist knew he had a gold record.  At least he'd know I got--they gotta pay me on a million records whereas before--as long as they don't certify you, you don't know what you've sold, and the manufacturer will tell you well, we sold five, half a million copies, you know, but they've sold much more than that, you know, because that was the norm.  That' why record companies did so well and got so rich, made so much money, but nowadays the artists are making the money.  So you see the surgence of a Puff Daddy [Sean "Puffy" Combs] and a Babyface [Kenneth Edmonds], and really, you know, you see all of a sudden they're getting the Grammys and getting all this awards and doing financially well 'cause they get paid on every record they made.  That's the way it go now, and they got good contracts, good lawyers, so the record companies are not eating them up like they used to do.  They would, they would kill you, the two percent contracts.  You'd get low contracts.  Now you get a ten percent contract.  You get good deals.  The deals are solid now, you know, but the business is different now, totally different.
Speaker 1: Now what about MP3?  Is it MP3 or.
Speaker 2: What?
Speaker 1: MP3?  The downloading of music over the Internet free.  Isn't it?
Speaker 2: (unclear)
Speaker 1: Right.  Anyone can download.  They're just going on--this is the big thing now.  Everyone
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Also got shut down, though, didn't they?
Speaker 2: (unclear)
Speaker 1: Oh.
Speaker 2: Well, you're getting out of my--off my turf now when you get into that because it was never like that.  All I know is the back door and the front door.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And seeing records come out the side, you know, the fact of a guy--say, for an example, Vee-Jay, they wanted to get a $1000 right quick cash money.  Uncle Sam and nobody else could catch up with them.  It's call one of the record stores, you know, in Chicago.  Look, I'm sending you so and so for a hit so they know it's gonna, it's gonna go and be evaporated, disappear, you know.  I need $1000.  Send $1000 cash, send the records out, and no one ever knows, and the guy that's taking it, he's happy because he's gonna make some money on it so the poor artist--they never knew what happened.  They lost their sales forever and a day.
Story_ID: 14106
Speaker 1: Of the people that you've worked with in this, you know, in the industry you've come across, who have you had--some of the people you've had the most respect for, and I'm talking about apart from talent, you know?
Speaker 2: Well, at the top of my list--deejay-wise I've got to give Herb Kent in Chicago [Illinois] the main man.  He's just been a giant in so many different ways.  Clarence Avant who helped me initially out of ABC Paramount in New York years ago, later become chairman of the board of Motown Records so I've got to give him credit.  We're still, we still talk to each other, and we're still very close friends.  Travis Gardner at KPR--that's in Kansas City [Missouri]--was a deejay friend of mine.  Now he's become station manager, great guy.  There's just so many, you know, but I'm just giving you a few off the top, you know, that you--that I can recall that are dynamite gentlemen, dynamite guys, you know.  Another guy that's a great guy in Chicago, Chuck Barksdale.  He's with The Dells.  Now he's a great guy.  You won't meet a finer gentleman.  You meet him, you know you're--you know, he's a friend.  This--I hate to start calling names because I'll omit, I'll omit somebody, you know.  You can't think of everybody, you know, but just a few to top it off the list, you know.  Lucky Cordell is another good guy who's been nice to me, you know.  I could just go on, you know.  That's a great list.
Story_ID: 14107
Speaker 1: Now music has been such an important part of your life when it could have been the military.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah.  My wife tells me--Verlene, she's my lady now--she tells me you could have been dead 'cause you go in the service, you knew they would call you on the front line first, you know, have your group up there first, you know, and you know, but the good Lord has something else in store for you, and he's keeping you here.  He has another direction for you and other things for you to do so I blame--I have to thank God for everything, you know.  It's the reason, you know.  Like she says, He sees, He knows, and He cares so I'm still here, you know, and I have my health and my strength.  That's why I think I'm as wealthy as a person could get.  I can't ask for anything else, you know, and I'm always trying to reach out and give somebody else a hand, and if I can, 'cause I enjoy that, and I know that they'll--somewhere down the line they'll remember that and say well, you know, he told me that.  Eddie Thomas told me what to do, you know.
Story_ID: 14108
Speaker 1: Now what are your hopes for African-Americans and music and their--you know, and their ability to excel in the music?
Speaker 2: Well, it's rough because we don't have the outlets anymore we used to have.  You see, there was a time in Chicago [Illinois] when you had a number of companies.  Chicago was a record market and had record companies.  Chicago no longer is a record market per se that it was and does not have the companies at all.  The companies are located between Los Angeles [California] and New York [New York] so it's very tough on the artists trying to make it and trying to get started.  The avenues are so closed to them now, just closed up.  It's very hard.  If you're not out on the west coast or in New York City, it's very difficult for you so it has changed, the whole music industry.  You don't see too many up and coming new stars emerging from zero as you used to do.  I mean, they were plentiful before, but now you don't see, you don't see that happening, you know.  How many Babyfaces [Kenneth Edmonds] and Puff Daddys [Sean "Puffy" Combs] do you see, you know?  You see a lot of them trying, you know what I mean?  Sisqo [Mark Althavan Andrews] and a couple of other artists, you know, but that's rap, you see.  We don't know how long it's gonna be around, but as far as the music we made, the music that we made which we call forever music, music that will do something to your heart, that'll make you feel inside, you know, make you cry, make you happy, you know, make your day for you, pass, you know, you don't see too many artists coming along brand-new that's hitting the top, making that kind of music anymore, you see.  It used to be common.  Now it's not common anymore.  It's a rarity.  You name a singing group now that's made a ballad, a smash ballad hit, you know.  It doesn't happen anymore.  It's hard.
Story_ID: 14109
Speaker 1: I wanted to ask you what music means to you.
Speaker 2: Oh, music is my life.  It has just, has been so wonderful to me being a part of it and still being a part of it, and it'll be my life, and I'll leave this world with a song in my heart, you know.  I love it.  My wife loves it.  I got a great wife.  She loves music, and so we have so much in common.  We're so happy together, and I believe that somewhere up in heaven my ex-wife, wife that's passed, she's lookin' down, you know, knowing that I'm happy, and she's happy that I am, you know, 'cause she'd want my life to go on.  I felt that maybe my life wouldn't be able to go on, but then the Lord took care of that, blessed me so I'm very happy, and I love music and always will.
Speaker 1: Your first wife's name was?
Speaker 2: Audrey.
Speaker 1: Audrey.  Okay, and now it's?
Speaker 2: Verlene.
Speaker 1: Verlene.
Speaker 2: Yeah, uh huh.
Speaker 1: Now, and you were married the first time in what year and the second time in?
Speaker 2: We got married in--she [his first wife Audrey] passed in '96 [1996], and we were married twenty-nine years, I think, at that time so long time, long time 'cause I'll be celebrating my third year anniversary with Verlene come December.  Pearl Harbor Day, December 7 will be our third year anniversary.
Story_ID: 14110
Speaker 1: So you've had a lot of stability in an industry that is not always viewed as stable.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I have because, you know, I guess I stay close to the Man Upstairs, very close because that's where everything comes from.  I'm a strong believer in that 'cause he's been carrying me through some rough times.  I'm never forget I was in Birmingham, Alabama, and I just--we just come from Houston, Texas.  I was doing promotion at that time in my car, and John White was driving me.  We were come--and we came to his home in Montgomery, Alabama, and we just got that long trip from Houston.  I was tired.  He was tired.  At least I thought he was tired.  Anyways, his brother Patrick had just bought a brand-new Ford, and as Patrick was--had just become a school teacher--principal, I'm sorry--principal of a school and said--John said let me try the car out, says okay, let's go into town.  John got in his brother's car, brother got in next to him.  I had to sit in the back.  We drove into town, and we went to a little place.  They had some drinks and stuff, and I said John, you know, I'm still tired from the trip.  I'm going to go out in the car and sit in the back and rest up so when I got in the car, it was a two-door.  I got in the front, and my mind told me well, you know what, Thomas?  Get in the back seat so that when they come out, you won't disturb them because otherwise they'll disturb you as you get in the back or whatever so John came out.  John took the wheel.  Patrick came out, and they got in after they were done, and we're headed back for the farm, called it White's Farm.  On our way I don't know what happened.  That car turned over three times.  John's brother, Patrick White, was killed on the spot, knocked his brains out.  John got a little scratch here, very insignificant, and I think I hit an artery right over here which made me bleed profusely, but I was okay.  I went to Saint Mary's Hospital [sic, Medical Center] in Montgomery, Alabama, stayed there a week, but again I just think how God wanted me to stay on because it could have been me, you know.  That's the closest call I had as far as in business (unclear).  That was some experience.  I mean, that's why I stay so close to the Man 'cause He's been there for me all the time, and He's still being there for me, and He's taking of me, and that's--that is so important for all of us, you know, just live a life that we can also dedicate our life and appreciate our life and appreciate our blessings, you know.  They never stop coming as long as you do that, never.
Story_ID: 14111
Speaker 1: If you have story to tell or if you have just a viewpoint or something or some of these (unclear) Ray Charles [Robinson]?
Speaker 2: Oh, Ray Charles, Ray Charles, great, great, great man.  He is so funny.  He's just a pleasure to be around.  You never knew that he was without sight because he always kibbitzing and telling jokes, and he's kept the same manager.  Joe Adams is his manager for all these years.  He's still his manager, you know.  They really stuck together.  They really--like tigers, like friends, you know, but he's a great artist, and I'm just so pleased to see his success continue to go on, see him on television, big shows, and just wonderful, just wonderful.  Ray Charles is a great artist, great man, and great person.
Story_ID: 14112
Speaker 1: Barry White?
Speaker 2: Barry White, the high priest Barry White.  Barry White is--he came out to one of our meetings at my record club, the Dogs of War.  We had it at the hotel down in McCormick Place [Chicago, Illinois].  At that time it was the McCormick Hotel before they tore it down, and he spoke, you know, and he was so appreciative of what all the jocks had done for him, the deejays, and the record pool had done for him, just a great man.  I didn't have a lot time with him, but I had more time with his products than I had with him, but I enjoyed the few little times I had with him personally one on one, you know, but he's just appreciative of where his successes came.
Speaker 1: Do you think if he, if he had come through, would you, would that have been a talent that you would have identified right away?
Speaker 2: Oh, yes indeed, absolutely, absolutely.  The man's an incredible talent, you know.  I  just only hate that he parted with his co-partner, co-producer Gene Page.  I thought they had a combination to me.  It's the same thing I had when I had Chuck Jackson and Marvin Yancy producing, you follow me?  They were just such a dynamic team together, you see, and after Marvin's passing Chuck is not being able to get ahold of it anymore, and after Gene Page and Barry White split up, Barry White has done some things but nothing outstanding as the success he was having with Gene Page, you know.  Everything they touched was just going off.  You could hear the arrangement sound.  You could hear Gene Page right there, you know, but Barry White is still talented, but he's got to find, you know, have someone also that can give him what he wants in his music, you know, but he has not had that super success that he had with Gene Page so that combination is very well missed.
Story_ID: 14113
Speaker 1: And what about the Stylistics?
Speaker 2: Oh, Stylistics, they're like my family.  Russell [Thompkins], the lead singer, is just like a son, you know.  Herbie [Murrell]--I just can't--we have a Herb also, not Herb Kent, but Herbie's also in the group.  They are just some wonderful kids, and I never will forget they came here last year.  They were at the Hawthorne Racetrack [Chicago, Illinois], and I was going to go back to see them.  The security guard told them--my wife [Verlene Thomas] and I were going back to the car to say hello to them--that I couldn't or something.  Anyway, Russell overheard them say that.  He told the security guard said man, you get them back, said this man responsible for us, everything that happened to us.  Now he just loaded the guy down with what kudos in regards to me, you know.  I felt so good that he felt that way, and then when they came out on stage, they said we'd like to dedicate this song to Mrs. Verlene Thomas, Happy Birthday.  They sang Happy Birthday to her.  She wanted to crawl up underneath the seat at the big stadium.  We had 10,000 people singing Happy Birthday by the, with the Stylistics, too.  That was just so wonderful of them, you know.  They're just such beautiful kids.  I love 'em.  I love 'em.  I love the Stylistics.
Story_ID: 14114
Speaker 1: And Donna Summer.  Now she was the queen of the disco.
Speaker 2: Yeah, Donna Summer, didn't have a lot of meetings with her briefly because when she came in there was a club on Rush Street [Chicago, Illinois].  Oh, I can't remember the name of the club on Rush Street, but that was the hottest club on Rush Street, right there Rush and--anyway, she came in for some, couple of guest performances, and I met her briefly.  I didn't have enough, not enough to know her well one on one so it was just briefly, just on P.R. [public relations] I had her.
Story_ID: 14115
Speaker 1: So who, who were the people--did, you know--?
Speaker 2: Well, let me say this.  I think the the most significant person and another sweet guy, I'd have to say Quincy Jones.  Quincy Jones had an album, his first album that went gold, and it started in Chicago [Illinois] and was called Body Heat, and he was so elated over the fact that, you know, his first gold album.  He was very happy.  He had never had a gold album before, and he came to Chicago, and he said you know what?  I want you to come to Los Angeles [California].  We're going to have a big party.  I'm inviting you out, and I'll fly you out there to be with me during my first big celebration, and he flew me out there, and I took pictures with him, you know.  We were just--was happy together.  Anyway, he's a great man.  He's easygoing, nice, not egotistical, just a regular guy, and my hat's off to him.  I told him.  Every time I meet him, I say man, don't you change.  You stay right--stay that way, and I said you gonna--your success will continue to follow you.  Great guy.
Speaker 1: And Clarence [Avant] had told me that he was writing--now he's writing Sammy Davis (unclear) you know, a screenplay.
Speaker 2: Quincy Jones?  Oh.
Speaker 1: About Sammy Davis.
Speaker 2: Well, see, Quincy Jones has no limits.  He's unlimited.  He's multitalented.  I'm not surprised at anything he's done so you can't tell me anything different about Quincy Jones that I would be surprised about because I know he's a genius.  He's like one of the greatest arrangers ever, just a genius, Quincy Jones, no question about it.
Story_ID: 14116
Speaker 1: And if you would look back on your life, do you think that there are things you would change or, you know, that you would, you know, you wish you hadn't done or not have done or if you had to do over?
Speaker 2: You know, when you look back, you can see a lot of things that you would have done or would like to have done, but I look back only through--as I tell everyone else, you know, you have your--you make your stumbling blocks stepping stones, and when I look back at, I see they were stepping stones.  You know, I had the stumbling blocks, but they were stepping stones to where I am now, and if I had to do it over again, I don't know if I want to do it differently because as Frank Sinatra said, I did it my way.  I'm very happy, and if this is the end results, I have no complaints.  I will not complain.  It's beautiful.
Speaker 1: And what do you want your legacy to be?
Speaker 2: Well, I just want to be an inspiration to those who are downtrodden who think that they can't make it, who think for whatever reason they don't have the looks, they don't have the hair, the nose, the mouth, the features, they don't have the weight, whatever, whatever things they are down or putting themselves about but overlook that.  They should remember that there are many great Negroes that have made it who came from opposite directions.  You never thought--Joe Williams, good friend of mine, Joe Williams--you know, he's not I would say a handsome man, wasn't a handsome good-looking man per se as your knockout, but he made it to the top.  I mean, he was accepted by whites everywhere, okay, so there's just so many idols out there that you could look at that you can look at and say well, I can make it, and I hope that I can push that into someone else's brain and nostril, that they would realize that they can and change their lives around and is not into gang-banging, stealing, robbing, trying to scam, trying to beat someone out of something, but just do it right, do it straight, and most of all, be a regular person.  Don't--you know, stay that way, and if you fall, down get up.  Don't try to--well, example, I know Major Lance, one of the artists that we worked with, we did a lot of tunes with him.  Major Lance's success, once that started to go down, he couldn't handle the fact of not having X amount of dollars in his pocket, thousand dollars, two thousand.  He went and started doing some other things, you know.  I don't have to say what he was doing, but you can imagine, and it causes demise, you see, so you have to learn to crawl.  You're gonna have some pit stops you gotta make, but you just, you know, take them in line and realize this is for temporary.  You may have to wash cars for the day and tomorrow, a couple of weeks, whatever it is, or I may have to carry bags or whatever, but I'm not looking to do that for the rest of my life, just an intern period and I'm going to go on.  There really are so many college students who have menial jobs if you go out there.  You find that you go to a restaurant.  They're waiting on tables.  They're doing everything.  Hey, that's not--that's not their whole life.  They're only there temporarily, but they're doing that, and it's menial, but we have to realize that, and our blacks, especially our black people as a whole, we've gotten away from that.  That's why the foreigners, the Mexicans, have come in, Hispanics come in, and have taken over all those jobs.  You know, go to a restaurant now and see the blacks there that you used to see.  It's all Hispanics.  They realize that hey, they got to earn a living, and they wanna do it, and they don't mind doing the menial jobs, but when they leave here, they'll go back to Mexico to their paradise, to their mansion.  It's happening.  I've seen it happen over and over again so we have to realize that things happen to us, misfortunes, you know.  We just can't go rob, knock somebody in the head, take someone's purse or do something.  Just get a job, no matter what it's paying.  It's just temporarily--McDonald's, Burger King, whatever it is.  You're not there for life, but just realize it's just a pit stop.  I'm gonna move on after that.  You stay on that course, Lord'll bless you and you'll find you'll see some light at the end of the tunnel.  I guarantee you will.
Story_ID: 14117
Speaker 1: Do you have any views about Whitney Houston and her apparent issues now or?
Speaker 2: Well, I tell you what.  Whitney Houston--I thought all along her biggest problem--and I still think it is--was Bobby Brown.  I think that that's a big mistake she made.  She is--she's such a classy woman.  I think she is or she could be.  If she isn't, she comes on as that, that just--they don't seem to have a fit together.  I think after the sex is over, I think they go their separate ways, you know, and I think that's--he's been a big bringdown for her, whether she realizes it or not, and why she's carrying him all this time has not upgraded her image at all.
Story_ID: 14118
Speaker 1: And do you have any hopes or thoughts about, for the black community?
Speaker 2: Oh, definitely, absolutely.  Are you kidding?  I think that we're on a roll.  Most important thing we realized is our power to vote.  That's the most important thing.  We realized that when we unite, we can make presidents, we can make secretaries, we can do anything.  That's why they're looking for our vote, and they realize the more together, more so than ever, that we are voting together as units so our power is there, and that's where--that's what, that's what happening.  When we're together, we're not voting scattered, voting, not coming out to vote, not doing it, we're making a desired effort to go out and vote and put in the people we want to, and that's why you see more blacks in top positions doing bigger things, more secretaries of state, more secretaries of this here, more than ever before 'cause we finally realized that we can do it together.  Unity--united we stand and divided we have been falling so we know what we can do together.
Story_ID: 14119
Speaker 1: And just one other question, just sort of legacy, but what do you want to be remembered for?
Speaker 2: Just what I'm telling you now, just what I'm doing now, that someone can see this and realize that I'm sincere.  It's coming from my heart, and they can capture that because if I wasn't real, if I was a phony, they can capture that also, but they know that they're getting it from the heart so they can appreciate that and hope that they will take that with 'em and put it in their bank account.
Story_ID: 14120
Speaker 1: Patrick--John White is the first gentleman you see on the extreme left who was my partner on the road when I drove for ABC Paramount Records nationwide across country.  The next person, of course, is yours truly.  In the middle is Governor [George Dekle] Busbee who was the governor of Atlanta, Georgia, and I think that's maybe how Curtis got hooked up on Atlanta, Georgia, and wanting to move to Atlanta, and next is, you know, the genius himself, Curtis Mayfield, and then that's Ron Short, the photographer who was doing the photography for us that evening. [Note: label on photo identifies the man at the right as Albert Smith, not Ron Short.]
Speaker 2: [Eddie Thomas (second from left) with (from left) John White, George Busbee, Curtis Mayfield, and Ron Short [or Albert Smith]  From the collection of Eddie Thomas.]
Story_ID: 14121
Speaker 1: The first picture is my son on the extreme left, Alvin Thomas, who when I retired, I turned the business over to him so he now is head of Thomas Associates and doing promotion the hard way, but he's doing it.  He's still making money, taking care of business.  The next is one of the Stylistics, Herbie [Murrell].  He's a great guy.  He sings tenor.  Then next to him is Airrion [Love].  Now Airrion is the guy that said--if you listen to the record God Bless You--is the one that says my love, I'll tell you how much I care.  He has a beautiful voice, opened up the song on You Make Me Feel Brand-new, and my wife Verlene L. Thomas, my wife, sweetheart, and friend.  Then yours truly is next, a couple of years older as you can see from the other photo, and then on the extreme right is the lead singer [Russell Thompkins] and my son.  I call him my other son with that beautiful falsetto voice.  He sounds as good as he did yesterday, Russell Thompkins Jr of the Stylistics, the lead singer.  They're still singing together.  It's been 31 years.  They only have one member that's not with the group.  I think he took sick, but otherwise that's the same original group from the beginning, a long way back.
Speaker 2: Now what year is this, you say?
Speaker 1: This was last year at Hawthorne Racetrack [Chicago, Illinois].  It was her [Verlene's] birthday.  We're celebrating her birthday.  Her birthday was August the 7th.  Yeah, so we celebrated her birthday August the 7th, 1999.
Speaker 2: [Eddie Thomas (second from right) with his son, Alvin, Herbie Murrell, Airrion Love, his wife, Verlene, and Russell Thompkins, Chicago, Illinois, August 7, 1999.  From the collection of Eddie Thomas.]
Story_ID: 14122
Speaker 1: Extreme left is yours truly again.  This is Chuck Jackson, the lead singer for my second group called the Independents, along with the Assistant Mayor.  I forget his name, and then Maurice Jackson, lead singer.  He's now a minister, Maurice Jackson now, and the young lady--I don't know her next to her, but then the next one is Helen Curry, a member of the Independents, and then Eric Thomas, a new member of the Independents, and that's the group the Independents with.
Speaker 2: Now what year is this, you say?
Speaker 1: This was about 1973, I'm guessing.  We had 'Leaving Me' was a very, was the biggest record in the world at that time, just a tremendous record.  In fact, it's going to be--it's a classic now.  It'll go on forever.  You can never forget that.
Speaker 2: [Eddie Thomas (left) with Chuck Jackson, Maurice Jackson, Helen Curry, and Eric Thomas of The Independents, and others, ca. 1973.  From the collection of Eddie Thomas.]
Story_ID: 14123
Speaker 1: This is the Deputy Sheriff Recruiting Program.  This is from when we graduated from the academy in Maywood, becoming a full-time deputy sheriff, but only we're going to be working part-time.  As they called it at that time, Holiday Court Deputies, and the reason why I took this course and became a deputy sheriff--in fact, most of the members of the singing groups like the Marshalls, the Chi-Lites, Eugene Record, and Chuck Barksdale of the Dells--we wanted to carry guns because at that time we were prominent figures as far as carrying money because (unclear), and that was a means of protection, and the only way we could carry a gun at that time, you either had to be a deputy sheriff, policeman, and that was our out for carrying a gun.  We were qualified, and we paid the dues and went through the whole training program and qualified, and we had to work at least twice a month for the Cook County [Illinois] Sheriff Department, you know, doing whatever, like I worked evictions, but that was our job and so we'd keep our gun with us.
Speaker 2: [Certificate from the Deputy Sheriff Recruiting Program.  From the collection of Eddie Thomas.]
Story_ID: 14124
Speaker 1: This is Curtom Records.  This is our official logo, Curt for Curtis Mayfield, Tom for Eddie Thomas, and we put it together.  In the middle of that sun you'll see a scorpion sign which is mine, and you'll see Curtis' sign, the Gemini, and this is the label that we also--when we made the deal with Buddah Records in New York City [New York] we distributed our product out on, you know, so this was our brand-new label, Curtom Records, and we did very well with that.  We were very successful.
Speaker 2: [CU 45rpm record by The Impressions "You'll Be Always Mine" on  Curtom Records, the label founded by Curtis Mayfield and Eddie Thomas. From the collection of Eddie Thomas.]
Story_ID: 14125
Speaker 1: This is my first label, Thomas Records, that I started up, and this is one of our--he's a good artist, too, Cash McCall, and this song is called When You Wake Up.  It did very well for us in Chicago [Illinois], New York [New York], Baltimore [Maryland], and Washington [D.C.].  It was a big record for us.  Cash McCall is still--I understand he's still singing, but I don't know how well he's doing, but I know he's still singing.  He's a good guy, a very good guy.
Speaker 2: [Cash McCalls' single 'You Mean Everything to Me' on Eddie Thomas' label, Thomas Records.  From the collection of Eddie Thomas.]
Story_ID: 14126
Speaker 1: Okay, this is Thomas Records, only this is--was not my company completely.  Curtis Mayfield and I were partners, and with Curtom [Records] we used Thomas Records for our blues artists.  That's what we had planned to do, and this artist's name was Jesse Anderson, and we had a great record on him, too.  We did very well with this artist, a thing called 'I Got a Problem.'  "I got a problem with my woman, I got a problem with my wife, I think somebody's going to ruin my life, ow, ow, ow, ow, ow." Jesse Anderson, I Got a Problem, a big record, big record for us, Curtis and I.  This is our label together, and when we had Curtom, this is our second label, Thomas Records.
Speaker 2: [Jesse Anderson's single 'Mighty Mighty,' on Eddie Thomas and Curtis Mayfield's blues label, Thomas Records.  From the collection of Eddie Thomas.]
Story_ID: 14127
Speaker 1: This is the George Foster Peabody Award.  I would say this is our--if you want anything that's close to an Oscar or Academy Award, this is it.  In 1994 Johnny Meadow, who is a music historian in New York City, and I did this show [radio documentary for WRKS-FM Radio, New York] with Bob Slade called "The Rise and Fall of Vee-Jay Records," [sic, The Rise and Fall of Vee-Jay"] in which we described the whole company, what happens, how they rose to the top and fell to the bottom, but it was so outstanding that it won the George Foster Peabody Award [for broadcasting], and we were very proud of that.  That's a great moment for us, and this is now in the musical library in Chicago [Illinois], Los Angeles [California], and New York [New York] so at least I've got some history for my kids because they'll listen to me whenever they want to, you know.  I'll be there forever.
Speaker 2: [The George Foster Peabody Award for "The Rise and Fall of Vee-Jay," 1994.  From the collection of Eddie Thomas.]
Story_ID: 14128
Speaker 1: This is Shaft, the original Shaft, Richard Roundtree.  We were doing the promotion.  He had a record, believe it or not.  As if Isaac Hayes' masterpiece wasn't enough, he had a record out of his own, and we had the radio station, one of the top deejays in Chicago [Illinois], and I was doing some PR [public relations] on his record, but he was a great guy, and he's a great guy to be around, great actor, and I'm glad that he's still making--and I'm glad he got a part in Shaft 2--I'm going to have to see that--but he's a great person, Richard Roundtree, my buddy.
Speaker 2: [Eddie Thomas with Richard Roundtree, Chicago, Illinois.  From the collection of Eddie Thomas.]
Story_ID: 14129
Speaker 1: This is the original Impressions.  At the top yours truly, a great singer and now Cook County Commissioner Jerry Butler.  Next to him at the top is Samuel Gooden, our big bass, you know?  Gypsy Woman bass, baroom--that's Sam Gooden.  Arthur Brooks at the top again, first tenor.  Then at the bottom row to your left, Richard Brooks, second tenor, very, very high falsetto there, and of course, the magnificent one himself, the genius of all times, the great Curtis Mayfield.  That was the original Impressions.  Arthur and Richard and Sam were from Chattanooga, Tennessee.  They came here to Chicago, and they met with Curtis and Jerry, and they formed the Roosters.  Later on after I met them, I didn't feel the Roosters was such a great name, but it was such a great group, and since I was impressed with them,  I renamed them the Impressions, and that stuck like glue, and they're still called the Impressions.
Speaker 2: What year was this, do you know?
Speaker 1: 1957.
Speaker 2: [(Clockwise from top left) Jerry Butler, Sam Gooden, Arthur Brooks, Curtis Mayfield, and Richard Brooks of The Impressions, Chicago, Illinois, ca. 1957.  From the collection of Eddie Thomas.]
Story_ID: 14130
Speaker 1: First to your left, guess who, Eddie Thomas.  Next is Fred Cash.  Fred Cash was the new member of the Impressions after Jerry Butler left [1959] and took Jerry Butler's place, and on your right is Henry Rush, Junior, one of my long-time friends and deejays who at the time was working for the post office, and they had their own radio program, and we had done so much humanitarian work for the post office and for others that they gave us, presented us with an award from the post office thanking us for our contribution and the work we had did to help.
Speaker 2: [(From left) Eddie Thomas with Fred Cash and Henry Rush Jr.  From the collection of Eddie Thomas.]
Story_ID: 14131
Speaker 1: This is yours truly, of course, and I'm honored to be with one of the greatest producers of all time, Quincy Jones.  This occasion was in Los Angeles, California, on behalf of Quincy's first gold album called Body Heat.  Chicago [Illinois] was the spearhead of that album saleswise, and Midwesterners took over.  Quincy was so excited over the sales and the fact that he had his first gold album.  He invited me out to California for the great party they had for him, and it was just beautiful, a great man, great person, great artist, and he's still doing things.  It's unlimited what he's doing--just fantastic.
Speaker 2: [Eddie Thomas with Quincy Jones, Los Angeles, California.  From the collection of Eddie Thomas.]
Story_ID: 14132
Speaker 1: Yeah, this is 1970, the great Dick Clark.  Let me go back, first of all, on the extreme left let me describe each individual.  On the extreme left is Fred Cash.  He was the one that replaced Jerry Butler with the Impressions.  Then yours truly, young Eddie Thomas, and then young Dick Clark here.  He's never aged.  He still looks almost the same as he does now, and next is Samuel Gooden, our bass singer, and then your master songwriter, the genius himself, Curtis Mayfield.  We're backstage and decided to take pictures so we have it for our future references, memorabilia.
Speaker 2: Now this was when?
Speaker 1: About 1970.
Speaker 2: Backstage where?
Speaker 1: Backstage at the Apollo Theater [New York, New York].
Speaker 2: [Eddie Thomas (second from left) with (from left) Fred Cash, Dick Clark, Samuel Gooden, and Curtis Mayfield, New York, New York, ca. 1970.  From the collection of Eddie Thomas.]
Story_ID: 14133
Speaker 1: This is our latest album called The Fabulous Impressions.  You can see how young Dick Clark was.
Speaker 2: [Dick Clark with The Impressions album, 'The Fabulous Impressions,' New York, New York, ca. 1970.  From the collection of Eddie Thomas.]
Story_ID: 14134
Speaker 1: [No audio. ]
Speaker 2: [Eddie Thomas seated at desk talking on the telephone in the office of Curtom Records; behind him are Fred Cash and Sam Gooden of the Impressions; ca. mid-late 1960s, Chicago, Illinois. From the collection of Eddie Thomas.]
Story_ID: 14135
Speaker 1: [No audio.]
Speaker 2: [Eddie Thomas seated at desk, with Curtis Mayfield standing at right holding and looking at a document; may be in the office of their record company, Curtom Records, ca. 1968-1969.]
Story_ID: 14136
Speaker 1: [No audio.]
Speaker 2: [Music promoter Eddie Thomas seated at his desk, talking on the telephone while looking at a document in the office of Curtom Records, Chicago, Illinois, 1960s. Black and white photograph. From the collection of Eddie Thomas.]
Story_ID: 14137
Speaker 1: [No audio.]
Speaker 2: [Eddie Thomas (seated) and Curtis Mayfield holding up a 45 rpm single (Curtom Records), Chicago, Illinois, ca. late 1960s. From the collection of Eddie Thomas.]
Story_ID: 14138
Speaker 1: [No audio.]
Speaker 2: [Eddie Thomas and Curtis Mayfield in the office of their record company, Curtom Records, in Chicago, Illinois. Thomas is seated, talking on the telephone while Mayfield watches, standing at rt. and leaning forward on the desk;  ca. late 1960s. From the collection of Eddie Thomas.]
Story_ID: 14139
Speaker 1: [No audio.]
Speaker 2: [Eddie Thomas, ca. 1960s, location unknown. From the collection of Eddie Thomas]
Story_ID: 14140
Speaker 1: [No audio.]
Speaker 2: [Eddie Thomas with an office worker seated at a desk in the offices of Curtom Records, Chicago, Illinois, ca. late 1960s.]
Story_ID: 14141
Speaker 1: [No audio.]
Speaker 2: [Eddie Thomas in swimming trunks, standing on a terrace, probably at a hotel swimming pool, location unknown, 1960s.]
Story_ID: 14142
Speaker 1: [No audio.]
Speaker 2: [Eddie Thomas talking on a telephone, ca. 1970.]
Story_ID: 14143
Speaker 1: [No audio.]
Speaker 2: [Curtis Mayfield (left) and Eddie Thomas relaxing, turning to look at camera; windows of observation deck, possibly at the Space Needle, Seattle, Washington, ca. mid-1960s. From the collection of Eddie Thomas.]
Story_ID: 14144
Speaker 1: [No audio.]
Speaker 2: [Music promoter Eddie Thomas (seated, left) with Sam Gooden of the Impressions, in office of Curtom Records, Chicago, Illinois, ca. 1960s.]
Story_ID: 14145
Speaker 1: [No audio.]
Speaker 2: [Eddie Thomas crouched on the sidewalk looking through home movie camera,  ca. 1960s; location unknown. From the collection of Eddie Thomas.]
Story_ID: 14146
Speaker 1: [No audio]
Speaker 2: [Close-up of Eddie Thomas wearing straw hat; ca. 1960s; location unknown. From the collection of Eddie Thomas.]
Story_ID: 14147
Speaker 1: [No audio.]
Speaker 2: [Eddie Thomas with arm raised stands next to a dummy, location unknown, not dated, from the collection of Eddie Thomas.]
Story_ID: 14148
Speaker 1: [No audio.]
Speaker 2: [Eddie Thomas stands behind a public art statue of man holding a starfish; not dated; location unknown. From the collection of Eddie Thomas.]
Story_ID: 14149
Speaker 1: [No audio.]
Speaker 2: [Eddie Thomas, laughing, in back seat of automobile; location unknown. From the collection of Eddie Thomas.]
Story_ID: 14150
Speaker 1: [No audio.]
Speaker 2: [Eddie Thomas getting out of a pink car, ca. 1965-1967.]
Story_ID: 14151
Speaker 1: [No audio.]
Speaker 2: [Eddie Thomas standing on a pedestrian ramp with translucent curved roof; other people in background, ca. mid-1960s; location unknown.]
Story_ID: 14152
Speaker 1: [No audio.]
Speaker 2: [Eddie Thomas stands on a Monorail platform, with a Monorail car stopped; Seattle, Washington, ca. mid 1960s. From the collection of Eddie Thomas.]
Story_ID: 14153
Speaker 1: [No audio.]
Speaker 2: [View looking up at Eddie Thomas standing at the base of the Space Needle; ca. mid 1960s, Seattle, Washington. From the collection of Eddie Thomas.]
Story_ID: 14154
Speaker 1: [No audio.]
Speaker 2: [Eddie Thomas close-up photograph, ca. mid 1960s; location unknown. From the collection of Eddie Thomas.]
Story_ID: 14155
Speaker 1: [No audio.]
Speaker 2: [Eddie Thomas stands beside a tree outside a building, ca. 1960s, location unknown. From the collection of Eddie Thomas.]
Story_ID: 14156
Speaker 1: [No audio.]
Speaker 2: [Eddie Thomas in a swimming pool;  location unknown, ca. 1960s. From the collection of Eddie Thomas.]
Story_ID: 14157
Speaker 1: [No audio.]
Speaker 2: [Eddie Thomas sitting on the edge of a swimming pool, location unknown (probably at a motel), ca. mid 1960s, . From the collection of Eddie Thomas.]
Story_ID: 14158
Speaker 1: [No audio.]
Speaker 2: [Eddie Thomas carrying a briefcase, standing outside a house, location unknown, ca. 1960s. From the collection of Eddie Thomas.]
Story_ID: 14159
Speaker 1: [No audio.]
Speaker 2: [Eddie Thomas wearing a straw hat, location unknown, ca. 1960s.  From the collection of Eddie Thomas.]
Story_ID: 14160
Speaker 1: [No audio.]
Speaker 2: [Eddie Thomas getting out of a car in front of a telephone booth; location unknown, ca. mid-1960s, . From the collection of Eddie Thomas.]
Story_ID: 14161
Speaker 1: [No audio.]
Speaker 2: [Eddie Thomas pointing at equipment in a recording studio; location unknown, ca. 1960s. From the collection of Eddie Thomas.]
Story_ID: 14162
Speaker 1: [No audio.]
Speaker 2: [Newspaper feature story on music promoter Robert Williams, Jr.showing photo of Williams and article in which Williams credits Eddie Thomas as his mentor in the business. From the collection of Eddie Thomas.]
Story_ID: 14163
Speaker 1: [No audio.]
Speaker 2: [Photo from unidentified publication showing Curtis Mayfield in the 1990s after the accident that paralyzed him; caption refers to Mayfield having had a leg amputated due to complications from diabetes. From the collection of Eddie Thomas.]
Story_ID: 14164
Speaker 1: This is over in the lake [Lake Michigan, at Chicago, Illinois].  We decided to have some fun so we went over on the lake and happy we caught a windy day.  As you can see, the wind was blowing like crazy.  Helen Curry is the pretty young lady there holding on, keeping from falling off, and below trying to hold her up is Maurice Jackson, another lead singer for the Independents, and then next to Helen is myself, yours truly, and then next to that is Chuck Jackson, the lead singer for the Independents.
Speaker 2: Which one did you say was Jesse Jackson's?
Speaker 1: Chuck Jackson, Chuck Jackson, Jesse Jackson's younger brother, right, so that was.
Speaker 2: So he's--where is he now?
Speaker 1: Chuck Jackson's now in--last I heard, he was in Los Angeles, California, still trying to do some writing and producing, but when he lost Marvin Yancy who was his partner, that was the big drift.  He missed Marvin.  He couldn't capture his--all the tunes he'd write, he couldn't come back and capture for him so that was--they were doing great before that.
Speaker 2: [Record promoter Eddie Thomas (center) with Helen Curry, Chuck Jackson (right), and Maurice Jackson (bottom), of the music group The Independents, at Lake Michigan, ca. 1970.  From the collection of Eddie Thomas.]
