Story_ID: 461145
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe, I'm interviewer today for The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Scott Stearns.  Sir, could you please state your full name and spell it for us please?
Speaker 2: I'm Charles C. Teamer, Sr., T-E-A-M-E-R [HistoryMaker Charles Teamer, Sr.].  The C stands for Charles Carl Teamer--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --Sr.
Speaker 1: And what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: May 20th, 1933, and I was born in Shelby, North Carolina.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Sir, what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: I am chairman of the board of directors of Dryades Savings Bank [Dryades Savings Bank, F.S.B., New Orleans, Louisiana].
Speaker 1: Okay.  I'm sorry, you said Shelby, North Carolina?
Speaker 2: Shelby, North Carolina.
Speaker 1: Okay, North Carolina, okay 'cause I'm thinking South.
Speaker 2: No, North Carolina.
Speaker 1: North Carolina, okay.  And you're the director of Dryades Savings Bank (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Chairman of the board of Dryades.
Speaker 1: You're the founding chairman?
Speaker 2: I'm the founding chairman.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: Okay.  You were also financial officer for Dillard University [New Orleans, Louisiana] for a long time (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I was the vice president and chief financial officer for Dillard University for a long, long time, from 1965 to 1997.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now what is today's date?
Speaker 2: Today's date is the 28th day of March.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Two thousand and--
Speaker 2: Two thousand eight [March 28, 2008].
Speaker 1: All right.  And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: We're at Dryades Bank in our executive floor.
Story_ID: 461146
Speaker 1: Now before we go into depth, there are five lightweight questions that the office compels me to ask of everyone as a warm up.  The first one is--and they only require a short answer.  The first one is: do you have a favorite food?
Speaker 2: I like fried chicken.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: I like gold.
Speaker 1: Okay.  A favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: I like fall.
Speaker 1: All right.  And do you have a favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Any golf course.
Speaker 1: And the last one is do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: Probably several that will come out during the source of our conversation (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay, the exclamation (unclear) (laughter).
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Story_ID: 461147
Speaker 1: Well, I'm gonna ask about your family history.
Speaker 2: Please.
Speaker 1: I'm gonna ask about your mother's side of the family and your father's [Boyd Teamer] side, but we'll start with your mother's side first (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) All right.
Speaker 1: Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: Mary Ellen Wilkins [Mary Wilkins Teamer].
Speaker 1: All right, and what is her date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: She was born in South Carolina, I don't know the exact date of birth right at the moment.
Speaker 1: Okay.  About the year, you're gonna get us in the ballpark here?
Speaker 2: She died at the--it was--just about nine- probably just before the turn of the century.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, 1890s I guess?
Speaker 2: About in the 1890s.
Speaker 1: All right.  Now what do you know about your mother's ancestors, or your ancestors on your mother's side.  How far back can you trace them back through slavery (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I can't trace them back.  I, I do know, I, I have a picture at one time of my mother's mother, but very little knowledge of her family before she married my father.  I could tell you that I probably know a little bit more about my father's family than my mother's family, but very little about her family.  There were not many members of her family--immediate family alive to the best of my knowledge.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Any he didn't talk about any of those, any stories from the past handed down?
Speaker 2: No, no, I have no stories like that.
Speaker 1: Just in reflection, you reflect back on the things you do know, do you think there're any African survivals, since it's South Carolina, you know?
Speaker 2: I, I don't know of any African survivals at all.  That part is not part of my memory or knowledge or discussion.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Well, so you did know your grandmother, right, you said?
Speaker 2: I did not know my grandmother.
Speaker 1: Oh, you did not know your grandmother, okay.  So you didn't know any of the--didn't know her parents?
Speaker 2: I, I just knew some--she had some cousins that I did meet.  And one--probably two first cousins that I, I did meet and the one first cousin was a chap by the name of Floyd Wilkins [ph.] who grew up in North Carolina.  And when I met him he lived in Salisbury, North Carolina.  Interestingly enough was a contractor at an early age and one of the African Americans in Salisbury who participated in establishing a small contracting business early on.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you know much about the occupations of the rest of her relatives?
Speaker 2: I really do not.
Speaker 1: Now did she grow up on a farm or (simultaneous) --?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I, I, I have very little knowledge of her family before she married my father.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now did she talk about growing up at all?
Speaker 2: Did not have any real discussions.  Had more discussions on my father's side about that, which I'm sure you'll ask me that question later on.  But very little, ironically very little discussion about my mother and her family, what they did, did not do.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now did your mother have a chance to go to school?
Speaker 2: She went to school, but she was not a high school graduate.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  So--but you're not even sure what town she grew up in?
Speaker 2: I am not.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Well, did she talk about--I mean, what, what life was like when she was coming up in terms of (simultaneous)--?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I had very little discussions with my mother about--ironically I--it--that's not a discussion that we had a lot about when she was growing up.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Well, okay that concludes that side (laughter).
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Story_ID: 461148
Speaker 1: Well, let me ask about your father's side.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) My father's name was Boyd Teamer, no middle initial, B-O-Y-D Teamer.  He grew up in Spartanburg County, South Carolina.  My grandfather on my p- paternal side was John B. Teamer [John Teamer], who was a farmer in Spartanburg County.  My father was born in the--suspect 1890, was not a high school graduate, but his father was a--I'm told, a rather well-to-do farmer in Spartanburg County with a very large family and, and owner of land.  How he accumulated the land, I do not know, but he did have a large number of children, fifteen boys and one girl.  And there were--the name Teamer was very prevalent in that section of South Carolina to the extent that there was a little village called Teamer Town [ph.].  And I did meet him.  He expired--my grandfather on my father's side expired when I was very young, so I can't tell you a lot about him.  But--
Speaker 1: Well then I guess we can assume on some level that Teamers were around, I guess, from--I mean for quite a while they have a town named after them (unclear) (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, I was gonna say that the folklore in our family is that immediately following the Civil War there were two slaves in what was then Virginia who ran away from their master and gave themselves the name Teamer, ostensibly after a team of horses.  And one of the Teamers when they came south, one stopped in South Carolina, raised a family and many offsprings in that area of South Carolina originated from that Teamer.  The second brother continued south to what is now Alabama and raised another group of Teamers.  There are--so there are the Teamers of South Carolina, in which my group of Teamers came from, and then there are--was--there's another group of Teamers that originated--originates out of Jackson, out of West Tennessee, and a third group out of the Huntsville, Texas area.  To the best that we can determine there's not a close correlation between the Teamers who originate out of South Carolina, those who come out of West Tennessee and those who come out of Huntsville, Texas.  Having visited with persons from time to time, we can't put any connection together between those in South Carolina.  So if I were to meet a Teamer now, the question would be did your family originate in South Carolina?  If they did, if you could trace a grandparent, then we're probably cousins, if not, we're probably not cousins.  So I have decided that when people tell me that I think I'm your cousin, my first question is do you have money (laughter).  So if you have money, then I'm happy to claim you, but if you do not have any money--
Speaker 1: It's an interesting story.  We, we all know the teamsters, you know (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes.
Speaker 1: --people who drove mules and horses for the Union forces during the war or even for the Confederate forces, you know, that--I guess that could be a source of a last name.
Speaker 2: Well, that's the--there is not a family tree derived, but that's the sta- story that's been passed down for many generations.
Story_ID: 461149
Speaker 1: And on another level, to be able to acquire land in South Carolina right after the war [Civil War] was, was even tough, even though the Union Army had promised people land.  It's still tough to get it, so maybe someone who had served would have a better chance, you know (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, that--a little bit of that was corroborated by the fact that I have a picture, a large picture, of my [paternal] grandfather [John Teamer] and grandmother and--that I found and asked a photographer who restores paintings to restore it for me.  And she said to me that "Obviously your grandfather had money."  And I said, "How did you determine that?"  She said, "When we do restorations, most of the people who made pictures during that time, they were made by a traveling photographer who carried clothes with them for them to dress in.  Your grandfather and grandmother were apparently dressed in their clothing, and so anyone who had the quality of clothing that they had, obviously had some resources."  So that was an interesting revelation to me.
Speaker 1: Well that's an aspect of that I never thought of before, when you see the old pictures that actually the photographer brings clothes?
Speaker 2: Well that--that's what she--this was a photographer in North Carolina who specialized in restoration of old photos.  And during the course of conversation, she just simply said to me that "It's obvious that the clothing that your grandfather's suit was a very good piece of--it was his suit, it was a very nice suit, and when I restored paintings of anybody during that era, nine times out of ten they were wearing clothing that the pho-photographer took with him because they didn't have any clothes to take pictures in."
Speaker 1: I imagine she could recognize the clothes after they'd been shot so many times, the same clothes (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, uh-huh, well she, she was very positive on that.
Speaker 1: Yeah, okay.
Story_ID: 461150
Speaker 1: Teamer Town [ph.] we would think then would be a black town, I gu- I would guess (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, I, I assume that it was a little village of--of a group of Teamers because my, my [paternal] grandfather [John Teamer] had fifteen sons--I mean fifteen boys, and so I presumed that they--he had brothers because over the years as I visited in the Spartanburg [South Carolina] area there were a number of Teamers in that area.
Speaker 1: Now are there any other stories passed down from that side of the family about life in those days, race relations, about property?
Speaker 2: I don't have any stories.  In--in our family reunions, I don't recall any discussions about other than the fact that they were born on a farm and they did own land and that most of the sons who--none of the sons apparently inherited his acumen in terms of developing more land.  And that is the s- problem that, as you know, the people who had land, unfortunately, worked very hard and their first challenge was to get off the land and go do something else.  So as I have bumped into from time to time cousins and so forth of the brothers, my father [Boyd Teamer] had fourteen brothers.  So from time to time I've encountered people who were distant cousins, but they have lived all over the country.  And my basic question when people tell me is where did your parents originate? If they were from South Carolina, then chances are we are related.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So was your, your father's grandfather that owned the--
Speaker 2: Owned the land.
Speaker 1: --land.  Yeah, his father, your, your, your grandfather I guess was he--was he a landowner at all or did he--?
Speaker 2: Yes, uh-huh.
Speaker 1: All right, so he, he owned--I mean he inherited that land from his, his father (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, I presume that's the case.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  So--so your father grew up on that land that they owned then?
Speaker 2: Yes, uh-huh.
Speaker 1: Now, when--what did he eventually do why--I guess he eventually left that land (unclear)?
Speaker 2: He left the land and, and moved from South Carolina actually to North Carolina, moved to Shelby, North Carolina, where he was a construction worker early in my life and later on moved to Salisbury, North Carolina.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now is there, is there--now did he stay in construction work, or did he--
Speaker 2: Actually the railroad ended up on--with the railroad which Salisbury was a big railroad town and ended up with the railroad.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Now, did your father talk about growing up and what it was like for him?
Speaker 2: Not particularly.  I--as I've thought about it later on, there was not a lot of discussion that I recall about growing up.  I presume that it was hard, and so there was no desire to really talk specifically about it.
Speaker 1: Well you know, a lot of black fathers they talk about how far they walked to school and that seems almost like--everybody has--
Speaker 2: I--unfortunately I can't give you any of that.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, so is there--so your father went to school in, in--
Speaker 2: South Carolina.
Speaker 1: --South Carolina, and ended up you know, doing contracting work--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --and then working for the railroad.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Now what did he do on the railroad?
Speaker 2: Basically worked for the railroad int- as a freight--I guess you call it a freight forwarder and Salisbury was a shipping point and they moved freight from one train to another train.
Story_ID: 461151
Speaker 1: Now is there a story about how your parents [Mary Wilkins Teamer and Boyd Teamer] met that they talk about?
Speaker 2: I don't--I, I don't, I don't have that story.
Speaker 1: Okay, so they didn't say they met at church or they met at (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I, I really don't--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --I, I never heard them say and I never asked the question, it's ironic, but I didn't.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Well they did meet and--
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Yeah--
Speaker 1: (Laughter) So--
Speaker 2: --there were seven children and--actually nine children were born to that union, two died early, and seven lived to become senior citizens--
Speaker 1: Now where do you (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) of four boys and three girls, and I'm the youngest.
Speaker 1: I'm sorry, you're the youngest, okay.
Speaker 2: Yes, um-hm.
Speaker 1: So you're the youngest of all of them, okay.  Now when you think about their personalities and dispositions and their talents, both of mother and father, who do you think you take after the most?
Speaker 2: Probably my mother.  I'm sure my mother.
Speaker 1: Okay, why?
Speaker 2: Well my father was a strong solid man who did not talk very much.  A Baptist deacon who believed very seriously in the, in the, in the church.  My mother was a--communicated more and provided, I would say, more parental wisdom, was very good at negotiating and mediating problems not only within the family, but within the community.  And I think that if I have any skills of relating to people and communicating I primarily got it from her side of the family.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now was she a member of--was she a member of organizations too, did she have an organizational life (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, church organizations.  Neither of my parents were high school graduates, but good solid people during that time.  But the- their organizational relations were primarily related to church.
Speaker 1: Okay, so the Baptist church, your father was a deacon--
Speaker 2: Yes.  And my mother--
Speaker 1: --and your mother involved in--
Speaker 2: --in the ladies auxiliaries and that sort of thing.
Story_ID: 461152
Speaker 1: Neither one of them were in the Masons or anything?
Speaker 2: My father [Boyd Teamer] was a Mason.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And so as a young lad he was a Mason.  And as you know, the Masons happen to be a secret organization.  And I always had that thirst for knowledge and of course his Mas- Masonry regalia was locked, and so secretly I just got inquisitiveness as a young child you have, this is the only thing in the house that's really locked and secret, so there must be something to it.  So I always had a great urge and a desire to know more about Masonry.  And so, which ultimately led to my becoming a Mason, but it was--that story in itself is a rather interesting story.
Speaker 1: Okay, how, how you became a Mason?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So if you like, I can tell you now.
Speaker 1: Well, well your interest- well okay, you can tell us now.
Speaker 2: Because it, it, it stems from the fact that a good bit of it, that my father was a Mason.  I mentioned the fact that my mother [Mary Wilkins Teamer] had a cousin [Floyd Wilkins (ph.)] who was more like an uncle to me, who in Salisbury [North Carolina] was very active in Masonry, all levels of Masonry and traveled to all of the national meetings and did that ritualistically.  So when I moved to New Orleans [Louisiana] and they had the national Masonry meetings, he would come to New Orleans and of course in that time the older people didn't stay at hotels, they stayed with relatives as you--as you know.  So the grand sovereign commander of Masonry, Dr. John G. Lewis who lived in Baton Rouge [Louisiana] who met me one day and he said, "Well, you know, you really should be a Mason because your father was a Mason and your uncle was a Mason, and not--apparently none of your brothers are Masons, so you--you've got to be a Mason."  And I said, "Well I don't have time to, to engage in this."  And he said, "Well I'll take care of it."  So one day he--I got a call and my wife [Mary Dixon Teamer] said, "Dr. John G. Lewis' office," he was the grand sovereign commander lived in Baton Rouge, and "he called and said if you would go to the Masons' hall [Prince Hall Masonic Temple] on Orleans Avenue [New Orleans, Louisiana] tonight, you are to be inducted into the Masons."  So that led to my becoming a Mason and subsequently a 33rd Degree Mason, which is the highest order that Masonry has.  And I must say that it's a great organization.  I've not been as active in Masonry as I have been in Alpha Phi Alpha [Alpha Phi Alpha Fraternity] or Sigma Pi Phi [Sigma Pi Phi Fraternity].  But I enjoy the relation and I pay my dues to the houses of Masonry.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  And you--when did you join?
Speaker 2: Probably around, must've been around 1980.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And how long did it take you to become a 33rd Degree Mason?
Speaker 2: Well, it did not take me very long because of my relationship with the grand sovereign commander.
Speaker 1: Okay, that's mysterious enough for us (laughter) (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) (Laughter).
Story_ID: 461153
Speaker 1: You were born in Shelby, North Carolina--
Speaker 2: Um-hm (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) but where did you grow up?
Speaker 2: I grew up primar- we moved--when I probably start- after starting high school [Cleveland County Training School] in Shelby I moved to Salisbury [North Carolina].
Speaker 1: Wait a minute, we don't wanna get you past high school yet (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, I'm telling you that I was gonna tell you that--
Speaker 1: So you grew up in Mas- in Shelby to--
Speaker 2: I grew up in Shelby as a young lad and--
Speaker 1: Okay and then in high school you moved to--
Speaker 2: --then we moved to Salisbury, you're asking for dates and I'm trying to--probably in 1951.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: No it would not have been '51 [1951].
Speaker 1: No, it would be--
Speaker 2: No, it would've been 1946 or something like that.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, all right.  So well tell us what were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up?
Speaker 2: Sights, sells and smile- sounds.  Well let me--I grew up as a young lad in Shelby, North Carolina, which was a town that was rigidly segregated.  The family was modest means, my parents [Mary Wilkins Teamer and Boyd Teamer] owned their own home.  We lived near a church.  So most of the things that one did in those days was involved school and church.  You went to school every day, went to church on Sunday.  The other activity that was available was scouting.  I became interested in scouting early on, became a scout, actually when I was eleven, before I really became twelve.  And my world kind of revolved around s- scouting.  At that time there was a Boy Scout camp [Camp James] at Kings Mountain, North Carolina.  We were in the Piedmont Council.  Scouting was segregated.  But we--scouting was the first non-school activity that helped to round me out into a number of areas.  In other words, I became active in scouting and the scouting handbook came--became kind of a guide to my life.  A scout is trustworthy, honor, you know, all of those things.  And I rapidly matriculated through the scouting ranking system.  And basically it also taught me how important adult male leadership is because there were two men who served as our scoutmaster during that time, neither had any sons.  I now--I later recognized that a man who would devote his time to helping other young men was a very special person.  So that thought always stayed with me.  And we went to camp every summer.  The one factor in scouting that I regret is that I couldn't cook, so I couldn't pass the cooking merit badge.  Cooking, at that time in scouting, a cooking merit badge was one of the merits required to become an Eagle Scout.  So to get a cooking merit badge, you had to spend a week working in the camp kitchen.  Well, as the youngest at that time of seven children, I had not been required to cook or learn to do anything cooking.  So--and I still cannot cook.  So therefore, when I would go into the camp kitchen, the cook would chase me out because I couldn't peel potatoes and all that sort of thing, so I couldn't get the cooking merit badge.  I had forty, fifty merit badges, but not the cooking merit badge.  So therefore, I could not become an Eagle Scout.
Story_ID: 461154
Speaker 1: So you didn't get a chance to become an Eagle Scout, scout because you (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I, I'm not an Eagle Scout.  I've gotten the Eagle Scout Award from an adult standpoint, but one thing I regret that I did not actually become an Eagle Scout.  But scouting played a tremendous part in my growing up and of course athletics, but athletics through the school.  But, but scouting was the extracurricular activity.
Speaker 1: Well it's interesting that there was like so much interest in scouting and so mu- and the opportunity to be a scout, you know.  This is in the f- in the '40s [1940s] I guess?
Speaker 2: This was in the '40s [1940s], yes, oh yeah, uh-huh.  Oh yes, scouting was the, the, the factor that really kind of shaped my moral fiber, you know, achievement.  Now you were a scout, I imagine too around the time of the war, right (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yes, that is correct, uh-huh.
Speaker 2: --World War II [WWII] was going on and that--
Speaker 1: So we collected cans and paper and stuff like that, and yes, that's correct (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And just from little things, you know, you're watching movies like 'Mr. Smith Goes to Washington,' and you see the scouts doing things and the scout (unclear) (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And the proudest thing was for me to get my scout uniform, you know.  And try to get--earn enough money for it to have two Boy Scout [Boy Scouts of America] shirts and stuff like that.  But, the, the camp that we--it was called ca- it was named Camp James over Crowders Mountain near Kings Mountain [North Carolina].  And oh in the last ten years I decided to go back and revisit the site of what seemed like such a steep mountain at the time is nothing but a hill.  You know, but to a small boy it looked like it was Mount Everest.  And part of what you had to do as part of the week there you had to climb the mountain.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: So--
Speaker 2: So this Crowders Mountain, Kings Mountain, North Carolina?
Speaker 1: Yeah, over in--right out of Charlotte [North Carolina]--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --between Charlotte and Gastonia [North Carolina].
Story_ID: 461155
Speaker 1: Was church a source of training too (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well church was--everyone went to church and what we called BYPU, Baptist--
Speaker 1: Now what was--
Speaker 2: --Young People's Union [Baptist Young People's Union of America].
Speaker 1: --yeah, what was the name of your church?
Speaker 2: Shiloh Baptist Church [Shelby, North Carolina]--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --S-H-I-L-O-H, Shiloh Baptist Church.
Speaker 1: I think there's one in every city in the country.
Speaker 2: Yes, um-hm.
Speaker 1: At least a black Baptist church named Shiloh.
Speaker 2: So you went to Sunday school, to church and that was your world.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you had the B--BYU--
Speaker 2: BYPU, yeah.
Speaker 1: BYPU.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Yeah, okay.  Now had you--were there any--well just--well continue with sights, sounds and smells, I don't wanna get thrown off, but--
Speaker 2: Well, that--then of course my parents [Mary Wilkins Teamer and Boyd Teamer] moved to Salisbury [North Carolina].  And I completed my high school at the J.C. Price High School [Salisbury, North Carolina].
Speaker 1: Now what year were you when you moved to Salisbury?
Speaker 2: In I guess fifty--I graduated from high school in 1950, so we must've moved to Salisbury around '47 [1947].
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So was it--was it very much different from--?
Speaker 2: Sal- yes, Salisbury was a college town.  Livingstone College was there which we lived on--one block away from the college.  So growing up in a college town with a historically black college [HBCU] brought a different atmosphere to the local black population.  Livingstone had lyceum features and the--
Speaker 1: Now what do you mean by--what is--what is lyceum (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Lyceum features, they had activities, invited speakers to come to come to the campus and the great singers of the day like Roland Hayes and whoever was popular on the speaking circuit would come.  They had football and basketball.  So therefore, you really--but more importantly you had the people who were officials at the college, the faculty members had children in school and you were--. Livingstone had a seminary [Hood Theological Seminary, Salisbury, North Carolina].  And of course, so they were training ministers and as you may or may not know, the Livingstone was founded by the A.M.E. Z [African Methodist Episcopal Zion] church.
Speaker 1: A.M.E. Zion, yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah. And so they were very strong in terms of a sense of--therefore, that brought more academic atmosphere to the African Am- well, the black community in Salisbury.
Speaker 1: Well the Zion church goes back to I think within a year.  Some people dispute it they think that A.M.E. Zion was first--
Speaker 2: I don't know, yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: --from A.M.E. James Varick, you know, founded (unclear), yeah (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) But it, it, it brought an atmosphere.  And of course, the faculty at Price High School was a very well-informed faculty.  And because of the fact that black people cou- who could not attend the public universities in the South, faculty people were literally paid to get an advanced degree at one of the northern universities.  So the faculty at Price High School was better prepared than the faculty at Salisbury High School [Salisbury, North Carolina] because the faculty had degrees from NYU [New York University, New York, New York] and the, the northern universities.  And of course they were paid to go north in the summer and that gave them a little vacation, but also an opportunity to get a degree.  So it had a well-prepared faculty.  It was a good high school, better than the high school [Cleveland County Training School] in Shelby [North Carolina].  And of course by being very close to Livingstone, you had the opportunity to understand a larger segment of the world.
Story_ID: 461156
Speaker 1: Well I wanna go back a little bit to, to grade school.  Can we--where did you first go to grade school, let- let's just start (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) In, in Shelby [North Carolina].
Speaker 1: Okay, what was the name of your school?
Speaker 2: Cleveland School [Cleveland County Training School, Shelby, North Carolina].
Speaker 1: Okay. Now this, of course, is a segregated school?
Speaker 2: Absolutely.
Speaker 1: Okay, did they call it Cleveland Colored School or something like that (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, no, no.
Speaker 1: --they just called it Cleveland, okay.
Speaker 2: It was called Cleveland County.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Cleveland County School.  And then what- did you stay there the whole time before you went to--
Speaker 2: Yes, it went from one through twelve.  So I was in high school when I moved at that time.
Speaker 1: All right, now did you have a favorite subject in school?
Speaker 2: Well, my favorite subjects has always been reading history, and, and (unclear).  Ironically, I did, I was the valedictorian of my s- I guess we graduated from elementary school in the seventh grade, then I guess it was the seventh grade.  And I found a copy of the speech that I delivered in the seventh grade.  And obviously someone wrote it for me.  But the, the, the tenure of the remarks would be remarkably own--in place today, and I just--in going through things it's remarkable that you find something that old, but it was folded, discolored, basically talked about the fact tha- how important school was to young people.  We spent more time in school than anything else and that leaving the seventh grade was the beginning of transition to more schooling.  But the fact is that we spent more time in school then any place else, but that it also indicated a roll for parents and other people to play in the transition.  And of course, we, we see in America today how important that roll is.
Speaker 1: That's right.  So did you--were there any favorite teachers or role models or mentors at Cleveland School?
Speaker 2: Yes, because at that time your entire world was shaped by the church and the school.
Story_ID: 461157
Speaker 1: And of course since I would've been considered kind of a nerd-like there was--
Speaker 2: Now did they consider people like that in those days?  I mean were you actually considered (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Well they didn't call you a nerd, but if you were the kid who did well academically and your parents washed and ironed your clothes and so forth, you know, you kind of stood out as a leader, you know, even at a young age.  Because the teachers kind of asked the kids who could read well and that sort of thing to kind of lead the other kids who were not quite as quote bright.
Speaker 2: Who didn't have the same kind of para- parental support and--
Speaker 1: Yes, right.  And by being the youngest of seven the advantage I had was that there were books always around my house to read.  So if you're smart and aggressive, you tend to read whatever is available for you, whether it's a comic book or whether it's a Bible.  And so having had brothers and sisters in school, I had the tendency to read literature way beyond my level of comprehension, but just because it was there and I had nothing else to do.  And, and back in those days there was no television, one had a radio in the house.  So you read for entertainment.
Speaker 2: Now what were your favorite things to read?
Speaker 1: I read anything I could put my hand on, comic books (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I know you mentioned the Boy Scout [Boy Scouts of America] handbook as one thing--
Speaker 1: Handbook, but comic books, mysteries, novels--
Speaker 2: What characters in comic books were popular?
Speaker 1: Superman, you know, Batman alway- and Flash Gordon.  And of course the ironic thing that we read Flash Gordon never thinking about anybody would ever really go to the moon.  And of course the advantage of moving to Salisbury [North Carolina], well Salisbury had a public library.  And my daughter [Cheryl Teamer] was introducing me once and someone asked, "How did your father get his thirst for education?"  And she said, "He brags that he read every book in the Salisbury library."  And I said, "There is a correction, it was the Salisbury colored library."  And it was the one place that was open every day, Monday through Friday, it was air conditioned, it was the only place that I knew that I could go free air conditioning and that's where I spent a lot of my time.
Speaker 2: Air conditioning, I, I never thought about, you know, I guess in the '40s [1940s] you had air conditioning.
Speaker 1: Well, it, it--the only place it was air conditioned was the movie.
Speaker 2: Okay, so were you allowed to use any facilities on the Livingstone College [Salisbury, North Carolina] campus (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Well, you could use the library and you could, as I said before, the activities building was the place where you were permitted to go and you could hear the great speakers and orators of the day, and, and of course by observing on the college campus, you--you learn many things about life in general, athletics, football games, basketball games, et cetera.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Now what kind of books were you reading that were above your age level that (laughter) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Well, I think I read high school literature books, you see.  So I was reading school books that my brothers and sisters had that all of the, the, you know, the great stories, you know, litera- literature, I don't remember specific what they were, but whatever was in the high school literature books and English books, I read them.
Story_ID: 461158
Speaker 1: Now the great hero of the age when you were growing up is Joe Louis I believe?
Speaker 2: That is correct.
Speaker 1: Do you remember the--?
Speaker 2: I do.
Speaker 1: Okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Joe Louis--when Joe Louis would fight, of course it was broadcast on the radio and I recall that folk would gather at various points to listen to the fight and you'd see knots of people at a house with the radio, a group of men, primarily men, listening to the fight.  And it became a point of celebration in the community when Joe Louis was fighting.  I mean just everything basically closed down during, during the fight.
Speaker 1: What was the biggest fight that you remember (unclear) (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) As I recall, I remember the one--two fights I remember.  Max Schmeling and Billy Conn.  I remember those.
Speaker 1: Those were his biggest challenges basically?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I, I remember that Max Schmeling was German and of course that was--I guess when the--probably that brought a lot of to it.  And the other was Billy Conn.
Speaker 1: Yeah, that was just before the war [World War II, WWII] (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes.
Speaker 1: --Max Schmeling, and Schmeling beat him the first time?
Speaker 2: I believe so, um-hm.
Speaker 1: So it made it dramatic.
Story_ID: 461159
Speaker 1: Let's see I was asking you about some of your teachers at Cleveland School [Cleveland County Training School, Shelby, North Carolina].  Can you name some of them that, that really were (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well I think there was a Ms. Bridges [ph.], who was a teacher who was very influential that I remember maybe more than anyone else.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So, and history, now, now did they teach any African American history in those days?
Speaker 2: Oh, no one taught African American history.  They taught American history, you know, what was in the book.  The--but there were teachers who made sure that you understood who the bright--I guess they--we were called colored then, leaders of the day, Countee Cullen and people like that who were very influential in the community and who had expressed themselves.  Duke Ellington, musicians, Booker T. Washington, people like that--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --Du Bois [W.E.B. Du Bois] and so forth.
Speaker 1: So the community was aware of who other prominent African Americans were?
Speaker 2: Oh yes, right, and, and aware with a great sense of pride I might add.
Speaker 1: I always ask that question 'cause I--I know a lot of people, people didn't get black history at school.  But Carter G. Woodson had founded the association [Association for the Study of Negro Life and History; Association for the Study of African American Life and History] and just give you a sense of how far wide his influence spread.
Speaker 2: And I think in, in moving to Salisbury [North Carolina] it became more of an impact because Livingstone [Livingstone College] was there.  And you had more leaders of the day coming to speak at Livingstone.
Speaker 1: Now who did--you said you heard Roland Hayes speak, the great singer?
Speaker 2: I, I, I don't--I don't place the others, but I just know there was a fervor of--you had an op- it was free.  In other words, whatever was going on they had a large chapel at Livingstone, and whatever they had, like the Christmas recital and all that sort of things, people in the community were encouraged to attend.
Story_ID: 461160
Speaker 1: In high school [J.C. Price High School, Salisbury, North Carolina], did you--were you still interested in history primarily, or--?
Speaker 2: Well, I've always been interested in history.  I read a lot about the American Revolution and books and novels that related to it, the--
Speaker 1: Okay.  Were there any special teachers there that?
Speaker 2: Well, there was a chap by the name of John Nicholson who was the--who had a club, I guess it was called the Hi-Y Club, it was kind of a civic club for boys and we didn't have a YMCA [Young Men's Christian Association] in Salisbury [North Carolina], but it would be something that related to the YMCA, who, who was very good.  Then of course I thought that the faculty at--the high school principal, a gentleman by the name of Mr. Hall, a fellow by the name of Mr. Miller [ph.] who was our math teacher.  And the faculty was very instrumental in identifying youngsters they thought might go to college and make sure that you took the proper courses so that you can make the transition to college smoothly.  Mr. Miller was our math teacher and I recall my junior or senior year I had an option as to whether I would take the fourth-year math.  And he said you should take that because when you go to college, not if you go, but when you go to college you'll need this.  And I didn't wanna take it because it was one of the last courses in the afternoon at two o'clock.  And he lived on the same street that my parents [Mary Wilkins Teamer and Boyd Teamer] lived and he walked down to my house and told my mother that "Charles [HistoryMaker Charles Teamer, Sr.] needs to take twelfth grade algebra," and of course Charles took twelfth grade algebra.  Needless to say when I did go to Clark [Clark College; Clark Atlanta University, Atlanta, Georgia] and in my first year it was literally the same thing that I had my senior year in high school and I was very grateful that he had taken that interest.  And that also illustrates how important it is for high school people to take an interest in going to school.
Story_ID: 461161
Speaker 1: Now did you play sports in school?
Speaker 2: I played basketball.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Now did they--was it like it is today, I mean, with--where the teams--I've heard that they have like lightweight, heavyweight teams different, you know, back in the day, I don't know--
Speaker 2: Well--
Speaker 1: --when they stopped doing that.
Speaker 2: Well, Salisbury [North Carolina] was basically--football was the big sport.  Basketball was not the primary sport, football was.  Price High [J.C. Price High School, Salisbury, North Carolina] didn't have a gym.  We, we used the gym at Livingstone College [Salisbury, North Carolina].  So, we practiced at Livingstone and played at Livingstone gym.  And we acquired a gym, I guess, maybe my last year there, or right after, but we didn't have a gym at Price High School, and so that's why football was primarily the sport of pride at Price.
Speaker 1: Okay.  But you're a basketball player, you didn't play football (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well I was basketball because living in a college community you had an opportunity to hang around the gym as a gym rat growing up on Saturdays and all.  And if they didn't open it for you, you would sneak in and break in.  So, I've always remembered that.
Speaker 1: Okay, you would break in (laughter)?
Speaker 2: Well that's, you know, kids will play.  And, and, and that stayed with me as I became an adult and worked at Dillard University [New Orleans, Louisiana] and making the gym there available for neighborhood youngsters to play.  You know, or that indicated that we didn't have the kind of playgrounds you have now so; therefore, you didn't have any community centers that you could play basketball in.  Fortunately for us, Livingstone had a gym in which they really didn't care very much if you played, I mean, they--except when they were trying to keep it locked.  But one of the things that you--I recall with great interest, that you had an opportunity to play basketball and sometimes you were playing with the faculty members, you know.  And you--the early lessons learned, you know, were gained just by being around these gentlemen who had it--who were college professors.
Speaker 1: Okay.  I would guess that would be the case--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --with, with the, with the faculty and the college, and so you really took advantage of the fact that there was a college (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh yeah, yeah.  I lived on one street, the college is on the other street and the cross streets you had college professors and they had children and so forth around.
Speaker 1: So they, they made a big impression on you?
Speaker 2: Very big impression, uh-huh.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So were you involved in clubs in high school or was your organizational life was, you know, does it replicate what you're doing now in any way?
Speaker 2: I, I think I was president of my senior class and very active in the various clubs and organizations on c- on, on the campus.
Story_ID: 461162
Speaker 1: So when you were a, a senior then how did you choose a college?
Speaker 2: Well, I don't--well, it was assumed that I would go to college, but it was assumed that I would go to Livingstone [Livingston College, Salisbury, North Carolina] because it was next door.  And they offered me a scholarship and then, there was not a lot of college recruiting going on in those days as I recall.  But a gentleman from North Carolina who had been a teacher and coach in Gastonia, North Carolina, whose name was C.R. Hamilton [Charlton Hamilton], went to work at Clark College [Clark Atlanta University] in Atlanta [Georgia], and North Carolina became his territory to recruit.  So he covered the Piedmont section of North Carolina because he knew that section.  And he recruited through there and that's how my interest in Clark developed and subsequently went there to school.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So, did they offer you a scholarship?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: All right.  Now did you have an athletic scholarship or just academic (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, no, no.  They--they basically had academic scholarships--
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: --and work.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, well, have you ever been to Atlanta before?
Speaker 2: I'd never been to Atlanta.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So it was a big experience of going to a town--
Speaker 2: When I came to Atlanta I rode the train to Atlanta.  Someone told me how to catch the bus and I got off the train and put my footlocker on my shoulder, went out and caught the bus and rode the bus to campus.
Speaker 1: Okay, did you stay on campus?
Speaker 2: I did.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And wha- how was Atlanta different from Salisbury [North Carolina]?
Speaker 2: Well, Atlanta was a much--was a metropolitan city, thriving.  It was Clark, I was in Atlanta University Center complex [Atlanta University Center; Atlanta University Center Consortium, Atlanta, Georgia].  It was a totally different world.  I mean a complete adjustment from Salisbury.
Speaker 1: Okay, so this is 1950, right?
Speaker 2: Right, um-hm.
Speaker 1: The fall of 1950?
Speaker 2: And of course, Atlanta had, at that time, had the beginning of a middle class area.  But in that Atlanta University complex with four colleges there and Atlanta University [Clark Atlanta University, Atlanta, Georgia], it was a, a wonderful place to mature for very young men and women.  You didn't need to go out of the AU complex hardly for anything.  It was rare, I think, that if you went any place you went down to Rich's [Rich's Department Store, Atlanta, Georgia] downtown, which was the big department store and almost anything that you could want was located in that area.
Speaker 1: Okay, was Paschal's Motor Inn [sic. Paschal's Restaurant, Atlanta, Georgia] over there in those days (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh yeah, Paschal's was.  Paschal's first location was there when I--but the motor inn [Paschal's Motor Hotel, Atlanta, Georgia] came later.  They had Paschal's Restaurant, which later moved across the street when they built the hotel, and everyone's greatest ambition was to buy a chicken sandwich on Sunday afternoon for fifty-two cents.
Speaker 1: Okay, they were good huh?
Speaker 2: And so if you could get fifty-two cents to go to Paschal's and buy a, a quarter of a chi- piece of chicken with lettuce and tomatoes and toast, you were a big guy.
Story_ID: 461163
Speaker 1: Now who were some of the--I know there're all sort of heroic fi- figures on campus, academics and activists, and such.  Who were some of the people that, that you met that impressed you?
Speaker 2: You mean students or faculty?
Speaker 1: Both.
Speaker 2: Well, the, the faculty was James P. Brawley was the--was the president, and Dr. McPheeters [A.A. McPheeters] was the dean.  Dr. William Hale was a professor of sociology.  Dr. Joe Dennis [Joseph James Dennis] in mathematics.  And I thought a rather distinguished faculty, and a faculty that was very much interested in students.  'Cause I told you Dean Hamilton [Charlton Hamilton], Dr. Dean Hamilton was the recruiter, but he was also dean of men.  And almost everyone at the college had more than one job.  Clark [Clark College; Clark Atlanta University, Atlanta, Georgia] was a United Methodist school and therefore it had required chapel and vesper.  So the religious atmosphere was there.  It was--it had moved to the campus from another section of Atlanta [Georgia], so the buildings were relatively new.  And it was a close-knit campus.  And I think the atmosphere had more of an emphasis on shaping me for the future then--well everything has an opportunity--has shaped you some, but I think that I was very young when I went to Clark.  I think I was just seventeen and had an opportunity to really meet people from around the world.  Clark, at that time, had started recruiting a few students from Liberia through the United Methodist church.  So you again, I met some at Livingstone [Livingstone College, Salisbury, North Carolina], but you now really (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, you were telling me before we started the interview that you met son of--of Nnamdi Azikiwe (unclear)--
Speaker 2: No, no, I'm not sure he was a son because you know that's a rather common name.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, but--
Speaker 1: You said it was John Azikiwe [ph.] that you met?
Speaker 2: I don't recall, but there were--at Livingstone, the parents--the Africans who came primarily were stu- ministers, studying for the ministry.  What we met and--so they would sometimes bring a husband and a wife or the husband and let him bring his family to Livingstone at Hood Theological Seminary [Salisbury, North Carolina].  What we saw at--well if you would step back, one of the early founders or presidents of Livingstone was a fellow by the name of Aggrey.  And you might remember they called him Aggrey of Africa.
Speaker 1: Oh, James Aggrey [James Emman Kwegyir Aggrey]?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  And his son later became an ambassador in the United States, and was ambassador to Romania, you know, career ambassador, Rudolph [Orison Rudolph Aggrey].  I think he still lives in Washington [D.C.].
Story_ID: 461164
Speaker 1: We were talking about the African students at--
Speaker 2: Well, I was gonna say that at, at Clark [Clark College; Clark Atlanta University, Atlanta, Georgia] they were recruiting African students from Liberia--the United Methodist church.  And so you, you had a sense of international student body, and of course students from all over the U.S. of A.  And at that time because of the need to acquire additional funds, students in Atlanta [Georgia] all went north for the most part to work in the summer.  Young men, a lot of young men at Clark and Morehouse [Morehouse College, Atlanta, Georgia] when to work in the tobacco fields in Connecticut, you might have heard of that.  So I didn't wanna work in any tobacco fields.  There's just a lot of--if you would talk to young men of that era who went wholesale up to--I don't why they were growing tobacco in Connecticut, but that was the case.  But I started going to New Jersey to work in the Morristown [New Jersey] area with my oldest sister.  So, that meant in the summers I would go to New Jersey and make money to pay my tuition for the fall, but that also meant that I was afforded an opportunity to travel fairly extensively in the Northeast in, in riding the train to New Jersey and chance to go over to New York [New York] from time to time.  And it added to what I would call the worldliness or sophistication of just simply going to college.  I found that people who attended college in those days because it was a small percentage of African Americans simply had a little more of a worldly view, that is you, you wanting to call, you're too young, but as you read that's when communism kind of penetrated the so-called elite group of, of African Americans as a way of equality.  And of course, I, I remember the date in 1954 when the [U.S.] Supreme Court handed down the edict of the Brown versus Topeka school system [Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka, 1954], and of course everyone thought that everything was gonna be hunky-dory from then on.  You know, there was a great shout went up.  We had, I think, one television in the dormitory and you know, we thought this is the beginning of the end, and of course it was just the beginning, not the end.
Speaker 1: Now were you--did--now were you recruited by any of the Socialist organizations of those days or (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, no, no, no, no, no, no.
Speaker 1: Did you have any professors that were really in--deep into one of the--
Speaker 2: Not that I know of.
Speaker 1: --Socialist Workers Party or Communist Party?
Speaker 2: No, not, not that I know of.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Did you suspect any of them were?
Speaker 2: No I didn't because as I said before, Clark College was a closely-knit school with a close-knit administration and they kept pretty close tabs of what was going on.  At that time, Rufus Clement [Rufus Early Clement] was president of Atlanta University [Clark Atlanta University, Atlanta, Georgia], Benny Mays [Benjamin Mays] was president of Morehouse and Florence Read [Florence M. Read] president of Spelman [Spelman College, Atlanta, Georgia].  They had pretty good grips of what was going on in Atlanta University [Atlanta University Center; Atlanta University Center Consortium, Atlanta, Georgia].
Speaker 1: Was there a certain amount of fear associated with being associated with Socialists or the Communists?
Speaker 2: I don't know.  I, I--that--we read about it, but it was not anything that dramatically impacted (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) It was up on the upper most consciousness of the students at all?
Speaker 2: I don't think so.
Speaker 1: 'Cause I know that--those were the times of McCarthy [Joseph McCarthy] and a lot--a lot of people got in big trouble about that (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well I remember when that was, but I don't think that it got down to our level.  One of the things that hap- is helpful to recall that so many of us were students who had to earn our way through school.  And there was a small percentage of--I suspect that the percentage of college--of students whose parents were college graduates must've been very small.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  Now was, was James Brawley [James P. Brawley] related to Benjamin Brawley [Benjamin Griffith Brawley] by any chance?
Speaker 2: I don't think so.
Story_ID: 461165
Speaker 1: What teachers influenced you the most at, at Clark [Clark College; Clark Atlanta University, Atlanta, Georgia]?
Speaker 2: Well--
Speaker 1: And did you take courses in all the complexes in, in Atlanta [Georgia]--at Atlanta U [Atlanta University Center; Atlanta University Center Consortium, Atlanta, Georgia]?
Speaker 2: Well, we--the only--the maj- well, if you were a business major you would take some courses at Morris Brown [Morris Brown College, Atlanta, Georgia].  Morris Brown had one or two courses that were offered primarily between Clark and Morris Brown, which meant that you kind of reduced the impact of the business curriculum and I was in business.  Dr. Larzette Hale [HistoryMaker Larzette Hale-Wilson] was at that time head of business, and she was one of the first female CPAs [certified public accountant], later became grand--a supreme basileus of AKA [Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority, Inc.].
Speaker 1: That's right--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --we interviewed her last week (laughter).
Speaker 2: It's a small world.  Her husband, Dr. William Hale, was head of sociology and later became national president of Alpha Phi Alpha [Alpha Phi Alpha Fraternity, Inc.].  Dr. Stella Brewer Brookes was head of the English department and was always admired because she made you remember poems and understand literature, and I think that all of those are things that kind of helped me as the years rolled on.
Speaker 1: Dr. Hale's in--in Utah, you know, yeah.
Speaker 2: Yes, uh-huh.
Speaker 1: Dr. Stella Brewer, so yeah, okay.  So it's interesting there's many women involved in business in those--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --in, at, at the Atlanta, you know, at, at Clark.
Story_ID: 461166
Speaker 1: Anything of note happened at Clark [Clark College; Clark Atlanta University, Atlanta, Georgia] we need to talk about before we graduate you and--?
Speaker 2: Well, I think that I became--I was--became a member of Alpha Phi Alpha [Alpha Phi Alpha Fraternity] at Clark.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And as an organization it kind of shaped my life to a certain extent because it led me--part of the challenge was they required you to work in terms of voter registration as a part of your pledgeship.  It required you to maintain a certain academic average, so there--it re- required you to dress a certain way and endorse a code of ethics, which you--which kind of sets the moral compass for a young man.  Well in introducing me to the whole voter registration idea in the '50s [1950s], I found about education for citizenship.  And the fact that the people who are educated usually are people who impact citizenship more, I mean--.  So part of our ritual was that as a pledge you worked in voter registration.  Well that was at about the time when Atlanta [Georgia] was moving towards more African American businesses and real estate and the first time I encountered an African American real estate company at all, and black business in general.  And the fact that the, the fury in, in the graduate chapter, Eta Lambda, was big in terms of the business community and encouraging voter registration and that was when people--Atlanta started its movement by getting more African Americans registered to vote.  And early on I understood that vote-less people are hopeless people.  If you don't vote, you don't have very much voice.  And so that understanding was, was, was initiated in Atlanta.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now were you in touch with the local leaders in NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] and other local leaders (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Not, not so much the NAACP as, as students, because I don't rec- I--I'm not--I don't even remember, but I think that the real fervor was created by private citizens with their own organization in Atlanta.  There was a group of citizens and I, I read a little bit about it in some of my stuff.  But it was a group of business people who developed their own Atlanta Voters League or something like that--that pressed hard for--
Speaker 1: So Herndon--maybe, John Wesley Dobbs, wasn't Herndon.
Speaker 2: No, it wasn't--it wasn't Herndon.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Dobbs might have been involved in it, but it was more the business commission.  You know, you had the Yates [Clayton R. Yates] and the Miltons [Lorimer D. Milton] and people like that.  Q.V. Williamson, who became one of the first black aldermen, you know, people like that.  The, the first for that and I don't speak as an authority, but it seems to me that a lot of it came from the private sector, the business people.
Speaker 1: Okay, Auburn Avenue group.
Speaker 2: And--yeah--and, and the academics had to do with it.  Because you had in, in that core of Atlanta, you had some of the great minds in the Atlanta University complex [Atlanta University Center; Atlanta University Center Consortium, Atlanta, Georgia].
Speaker 1: Now Du Bois [W.E.B. Du Bois] was out of there by then (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Du Bois had been there but he had gone by that time.
Speaker 1: Yeah, he'd been gone by the time you'd--yeah.
Story_ID: 461167
Speaker 1: You're on the verge of graduation, what, what was your next step?  Were you going on to graduate school, or--?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, I, like many young people I didn't know what I was gonna do.  But I planned to go to graduate school and I went back to New Jersey to work, and while I was working in New Jersey I got a call from a chap by the name of Paul King, who had--I worked all four years in the business office at, at, at, at Clark [Clark College; Clark Atlanta University, Atlanta, Georgia].  And it kind of stimulated in me that entrepreneurial--'cause I was poor and I had to do what I could to earn money.  So I always had one or two jobs working.  And Paul King, who was the business manager, called me that summer I was working in New Jersey planning to go to graduate school.  And he called me and said, "I am going to go to South Carolina State [South Carolina State College; South Carolina State University, Orangeburg, South Carolina] as the business officer, and I have an opportunity for a young man like you to join me as a full-time employee."  So I went to Orangeburg, South Carolina in the fall of 1954 as a real junior employee in the office of the business manager.
Speaker 1: Okay.  This is--what college is this (unclear)?
Speaker 2: South Carolina State (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) South Carolina State, okay.
Speaker 2: --in Orangeburg, South Carolina.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: And worked there for two years and then I was going to take a commission in the [U.S.] Navy and I decided I just couldn't give up--commit four years, then I let them draft me and they did.
Speaker 1: So this is 1956 or so?
Speaker 2: Yeah, so I went into the [U.S.] military and--
Speaker 1: Into the [U.S.] Army?
Speaker 2: --into the Army--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --in '56 [1956], served two years.
Speaker 1: Did you, did you go overseas or stay (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, no, I was--I found that in the military, if you were a college graduate and you had administrative experience, they were looking for administrative type people.  So I--that was my assignment and you quickly figure out how not to go overseas, that you can determine where you're gonna be assigned.  So I was one of those who--when, when I was drafted I found myself at Fort Jackson [Columbia, South Carolina], angry at the world, looked out and the commandant of the induction center was a major who had been at the ROTC [Reserve Officers' Training Corps] in South Carolina State.  So he sent for me, and said, "What are you doing here?"  I said, "Well I'm drafted."  And I found right away that if you have friends in high places that you'll be all right, and--
Speaker 1: Well, you were in kind of familiar territory in some ways in--in Columbia [South Carolina], right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, but that--that, you know, as big as the military is that doesn't mean anything.  It just so happened that he had been moved from the ROTC and been reassigned at Fort Jackson, and just by chance.  And of course, that by chance helped me through the first two weeks at Fort Jackson, and ironically when I was assigned to Fort Knox [Kentucky], by the grace of God, he shows up as a commandant of the Army school of administration at Fort Knox, where I happened to end up, and that shapes my assignment for the rest of my career in the Army--
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: --as an administrative support person.
Story_ID: 461168
Speaker 1: Got married in 1957 while I was still in the [U.S.] Army, and--
Speaker 2: Now where did you meet your wife [Mary Dixon Teamer]?
Speaker 1: I met her at South Carolina State [South Carolina State College; South Carolina State University, Orangeburg, South Carolina]--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --when--my first stint, and--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --got married in 1957 while I was still in the Army and--
Speaker 2: Now while you're in the Army, the, the, the Montgomery Bus Boycott kicks off and all of that.  Now did you--were you familiar with the--with Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] when you were in Atlanta [Georgia]?
Speaker 1: No, unh-uh, unh-uh.  He was there before I was.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I know, he was probably in Boston [Massachusetts] I guess when you were--
Speaker 1: No, so I did not.  Went to--while I was in the Army, Paul King who had been at South Carolina State elected to take a job at Tennessee State [Tennessee Agricultural and Industrial State University; Tennessee State University, Nashville, Tennessee].  And when I was out--coming out of the Army, he said rather than go back to South Carolina State, why don't you come and go with me to Tennessee State.  So coming out of the Army in '58 [1958], I came out of the Army one week and the next couple weeks went immediately to Nashville [Tennessee] to Tennessee State.
Speaker 2: So you worked in the business office there?
Speaker 1: Yeah--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --I was assistant business manager at Tennessee State.
Speaker 2: Okay, so yeah that's in Nashville, so, okay.
Speaker 1: And that's when the whole fervor of the civil rights thing was really kind of kicking up.  And it--stayed in Nashville from '58 [1958] to '62 [1962].
Speaker 2: Well you were there then during the heat of all that--
Speaker 1: Yes, yes.
Speaker 2: --James Lawson was there with Bevel [HistoryMaker Reverend James Bevel], Diane Nash, that's when the sit-ins, I mean the Freedom Rides started, at some point sit-ins too?
Speaker 1: Well during that period of time, there was a lot going on and of course the social consciousness of, of, of the country.  And so, but the--I went to Marshall, Texas in 1962 to accept a position at Wiley College [Marshall, Texas].
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And I think that's--during that period of time traveling through the country with small children, you really were, were the whole--once you have children your paternal fires burn and, and while you might take things that you'd take as an individual, when you're protecting your children your whole atmosphere and outlook.  I didn't know that then, but I now recognize that that's when you become more concerned about where you sit, where you eat, and you gotta plan where you're gonna go when you drive from Marshall, Texas to Atlanta [Georgia] because you know you can't stop in the bathrooms, can't stop in hotels.  That was at a time when I was becoming active in Alpha Phi Alpha [Alpha Phi Alpha Fraternity, Inc.] on the national level.  Tom Cole [Thomas W. Cole, Sr.], who was the president of Wiley, became national president of Alpha.  My exposure to the fraternity on the national level kicked in.
Story_ID: 461169
Speaker 1: One particular incident kind of stimulated that thought was I went to a national convention [for Alpha Phi Alpha Fraternity, Inc.] in Boston [Massachusetts].  We had a march led by Charles Wesley [Charles H. Wesley], Ed Brooke [HistoryMaker Edward Brooke] was the speaker.  We marched in Boston.  This would've been in, I guess, '62 [1962], '63 [1963].  We marched in Boston to protest segregation and we--
Speaker 2: Now that's when Wesley was president of Central State [Central State College; Central State University, Wilberforce, Ohio].
Speaker 1: That's right, yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah. Dr. Charles Wesley, yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah. And in driving from--my family from Washington [D.C.] to Nashville [Tennessee], because you had to plot where you were gonna go and where you were gonna stop.  And so that meant that I plotted like a sixteen-hour drive because keep in mind that the only place you could stop literally was at a black hotel.  And I knew there was a black hotel in Knoxville [Tennessee] called Gaither's Hotel [ph.].  And when I got to Knoxville it had been closed because the interstate was coming through there.  So there were no black hotels.  Well my wife [Mary Dixon Teamer] was pregnant, I had two young boys [Charles Teamer, Jr. and Roderick Teamer], so I had heard that you could go to a Holiday Inn, never been to a Holiday Inn.  I went to a Holiday Inn and they said well we're full, it's after six o'clock.  We now--I now know that if you go anywhere after six o'clock chance of getting in there--.  So I said could you recommend another place.  And the young lady said the Andrew Johnson Hotel [Andrew Johnson Building], which was the old guard hotel in downtown Knoxville.  I said well, as a father of two young--I gotta find a place to sleep.  So I gathered up my nerve and pulled up in front of the Andrew Johnson Hotel, which is the biggest hotel in Knoxville.  Before my nerve departed me, jumped up and ran in, ran to the fir- front de- saw the black bellman, you know, the men--that was a good job.  So these were older guys, they saw me coming in they thought I was coming in to start a demonstration, so they all disappeared.  I went in and went to the desk and said, you know, "I'd like accommodations for the night."  The young lady, who obviously was a University of Tennessee [Knoxville, Tennessee] student said, "Yes sir."  She said, "How many are in your party?"  I said, "My wife and two small boys."  And she said, "We have the perfect accommodations; we have a junior suite."  So we got our stuff hurried in.  Gave us--it was an old hotel, but a nice hotel, we got a nice accommodations and ordered room service and ate in the room and had room service at breakfast in the morning and I will always remember that it cost me exactly twenty-seven dollars.  And I said no wonder these people don't want us in these places because the cost was so modest.  Got in our car the next day and drove directly to--I think we drove to Memphis [Tennessee] from--before we stopped.
Speaker 2: So no trouble at all?
Speaker 1: No trouble at all.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: But parenthood will force you to do some things that you would--. But traveling with small children during that time was a challenge because you had to plot where you were gonna go to the bathroom, you know, all those things.  'Cause you couldn't even stop at the roadside parks, I mean which were public domains.
Speaker 2: State parks and such (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) State parks.  I mean, you know, they used to have little rest parks--
Speaker 2: Oh rest stops, yeah.
Speaker 1: --rest stops, you know, some concrete benches and so forth.  And if you stopped there, the state highway patrol would chase you away.  Black people couldn't stop anyplace.  So when you pull up to a service station, the first thing you'd do would test- ask the guy where's the restroom.  If he wouldn't let you use the restroom you go to another service station.  So I've gone to--many times to a service station and they say, "No, we don't have one for colored," you just go across the street to use your national brand, maybe an Exxon at that time or something.  They would have one.
Story_ID: 461170
Speaker 1: Then of course in Marshall [Texas], an incident that I recall that we--my wife [Mary Dixon Teamer] was United Methodist, I was a Baptist.  We agreed that when we got married that we would always belong to the same church.  In Nashville [Tennessee] she became a Baptist because the church we liked was the First Baptist Church [First Baptist Church, Capitol Hill, Nashville, Tennessee], 8th Avenue where Kelly Miller Smith was the pastor, who was a noted Baptist.  So she even baptized to become a Baptist.  We go to Marshall, the church we like is the United Methodist church because Wiley [Wiley College, Marshall, Texas] is a United Methodist school.  And one Sunday morning we're in--now we're coming from Nashville where everybody's kind of activist.  And they said were gonna sit-in at the Marshall Hotel [Hotel Marshall, Marshall, Texas] right after church.  So my wife and I didn't know any better, we went down to the Marshall Hotel and took a seat.  Well everybody in the Marshall Hotel ran, all the people ran out of the hotel.
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Ran out of it?
Speaker 1: Well, you know, Sunday morning people come to church, they didn't wanna be involved in a demonstration.  The--we were waiting on our colleagues, the other black people to come, well they never showed up.  And so in the meanwhile, they, they weren't gonna do it.  So we did it and the people at the hotel finally sent a little black girl out of the kitchen to wait on us.  You know, she was obviously a dishwasher or something.  She came up, took our order.  But, you know, when you're young you do things because you've come from that atmosphere.  So we, we did that.  And stayed in Marshall actually three years and then was recruited by Dr. Albert Dent [Albert W. Dent] to come to Dillard University [New Orleans, Louisiana].
Story_ID: 461171
Speaker 1: Now I have to ask you something about Marshall [Texas]--
Speaker 2: Go ahead (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) since this has been in the news or maybe recently because of 'The Great Debaters' movie in Wiley College [Marshall, Texas]--
Speaker 2: Sure.  'The Great Debaters,' which I went to see.
Speaker 1: --debate team.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Did, did that remind you of any or your time there at all?  I know that that era was before you got there, but--
Speaker 2: Yeah, but--and it did.  And ironically, one of the men on the debate team, he was not involved in the movie, was a chap by the name of Dr. Hobart Jarrett [Hobart S. Jarrett], who was the first African American to be a full professor at Brooklyn College [Brooklyn, New York].  His brother [HistoryMaker] Vernon Jarrett from Chicago [Illinois] was the journalist, noted journalist, and his other brother [Thomas D. Jarrett] was president of Atlanta University [Clark Atlanta University, Atlanta, Georgia].  But they, they came from Tulsa [Oklahoma].  He was one of the debaters, but not like--as the movie depicted it.  But--'cause one of my friends from Dallas [Texas] sent me a picture of Hobart when he was on the debate team, he went to Wiley.  He and [HistoryMaker] John Hope Franklin were high school friends in Tulsa [at Booker T. Washington High School].  And I remembered that Hobart became one of my mentors.  And when I became national president of Alpha [Alpha Phi Alpha Fraternity, Inc.], and Hobart at that time was retired and he was hard of hearing and he always sat on the front row, he and his wife, Glad [Gladys Jarrett], at every public occasion.  So as national president of Alpha when I got up to speak, Hobart was sitting on the front row.  So I went through my speech and after the speech he came up to me and said, "Charles [HistoryMaker Charles Teamer, Sr.]," he said, "very good job."  He said, "But let me caution you, you're using your hands too much."  So he said you know, it takes away from what you have to say by gesturing and all this sort of thing.  So the next time I get up to speak I look down, there's Hobart sitting on the front row and I'm trying to remember what he said.  So I grabbed the rostrum.  And so after he comes up he said, "I said--I didn't say choke the damn rostrum, I said," (laughter) "just don't gesture too much."  So I--I had to kind of laugh.  And of course when he passed, I was one of the principal speakers at his memorial service at Riverside Church [New York, New York], you know, which is a very dignified edifice and I was--and I told that story and his wife said that, you know, that kind of comforted everybody because they knew that was so Hobart, you know, to, to, to say that.  And the whole idea of mentoring is that you look back and you realize that you've been mentored by probably a hundred guys.  The same thing, I think I was--when I was sitting president of Alpha, I presided at the service for Charles Wesley [Charles H. Wesley], who had, I'd gotten to now as a giant and that helped me to--when you can speak about someone that you've had a personal acquaintance with it just means more and when you can put it into plain terms.  But I, I was gonna tell you that in--so Marshall from the standpoint then, Marshall was in a small segregated town.  So most of your activities were confined to the campus.  It was rigidly segregated at the time we were there.  And that was--Tom, T. Winston Cole [Thomas W. Cole, Sr.] was president at the time.  And that was an opportunity for me to really broaden my experience in administration.  You might recall that during that period of time while I was there, John F. Kennedy [President John Fitzgerald Kennedy] was assassinated in Dallas.  And when we talk about where were you when major events happened, I will always remember where I was when that took place.
Story_ID: 461172
Speaker 1: We were talking about 1963 and what you were doing (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah.  Well, actually I was telling you that I was at Wiley College [Marshall, Texas].  I was a business officer, and--when John F. Kennedy [President John Fitzgerald Kennedy] was killed.  And I--it was traumatic all over the world but being in Marshall [Texas], close to Dallas [Texas] it was even more so.  But the, the lesson that I came away from, if the president of the United States could be killed that morning and Lyndon Johnson [President Lyndon Baines Johnson], or anyone, sworn in as president before the sun would go down, then the lesson to me was all of us are expendable, and so don't get caught up in how important you are.  So the lesson was that one of the first things that one should do, if you wanna be successful in anything is to identify and train your successor quick.  So, so that's a lesson in our community that we very often do not learn that the most important challenge for us is to train the next generation.  And, and I feel that's one thing that we haven't done as well as we should as African American leadership.  And so, that's why I agreed to take on the chamber situation because I think that it's crucial in New Orleans [Louisiana] today to not only identify but indoctrinate and, and, and put in place the next generation of leaders.  And if you do what you're doing, you see a lot of guys, as Dr. Benjamin Mays said, that young men may die, but old men will die.
Speaker 1: Okay, now put this in perspective for those who (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I'll put this in perspective--
Speaker 1: --watching this now, you have just become the--just recently named chairman of the--
Speaker 2: Chamber--
Speaker 1: --New Orleans Chamber of Commerce?
Speaker 2: --right, right.
Speaker 1: Okay, and that's--that was when? Just, just for the record--
Speaker 2: Just within the last month.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: We're gonna have the annual meeting--
Speaker 1: March 2008, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: We have an annual meeting in April, and I'll be officially sworn in, but I've already (laughter) taken over the duties of office.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And, and I say that because when you look at the--and, and I'm trying--I'm going back to 1963 that a number of the things that we thought we were changing then haven't really changed.
Story_ID: 461173
Speaker 1: So in six- so when I was at Wiley College [Marshall, Texas] I saw that happen to John F. Kennedy [President John Fitzgerald Kennedy].  Well within months after that, Dr. Dent [Albert W. Dent] who was president of Dillard [Dillard University, New Orleans, Louisiana] came to see me to invite me to, to come to Dillard.  It, it took me a year to transition because I didn't wanna leave Wiley in the lurch, but I ended up at Dillard in 1965, a month before Hurricane Betsy came, which was the greatest hurricane to hit this city before Hurricane Katrina.  So when Hurricane Betsy came, I just moved my wife [Mary Dixon Teamer] and three small children to New Orleans [Louisiana].  Dr. Dent identified me as, as a bright young man that he thought would do well.  And one of the things that he asked me to do was to become involved in the community and helped me.  So that led to my becoming involved in civic affairs in the community.  Because Dr. Dent at that time was--I guess he retired probably--but anyway he, he the transition of leadership began with one leader who said I want you to become involved in the community.  So that led to the things that I've done in the community.  And I remind young people today that for those of us who are not, as we would say to the manor born, we weren't born with wealth and influence.  The question is how do you gain it.  One way is through the civic arena, you know.  I was laughing with someone last night that yesterday, I started out with the Junior Achievement [Junior Achievement of Greater New Orleans, New Orleans, Louisiana] luncheon and was sitting at my table where three former kings of Rex, and you know Rex is the king of Carnival.  What you probably don't know is I was the first African American member in Rex.
Speaker 2: Okay, no I didn't.
Speaker 1: And so the king of Carnival this year, and I have been on the same float for the last ten years, and so we were sitting together yesterday and he said, "Well I'm coming back" (laughter) "to my float."  So these guys ride on these floats year in and year out.
Story_ID: 461174
Speaker 1: Now (unclear) let me go back for a minute and just explain 'cause New Orleans [Louisiana] culture is so specific--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --people around the country don't understand what we're talking about.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: What is Rex?
Speaker 2: Rex is the king of Mardi Gras--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --and--
Speaker 1: And so to be in Rex is to--
Speaker 2: You're invited.  It's a--
Speaker 1: Rex is an organization?
Speaker 2: It's an organization of eight hundred--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --eight hundred plus men.  It's what we call a carnival organization--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --a Mardi Gras organization.
Speaker 1: Now I would guess it's kind of a business, I mean as an organization as well, right (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, that's, that's, that's, that's the real nexus of it.  That for years it had no blacks, and Mrs. Dorothy Taylor [Dorothy Mae Delavallade Taylor], who was the council person at-large proposed legislation to require the various Mardi Gras organizations to become integrated because they were using city services.  And she said that- that's what you are, you're denying people an opportunity to participate for business reasons.  And subsequently they invited me to become the first black member of Rex, which is the, one of the oldest and they parade on Mardi Gras day.  And the King of Rex--Rex the king is called the king of Mardi Gras.  It's the most prestigious (unclear)--
Speaker 1: These are the people with most money and prestige, right (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) These are the people with money, prestige, and--
Speaker 1: It's primarily white people in there?
Speaker 2: Prob- basically (laughter) yes, probably.
Speaker 1: Rex means king in Latin and so you're--
Speaker 2: Right.  So the business community.  So the point that Mrs. Taylor is absolutely true.  That by belonging to this organization you rub elbows with the people who make the basic financial decisions, you know, in this community.  So she was absolutely correct.
Speaker 1: Okay.  'Cause the other group--so the other people around--I mean the ones we usually contact are--come in contact with the king of Zulu, and--
Speaker 2: Right, well--
Speaker 1: --king of Wild Tchoupitoulas or something.
Speaker 2: Right, right, right, right.
Speaker 1: Yeah. Which, which are krewes, mount floats, but Rex--
Speaker 2: And, and Zulu rides on Mardi Gras day.  Elected from the membership as I understand it.  But Rex is, is, is the prestigious post, you know.  And obviously you've got to have real resources to be Rex because just the emoluments of office that day would cost more than most people could afford, you know, or that I would like to pay it even if you're asked to do it.  But the, the fact is that I was using that as an illustration that I started out the day with all these powerful guys, head of shipbuilding cor- corporations, et cetera.  And last night I went to dinner at T- Total Community Action [Total Community Action, Inc., New Orleans, Louisiana], which is (laughter) just the opposite.  I mean, good people, but you know, people who are doing community (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Donating a lot of money, yeah?
Speaker 2: --yeah doing the community good, you know, a fundraiser.  So, but as I was--I came to New Orleans in 1965 and of course that was when seg- (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Well I don't wanna miss this is a good point here and a good point you're making I think is that community involvement is at both ends, the high and the low--
Speaker 2: It is.
Speaker 1: --and the lowest--
Speaker 2: And we can't forget that.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I don't wanna appear egotistical, but I happen to kind of fit in both sides.  I mean I'm first name basis with the business group and first name basis with, you know, my neighborhoods and members of my church (laughter) and my lodge [Prince Hall Masonic Temple, New Orleans, Louisiana] (laughter).
Speaker 1: So what year did, did you become a member of Rex? Did you--can you give us (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Nineteen ninety-one [1991] I believe it was.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 461175
Speaker 1: Back to our chronology, we had you at Dillard [Dillard University, New Orleans, Louisiana] and you come here you spend like, was it twenty-three [sic. thirty-two] years at Dillard, is it that long (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, yeah, well from 1965 to 1997.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Whatever that is.
Speaker 1: To 1997.  So how was that experience, did you--did you enjoy working at Dillard?
Speaker 2: Well, obviously I stayed there a long time so.  It was--among the things that it did for me that the president of the university and the board were very supportive and encouraged me to, to do a number of things.  And I recall one of--the treasurer of the board, I was elected as first African American to serve on the board of a corporate--one of the corporate companies in the city.  So, he said, "Well if we can get you one more of those then you can't leave because you can't afford to leave."  Well I didn't really know what he meant.  So when I went to my first corporate board meeting, sitting at this table and the chap next to me has an envelope with my name on it and he opens his envelope and takes a check out.  Well I figured they'd paid your board fee, but I wasn't arrogant, I had to ask them how much do they pay you?  Well I tell this joke on myself, I got up and took my envelope and went into the men's room and went into a cubicle.  And opened the envelope, and when I saw how much they were paying for serving as a member of the board I said my God no wonder they don't want any of us serving on these boards, you know, board members do very well.  Well there's responsibility, but it also--you can do very well financially.  It helped me to understand that there are, you know, this was a new world and not only can you do well financially, but you can do well influentially in terms of what is gonna happen in the business community and these huge corporations that impact other people.  Because in that I was able to influence the company to look for more--for African Americans at senior levels.  Not so much to integrate, but just to say good business practice.  And the one thing, directors understand how to improve shareholder value.  You know, you know, it could be socially effective and economically effective.  And, and, and we've just seen that happen recently in America what it means when the corporations don't do well.
Story_ID: 461176
Speaker 1: But I- as I said before, 1965 led to my becoming active in the--.  Well, let me just step back minute to Boy Scouts [Boy Scouts of America] because we talked about that earlier and I can tie this in very quickly.  When I came to New Orleans [Louisiana] I'd been serving in the Boy Scout council in East Texas.  They sent a transcript from East Texas where Marshall [Texas] is located, council to New Orleans simply notifying them that one of our board members has transferred to New Orleans.  So the scouting community in New Orleans sought me out to become involved in scouting.  Well scouting at that time was segregated in New Orleans.  There was a black camp and a white camp.  This was 1965, '66 [1966].  And among the things that we were able to do was to--there, there was a fundraiser for the new Boy Scout reservation.  There was a young quote militant there and I suggested that we rate--. Well we wanted to have more African American scout troops.  When I found out that most of the troops were really operated by females.  All of the packs were run by females and this was in--
Speaker 2: On the Cub Scouts, you mean (simultaneous)
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, the Cub Scouts.  So--
Speaker 2: You're right.
Speaker 1: --there were very few, we had a hard time finding scoutmasters.  If you're gonna have more troops, you got to have more scoutmasters.  Two things that we helped to do. One was they were in the process of building a new scout reservation.  A group of us said well if we help them raise money for the reservation they will have to integrate it.  So let's do a little fundraising in our community.  So I went to Dr. Albert Dent [Albert W. Dent], the president of Dillard [Dillard University, New Orleans, Louisiana], and several others, help me raise ten thousand dollars or so, and we did.  The second thing was, once we got that, then they said okay we integrated it.  At a scout reservation, troops lived in a little cluster so you got to have an adult male with each troop.  Well, we'd been clustering the troops together because we didn't have enough male scoutmas- I mean women couldn't go to camp, so you didn't have enough males.  So we had a problem.  Where do you get the males to go if you get more boys to go?  Several of us came up with the idea that we can hire a paraprofessional.  We can pay someone to help organize troops and also go to camp, that's part of his job.  Well where do you get the money?  I had heard that you can get a grant from the United Way [Capital Area United Way, Baton Rouge, Louisiana].  I knew about the United Way, but I'd never really been involved with it.  So, I was asked to go to the United Way and ask for a grant.  I went to the United Way, and of course I'm appearing before this group of white, middle-aged and older males, and I put on this show and asked for this money.  Well, they gave us ten grand [$10,000] to do that program.  One of the guys told this story recently, he said, "Charlie Teamer [HistoryMaker Charles Teamer, Sr.] came before us and called us a bunch of honkies and other names, and he was a young guy in a dashiki and an afro and a gold chain."  Well, I did have an afro and maybe a gold chain, but I didn't have on a dashiki, I did have on a blue suit.  And he said--we, we said this guy's bright, he's got something going.  So they gave me the $10,000 for the scouting program.  And then named me part of the United Way, and so then I became an officer in the United Way and worked it up and became the first African American to chair the United Way board of directors, and this was in the '80s [1980s] when I became--by the time I became chair because, you know, it takes years to work your way up to that pinnacle.  So that was, scouting led from--as a boy, led me into New Orleans to work with, with the program.
Story_ID: 461177
Speaker 1: You were gonna tell us about where you were in 1968 when Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] was assassinated.
Speaker 2: I--in 1968, I was the chief financial officer at Dillard [Dillard University, New Orleans, Louisiana].  Had been offered a job at Fisk [Fisk University, Nashville, Tennessee] by Dr. James Lawson, who was president of Fisk at that time.  Was on my way to Nashville [Tennessee] and I was sitting in the airport on an Eastern Air Lines plane and a reporter got on and I was reading a newspaper or something.  He said, "Obviously you are very calm, you haven't heard."  I said, "Heard what?"  He said, "Martin Luther King had been shot, and I'm on my way to Memphis [Tennessee] to cover the story."  When I got off in Nashville and one of my friends picks me up at the airport and takes me to the Holiday Inn out on West End [Avenue], near Vanderbilt [Vanderbilt University, Nashville, Tennessee], and while we are checking into the hotel, we hear rumbling going down West End Boulevard [sic.].  He's been in the [U.S.] military, and I have too.  He said, "Sounds like tanks."  I said, "Yeah, it does sound like tanks," I was at Fort Knox [Kentucky], I know what a tank sounds like.  The National Guard had been called out because they were--there was rioting on Jefferson Street out in an area around Tennessee State [Tennessee State University, Nashville, Tennessee].  And as you recall that's where they had a lot of trouble that night.  That's why I said I was in the airport [Atlanta Municipal Airport; Hartsfield-Jackson Atlanta International Airport] in Atlanta [Georgia] on my way to Nashville when the word came down.  And of course when I came back to New Orleans [Louisiana], then New Orleans was in turmoil.  And they would--if you were not sympathetic and you didn't put a black rag or something outside of your house, the people were saying we're gonna burn your house down.  So we didn't have that kind of riot in New Orleans, but that was when--so that's how I--I remember very well where I was when that, when that happened.
Story_ID: 461178
Speaker 1: What are some of the highlights at, at Dillard [Dillard University, New Orleans, Louisiana], you know, as, as a chief financial officer there?
Speaker 2: Well, Dillard was an opportunity for me and--to grow both professionally and, and personally, civically.  I had an opportunity to serve on a number of city civic boards and agencies as the first black.  Dillard supported me, I always had the support of the president and the board of trustees.  But I never forgot for one moment how I got where I was and how it benefited me.  So consequently, I'm proud of the fact that of all the years that I served at Dillard, we never had a deficit.  We didn't have any retrenchment.  I attempted to use my board experience and outside experience to help generate money for the university, but also to improve the best business practices before it became required.  I'll give you two examples.  I served on the Commonfund for colleges and universities for twelve years.  So in doing that, I was sitting with some of the best minds in investment in the country.  So I attempted to utilize it in two ways.  One, to improve the management of the endowment at Dillard University in a sound, but sensitive and conservative way.  And I would always say to our president that while everyone would like for you to earn more in your endowment, I don't want to have to report to our board that we lost any money on endowment at any time.  So I kind of--it was conservative, but prudent fashion.  The other factor was that I was able to, while I was at Dillard, that was at a time when federal money was becoming very much available to colleges and universities as you recall in the late '60s [1960s] and early '70s [1970s].  You know, the financial aid program was (unclear).  Well through the support of our president, I became one of the CFOs who participated in the National Association of College and University Business Officers as an officer and a leader.  And became very much involved in understanding and the leadership of administering federal funds recognizing that if you utilize a lot of federal funds, you're gonna have to be accountable for federal funds.  So we developed a, a program of implementing audits before audits became required.  So you may recall there was a program called Strengthening Developing Institutions [Strengthening Developing Institutions of Higher Education], which was a federal program designed primarily for HBUs [historically black colleges and universities (HBCUs)], but it certainly later on went to other institutions.  And we were one of the first schools to have a federal audit, and that helped us make sure that we had good audits.  And through my work with the National Association of Business Officers, I was asked to lecture at workshops and programs throughout the country and implement the programs and procedures at the university that would help us do well.  So, you know Dr. Samuel DuBois Cook [HistoryMaker Samuel DuBois Cook] who was president at Dillard for a long time, and he and I were chatting the other day that we never had to--had any financial crisis at the university.  And one day he came back from the United Negro College Fund [UNCF] meeting and he said, "You know, I hear all these people talking about missing payrolls at their institutions and so forth. What would you do if we couldn't meet our payroll?"  He was asking me that.  I said, "I would call you as president and tell you, but I would be at the airport standing--getting ready to get on Delta Air Lines when I called you to tell you because" (laughter) "these people would" (laughter) "hang both of us if we couldn't pay them.  So yes I would tell you, but I would be ready to get out of here at the moment I conveyed the information to you."  So that was always a good experience for me.
Story_ID: 461179
Speaker 1: So you were there from--till 1997 and then (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Nineteen ninety-seven [1997] I retired and when I left the university, well two, two things.  One, we--in 1993, we put together Dryades [Dryades Savings Bank, F.S.B., New Orleans, Louisiana].  Dryades Bank grew out of the RTC, Resolution Trust company [Resolution Trust Corporation] that you might recall in which banks were failing in the country.  And we learned that a failed financial institution could be purchased by a group of minority investors to become a minority bank under the federal regulations.  You couldn't get it for free, but you had to meet some criteria.  So you had to put capital together to generate it.  So, but we led a group of investors who bought Dryades Savings and Loan [Dryades Savings and Loan Association, F.A.] and made it Dryades Federal Savings Bank.
Speaker 1: Okay, so Dryades was--was it an African American owned company?  Okay.
Speaker 2: No, no, it was, it was an old conservative, white, which was right around the corner.
Speaker 1: 'Cause we were speculating about the name of it even, Dryades has to do with the sea or something, or does it--was it--?
Speaker 2: No, it was--there was a street--the original Dryades was on Dryades Street, which was a street which is now called Oretha Castle Haley Street [sic. Oretha Castle Haley Boulevard] in the Uptown area [New Orleans, Louisiana].  The original institution was on that street, which was over a hundred years ago.  And then they moved it downtown and kept the name Dryades Savings and Loan.  When we bought it, we kept the name Dryades and called it Dryades Federal Savings Bank.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Yeah, I, I, I remember when there was a savings and loan crisis.  I don't remember all the details, but a lot of them closed down around the country (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right, that's right, yeah, and that's--and so we were able to ascertain that through assistance you can--we were able to put the stock together and, and, and, and purchase it from the federal--from the federal government in 1993.  We opened in September of '04 [sic. 1994].
Speaker 1: Okay, so you were working on this while you were working at Dillard [Dillard University, New Orleans, Louisiana] (unclear) (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I--absolutely.  And I became chairman and founder, and my, my goal was to retire and devote more time to the bank.
Story_ID: 461180
Speaker 1: So I went through a period of years in which--. And then when I did retire [from Dillard University, New Orleans, Louisiana] in 1997, Tom Cole [HistoryMaker Thomas W. Cole], who was president of Clark Atlanta [Clark Atlanta University, Atlanta, Georgia] and [HistoryMaker] Carl Ware asked me if I would serve as a consultant to Clark Atlanta to help them clear up some financial challenges.  And I ended up virtually spending two years between Atlanta [Georgia] and New Orleans [Louisiana] helping them clear up some financial challenges.  And then--
Speaker 2: So this is in 1997 (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Seven [1997] to 1999.
Speaker 2: Okay, okay.
Speaker 1: I literally lived in two cities.
Speaker 2: Okay.  So you were financial consultant for them?
Speaker 1: Well actually I ended up becoming vice president (laughter).
Speaker 2: All right, from consultant to vice president, okay.
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, um-hm. And of course Carl's idea was that if--do you know Carl Ware?  Do--Carl Ware was the highest ranking African American with Coca-Cola [The Coca-Cola Company, Atlanta, Georgia] at that time, and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, we've met, yeah.
Speaker 1: --yeah and Carl at that time was in charge of Coke in Africa and he spent about a week a month in Africa.  So he said if I can live in Atlanta and work in Africa, you can live in New Orleans and work in Atlanta.  And that was how he sold me the idea of doing it.
Speaker 2: Okay, he--he and Thomas Cole were--yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, Tom Cole, Jr. who was president at that time.
Speaker 2: Okay, all right.  Now, well it seemed like you were, you were somewhere else too, another one of the colleges--I--let's see.  Well what happened next, I'll just ask you (laughter) rather than trying to (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) (Laughter) Well in 1999, we, we thought that Clark was where it should be and we came back to New Orleans full time.
Story_ID: 461181
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Dryades Savings Bank [Dryades Savings Bank, F.S.B., New Orleans, Louisiana] now (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right.  Well I wa- Dryades, as I said--when I came back and, and resumed my role as chairman of the board and about a year ago, maybe a little more than a year ago, the president of the bank after the storm [Hurricane Katrina] came in one Monday and announced to me that he thought he would retire.  He, he just burned out after the storm.  So, the board said, "Well you're the new CEO" (laughter).  So I, I served for about--I served for about a year as chairman and interim CEO.  During that time, I located a new CEO who was a young woman that I worked with when she was at First NBC [First NBC Bank, New Orleans, Louisiana].  First NBC was the largest bank in the state in the '90s [1990s], I mean up until it sold to Bank One [Bank One Corporation].  Subsequently, Bank One sold to Chase, JCMorgan [sic. JPMorgan Chase and Co.].  But I was the first black on their board and met her then.  And she had, after the storm like many people, she'd been kind of looking for things, not doing anything, and I convinced her.  So she is now a CEO.  So in that same period of time, we created what we call an alliance with a new First NBC, in which there'll be a holding company with two banks, Dryades, which is the minority bank, and First NBC, which is the majority bank.  The idea is that as we move forward after the storm, there is more need than ever for strong community banks both in the white community and in the African American community simply because you know what the challenges are for the least of these.  The people who need more help are the people who are not getting the help.  And so our mission remains the same.  It's the idea of creating a, a new kind of institution and we feel very good about it because I came back to New Orleans [Louisiana] about a month after the storm.  And I was very fortunate because one of my friends who was a member of Sigma Pi Phi [Sigma Pi Phi Fraternity, Inc.] who had transferred to California called me and he said, "Where you gonna stay?"  Well I hadn't--I didn't know, I hadn't gotten to that point.  And so he said, "Well I have a house and a car.  I'll leave my--I'll have my secretary send the keys to my house and my car to you."  I was in Atlanta [Georgia] at the time.  And he said, "Feel free to use both of them as long as you want to."  So I ended up with a large house at English (unclear) in a private neighborhood and his car.  Because he said you've been a good friend to me and use it as long as you need to.  And I used it for about eighteen months and then I bought another house.  I'm in the process now of cleaning out my original house, which we lived in for twenty-five years and moving into a new house.  So that's why I said I lost some of the things because we had three feet of water in our house.  So my records in my garage, I had steel file cabinets which I had the records for--I was Dutch Morial's [Ernest Morial] campaign treasurer when he ran for mayor.  So I had those records in there and I was the campaign treasurer for Max Spears when he ran as the first African American for a city-wide office, I had those records in there.  So I lost those, but a good many of my records from Sigma Pi Phi and Alpha Phi Alpha [Alpha Phi Alpha Fraternity, Inc.] were in the attic of my residence and I have most of those.
Story_ID: 461182
Speaker 1: Ironically, after returning to New Orleans [Louisiana] from Atlanta [Georgia], my wife [Mary Dixon Teamer] became ill and several things happened to me just--it's almost as if sometimes you--God has ordained you to be involved in some good things and some bad things.  After coming back and planning to take it easy, my wife became seriously ill with cancer and at the same time, I was encouraged to become a candidate for the grand sire of Sigma Pi Phi [Sigma Pi Phi Fraternity, Inc.].  So, she was ill when I was inducted as the grand sire in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] at the centennial.  And within a month after returning to New Orleans, she passed on.  So (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) What year is this?
Speaker 1: That was in the summer before, in July of '04 [2004].  The centennial celebration was--Sigma Pi Phi one--centennial took place in June of '04 [2004].  She passed away in July of '04 [2004].  And of course the great storm of Katrina [Hurricane Katrina] came in August of '05 [2005].  So I had kind of a busy period.  The--I would say that the--my role as the grand sire of Sigma Pi Phi--really I tried to implement--we had developed a strategic plan.  And so my role was to take that strategic plan, implement it and move it onto our member organizations.  So fortunately we had a great period of growth in my role as the grand sire.  We moved the office from New York [New York] to Atlanta [Georgia].  Peyton Williams [HistoryMaker Peyton Williams, Jr.], whom you've interviewed, and I came on board about the same time.  We happened to--I guess you would say we, we kind of feed upon each other because we worked very closely to move the office from New York down to Atlanta and to do some new things in the organization.  One of my mentors in organization was Thomas Shropshire [Thomas B. Shropshire], who was grand sire.  We believed that, that it's a challenge for Sigma Pi Phi to grow and prosper by not only inducting younger men, but also taking our organization into venues that we have not been before simply because the pattern for African American men has changed.  The, the men who are in Corporate America, now many of them are younger.  They have not had the traditional pathways of growth.  They did not come necessarily out of historically black colleges and universities [HBCUs].  So historically, they do not understand where we have come and where we're going.  So the best way to do that is transitioning leadership.  But also it's important for us to look for new venues of growth.  In the Chicago [Illinois] area we now--at one time we only had Beta in Chicago, now there--they have two, I guess, in the suburbs of Chicago, probably should be more because the growth is just there.  In Atlanta, we created a new Boule in north Atlanta.  We probably should have one south of the city.  Within the next two months, we will create a new member Boule in Chapel Hill [North Carolina], which will be the seventh in the State of North Carolina.  There are more member Boules in North Carolina than any other state.  Because as you know there's a huge concentration of bright articulate African American men in, in, in North Carolina and especially in that golden tri- in that triangle.  We are creating another member Boule in Williamsburg [Virginia] midway between Richmond [Virginia] and Norfolk [Virginia].  Here again, we have found that there are tremendous men of color in areas that we've never--we kind of overlooked in the past.  The patterns of growth in a population are changing.
Story_ID: 461183
Speaker 1: Fast forwarding back to New Orleans [Louisiana] as we talk about the bank [Dryades Savings Bank, F.S.B., New Orleans, Louisiana] and where we're going, a part of the role that I see is that the p- the percentage of people in the community who are underserved still remain.  They're unbanked.  And especially as we talk about rebuilding the community, you've been here for several days now and you've driven through the city and you recognize that you can be in a--what we would call a pretty good neighborhood, you're on one street, it seems to be growing and prospering, you go on the next street it's like, is this the same neighborhood?  The patterns are so unpredictable.  Let me give you an example.  As I told you my wife [Mary Dixon Teamer] passed away in 2004.  The storm [Hurricane Katrina] occurred in 2005.  I had not completed the succession of the estate when, when the storm occurred.  If something had happened to me, my children would've been in a terrible problem because the estate would still be open and the question would be who actually owns the property.  If you transform that to people who are less informed you find incident after incident where the title to the property is unclear.  New Orleans is a very old city.  Its traditions are very old, so you might have generations of people living in the same house and they do not know where the title is.  In the 9th Ward [New Orleans, Louisiana], for example, I'm told, that there's home after home in which the mortgages had been paid, the people have been there for years, there was no flood insurance.  So flood insurance is mandatory when you have a mortgage, well if you don't have a mortgage you have no flood insurance and obviously then you're not gonna have any wind in- wind storm insurance.  So consequently, the problems of redeveloping these properties becomes even more severe.  What we are doing looking for innovative ways to serve the people in our community to, to, to, to come up with new products, but maybe more than new products just to be available to work and talk with the people in our community on a one-to-one basis.  While everybody wants to use the Internet and the computer, the challenge is that the people who really need the services probably are not computer savvy.  So that means that the cost of doing business is a little more expensive for hands on, but that's the only way we're gonna do it.  And so what we're trying to do is create a way to do what needs to be done in our community while at the same time being a profitable and viable institution.
Story_ID: 461184
Speaker 1: A good example would be, I live in this community and I belong to the same church for forty-some odd years.  I went to another church Easter Sunday and of course the pastor automatically--not automatically--but we'd been friends for a long time, he asked me to come down and say a few words.  Well before I can get out of the church, members of the congregation are coming up to me with their challenges.  So as the chairman of a minority bank [Dryades Savings Bank, F.S.B.] in the City of New Orleans [Louisiana], it's hard for me to walk down the street or do anything socially without meeting someone who does not have a financial challenger.  And so from that standpoint, I see the need for us to do what we've been doing, plus some.  Because there is only one New Orleans and, and, and as someone said where we are now on the Mississippi River, if we didn't have a great port, we'd have to invent one.
Speaker 2: So, do you think the federal government's doing what they--well you know, what's your assessment of that commitment?
Speaker 1: Well obviously the federal government didn't do what it could've done.  The state government didn't do what it could've done.  But part of the challenge is--and, and, and we, we all agree on that.  But it--it- it's--leadership is crucial and the one thread that you'll find in all that I've done is that the legacy of leadership and service is crucial.  It's very crucial in our community.  And if, if--good leadership can always rise to the occasion, but a catastrophe is a catastrophe anyway, but with the right leadership you have a much better chance of moving over it then you have when you don't have the leadership.  So I think that that's the challenge that we faced.  We- we're beyond that now the question is where do we go from this point on.  And so I think that's, that's--obviously we didn't--our government didn't do what it could've done or can do.  If we can move armies into foreign soil and, and, and construct hospitals overnight, we can do it in this country too.  Now the question is, how do we get state governments and the national government to understand who calls the shots.
Speaker 2: Okay.  I understand there is some money, I was looking online at some money from Fannie Mae [Federal National Mortgage Association] and you know, that you all have been able to get (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Well, there, there--a lot of sources of income and one that I'd say I word about because is--the whole matter of Section 8 money for people without funds.  In other words, using the Section 8 vouchers to create homeownership.  I believe and I strongly believe if you go--as we talked earlier today, my grandfather on my paternal side [John Teamer] accumulated land.  Obviously his sons, some of them, did not understand the importance of keeping that land intact.  Now my father [Boyd Teamer] believed in owning his own house and he, he spent a good bit of time emphasizing that.  So I grew up in a family that understood that you ought to own your house.  But I want to impact on my children not only do you wanna own your own home, but you wanna own two or three homes, because there's value in that.  And you wanna do it in a clearly practical way.  As I've said to my sons, you build the house--my father wanted to live in the same house and pay for it.  It's not necessarily important that you pay for that house, you gotta keep up with it, I mean with your payments.  But as you develop equity in that house and your salary increases it's important for you to think about moving to the next level of housing.  You know, for tax purposes and estate planning.  So I think that in our community that's what we have to help people understand that as your income and your resources grow, then you ought to think about, where do I go on the next level?
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And I'm not sure that we have had that conversation in an adequate way.
Story_ID: 461185
Speaker 1: Tell me about the Cotton Exchange [Historic Cotton Exchange, New Orleans, Louisiana] and the Holiday Inn Express, now you were--
Speaker 2: Happy to.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: When we developed the franchise, the bank [Dryades Savings Bank, F.S.B., New Orleans, Louisiana], I learned from actually our congressman, [HistoryMaker] William Jefferson, that there were opportunities available for us in terms of purchase of buildings that had housed banks by the RTC [Resolution Trust Corporation].  And through my relationships with people in the real estate business, I identified two or three properties of which this was one, this--that we would be interested in.  One day somebody came and said to me, Charlie Teamer [HistoryMaker Charles Teamer, Sr.] there's some--there's a white group interested in your building, so to speak.  So I decided that I would make an inquiry.  I went to my bank, the bank that I was doing business with and talked with the people there and said I'm interested in purchasing the Cotton Exchange.  No, I said I need a half million dollars.  They in turn said, "What are you gonna do?" I said, "I'm gonna put a bid on the Cotton Exchange building."  Because of my experience with them and having been a customer for a long time, they realized that the Cotton Exchange building was worth more than I was gonna pay for it.  So they said, "We'll cover you."  So I led a group of investors.  We bought the building that we're in for considerably less than $500,000, eight story building, it was empty at the time.  We purchased the building, moved the bank into the building, leased the first two floors to the bank for ninety-nine years, and decided that we would do something else with floors three through eight.  We tried a number of things.  We wanted to, to develop something like the Equal Opportunity [Equal Employment Opportunity Commission] building in New York [New York], you know, where the United--where the Negro College Fund [United Negro College Fund] and Urban League [National Urban League] and all--but we weren't able to do that.  So the first couple of years, three or four years, the third through the eighth floor was vacant.  And then one day one of my acquaintances came in and said, you know, we are in the process of developing empty buildings, boutique hotels, and therefore, we'd like to develop a hotel in this building, floors three through eight.  We created a partnership with three groups, our Cotton Exchange partners, one, which own this building to create a hotel.  We sold floors one through two to our partnership, invested three through eight into a new partnership, bought the building next door and created a hotel, which we call the Cotton Exchange Hotel, it's a Holiday Inn franchise.  So we are one-third owners of the hotel property that is next door.  So therefore, we own these two floors and we're one-third owners of the building next door.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: So we are substantial hoteliers in downtown New Orleans [Louisiana].
Story_ID: 461186
Speaker 1: Tell us about your involvement with the Amistad Research Center [New Orleans, Louisiana]?
Speaker 2: During the period (laughter) of time which I call myself retired, the Amistad board relieved the director of his responsibilities, which is on the campus of Tulane [Tulane University, New Orleans, Louisiana], which I happen to be a member of the board of trustees of Tulane.  Dr. Andrea Jefferson [Andrea Green Jefferson] was the chairman, called me one day and she said, "I know you have some free time." And said, "Could you just serve as the interim director of the Amistad until we can find somebody."  As I'm often a glutton for punishment, I said, "I can do that."  She said, "Well you don't even have to really spend any time there just, you know, keep it going until we can find somebody."  Well that went on for about two years until I decided that I couldn't do that anymore and went out and found--recruited an executive director.  But during that period of time we, pleased to say, that the center grew in its collections.  We increased the budget, its funding.  We hosted the Amistad vessel and we raised several hundred thousand dollars to host the vessel here which was a great success.  Thousands of school children were able to visit the Amistad vessel itself, which is a wonderful, just a wonderful exhibit.  And so the center goes on, it's still operating.  There's a new--well he's not new anymore, but a director there.  We hope that you will have an opportunity to visit sometime when you're in New Orleans [Louisiana], it's, it's a great repository.  And--in your notes you ask have I ever ge- deposited my papers any place.  It is my plan that I will--and, and I'm sorry that I didn't do it before the storm [Hurricane Katrina], because they had asked me to do that.  But the actual fact is, I think that most of us in my position have not understood the value of preserving your papers and depositing them, and providing funding for the support of them.  As a historian, you certainly know that you--this can't be done without cost.  And so part of my challenge is that yes, I do want to place my memorabilia and my papers with the Amistad, but I have to find a way to provide them with some funding to maintain them.
Story_ID: 461187
Speaker 1: What are some of your hopes for the African American community today?
Speaker 2: Very simple.  I, I think that we have to preserve the African American community not only in name, but in fact and deed.  We have a great culture here.  You have the Mardi Gras Indians [Native Americans] and all of that, but there's a cost to that.  And I think that we've got to start with the business side and we've got to maintain the residential side.  And of course, all of this is based upon education.  Since the storm [Hurricane Katrina], our, our public education system has been in chaos.  We are depending largely on charter schools.  I do not have a qualm with charter schools, but we discovered in America a long time ago that a public education system is essential to a thriving community and especially in the black community.  We know full well that after the Civil War, the missionaries and other people came south and helped to establish schools--that was a good thing.  No question about it.  But until the--it, it took a long time to open up the public colleges.  You know, we had our system of public colleges where--which, which are tremendous--I mean historically black, good school [HBCU].  But if you would look now throughout the country, there's a larger percentage of African American students in the public colleges of this university than ever before.  So consequently, the great cities of America have great public school systems.  Your City of Chicago [Illinois] is a good example.  It does not matter how the governance is done, as long as it's good.  And--and I--I've done a lot of business in Chicago over the years and I remember when the public school system was not nearly as successful as it apparently is now.  So I think that is one--that is a great challenge for us.  Having been involved at one time in the selection of school board members, I believe that is something that those of us in the citizenry will have to go back to.
Story_ID: 461188
Speaker 1: Now when you look back on everything you've done to this point, was there any--is there any- anything major that you would do differently now if you could?
Speaker 2: Well (laughter), I suspect that a lot of what I've done has been based on being in the right place at the right time.  You could call it luck.  If I could do some things differently I suspect that I would--I'd wanna be a little more strategic then I've been--
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: --in terms of planning.
Speaker 1: So things, okay--so you've been reacting--
Speaker 2: I've been reacting (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) vol- volunteering for things--
Speaker 2: I- I've been reacting--
Speaker 1: Yeah, okay.
Speaker 2: --it's turned out well, but the fact is that it probably could've been better if I had been a little more strategic.
Story_ID: 461189
Speaker 1: Well likewise if you look back on everything you've done to this point, what today would you consider to be your legacy?
Speaker 2: Leadership.  I, I think that I've been in a position to provide leadership on a number of boards and agencies, and I think that has been to the public good.  For example, my work as president of the board of commissioners of the Port of New Orleans [New Orleans, Louisiana].  During that period of time, we constructed new condos on the--on the riverfront.  We signed the deal to co- put the--aquarium on the riverfront.  A number of things that I think will go on, last long after I'm gone.  And, and I've realized that--I realized that change will occur and therefore, it's important to try to guide it and strategically move it forward, you know.  And as I said earlier, you know, young men may die, but old men will die, we're going.
Story_ID: 461190
Speaker 1: Can you tell us a little bit about your family?
Speaker 2: Yes.  I told you my wife [Mary Dixon Teamer] and I were married for forty-seven years.  We both grew up together.  I have three adult children.  My oldest son, Charles, Jr. [Charles Teamer, Jr.] is a Morehouse [Morehouse College, Atlanta, Georgia] graduate with honors who works for the community college system.  He and his, his wife teach in the public schools.  They have three great children.  His old- my oldest granddaughter, Sheree [ph.] is a sophomore in the honor college at LSU [Louisiana State University, Baton Rouge, Louisiana], just been elected chair-elect of the student union board and is the only student--black st- maybe only student on the selection committee for the new chancellor of the university.  My son Rod [Roderick Teamer], is managing director for Blue Cross [Blue Cross and Blue Shield of Louisiana] in New Orleans [Louisiana].  Has--his wife [Toya Barnes-Teamer] is a vice president at Dillard [Dillard University, New Orleans, Louisiana].  He has three wonderful children.  And my daughter Cheryl [Cheryl Teamer] is the only girl and she has--she's not married, but she is a vice president for Harrah's Entertainment [Harrah's Entertainment, Inc.; Caesars Entertainment Corporation], reports to the people in Las Vegas [Nevada].  From a standpoint of leadership, two of my three children are second generation civic leaders.  Cheryl is a second generation to serve on the Audubon Institute [Audubon Nature Institute, New Orleans, Louisiana] board, which has the zoo [Audubon Zoo, New Orleans, Louisiana] and the aquarium [Audubon Aquarium of the Americas, New Orleans, Louisiana].  And she also serves on the Greater New Orleans Foundation [New Orleans, Louisiana] board, the community foundation, which I helped to found and served as chair.  So she is the second generation on that.  Rod is on the board of the United Way [Capital Area United Way, Baton Rouge, Louisiana] and several major philanthropical organizations.  And I'm pleased to say that the Teamers are one of the few families in New Orleans to have second generation youngsters in positions of leadership in civic (unclear) New Orleans.
Story_ID: 461191
Speaker 1: The last question is similar to legacy, but a little different.  How would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: I'd like to be remembered as one who wanted to see things better for the next generation.
Speaker 1: Okay, thank you sir.
Speaker 2: My pleasure (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay.
Story_ID: 461192
Speaker 1: First one is 1986 when I was in Senegal with a government official and we were looking at their import of, of tuna to Paris [France].  And I was leading a trade mission on behalf of the Port of New Orleans [New Orleans, Louisiana].
Speaker 2: That's my--there I am with Broadus Butler, who was a former president of Dillard University [New Orleans, Louisiana].
Speaker 1: That was in 1987 with a group that went to the State of Israel.  The former Mayor Sidney Barthelemy, now Congressman Bill Jefferson [HistoryMaker William Jefferson] and Donald Mintz, who was a local civic leader.
Speaker 2: That was former Mayor Ernest "Dutch" Morial [Ernest Morial] introducing me at an affair in New Orleans [Louisiana] when I became general president of Alpha [Alpha Phi Alpha Fraternity, Inc.].
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: There I am with the great Lionel Hampton, Donald Mintz and Walter Washington who was president of Alcorn State University [Alcorn Agricultural and Mechanical College; Alcorn State University, Alcorn, Mississippi].  Lionel was in New Orleans for an affair.
Speaker 1: There I am with former mayor of Chicago [Illinois] and Reggie Williams of NFL [National Football League] pro football player when I was national president of Alpha.
Speaker 2: There I am with the former mayor and my wife [Mary Dixon Teamer] at reception for the former mayor--I mean governor of Louisiana, the Honorable Kathleen Blanco.
Speaker 1: Here we are with President Samuel DuBois Cook [HistoryMaker Samuel DuBois Cook] at Dillard University in 1996.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: Here I am again with, with Mayor Ernest "Dutch" Morial who was a former general president of Alpha when, again, he was swearing me in as president.
Speaker 2: Of course there we are with the Honorable William Clinton [President William Jefferson "Bill" Clinton], president of the United States and pr- Dr. Sam Cook, president of Dillard when we invited him to the campus.
Speaker 1: There I am with the Honorable John Stroger [HistoryMaker John H. Stroger, Jr.] who was the commissioner of Cook County [Illinois], who was an Xavier [Xavier University of Louisiana, New Orleans, Louisiana] graduate who was in New Orleans and Paul Valteau [HistoryMaker Paul R. Valteau, Jr.] was a civil sheriff of--
Speaker 2: There I am with my wife and the Congressperson Maxine Waters [HistoryMaker Maxine Waters].
Speaker 1: That's Charles Teamer [HistoryMaker Charles Teamer, Sr.] at a very young age and my wife, we just gotten married in 1957, headed on a honeymoon.
Speaker 2: And that was in 1951, actually, yeah 1951 when I was a student at Clark College [Clark Atlanta University, Atlanta, Georgia] and president of the freshman class.
Speaker 1: And that's a scene at one of the Alpha conventions in 1985.
Speaker 2: That's--there I am again with--1995--with--greeting the Honorable Johnnie Cochran at the Congressional Black Caucus.
Speaker 1: That's when Mayor Dutch Morial, former president, was swearing me in, in as general president of Alpha.
Speaker 2: There I am with Congressman, I guess, Andy Young [HistoryMaker Andrew Young] when he was ambassador to the UN [United Nations].
Speaker 1: Here again we are with the mayor of Chicago, [HistoryMaker] Eugene Sawyer.
Speaker 2: And that's Charles Teamer, I think when I was a young lad, I might've been about eight or nine years of age.
Speaker 1: There I am with Chief Justice Ernest Finley [sic. Ernest A. Finney, Jr.] who was--I don't even know, I can't remember his name--Finney, who was chief justice of supreme court of South Carolina [South Carolina Supreme Court].
Speaker 2: Here I am with the Governor Roemer [Buddy Roemer] of Louisiana when he was governor and that would've been in 1985 [sic.].
Speaker 1: So this is Mrs. Diana Lewis, a civic leader in New Orleans when I was retiring as the chairman of the board of the metropolitan area committee and she was incoming.
Speaker 2: That's Charles Teamer as a you- as a young guy looking at something in my office at Dillard University.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: That's Charles Teamer of right--I guess it must've been around 1967, I was with [HistoryMaker] Norman Francis on the right the president of Xavier, Emmett Bashful the dean at Southern University of New Orleans [Southern University at New Orleans, New Orleans, Louisiana] and Jessie Richards [ph.], who was a principal in the public school system.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: That was when I was sworn in in 1982 as the first black commissioner of the Port of New Orleans by Supreme Court Justice Revius Ortique [HistoryMaker Revius Oliver Ortique, Jr.] with my wife.
Speaker 1: I am with Congressperson Lindy Boggs and the assistant secretary of the [U.S.] Army and the president of the Port of New Orleans when I was chairman of the board of the commissioner--of the board of commissions of Port of New Orleans.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: Here we are the centennial convocation for Alpha Phi Alpha at Cornell University [Ithaca, New York] in 2006.
Speaker 2: And this is the board of directors of the Boule Foundation when I was grand sire of the Boule [Sigma Pi Phi Fraternity] in 2006.
Speaker 1: This is the platform party in Washington, D.C. when--for the celebration of the Martin Luther King monument [Martin Luther King, Jr. Memorial, Washington, D.C.], which started in my administration as the national president of Alpha Phi Alpha.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: And on, on the left that's when I went to--I was grand sire of Sigma Pi Phi and I went out to Port Arthur [Texas] to present scholarships to young students who had been impacted by Hurricane Rita.
Speaker 2: And on the second, during my tenure as grand sire of Sigma Pi Phi, we raised approximately a million dollars to distribute to students and this is when we presented $150,000 to the officials at Southern University in New Orleans.
