Story_ID: 29661
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe.  I'm interviewer today for The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Scott Stearns.  Sir, could you state your full name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: John David Terry.  That's J-O-H-N, D-A-V-I-D, T-E-R-R-Y.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And, sir, what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: September 29, 1966 in Norfolk, Virginia.
Speaker 1: An, sir, what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: I am the president of a small business which focuses on wireless technology, but an engineer by trade.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Would you call yourself a computer engineer or-?
Speaker 2: No, I'm a, probably the closest thing, you would say I'm a wireless expert, but electrical engineer by profession so my degrees and titles typically have engineer or system engineer or communications engineer.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Now, what is today's date?
Speaker 2: August 13, 2007.
Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: We're in Plano, Texas in the Dallas office for my small start up.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 29662
Speaker 1: All right.  Now, before we go into depth there five light-weight, kind of "People Magazine-ish" type questions that management compels me to ask of everyone as a warm up.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And they only require a short answer.  The first one is, do you have a favorite food and what is it?
Speaker 2: Steak.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: Blue.
Speaker 1: Favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Spring.
Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Costa Rica.
Speaker 1: And the last one is, do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: Do I have a favorite phrase or saying?  I have a few.  I used to, it used to be, one was, "Whinnie, whinnie, whincey (ph.) [SIC] [Veni, Vidi, Vici], which was, it means, "I came, I saw, I conquered".  I used to use that a lot.  So that's probably my, the most popular one and one of the most familiar (unclear).  But recently I, you know, started looking at some others.  One was, a gentleman told me recently that you need to make footprints before you can start walking.  So in other words, you gotta take baby steps, so I'm kinda starting to adopt that, understanding as I try to grow my business, there're just stages that you have to go through in order to get to the end goal.  And being a person who is pretty driven, sometimes it's hard for me to have the patience to see that through.
Story_ID: 29663
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Now, I'm gonna ask about your family history?
Speaker 2: Sure.
Speaker 1: I'm gonna ask about your mother's side of the family and your father's side of the family.  But we start with your mother's side.  So can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: Deborah, D-E-B-O-R-A-H, Kathleen, K-A-T-H-L-E-E-N, Terry.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Is Terry her maiden name too?
Speaker 2: Terry is her maiden name.  Mother's never been married.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what is her date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: Her date of birth is August 15, 1948-- Norfolk, Virginia.
Speaker 1: Okay, Norfolk.  Now, what do you know about your mother's side of the family?  How far back can you trace that side of the family?
Speaker 2: Really, it stops at my grand--my great grandparents, pretty much.
Speaker 1: Now, what did they do for a living?
Speaker 2: My mother?  My mother worked--
Speaker 1: Well, no, your great grand--well,--?
Speaker 2: My grandparents?
Speaker 1: Uh-huh.
Speaker 2: Well, my grandparent, my grandfather's is a retired military from World War II [1939-1945].  He's a veteran.  My grandmother as far as I know was just a homemaker.
Speaker 1: And your great grandparents, what do you know about them?  You say (unclear) (simultaneous)--?
Speaker 2: I don't know very much about, I don't know very much about that.  My grandfather, he was one of twelve kids.  And I only met my great grandmother at his funeral.  You know, she's, the thing that was remarkable, she's really short.  She's 4'10" and my grandfather was 6'4".  And I hear that my, her husband was nearly seven feet tall.  But I never met him.  So that's, that's all I pretty much know about my great, you know, my maternal great grandparents.
Speaker 1: Now, were they from Norfolk too?
Speaker 2: No, actually Danville, Virginia.
Speaker 1: Danville, okay.  What did they do?  Were they farmers or were they-?
Speaker 2: They were farmers.
Speaker 1: Okay, are there any stories that were passed down from that side of the family about life in those days?
Speaker 2: You know, my grandfather, not very many.  My grandfather, when he left Danville and came, and he joined the service and came to Norfolk, we didn't know very many, in fact, we didn't interact with the family up there very much.  I just knew that, you know, he didn't have, he wasn't very educated.  He had like a sixth grade education.  He was a farmer.  He was a, you know, big, strong kind of guy and, in fact, I'm named after him.  I'm supposed to be his splitting image.
Speaker 1: So he's John David Terry?
Speaker 2: John David Terry.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And our birthdays are one day apart.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what's your grandmother's name?
Speaker 2: Her name is Dora Terry.  I'm not sure of her middle name.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And she was born and raised in Norfolk, Virginia.  So she's born and raised in Norfolk.  My grandfather is from Danville, Virginia.
Speaker 1: Now, Norfolk is one of the places that black folks first landed, coming to this country from Africa.  Are there any stories in their family about, having to do with the sea or anything like that?
Speaker 2: No, no, I mean, again, you know, because we were kind of cut off from our history, you know, after my, you know, when my grandfather got here, we didn't know much of our folks.  And, in fact, in the first of September will be a reunion of the Terry's and the relatives that have branched from that main Terry family line.  And we're gonna, you know, share stories and so on and so forth.  I'm supposed to be the keynote speaker for the family for some reason, but, yeah, so, no, we don't really know a whole, a great deal other than that, you know, they were hard-working people.  And my grandfather instilled, I mean he wasn't a very talkative person.  He was a very, you know, the strong, silent type.  So in that sense, he wasn't gonna talk, talk very much.  My grandmother was local from Norfolk and so she had been here her whole life.  Her mother had been here her whole life.  And, you know, they, you know, did the same stuff, you know, sharecroppers and things like that at one point.  But again, there wasn't a bunch of, you know, a bunch of talk around the family about that, just, just people just working hard.
Speaker 1: Well, it's not unusual.  What you're saying is not unusual in families.  But are there any stories about your grandfather's experiences in World War II [1939-1945]?  Did he serve in the Navy or the Army?
Speaker 2: He was in the Navy.  I knew that for a fact.  In fact, I still have his flag from his casket.
Speaker 1: Yeah, that's, that kind of figures.  I know there had to be some kind of Naval kind of experience or sea-related--
Speaker 2: Right, exactly.  And you have to understand, like both my grandparents died when I was in the second and third grade.  So even if there were stories, I wouldn't remember them nearly as much.  But I remember my grandfather, you know, after he got out of the military, he became like a handyman.  He just kind of worked around, did odd jobs and things like that and took care of the family.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 29664
Speaker 1: Anybody in your family work for the government?
Speaker 2: I have a cousin, you're talking about immediate family?
Speaker 1: Well, I mean just--?
Speaker 2: In his generation.
Speaker 1: I guess in his generation, you know, in that generation or your mother's [Deborah Kathleen Terry] generation?
Speaker 2: My uncle was a Merchant Marine.  His name is David Terry, (laughter) and, you know, we didn't do too much with the names.  We kind of stayed kind of close to.  So my mother's was in the military in that generation.  So that's pretty much the only person.  And my generation, my brother [Melvin Terry] is former, Army.  He's out of the Army.  He works for me now, or part-time, works for me.  He was in Iraq [Operation Iraqi Freedom, 2003- ] and he got out.  I have a cousin that just went over there, first cousin.  He just went to Iraq.  He volunteered to go back to Iraq.  You know, so he's over there right now as we speak.  So this, so in my generation, there're a couple of folks.  I have two other first cousins.  All of us, from my grandparents, that are Merchant Marines.
Speaker 1: Now, did your mother have a chance to finish school?
Speaker 2: That's an interesting story.  My mother, at the time then--my mother was a teenage pregnancy with me.  And at that time, you couldn't kind of go back to school.  So my mother didn't finish high school.  Later when I was ten, she went back to school, to a community college and got an accounting degree, but it was strange that she actually finished her accounting degree without ever first getting her GED.  She's a, in terms--and of my mother's really smart.  So I get most of my intelligence from my mother.
Speaker 1: Okay, so she got, was it an associate's degree in accounting.
Speaker 2: Associate's degree in accounting.
Speaker 1: Well, that is something.  That is something.  A lot of times they don't check the records.  I don't know what--?
Speaker 2: Yeah, they did do that.  Yeah, it was either accounting or bookkeeping, one of the two.  And I mean, again, I was eleven, eleven or twelve at the time.  It's easy for me to remember that because my brother wasn't born at that time.  We're eleven years apart.
Speaker 1: Okay, well, that's good.  So she was a bookkeeper for, she was--?
Speaker 2: She actually never used her degree.  After she went to school, she never used the degree.  She ends up going into the restaurant business and just being a cook, short-order cook and never did use the degree; did quite well and got very good grades and never knew why she didn't try to find something in that field.  It would have paid a lot better.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Did she have any stories about growing up and what it was like to grown up Norfolk [Virginia] in those days?
Speaker 2: Well, yeah, I mean they, you know, at that time, and we lived in the projects that used to be a military base, so, you know, the whole community was very close knit, I mean very, very close knit.
Speaker 1: What was the name of the community?
Speaker 2: Liberty Park.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And it's no longer there.  It's right next to what is currently Norfolk State University [Norfolk, Virginia].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And families that lived there, generations, still have reunions every couple of years, you know, to kind of celebrate the camaraderie we had as a community.  So she, and my mother's the youngest of the five kids.  There were three girls and two boys.  So she was the youngest.  So they, you know, it was, you know, it was kind of like the whole six--you know, I don't whether it would have been like '60s [1960s] or whatever, '60s, and then she was, you know, it was really kind of a safe time.  I remember when I was a kid that, you know, we kept our doors open.  You know, we walked out and played and I knew, even to this day, if someone tells me that they're from Liberty Park, it was a big community.  And it's like 2,000 units or something like that, if they'd know--if I didn't know them directly, within, you know, two generations, I knew somebody in their family or they would know someone in my family.  So it was a really different time even though it was, at the time, considered the projects.  It was not a, it wasn't low income projects.  They were projects.  So there were families of very, you know different economic situations.  And when they, you know, tore them down, some families went directly into homes and some went into the lower-income projects.  But that, you know, created a different kind of environment.  I saw lot good things as a kid in terms of family values from my neighbors and so on and so forth that was markedly different than when we had to go into the lower income neighborhoods.  It was, everything was kind of rough then.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 29665
Speaker 1: Now, can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: Actually, this is to be the short part because I don't really know him at all.  I probably met him, the person that claims to be my father, only once.  So--
Speaker 1: Is there kind of a dispute as to whether he is or not or?
Speaker 2: I really don't even know.  He, he, from what my mother [Deborah Kathleen Terry] told me even just recently that when she tried to file paternity, he said he didn't know who she was.  So, but now he's claiming that, now after I've kind of got some notoriety that, indeed, he is my father.  I met him one time when I was twelve.  And that's, interesting enough, he lives next door to my aunt now.  So he's trying to get in contact.  But I don't know anything about him.  He has, he was married with another set of family.  And my mother was a teenager.  She's, he's maybe, I don't know, ten, ten-plus years older.  So she, you know, she was an adult and she was a--
Speaker 1: So he would be in his late sixties now?
Speaker 2: Yeah, something like that, you know.  And he has, you know, one of his kids contacted me, said that, he said that, you know, don't let your, don't let one man's mistake, you know, separate us.  And I was like, well, if you really wanna be in contact, if you really want to get to know me, fine.  But if you're just trying to meet on his behalf, then I don't have any time.  And I haven't heard anything else from him.  So I can't really tell you much of anything about--
Speaker 1: So you don't have much of a feeling about whether it's true or not or-?
Speaker 2: I mean she says it's true, but, you know.
Speaker 1: Your mother says it's true?
Speaker 2: I mean she, that's who she told his name was, you know.  I don't even, I don't even wanna repeat his name.  I don't wanna give him that kind of credit.  She, he told me that that's, you know, ever since I was a kid, that's who she said, the name of person who she said, that was my father, and he lived literally a ten minute walk from where I was and never came to see me.  So, so what, you know, what can I say from that?  So, it's pretty much all, that's pretty much all I know about him to be truthful.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And you don't really know what he does for a living?
Speaker 2: No, I don't, actually, don't know what he does for a living.  He's retired now, and I think he's kind of, he's sickly.  I think that's why he's trying to make amends.  From my understanding, I think he has somewhere in the neighborhood of twenty kids or something like that, over several women.  I, I really don't know.  I mean but that, and this is all hearsay.  I couldn't, I couldn't verify any of this for you.
Speaker 1: Did you mother ever talk about how they met or?
Speaker 2: No, actually growing up, she never said anything.  When I was a, when I was really young like until I was about eight or nine, I really wanted, you know, to be involved and get to know him.  And she really wouldn't let me, and I didn't understand at the time.  But now, I mean I'm forty-one now, almost, I'll be forty-one next month.  And like I just found out maybe two or three months ago that he denied that he, you know, any association with me when she tried to put paternity.  And so now I understand when I was a kid why she wouldn't allow me any access to him, even though I didn't, you know, he didn't even try to come by.  And so, you know, that's it.  I mean it's an interesting story.  My, he doesn't even know what I look like.  My cousin that, you know, next door, that--whose mother lives next door to him, came by to see his mom, and he thought it was me.  So he starts to say, you know, I know who you are and my cousin, who's a practical joker, was like, "Oh really"?  And he just really goes after him, like, what do you know about me?  Who am I?  And then he starts really, you know, really giving him the business.  And then he starts to come up with all these lames excuses that my grandfather [John David Terry] didn't allow him to come around and so on and so forth, never even knowing it wasn't me the whole time.  And so it, so then my cousin asked him the question and said, you know, he's a grown man now.  What do you have to offer him but excuses, and you didn't even know I wasn't him.  And all he could do was put his hands up like this.  And so that, and that's the last story, you know, and that's fairly recent, about maybe a year ago.
Speaker 1: Well, now, do you have, you've got a brother, right?  How many-?
Speaker 2: I have, on my mother's side, I have a brother [Melvin Terry].  That's the only brother I claim.  I have a sister [Tonja Terry] and a brother on my mother's side.  Like I said, he has somewhere in the neighborhood of twenty kids (unclear) (simultaneous)-
Speaker 1: Yeah, okay.
Speaker 2: --and I don't know, and the one just contacted me one time, and I haven't heard back from him.  But other than that.
Story_ID: 29666
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well, now did, so you grew up in Liberty Park [Neighborhood, Norfolk, Virginia]?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Well, I suppose, and I always ask this question.  I suppose there's only one answer to it, and I always ask people who they think they take after the most, their mother or their father?  And I guess-?
Speaker 2: Oh, definitely, I take after, and actually, they say I take after my grandfather [John David Terry].  Everyone says that.  You know, I mean recently I attended a funeral.  Again, the neighborhood is, you know, the neighborhood, Liberty Park, was a pretty close knit neighborhood, and people who hadn't seen me since I was a little boy walked up to me and just said, you look just like John David, remembered my grandfather, and said, you look just like your grandfather.  I mean I'm like the same height, same color, same build and-
Speaker 1: Same name.
Speaker 2: Same name, and I was only, he was born September 28.  I was born the 29.  So a lot of-
Speaker 1: Did he serve as sort of a father figure for you?
Speaker 2: Absolutely, in fact, he's the only person I ever called father in my life.  And in fact, the whole family called him father.  We never called him grandfather.  We all called, everyone called him "daddy" including, you know, I think, my grandmother.  But we called her by her first name which was interesting (laughter).  But, yeah, so he was the father, he was a father figure, and I was so-called his favorite, you know, for a while, for the little bit of time we had together.
Speaker 1: Okay, because he passed when you were about?
Speaker 2: In the first grade.
Speaker 1: First grade, okay.
Speaker 2: Second grade, second grade.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you were about seven when he passed?
Speaker 2: Yeah, about seven.  I can remember the grades and the dates because the year that he died, he used to tease my sister [Tonja Terry] and we're like eighteen months apart, something like nineteen months apart, that he wasn't giving her a birthday gift that year.  And he was, he was buried on her birthday.  So things like that, you know, kind of stick with me.  So I can remember exactly.  Then I left from where were staying.  Then we moved back into the house that my mother [Deborah Kathleen Terry] was born in, that, you know, all the kids were raised in, and I was going into the second grade.  And there was a period in my time, a period of time in my life where they said that I was really far behind academically and that I would never be able to catch up and so on and so forth.  But that was, you know, then something changed at that point in my life, and I turned, turned things around.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 29667
Speaker 1: Now, do you have an earliest childhood memory?
Speaker 2: That really.  I mean I have some, I really do, I mean.  I was fairly carefree.  The two things that I remember most when I was a kid was sitting in my grandfather's [John David Terry] lap, and he, and he drank tea but he drank it out of a bowl, like a big bowl.  And I would sit on his lap, and I just remember him being so tall that I could climb, you know, and I really, I didn't understand that feeling until I had my own son, and he used to do the same thing with me, he could literally climb on me because he's just, you know, this big, and he could climb on me.  So that was like most of my, you know, fondest memories, just sitting down, just eating breakfast with my grandfather.  Up until the time, but then, you know, I think we moved away and we were in elementary school, and I can remember just kind of playing out in the fields.  But my most vivid memory came, I mean from the time he died, my memory is very vivid.  My life changed, you know, tremendously.  You know, like I remember every moment after his death.  Okay, so, up to that time it was kind of carefree.
Speaker 1: We always ask this question.  What are some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up?
Speaker 2: Butter flowers, you know, the weed butter flowers, and you smell those and then the honeysuckle.  We used to have honeysuckles in the backyard.  Mulberries and that sort of thing.  Sounds, trains.  We had a train that ran, the Norfolk Southern [Railway] ran behind us and also there was a bus station.  Those are pretty much, probably the most vivid sounds that were predominant most of the time, you know, when I was a very, you know, very young kid.  Those are things that I heard all the time and didn't really pay too much attention to.  But if it wasn't there, I would have missed it, crickets and things like that, but mostly, and cats.  Actually, that's a strange thing to say, the neighborhood at Liberty Park [Norfolk, Virginia] had like thousands and thousands of stray cats.  And they used to call it cat city, I mean like literally thousands, all over the place.  There were thousands of cats, you know, but it kept the mice out (laughter) so we didn't mind.  But, yeah, so it's--
Speaker 1: Cat City.  So did people mess with the cats or did they just kind of leave them alone?
Speaker 2: They kind of fed them.
Speaker 1: Fed them, and--?
Speaker 2: Yeah, they fed them.  And in fact, all the other neighborhood parks would call Liberty Park, refer it to as Cat City because there were so many stray cats out there.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Now, was music a big part of growing up?
Speaker 2: No, not really.  I loved music and until this day, I work to music, and I can really focus with music on.  It becomes ambient noise, and I can really concentrate.  But I've never had any real musical aptitude, even though I love, you know, I love to listen to it, and I love the beats and things like that.  You know, I did the typical, the flute, you know, in the fourth, fifth and sixth grade and (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Unclear) played an instrument in high school?
Speaker 2: Yeah, and learned very quickly that, you know, I was tone deaf, and I would sing and hear this horrible noise, and stop to try to find out where it was coming from.  And then I finally realized it was coming from me, and then I just decided well, maybe I should just sing in the shower or something.
Story_ID: 29668
Speaker 1: Now, what about church?  Was that a big part?
Speaker 2: My family wasn't really actively involved in the church, I went a couple of times when I was really young.  We got, you know, we were exposed to the Southern Baptist.  I actually had a fairly disturbing early experience in the church that kind of shaped a lot of my thinking early on, and--
Speaker 1: What happened?
Speaker 2: You know, I was, you know, I've always been, had, always liked to learn.  I mean I've always had this aptitude to learn, especially after my grandfather's [John David Terry] death.  I had just like this incredible thirst for knowledge.  I mean like literally, just, I would come home and just read, read, read.  So I really enjoyed Sunday school.  You know, and I really enjoyed going to Sunday school.  And then we had started going to the church.  I was a young kid, and, you know, at the end of, you know, church, we'd get up around, and people would get in a circle and people would give praise.  And I started noticing things like, you know, people would, you know, start shouting and having sanctified and having, you know, the holy ghost experience and things like that.  But it was always scheduled (laughter).  You know, it was like you could, you know, when the next person's time was to come, you know, when the other person was talking, they'd slowly start to, you know, get animated and really excited and even as a kid, you know, that felt like it cheapened the experience, and it really, it really had a lasting impression on me.  And I didn't, I stop going to church for quite a long while after that.  Later, I started reading on my own.  Today I read on my own, but, that whole experience was supposed to be fellowship, and it felt kind of cheapening.  And it's amazing how things can shape you early on, that, you know, and I wasn't even looking for, and I was a kid, just kind of just, kind of idly, you know, waiting for the time for us to go home, and I would just start noticing like week after week, it was the same thing, you know.  And I said, awl, awl, this is, I felt like it was a scam, you know, because it's like when it was the next person's turn to talk, you know, they get all animated and they fall out and they're revived and they talk to the next person and so on.  And maybe the first time, I didn't notice and the second time I didn't notice, but by the time, you know, week after week, that that was happening, I started, you know, to develop a sort of, kind of, just animosity towards the whole procedure.  You know, and then I just eventually just stopped going.
Story_ID: 29669
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, what about school?  Where did you go to school early on?
Speaker 2: I, so I start, so are you talking about primary, elementary?
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah.  When did you start school, in kindergarten or--?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I started in kindergarten, but then my mother [Deborah Kathleen Terry] took me out because I ran into--I have like a cut over one of my eyes that I did in Kindergarten, and I ran into the chair.  And then also my grandfather [John David Terry], I was being spoiled at that time, I told him I didn't wanna go back.  And he told me I didn't have to go back.  So I went to kindergarten for one year, and then the next year I stayed out.  The following year my mother moved out on her own from the house, and then I went to first grade.  And it was pretty fun.  I mean we lived in--
Speaker 1: What was the name of your school?
Speaker 2: It was Lakewood Primary School, and that's in Norfolk [Virginia].
Speaker 1: Okay.  Lakewood Primary School.  And you say you liked to read, and you were interested in learning?
Speaker 2: No, not then.  At that time, I wasn't, you know.  It happened right after my grandfather (unclear) (simultaneous)-
Speaker 1: Okay, so first grade, it wasn't like that, but after the second grade, after your father--grandfather passed-
Speaker 2: Grandfather died.
Speaker 1: --you got--?
Speaker 2: So like, so even in the second grade, up until then I had no interest in school.
Speaker 1: What do you account?  You know, what (unclear) (simultaneous)--?
Speaker 2: The (unclear) story is kind of interesting because literally, and then I try to describe it, how it happened, you know, I was this kind of carefree kid, that's just kind of just, just kind of, just existing.  And when my grandfather died, another thing is that I knew he had died.  You know, and it happened twice.  When my grandfather and when my grandmother died, I knew they had died, like I felt that they had passed.  And as a kid, it didn't bother me.  I wasn't sad.  I was just, it was just in matter of fact.  You know, again, I was kind of young, and I had to move back into the old house.  And we were out of school for two years, I mean two weeks because of, you know, bereavement.  So we didn't have to go back to school.  And when I got in school, they told me, it was probably about the middle of April.  And I can remember that again because he was buried on my sister's [Tonja Terry] birthday.  And they told my mother that there was no way that I was gonna pass the second grade.  I was too far behind.  I didn't know that at the time.  But, and when I got to school, I just wanted to read.  And I mean I went through like nine reading levels from the middle of April to the middle of June.  And went through and (unclear).  So I started like, really in like the lowest reading level and ended up at the highest reading, almost the highest reading level in that, just that short period.  And I can't explain it, more than just I just, just was always asking, all of a sudden I just wanted to know, why, why, why?  And I started irritating my family because anytime somebody would say something, I wanted to know why, you know, why this and why that?  And they didn't have the Internet back then.  Back then you had to go read the Encyclopedia Britannica.  So I would go and I would just literally spend hours and hours reading the encyclopedia in sections.
Speaker 1: So you had a set of encyclopedias at home?
Speaker 2: Yeah, and so I would just read and read and, then, of course, I was, you know, into sports.  But, you know, once I was not focused on sports, and I was in some sort of relaxed environment, you know, any time I saw or heard anything, I just wanted to why, you know, why was that?  Why is this?  And, you know, back in those days, parents weren't as patient with their kids as today, in terms of making them, you know, be comfortable with being inquisitive.  You know, they just kind of felt that I was just irritating because I talking through their television show.  And they would tell me, get up, get up, boy, and go in the room, and you know, look it up yourself or something like that.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 29670
Speaker 1: Now, did you have friends that had similar interests, who were just as inquisitive and interested in science?
Speaker 2: No, actually, no, my friends were, we were all very athletic, you know.  And we, you know, we played and wrestled and boxed and raced and played football, basketball and that sort of thing.  I also had a real big interest in comic books, you know, as a teen, and I still collect them to this day.  Other than that, that's probably the closest hobby that I had friends that, that shared a similar interest, you know, in terms of that.  But, in fact, most of them didn't even know that I was that inquisitive.  When I was around other kids, I was just a big kid.
Speaker 1: Now, what about in class, in school?  Did teachers, were they aware of what your interests were?  I mean and they may see you as a good student?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I mean when I got, so when I left primary school, I was there, you know, the second grade was kind of, you know, was--
Speaker 1: Kind of rough?
Speaker 2: --rough, rough, that end of the year.  The third grade kind of went by in a blaze, and I don't really remember.  Then I went to elementary school, which is local school.  It was Liberty Park Elementary school.  So then, you know, I was always the, you know, pretty much top one or two students in every field in the class.  By the time I got into the sixth grade, then it was, you know, I was pretty much well known for being most likely, you know, people say, most likely to succeed.  And in the sixth grade, they gave out different kinds of awards, academic awards, athletic awards and things like that.  And I think there were like twenty-five awards or something given out for the whole sixth grade class, and I got like twenty-three of them.  You know, so it was like at that time I had really started to, really started to separate myself from the pack.
Speaker 1: Do you any of the teachers or anybody else in the community stand out as somebody that tried to guide you or mentor you?
Speaker 2: At different points, I mean at different points in my life, different folks helped me out so to speak, in different ways.  My sixth grade teacher was really a kind of fun guy.  He was, you know, he played basketball with us.  You know, we would play basketball, and he, and he kind of had this hands-off approach, I mean kind of like that white shadow thing going on where, you know, he was just like one of the guys.  As long as we did our work, he played with (unclear), you know, so, so I learned to do the right thing because you then get to do some fun things afterwards.  And that helped out a lot because I don't work real well under strict control.  But I'm very, very disciplined, self disciplined so I don't have to have someone looking over my shoulder.  But that was really an important experience because, you know, once you give me goals and guidelines and say, just get this done, and allow me the, you know, the latitude to do it the way I would like to do it, then I, you know, I tend to be very productive and things like that.  I found that later in my career, the only times that I had problems when people were trying to dictate to me what, the way things should be done, because I do things different.  I get inspiration at a different time, like, my most productive times are like, oh, 11:00 a.m., I mean 11:00 p.m. to 2:00 a.m. in the morning.  And a lot of times during the day, I'm kind of, you know, planning and strategizing or if I just, just, not mentally, not into at that time, I'll do something that doesn't take as much concentration.  So that was, you know, the big influence at, in the sixth grade, a male influence so to speak.  And even after this, I remember at that point that I first was introduced to problem-solving with math.  They was giving some, in fact, they were giving us algebra problems.  I didn't know at the time they were algebra problems, didn't have the tool set to solve them, and, and if you, you know, if you got them right, you got like ice cream or a dollar or something like that.  And every day I would go home and diligently try to, I mean just spend hours upon hours trying to figure out these problems.  And you know I got a fair share of them correct and sometimes I didn't.  Some people just didn't care.  It wasn't like required.  But then I could really start seeing that I really had an aptitude for math and, mostly math, because there wasn't a whole bunch of science at that time.  And I, so then when I got to the seventh grade and I was pre-algebra, and they started teaching us some of the tools to solve the problem, I was so excited, I went back to my sixth grade teacher to explain to him, oh, now, I understand how you go about solving these problems, things that took me hours to do, I could solve in five minutes.  And I thought that was like, you know, a great achievement, you know, things that I had to puzzle out.  Then I thought, wow, that's wonderful.  Well, you know, with the right training, there's so much more you can do than trying to figure everything out yourself.  I mean that was a big jump, you know, for me at that time.  So that, so that happening.  And then I started, I think in the seventh grade, I got a paper route.  So I first started working in the seventh grade.  And my mother [Deborah Kathleen Terry] didn't really want me to have a paper route at that time.
Speaker 1: So that would be about nineteen seventy what?
Speaker 2: Seven [1977], '78 [1978] or '77 [1977].
Speaker 1: Yeah, right--
Speaker 2: Seventy eight [1978], around, about '78, '78, '79 [1979], something like, '78, '79, you know, around that time frame.
Story_ID: 29671
Speaker 1: Now, were your schools all black schools?
Speaker 2: No, no, they were mixed, they were mixed, they were mixed.  Like my primary school, was, although when I left, when I moved to my grandfather's [John David Terry] house, I went to a different primary school, Azalea Garden Primary School, which is on the other side of town.  And then I went to a neighborhood school from elementary years.  And then I went back to the exact same area for my junior high years, you know.  They just were around the corner from each other.  So it was always kind of, sometimes you were in a neighborhood, sometimes you were bused.  But it was always mixed.  If I wasn't bused, other folks were bused to me, you know.  But it was always mixed.
Speaker 1: I know there was a big struggle in Virginia around school desegregation at one time, so I--?
Speaker 2: Yeah, that was, that was before me.  And I was, actually, I tell people, you know, I really benefited from integration.  I really do think so, that I benefited from that, especially in my junior, I mean in my junior high and senior years because I was, you know, I was the best kid in elementary school in, you know, so everybody was behind me.  I didn't have really a whole bunch of competition so to speak.  In junior high school that changed.  At King, there was a lot of kids smarter than I was, and I always kind of do well in a very highly-competitive environment.  Otherwise, I'd a always thought I would--I wouldn't [have] understood where my relative abilities stood on the, on the grand scale without having integration, and, and so people from other elementary schools and kids who were doing really well in the elementary schools and were doing much better than I, I mean.  And then I didn't realize that I had a problem with language arts and grammar, you know, until then, you know.  I was used to people talking slang all the time and, and so, and so that was like, you know, really an exposure.  Like, my grades weren't as good as, you know, I thought they would be in my seventh grade year.  It took me a little bit of time to get acclimated, and then in eighth grade, you know, I took off, and, you know, and got it under control and got inducted into the National Honor Society and so on and so forth.  So it took me just a year to kind of, I can always catch up to the speed, no matter how fast no matter fast things will go, I can always, well, so far I've been able to always catch up to the speed.  So if people are going faster than I am, I can, I can work hard to match their pace.  So that was really good for me.  You know, some people don't like that.  I love, I love competition.  So that helps out a lot.  So I always like to seek the next great challenge, you know, to keep me motivated and so on and so forth.  It's, it's not as easy to be the lead dog all the time.
Story_ID: 29672
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, tell me this now.  I think Apple was coming out, it had to be '79 [1979] or '80 [1980] when the little Apple Plus [Apple II Plus] came out, the little, the first personal kind of computer?
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: You know, well, it wasn't the first maybe, but--
Speaker 2: Like the Commodore [Commodore 64].
Speaker 1: Yeah, they had those--
Speaker 2: Commodore 64.
Speaker 1: Yeah, with the green screens, but the, I know what made me excited when I first it was that little Apple Plus.  I saw the little screen and I began, but I never was excited about the other ones.  I saw that Apple Plus and the stuff you could do.  You could do layout and design on it, and all that kind of stuff.  Did you, when did you first see one of those?
Speaker 2: Well, I, I didn't get to see it in my personal life.  I kind of knew people who had Commodores and, you know, and they had the big tracks to go in there.  But I never got to play on them.  We, you know, I wasn't gonna get anything like that.
Speaker 1: So a computer was out of your world at this point?
Speaker 2: Yeah, it was out of my world.  I mean there was no way, I mean we were just too poor.  I mean I was just trying to get, I mean at that point in my life, I was trying to get, you know, make money to buy my own school clothes.  So it was a whole different set of priorities at that time.  My mom [Deborah Kathleen Terry] went through a rough time during that period.  She broke up with my, my brother [Melvin Terry] and I don't have the same father, she broke up with my brother's father at that period.  And so then all of a sudden at age twelve, I'm thrust into being the man of the house.  And so it was, so it was, you know, it was a different--
Story_ID: 29673
Speaker 1: You had to start working then?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, I started working.  So in the seventh grade, I was, I was carrying papers.  And then I migrated.  It was kind of strange, and that shows you how family ties come into play.  There was a gentleman, an older man.  And it's like one of these kind of old, you know, old wise guys in the neighborhood, everyone knows.  And he used to be our next-door neighbor.  He was my grandfather's [John David Terry] next-door neighbor.  And he actually sold candy out of the house.  He didn't need to.  He just did that to, you know, to interact with people.  And I would, you know, when I was, when I had my paper route, I would come over there, and I would buy candy.  And sometimes before I got paid, I would get stuff on credit, and I was always diligent about paying him on time.  And when I lost my paper route, I had owed him some money, and I didn't have the money to pay him.  And I didn't show up.  It was months, but soon as I got some money I went over there and I apologized to him.  I said, I didn't have any money so I couldn't pay you, but I have money and I'm paying you.  And so, it's funny, you know, he knows my grandfather, and he knows my, he knows my mother [Deborah Kathleen Terry] and all my uncles.  He knows my whole family. So he started giving me, he--he didn't tell me he was giving me a job, but in a sense, he gave me a job and, and taught me a lot.  And I'm not being real clear, but then what happened was, like we would sit around literally and play dominos and because I was close to the candy, when people would come in, I would get up and, you know, because I was sitting there, I would get the candy for him and take the money, and I would, just literally just end up just working for him.
Speaker 1: Were they, did he have a set up where they would come to the door, or were they coming to a (unclear) (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: They would come to his back door and so his whole back kitchen counter had candy along it, right.  And so, and they couldn't get to the candy so they a tell me what they want.  And the other guys, I mean they were literally your age, and they were, I would get up.  I was young, you know, I would get up and get the candy or get the money and tell 'em how much it costs, and I would go restock the candy.  And then, end of the day he'd give me a couple bucks.  And then he kept giving me, you know, he kept doing that, and then he started, you know, and then as I took on more responsibility and did better job, he started paying me.  And he, in fact, started paying me more than I made, you know, with candy, so to the point that I could start buying my own school clothes.  And he also was feeding me, you know, regularly, and I grew.  And I was a little, small kid at that time, and I kind of grew over the summer because I was eating well.  And he taught me a lot of life lessons, and he could barely write his name.  His name was John too, but, his name was John Woodis, but everyone called him Slacksey (ph.).
Speaker 1: John what?
Speaker 2: John Woodis, W-O-O-D-I-S.
Speaker 1: Oh, okay.  So they called Slacksey?
Speaker 2: Slacksey, and he actually told me the most, you know, (unclear) [if you wanna know?], he's probably the biggest father figure for me.  He told me lots of stories, that he, he played in the Negro League baseball.  He saw Josh Gibson, Josh Gibson when he came in the league.  He said when Josh Gibson was a rookie, he was a, he was on his way out when he couldn't get out of the way of somebody sliding on the base and kicking him, he decided it was time for him to hang up his cleats and do something different.  He also told me, he was also a street, street hustler.  He was a numbers, a rackets man.  He was a, and he was very, very--he looked like, I kid you not, almost identical to Red Foxx, I mean identical to Red Foxx.  I mean the same color, the big pot belly.  The only thing he had was a gold tooth, and even his, when I met him, and I was, oh, I guess thirteen, twelve or thirteen, he was like seventy-seven.  And he was really, really active and very, and he showed, showed pictures of him when he was in his fifties, he looked like he was thirty.  And, you know, he used to bet that he could, you know, outrace guys and things like that.  But he walked around looking like he was homeless, but he walked around with like thirty, but like at least two or 3,000 dollars in his pocket all the time, you know.  And, but he had these, you know, pants were falling off him.  He looked like this street bum, and everybody knew he had money, but no one ever messed with him because he always walked around with a gun too.  But he was really, his thing was kind of this kind of tough love.  I mean he was, not just for me, he helped out a lot of folks.  Every time some family was in, got behind on their rent, they would come to him, and he would basically cuss 'em out, and if you let, if you stood around long enough, if you could survive the barrage, he a pay your rent for you.  You know, then, but I felt that people were starting to use him, and that, I mean, and it showed me two sides.  I mean this person was like really, and he was a jokester, I mean really always laughing and playing.  And he told me a lot of street, I mean a lot of street knowledge that I would a never got.  He told me about how it was during Prohibition.  He told me about, you know, gambling.  He said he was the first person in Norfolk [Virginia] to ever be brought up on racketeering charges.  And, you know, he told me a--he was still running numbers when I was working for him.  I mean literally, he would take bags of money every week to the, to the bank.  You know, he had like four or five bank accounts.  He would leave thousands of dollars laying around on the dresser, and I would never take anything.  And he would actually, would, turned out that was a test.  He would leave, I mean, I mean like dressers full of, you know, singles on top of his dresser and then at the end of day--and then he would leave for hours, and then come back and, you know.  And I could account for everything, you know, watch around the shop while he's away.  And, you know, I wasn't gonna take from him because, you know, he was doing well by me.  And so he was a real big influence in my life til I got old enough to work for, you know, like a regular restaurant, like sixteen.  Then I started working, and I didn't work for him as much, and we kind of grew apart a little bit.  And it kind a, you know, it was a little bit, and he's the, mostly, the only father figure I had.  And, you know, he didn't, he didn't grow apart so much as I think that he was afraid that I was gonna turn into the people that would come, when I would come back, he was thinking I was coming back to ask for money because that's the only time he would see people.  And it would take like a whole day for him to realize that I'm just here to see him.  And I think he died when I was in, when I got, he did see me go to college.  So he did see me graduate from high school.  He did, and I got a job and I got my own car.  He, he saw me go to college.  I was freshman.  He knew I was studying Engineering, and he, I think--I graduated from college and he was still alive, but by that time he was old and senile.  He didn't, he didn't know who he was.  So he didn't know, he didn't know how far I had gotten.  But I would come every year, and I would come back to see him and I mean, you know, and see how he was doing and so.  So, he's probably the biggest father figure that I, that I had.  But he was really kind, but he, it wasn't like overly kind.
Story_ID: 29674
Speaker 1: And the men (laughter), the men in our neighborhood were like that.  It's another gentleman, and all of them lived right (unclear).  So the families weren't all low income.  There were some families that were low, middle income, families.  So the family right across the street whose family and I been knowing each other since my mother [Deborah Kathleen Terry] was little, that, his name was Blackjack.  We called him Blackjack, but his name--I can't think of his name right now.  But I'll think of it soon, but he was married to a lady named Ms. Sis.  She was very, very nice, I mean she was, I mean she, her neighbor was sickly, and she worked as an assistant nurse and came home and on her own time took care of a lady who was, you know, wheelchair bound.  And she did that for years and finally the city started paying it for her, just because she was just so nice.  So I saw all of these things.  And he was mean, just mean, Blackjack was just mean to everybody, everybody but her.  And so, and he was mean.  He was just stern.  I just, I mean I learned these things that men had to be strong and they took care of business and they weren't, you know, out there doing things they don't supposed to be doing.  So I didn't have a father per se, you know, biological father.  I had surrogate fathers in many different forms, but I learned a lot.  I mean all these men that were around me, they were, you know, husbands.  They were good providers and all they did was, went to work and provide.  And they would tease us sometimes, you know, but they were always really mean, you know, they were mean, but they teasingly mean.  And his name was Fields, but I don't know, that's his last name.  So the whole Fields family.  And when I told you that someone saw me and told me I looked like my grandfather [John David Terry], that was his son that said, had seen me just this past and said, "Man, you look just like John now", and he's probably your age, no, he's probably older than you because you're my mother's age, and he's older than my mother.  So I mean I saw all these, and so I saw these different kinds of--and so those things really shaped me in terms of what I thought a man should be, you know.  A man was someone that carried himself with pride, someone who didn't do things to embarrass himself, and someone who provided.  So I learned then through observation, not particularly through, you know, someone directly giving me guidance.  And so those, and so it was a different kind of experience.  And some of them don't know that, you know, that they had that kind of influence on me at the time, but it did, you know, because that's what I saw.  And so I mimicked that as I got older.
Speaker 2: Okay, so you had a strong--
Speaker 1: Yeah, right.
Speaker 2: --yeah, strong support even though it wasn't like in the usual way?
Speaker 1: It was, and they were really close.  I'm trying to describe it.  It was really close without them, you know, you see on television, they kind of give you the, like they talk to you a lot and all that stuff.  No, not like that (unclear), the guys throw water at you and get away from me; then they give you some money if you clean the car for them, you know.  They showed you the value of hard work, you know, but they didn't do a bunch of talking.  The men back there didn't do a bunch of talking.  And so they flush you out and run you off, but they didn't do a bunch of talking, and to the, you know, so.  And I don't do a bunch of talking to my kid, to this day.  It's kind of just kind of how I am because that's what I saw.  But they did teach me a lot of lessons.  I try to lead by example, and that's what I thought that they did.  And so, so even in work, I try to lead by example.  I, I always say, I tell my son, when I ask something of you, I don't ask any more than I ask of myself, you know, and you can always look at me and see, you know, do I do the same thing?  Do I practice what I preach?  And so that's what I thought those men did.  They just practiced and they didn't actually preach.  So that sort of thing.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Story_ID: 29675
Speaker 1: Now, okay, now where did you go to high school?
Speaker 2: I went to Lake Taylor Senior High School.
Speaker 1: Lake Teller, T-E-L-L-?
Speaker 2: No, T-A-
Speaker 1: T-A-.
Speaker 2: Y-.
Speaker 1: Oh, Taylor.
Speaker 2: Taylor, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, I'm sorry.
Speaker 2: Senior high school.
Speaker 1: Taylor Senior High School, and that's in Norfolk [Virginia], right?
Speaker 2: Yep.
Speaker 1: Now, and this is an integrated school as well?
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: Was this one in your neighborhood or did you have to be bussed?
Speaker 2: No, this was bussed, this was bussed.
Speaker 1: Was it a special school, a magnet or something or?
Speaker 2: I don't think we had magnet schools at that time.  We did have programs within the school like accelerated classes and things like that, college prep classes, but we didn't have a separate school per se.  And after my freshman year, pretty much I was never in the regular classes.  So then I got this reputation in, that people thought that I was always skipping school because I would come to school.  And they would never see me anymore till lunch and then when I was going home.  So they thought I was playing hooky because a lot of kids, the school was walking distance from the mall, and a lot of kids would just skip class and go to the mall, and hang out all day, come back for lunch, go back and hang out at the mall, and come back home.  And so a lot of guys thought I was dumb as a doornail.
Story_ID: 29676
Speaker 1: And then I was also trying to, you know, really, everyone knew I was a good basketball player and that sort of thing.
Speaker 2: So did you play for the team?
Speaker 1: Actually, I did.  I made, I played JV [junior varsity], and that was another interesting experience.  Now, the coach actually there was racist at the high school.  In fact, he had got brought up on charges, the high school coach, like a year or two before.  And so he, his outward demeanors were different.  It, you know, inwardly, that kind of thing don't change overnight.  So when I was, and then so that coupled with, you know, we were all bussed from different neighborhoods.  We were all, I was the only person on the Junior Varsity team from my neighborhood, like five kids from one neighborhood, five kids from another neighborhood and just me.  And I was, and I was always used to being always picked first.  I was always the person everyone threw the ball to.  And it was really strange that these kids from other neighborhoods would throw to their friends and all these kids.  And no one threw it to me because they didn't know me.  We were all bused, right, so I, you know, I went through this period where I, you know, kind of lost my self confidence because I mean I'm a kid.  I just don't know that people only don't pass the ball when you can't play.  And I'm thinking, wow, they must don't think I can play.  And so I started to, you know, doubt my own abilities, but it was a really growing period for me.  I just learned to not let other people determine my own, my world, my view of myself.  So I worked really hard and, and I learned to be very objective about myself.  I worked, and I got, you know, I got--and I lost my start, when I first went out there, the first day, the coaches just saw me play.  He said, he gave me a starting spot the first day, where it's just a free for all.  And then I lost in the middle of the season.  And then the second half, I went through, like during the Christmas break, you know, I really did a lot of soul searching because I didn't have a father, I didn't have any older, anybody to talk to.  I didn't have a father to tell me, "Man, you don't let them people, you know, get you down" or "play your own game".  I didn't have that.  I mean I had to learn all these lessons, lessons myself, and it was really tough.  I mean it was really, really tough, I mean, and you know, didn't have anybody to talk to.  I just didn't know, you know, I didn't know what was going on.  I didn't have anybody to express my feelings, and so I learned to be kind of brash.  I'm like, I told the coach that--and at that time, our varsity was ranked Number one in the state.  And I told him, I said, there's nobody in this gym that can check me.  I just made that announcement loud enough for everybody in the gym to hear it, and then they were undefeated at the time and so on and so forth.  And that day, nobody could check me, you know.  I just had to learn to just push myself to, you know, to certain levels.  You know, when I get in this, (unclear) would start battling this insecurity, I would just push myself to, you know, just out there and because I refused to be embarrassed, like I gotta carry myself, and don't do anything to embarrass yourself because I forced myself into them situations.  And, of course, I wouldn't do anything that I think I really couldn't handle anyway.  Then I got, you know, next, you know, the second half of the season, I average double figures, got the starting job and all that sort of thing.
Speaker 2: So what position did you play?
Speaker 1: I was a guard, I was, I started out as a guard.  He moved me down to forward.  I was too small to play forward.  Then I told him he needed to put me back at guard.  After I had did the thing in the gym, I told him I'm a two guard because at the time I was only 5'6", like 115 pounds.  I was a little guy, but I could jump.  So he put me underneath the basket, but I couldn't hold my position.  People would throw me out of bounds, I mean literally throw me out of bounds.  I couldn't hold my position; put me in two guard, you know, I averaged double figures, played good defense, you know, was just really, really good.  In fact, I probably, in my personal opinion, I had the most talent, raw talent, not the most processed talent on, in the school.  And, in fact, the people recognized it, like you had the most talent, you know, and in fact, it was strange that the guy that end up being All-American [National Collegiate Athletic Association All-American Basketball Team], who I grew up with, he told me about twenty, twenty-fifth, twenty-five, twenty-year reunion, he said that he knew that they kind of, you know, because of the neighborhoods, they kind of left me out.  He said, you know, we did kinda let you slip through the crack.  I mean it must have been bothering him.  I never said anything about it.  Here it is twenty years later, he told me, "We did kinda let you slip through the cracks", and, you know, but, you know, you could a did more too.  And I was like, Dude, that was twenty years ago, you know.
Speaker 2: In (unclear) pigs are allies.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: It's important in sports.
Speaker 1: Yeah, it is, it was.  But it did teach me, and it's amazing, these things taught me.  Every little thing taught me a lesson, and then when I was, I went out every year, and I made the Varsity team, and I quit every year because I had to go to work, had to work.  And I told the coach, I said, you know, I need to help my family out, and I understand I can't have a starting spot and not make all the practices, but, you know, I want, I do wanna be part of the team, but I have to under--you have to understand that I have to work to help my family out.  And the guy told me, you need to make up your mind.  Are you gonna work or play basketball?  And it was working because, you know, I had to take, I was the oldest and I had to take--and by this time, I was paying the bills in the house.  So I was sixteen, paying all the bills, paying the rent, and that--.
Speaker 2: So you started working at a restaurant or something?
Speaker 1: Yeah, working at a restaurant.  I started off as a dishwasher, then moved up to bus boy and then moved up to short-order cook so I'm a pretty decent cook to this day because I cooked for, in the restaurant business about six, seven, six or seven years.  So I, you know, I'm a pretty decent cook now, but, you know, he made it clear that, you know, he, and I, and I knew I could go to college, on my, academically.  I didn't need them to go to college.  And so, I mean I kinda knew that, and I didn't need them as much.  And I played basketball because I loved basketball.  So then it kind of tainted the whole thing.  You know, it's like, you know, you--and then the whole thing with the neighborhoods and the, you know, the favoritism.  It was just a part of all athletics and stuff like that.  It's nothing new.  It's just that, again, I had no one to talk to about it.
Speaker 2: No one, (unclear) (simultaneous)
Speaker 1: Right, so I'm just really naive in a lot of ways, and it just, and I just loved basketball.  I just like loved to play and that's all I wanted to do so.
Story_ID: 29677
Speaker 1: I remember those days.  I played in the local Rec leagues and stuff like that and made a reputation to those.  And so I know what you mean.  And those are important to the kids, you know.
Speaker 2: Yeah, it seems like (unclear) as a whole--
Speaker 1: Oh, yeah, I mean that really bothers, bothers you, you know.  And, you know, you, you know, and like I said, the whole, you know, there's a politics of athletics kind of turned me off to it for a while.  I mean I didn't understand it.  And like when my son goes through it, I can explain to him, oh, you know, sometimes people show favoritism so you gotta work through, past that.  I, I didn't have anybody to talk to.  I didn't know what was going on.  I was just like out there, you know, and feelings hurt, you know.  Your love, you know, your love of the game is gone.  And I was never like this real ball hog.  I was really good all the way around.  I could, I was good defensively and good offensively, but I was, and then I was a good passer.  And I was never a ball hog.  So I was perfectly content to only score when I had to score.  You know, some players like Kobe [Kobe Bryant] wants to score all the time, you know.  And so it'd be different, Allen Iverson, has a scoreless (unclear) mentality, but LeBron [LeBron James] doesn't, you know.  You know, but he can score.  You know, all you have to do is challenge him to be aggressive, and I was kind of, I had a game kind of like a LeBron or Scottie Pippen type, you know, could do defense and you can play offense as well, but feel more comfortable playing defense first and that sort of thing.
Speaker 2: And I think that makes a better ball player.  We're rolling and so, as you progressed in high school, were you considered one of the top students when you graduated?
Speaker 1: Actually, I was in the top ten percent, but there were a lot of people ahead of me, you know, a lot of people.  But in science and math, I was like in the top, I was like the top one of two.  Overall, I was in the top ten percent of the class, but like in science and math, I was in the top two.  For instance, like I took in my senior year, I took, interesting story, I took calculus and physics.  In order to get into physics, you had to take accelerated life science the year before, and we were going through some tough times, and personal tough times, and I dropped out of it and went into regular science and did okay.  But there's no way you can go through regular science and get into the physics class.  I signed my own sheet.  You know, I took the sheet and I signed it myself and got myself into physics.  And in the beginning of the year, you take a test, and it's like a standardized test to tell you, you know, where you are, where students are.  And at the end of the year, you take, you take the same test and then see how much progress you made.  And so at the end of the year, in the physics class, they said that, you know, people can, they asked the class, you can get graded one of two ways.  You can either graded on, you know, how much you've learned or your absolute score.  And if it turns out the same person gets the highest score either way you do it.  And that was me.  I got the lowest score in two different classes when I first got in there.  And I got the highest score in two different classes by the end of the year.  So I made the most progress and had the most absolute.  And in calculus, I averaged, in one semester, I had a 105 average for the semester.  I wasn't working.  I lost my job and wasn't working and so I put all my energy into math and science and so I got, you know, so I was top, you know, top, tops in the math and science.  Overall, I wasn't the top.  The top, I wasn't close.  I was like number 30 out of 300 and some students in our graduating class.
Speaker 2: That's near the top.  That's pretty close.
Story_ID: 29678
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Yeah, yeah, I mean it was, it was good, I mean, considering, I mean even the, I had no interest in being in stuff like in the National Honor Society, and in my ninth grade year, one teacher wanted to nominate me for it.  I told her I wouldn't show up because I had this bad experience.  When I got inducted into the National Honor Society in junior high, nobody showed up.  My mom didn't come.
Speaker 2: (Unclear) nobody was interested?
Speaker 1: No, nobody came and I was wearing hand-me-down's.  I mean literally, I mean I was embarrassed.  I had shoes that like fit me today.  And I mean I was just all embarrassed.  I was so uncomfortable.  And, you know, the only thing I had new on was a bowtie from like Target or something like that.  And so it was a really bad experience.  So I didn't want, so I kind a shied away from anything that, you know, was visible, you know, and took pictures.  And that's why I said there's no pictures of me.  I was so insecure.  I never took any pictures.  I never wanted, I never looked in the mirror.  I never took any pictures.  So that's why there're no pictures of me, you know, as, so like literally till I'm an adult, till I'm like in college.  You know, I mean maybe school pictures, you know, where you have to take them, but there're no family pictures of me at all, anywhere.  You know, I was just going, I was just a really insecure kid struggling, you know, with no real father around and having to be like a father figure and still trying to be a kid at the same time and it was, you know, it was tough.  It was tough.
Speaker 2: Now, how, so I guess your social life in high school had to be kind of strange where you were between two worlds, I guess, right?
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, yeah, and I was going through a period of time when, you know, being a dark kid wasn't the most popular thing to be.  I wasn't, you know, quite on the team.  I kept quitting the team.  So I wasn't popular because of athletics.  No one cared about you being smart in class.  Hell, most people didn't even know I was in class because they thought I was skipping class because I was the, I was the only--there was only two black kids in my classes.  It was me and another girl and she lived in another project.  So she was bussed over.  So most people didn't think I was in school most of the time.  They thought I was just playing hooky; had a couple of close friends, neighborhood friends, and they were terrible in school.  But it was like a really, you know, awkward period, you know, for a teenager.  I mean it was really, really awkward, you know, trying to be, trying to be popular, you know.
Story_ID: 29679
Speaker 1: (Unclear) Did you do the prom and all this sort of thing?
Speaker 2: I worked, worked the night of the prom.  Interesting, I was, I never went to a graduation until I got my Ph.D.  So I wouldn't go.  I didn't go the high school graduation, didn't go to the my college graduation, didn't go to my master's, didn't go until I got my Ph.D.
Speaker 1: Okay, now was that a conscious decision?
Speaker 2: It's a conscious decision.
Speaker 1: So you had tracked yourself to go after a Ph.D.--
Speaker 2: No, no, actually, when I first got my high school, when I got my high school, when it was time to graduate and I was just, I just, just would challenge myself.  I said, anybody can get a high school education.  That's not really anything that be all that proud of, you know.  Why am I rushing to go to this thing?  And I didn't have a date, and I mean that's probably one of my main reasons why I didn't go.  Then it kind of followed through to college.  I mean I, even though I got inducted into the National Honor Society in college, and I was like the only, maybe one, I was like only two black guys, you know, in the whole (unclear) class in my sophomore year.  You know, I started, you know, starting to feel like, yeah, I was really starting to do something that wasn't that easy to do.  And I really started to feel a little bit proud of myself, but I still wanted to keep that edge.  And when it was time to go to graduation, I said, well, you know, any old clown can get a BS in electrical engineering, you know.  And I had a job at NASA lined up.  And so then I went to NASA and, you know, they, you know, they had on-campus program where, you know, the university professors came and taught at a univi--and taught at work.  So we didn't have to leave work.  We could (unclear) right at the on campus.  I mean I didn't go to the campus till like, you know, I had to go pick up my diploma.  And that was the first time I had to go on (unclear).  So then I thought, nah, that's not like a real college experience.  You know, I was making up these excused why I didn't go to graduation till I went to Georgia Tech.  And that was the whole, I mean it was all about trying to keep pushing myself to the, you know, to my limits.  And then the whole time I'm playing basketball, playing against D-1 [Division One Basketball] ballplayers, killing 'em.  I mean like, I'm like, I can see how good I would a been because I filled out.  I got bigger and stronger and faster at the same time.  So I'm like playing against guys playing Division One right there, and I'm like twenty-two, twenty-three, and I'm killing 'em on the court.  I'm faster, stronger, they can't check me.  I can shut them down.  So I was like, ah, you know, I coulda, you know, it was important to know that I could a, I coulda went to college and played D-1 ball And it was important to me to prove to myself.  Again, that whole experience, when I learned not to let other people determine my value for my decisions.  So I started only doing things for myself and being able to prove that I coulda played D-1 ball was a thing that I always wondered about.  And then, but when I start, and then I got into my career at NASA, I came from Old Dominion [University, Norfolk, Virginia], and Old Dominion's okay for the Southeast coast, but NASA people are from Purdue [University, West Lafayette, Indiana] and Notre Dame [The University of Notre Dame, South Bend, Indiana] the Ohio State [University, Columbus, Ohio], University of Illinois, Urbana-Campaign [University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Urbana, Illinois], all these big, big schools.  And here I got tossed back in that same familiar environment where I had to prove myself again which is just the right breeding ground for me to excel.  And that first year, I won an award, an achievement award for saving the government like 300,000 dollars with an idea that I worked on.
Speaker 1: At Old Dominion?
Speaker 2: No, no, this is when I had just graduated from Old Dominion.  And this is my first year at--
Speaker 1: Cleveland [Ohio]--?
Speaker 2: It's NASA Glenn [Glenn Research Center] now.  It's NASA Glenn now.  It was NASA Lewis [Lewis Research Center] at the time I was there.  And that was actually a really interesting program because NASA purposely went out to create diversity in their recruitment.  And so it was a whole bunch of us.  And there used to be a picture at the, at--what's the Cleveland Airport?  I can't think of it.  Hopkins?  Is it Hopkins or something?
Speaker 1: Yeah, I think so.
Speaker 2: Yeah, the Cleveland Hopkins Airport [Cleveland-Hopkins International Airport, Cleveland, Ohio] and it was a picture of the whole group.  And I was the only one, always missing our group.  I was always working and missed the photo shoot.  But that whole group of people, it's interesting if you ever can get a copy of that and you track, you know, they went to the University of Puerto Rico [San Juan, Puerto Rico].  They got people from all over the country, from schools up in New York, if you track the careers of that group that came into NASA at that time, myself included, all of them are doing very well, very well.  But at the time, it was an unpopular decision.  They thought they were just, you know, these kids, you know, you just, they're just some sort of diverse, some sort of affirmative action, you know, number crunching thing.  You know, these guys will never be successful, but everybody from that group, and it was like twenty or thirty of us because I know at least, at least ten personally.  Almost all of us got our masters.  Some got their Ph.D.'s.  Some went on to be lawyers.  In that whole group, and it was a very good program.  I mean NASA should be very, very proud of themselves.
Speaker 1: (Unclear) There's a group that needed opportunities.
Speaker 2: Yeah, well, but just to give us an opportunity.  Remember, all of us had graduated.  We (unclear), you know, we had to have at least a 3.0 from a university.  It was not like they were just, you know, throwing away the roads for us or anything like that.  But we showed to have a lot more initiative and drive than some of the other folks.
Story_ID: 29680
Speaker 1: I'm going to hang onto, I'm gonna remember what you just said, but I want you to go back to your decision in high school as to what college you were going to?
Speaker 2: Oh, okay.
Speaker 1: How did you make that decision or did you have help or how did you go--?
Speaker 2: Sure, oh, that's a real good.  That's a good question, Larry, because that's an interesting story as well.  I was, I knew I wanted to go to college.  I actually joined the army in the delayed entry program because I was determined not to be on the street, and I said, again, I always put myself in the situation--
Speaker 1: Now, you graduated, what year was it that you graduated?
Speaker 2: Eighty-four [1984].
Speaker 1: Eighty-four [1984], okay.
Speaker 2: So, so senior year, '84 [1984], I went, you know, took the test to go to the Army, delayed entry program.  Delayed entry has a stipulation that if you have a scholarship to college, you do not have to go in.  And I knew that.  So my, my thing was is that, either I'm gonna get a scholarship to go to college or I'm going into the Army.  I'm not gonna be out there on the streets.  And so really not understanding how I was gonna go to college, no one in my family had ever--I had an older cousin that went on like a track grant, and they, you know, no one--
Speaker 1: What about the school?  Didn't you have counseling?  Where were the counselors?
Speaker 2: No, okay.  Now, that, yeah, so I don't even know who my counselor was, but I do have a counselor who remained very close to me.  I came in there one day, and I told her I wanna go to college.  And by this time, I'm this flashy kid, got all this, new Puma outfit on, got rings, because I'm working now and buy myself some nice clothes, got gold rings on and things like that.  And I said, I really wanna go to college.  And she don't know me from Jackson, and she said, well--I mean she's not even my, she was the head guidance counselor.  She wasn't even my counselor.  I don't, to this day, I don't know who my counselor was because I never ended up going to her.  She said, well, let me, well, let's see what kind of grades you got.  And she looked at it, and see I was in advanced placement (AP) calculus and I was AP physics and, you know, you know, I had all the credits I needed and I had good grades and so on and so forth.  And she said, okay, I can help you, you know, I can help you.  And she filled out the applications for, she filled out my applications for scholarships for me.  And, I mean, for some of them, and some of them, you know, some of them I had to do writing samples.  Some of them, she just filled them out for me.  And I didn't know what was going on.  And I got, I got like academic scholarships, and she says to this day, I'm, you know, I'm still one of her two favorite students.  So one of them was actually to go to Norfolk State University, and I never even applied at Norfolk State, but I used that scholarship to get out of my army commitment (laughter).  And then the other scholarships came in later.  So her name was Gwen Russ, doctor, then she later went on to get her doctorate and Gwen Russ.  I think it's Earls now.  One of, it's either Gwen Russ or Earls.  One of them is her maiden name.  I can't remember which one.  She got divorced from the time I was in high school.  And I've never been able to try to find her again after, after I graduated.  After I started Georgia Tech [Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, Geogria], I lost track of her.  She was, she moved to like Northview, Northview High School or something.  But I can't find her now, but I've been trying for years.
Speaker 1: So she got you in Old Dominion [University, Norfolk, Virginia]?
Speaker 2: She pretty much, she got me, I said, I wanna go to two schools.  I wanna go to either Howard [University, Washington, District of Columbia] or I wanna go to Old Dominion.  Those were the two places I picked.  I had a scholarship to Howard and I had a scholarship to Old Dominion.  I didn't understand that, I didn't know anything about paying, Pell Grant [Federal Pell Grant].  So the scholarship to Howard was just enough to pay tuition and I'm like, and family didn't have any money, so I didn't think I'd have enough for room and board.  And I didn't feel comfortable necessarily working.  I didn't, you know, I tried, I try not to put myself in a situation that I'm really stressed.  I mean I would a been in D.C. and my family just had no money, you understand, no money.  So if I'm out there, and I need money, there's no way to get money to me.  So, and then I didn't know if I was gonna have it, and I'm like I'm already looking at I'm going there needing money that I don't have.  And so I ended up choosing Old Dominion, you know, my heart was wanting to go to Howard.  Later, when I went to Old Dominion, I got all this Pell Grant [Federal Pell Grant] and I didn't know anything about it.  And another lady helped me out.  She saw that, you know, she helped me get more scholarships and helped me fill out my Pell Grant.  And these were sort of a kid that was really trying.  I never asked for a hand out.  I was always willing to do my part and so on and so forth, but they saw things in me and helped and helped me out.  So my high school guidance counselor got me in college.  And this lady who was the Vice President of Financial Aid got me, you know, she, one got me in and the other one got me out so to speak.  And her husband ended up being, I think he's a prominent minister in Norfolk now.  I met him.  He was going to school for Theology cause we had older men at the same time.  And we would have lots of interesting conversations cause I was thinking about being a psychology, I mean philosophy major for a brief moment.  And I realized they didn't make any money, and I stopped (laughter).  And that kind of went out of the window, but yeah, so she, my high school counselor helped me get in.  And she made a promise to me.  She said that when my brother [Melvin Terry] was old enough to go to school--she knew I was working.  She knew my whole story.  She helped him go to college.  Now, understand, that's an eleven-year promise and it turned out that when he was in his senior year in high school, I called her up, and not even in her high school.  She was in a different high school, and she called her brother who was a chancellor or something at Davidson College [Davidson, North Carolina].  And they set up that he, as long as he keep his grades up, he had a full ride at Davidson.  So she made do on her promise for me eleven years later.
Story_ID: 29681
Speaker 1: That's interesting that both of you, you and your brother [Melvin Terry] were pretty much, achieved a lot in school.  I mean, you know.
Speaker 2: Yeah, he didn't go, but he didn't, he didn't, he ended up going into the Army, you know.  He went, he was under a lot of pressure.  I didn't understand this.  He was under a lot of pressure to be the next me, you know.  Then the family are like, you know, he had to do everything I did.  You know, everybody started--
Speaker 1: How much older are you than him?
Speaker 2: I'm eleven years older than he is.
Speaker 1: Eleven years older.
Speaker 2: I'm eleven years older than he is.  So all he heard was, you're smart like John, you're smart like John and John did this, John did that, you know.  And, of course, I wasn't there.  I didn't hear this.  And so he, he had this, you know, this image, this shadow to try to overcome.  And so he rebelled a little bit.  So he didn't, he, I mean his grades dropped the senior year.  Then he ended up not being able to take advantage of that scholarship.  And then he ended up going to Old Dominion and for a year, for like a little bit over a year and then he decided to just go in the army.  He went in the army and served his time and then got out.  I told him he can come back and stay with me and, you know, I didn't want him to be, I didn't want him to be, his whole life to be dictated by that early decision of trying to be, you know, follow in my footsteps when I wasn't even there cause I was in Cleveland [Ohio] by this time.  And he was like, I'm twenty-two and he's eleven.
Speaker 1: That's a big gap.
Speaker 2: Yeah, that's a big, a big gap, you know.  So I'm off doing, you know, it's hard for him.  He'll never be able to compete with what I was doing at twenty-two and he's eleven, you know.  So then people, you know, in their mind thinks, starting to exaggerate, well, you know, John had straight A's all his life.  So I never was a straight A's.  You know, I had good grades, but, you know.  So, you know, he was, he was, he was in competition of an image of me, not really the--and he should never have been in competition with me.  And I've always told him, just be you or be better than me.  Hell, I don't care, you know, so.  You know, so then with the age gap and everything like that really, I think it was a disservice to him.  I always, I was out there trying to make my way in the world, and in a sense, he was going through the same thing I had to go through.  You know, he had to try to find his way, you know, even though he had a brother, but I was gone.  He really, you know, couldn't really grab me.
Speaker 1: (Interviewer speaks simultaneously)
Story_ID: 29682
Speaker 1: So when did, did you start involved with computer science at Old Dominion [University, Norfolk, Virginia]?
Speaker 2: Yeah, a little bit.  I mean computer science was part of, you know, the program.  You know, you had to take so many programming classes.
Speaker 1: Because your major was--?
Speaker 2: Electrical Engineer.
Speaker 1: Electrical Engineer.
Speaker 2: And there are some, and in fact, I used to play with, in the gym, the head of the computer science department, played basketball with me all the time (laughter).  And he just loved me to death, and he wanted me to go to graduate school in Computer Science.  And it's like, now, I got my whole heart is in, I'm a good, well, I was a pretty good programmer.  You know, pretty good programmer, but I really liked electrical engineering.  Matter of fact, I had decided to be an electrical engineer in eighth grade.  I had really decided early on.  And I had already planned my career out, what I needed to take and, you know, what classes I needed.  So I've always been kind of been in control, and I've always kind of planned my life off five years ahead and have, you know, I have long-term goals and short-terms goals.  I have goals all the way down to like weekly goals and daily goals.   And the way I got through school is that whenever I made my weekly goals, I would reward myself and my reward to myself was treating myself to a banana split and going downtown, eating at my favorite burger shop, a banana split and reading comic books.  That was my goal, that was my reward to myself.  So I created to this (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Did you have a favorite comic book hero?
Speaker 2: Character?
Speaker 1: --or character?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, I still do, Wolverine, you know.  But I, and I have maybe, in my other home, I have maybe about three or 4,000 comic books.  You know, the, I actually had to end selling all my comic books to eat one time when I was in, like in my junior year.  I didn't have any money, had to sell them for far less than what they were worth.
Speaker 1: You sold them all?
Speaker 2: I sold them all so I could eat, you know.  I eventually bought 'em back, you know, at a premium, you know, I had to (laughter).  I was on the back side of that, but, but, yeah, I had to sell 'em all, you know, to buy food at one point.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: You know, you go through these things.
Speaker 1: So, well, how, well, were there very many black students at Old Dominion?
Speaker 2: No, no, no.  There were, in engineering?  You're talking about in engineering program or just in general?
Speaker 1: Well, in general.  I know in engineering--
Speaker 2: In general.
Speaker 1: --it probably really got thin, didn't it?
Speaker 2: Yeah, well, in general, Old Dominion was at that time about seventeen or 20,000.  So it's not small, you know, it was decent sized, maybe three percent black, three percent, you know.  So Old Dominion was considered like, you know, if you're in the Hampton Rhodes[Harbor, Norfolk, Virginia] area , you got to go to Old Dominion if you want to get a job.  If you went to any of the local black colleges, you couldn't get a job when you graduated.  And I'm thinking, I'm not gonna work this hard and then people gonna, you know, basically, you know, critique my credentials.  I'm not, if I'm a work hard, I want people to say, hey, if he graduated from here and got these kind of grades, then they speak for themselves, and when I graduated from Old Dominion, I had--I only got one job offer.  And it wasn't local.  It was from NASA in Cleveland [Ohio].  In fact, I had that job offer in my junior year.  They told me when you graduate you'll have a job as long as you keep your grades up.  So I had a, I knew, actually, I was kind of like, just kind of biding my time, just had to get to my senior year.
Story_ID: 29683
Speaker 1: So you said when you went to Cleveland [Ohio].  This would have been in 19--?
Speaker 2: Eighty nine [1989].
Speaker 1: Eighty nine [1989].
Speaker 2: January of, in '89 [1989].
Speaker 1: Okay, so when you went to Cleveland, you basically worked for NASA and then worked on a masters kind of--?
Speaker 2: At the same time.  I started my master--
Speaker 1: --at work.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I started my Masters program March of '89.  I graduated December of '88 [1988].  I started at NASA January of '89.  I started my Masters in March of '89 and worked on it part time through March of '93 [1993], started my Ph.D. August of '93.  So I never stopped, just kept going.  So I was in grad school about, I think eleven years straight and worked full time.  I took one year off.
Speaker 1: So how did you like living in Cleveland?  Were you actually in Cleveland proper or the suburbs?
Speaker 2: I was in the suburbs.  I was in Brook Park [Ohio], Berea [Ohio], North Olmsted [Ohio], area, cause that's where NASA is close by.  Actually, I just moved close to where I was working, but then I did, you know, venture out and found downtown, the East Side and that so I was there for seven years.  So I kind of found my way around.  Cleveland is a very different, it really, you know, what it did, and I was a really angry kid when I got to Cleveland.  I was still real project hard.  I mean I was, had a chip on my shoulder.  Cleveland actually helped to alleviate that.  It was the very strangest thing because there was racial tension in Cleveland like the East side and the West side.  And I didn't understand it at all because I wasn't there.  I mean, you know, as an outside observer, I just really didn't, couldn't see what it was all about.  I mean I really, I mean I really didn't understand.  It helped me to understand all the, it's the same kind of thing in Norfolk [Virginia] and Virginia Beach [Virginia], a kind of racial divide.  And it helped me to see things, how, you know, how I felt as a kid being oppressed, how the people in the East side of Cleveland felt oppressed.  And people would come up to me angry, like, how can you live on the West side.  I'm like it's close my job.  I mean literally, I'm like, what, I don't know, I don't the history.  I don't know that the Cuyahoga River divides the color line, color line.  I didn't know any of that.  So it was really, really, really, you know, kind of a renaissance period for me in, helping open my eyes and understanding that people, people just aren't, you know, have different life experiences.  People are culturally different, and they're not bad.  Most people are doing, most people are doing what they think is best for their families rather than purposely trying to hurt other folks.  Sometimes people who are not on the receiving end view it as being a slight on their behalf, cause I started working in Cleveland, you know, I'm like the only black, you know.  And so, you know, are calling about their mortgages and things like that, and they're talking about taxes.  And all they would, it was all about what was good for their family.  And it was really, really an eye opener for me.  I was like, they're not trying to keep black people down so to speak.  They're just trying to do what they, you know, what's good for their family, you know.  (Unclear), I mean they were voting, voting for politics that benefited their family.  That was, you know, I mean not to say that I didn't see my share of racism in Cleveland.  I did see that.  Like when one of the people who's actually featured in The HistoryMakers, Dr. Julian Earls, he was there at the time.  At that time, if you go, probably read his history, that was the time where he had got ousted out of his office.  And he was, he was, you know, like a division chief, and there was some sort of scandal that he had sleeping with his employees.  It was all on the news.  I mean I got there right after that.  So he was literally a man without a home at the time that, that I had got in.  And he's from Portsmouth [Virginia] and I'm from Norfolk and so he went to Norfolk State [University, Norfolk, Virginia] so.  And I would go in there and, you know, talk to him like you and I are talking right now.  And, you know, Julian is a really, really smooth guy and meant, learned a lot in just, in just how he carried himself during that time.  And eventually, you know, he ended up getting all this power, ended up, you know, running NASA.  I mean he even went further than he was before, but at the time that I got there, he was like on the outs.  I mean they had stripped him of all his power.  He was, and had been publicly embarrassed.  I mean, I mean it had to effect his personal life.  I mean I didn't see that part.  I mean it was likely literally the year before I got there that all this happened.  He was, they had did some sort of sting operation on him and on the news.  It was, it was a lot of tension because they say they targeted him because, you know, he had his PhD, and he's black, and he was, you know, he was highly visible and so on and so forth.  So it was all these things going on when I came in the midst of Cleveland.  And I just really didn't get involved with it.  I, I mean I just couldn't because it wasn't, so to speak, my war because I, I didn't understand it.  I mean I wasn't there.  But this, and this is coming a kid who's about as militant and hard as you can get.  I just realized that I had my own personal war that was part of my own upbringing, that I was harboring and I needed to cleanse myself of that before I could grow.  I, by seeing it in someone else, I was able to see, you know, the cancerous views in myself.  And that was really like the blossom experience.  And then I learned to think, and Julian Earls said one thing to me, and he probably don't even remember this, but he told me, he said, "Not everybody black is your friend; not everybody white is your enemy, remember that."  He told me that a long time ago and I still, I still remember that.  And I was like, right, just judge people for who they are.  And in essence, that's what he was saying to me.  And I learned that and I've had people of all shapes and colors help me and people of all shapes and colors to hurt me, you know.  So, and, but I don't take it to be beyond what it is.  You know, that's just a individual who has done this to either help me or try to harm me.  So it was really, you know, that was a very important growth period for, you know, basically, some of these inner city kids, and that's the kind of thing I can, I can teach them.  I can help them, I can heal that, that pain.  I can tell 'em, I say, I've been there.  I know exactly how you feel.  I know, you know, why you, you know, why you had to deal with this.  No one understands you.  I can, I can identify with that, and I can tell you that, you know, hey, you know, it's not always gonna be that way.  It can, it'll be better.  I mean sometimes I wish I can go back in the past and tell myself, hey, you know, just keep your head up, buddy, it'll be all right, you know.  And, and so when I see other kids like that, I think, I think of that.
Story_ID: 29684
Speaker 1: We were talking about someone at Browns [Cleveland Browns, National Football League] you used to play ball with, just off the cuff here.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Like Kenan McCarty (ph.) and Webster Slaughter [Webster Melvin Slaughter].
Speaker 2: Slaughter, and then that's when Eric Metcalf [Eric Quinn Metcalf] came, had just got in.
Speaker 1: Metcalf, Reggie Rucker, yeah--
Speaker 2: Right, and I played with Raymond Clayborn [Raymond DeWayne Clayborn].  I played against this guy name, a guy named Richard Brown and some of those guys and so I played with them a lot.
Speaker 1: Okay, well, let me ask you about your Ph.D. now.  When you were at Cleveland about seven years, you said?
Speaker 2: Um-hum, then I went away to Atlanta.
Speaker 1: Yeah, to Georgia Tech [Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, Geogria].
Speaker 2: Georgia Tech.
Speaker 1: Georgia Tech.  So tell us about your experience at Georgia Tech and what was your Ph.D. dissertation about?
Speaker 2: Okay, so I went to Georgia, so I was looking at a couple of schools, you know, to look at my, for my Ph.D.  And I wanted, and I went to decent schools, but I wanted to go to a top ten school.  You know, you gotta understand, I'm always about competition.  And I always need to know where I stack up in the ranks.  And so then I was looking at Purdue [University, West Lafayette, Indiana], Stanford [University, Palo Alto, California] and Georgia Tech.  And both of them had, all three of those schools had a good history with graduating minorities, but Stanford graduated the most minorities, most minorities and Georgia Tech graduated the most African Americans in graduate degrees.  And most of the minorities at Stanford were Hispanic.  So I decided, that's how I ended up picking Georgia Tech.  And I went to Georgia Tech, you know, kinda and pretty much on that, and they have a good strong school ranking, and I was going under Digital Signal Processing.  And so for those of you who don't know what that means, it's kind of like, it's just how, how you take the signals and clean them up and make them clear, you know, where you see a blurry vision and then you focus in.  Well, signal processing is like, is the science behind that.  So how do you clean up signals and make them more discernable, crisper, sometimes more audible so to speak.  That's the whole process behind digital signal processing.  And Georgia Tech is number one in engineering schools in that area.  So everyone goes to Georgia Tech to study that.  I also was, I was working in the satellite communication division at NASA so I had to create a Ph.D. program that matches signal processing which was my own interests with communications and satellite communications in particular because NASA was paying, I was on a sabbatical.  I won a Fellowship to go, go on a full sabbatical to pursue my Ph.D.  So I had to make it relate to my work when I came back.  And so what I did was, I looked at a science that's called array signal processing.  And you might, what people call today, MIMO technology, if you see it on, you know, you go to a Best Buy and you'll see MIMO technology, which stands for, that's M-I-M-O, that's the acronym which is multiple input, multiple output.  But back in the days when I was working on Ph.D., I was, it was called "Array Signal Processing".  And it's the same thing.  It takes multiple antennas, like, you know, you see these rabbit ear, everyone's seen the rabbit ears on the top of a, the rooftops.  But instead of feeding out to a single point, each, each individual ear has its own, its own individual connector.  And you combine them in a way to enhance the signal in a particular direction without actually having to physically steer it.  So that was my, so that was my Ph.D., what it's about, taking signal processing, coupled with array technology, antenna technology with satellite communications cause I was in the satellite communications department.  I wanted to use Array signal processing, algorisms and techniques that, you know, and that I was learning at Georgia Tech and also coupled with the communications.  So when I came out of Old Dominion [University, Norfolk, Virginia], I had a signal processing emphasis.  Then I went to Cleveland where I worked for a communications department.  So I had to take all my masters classes in communication.  And I didn't, and so I'm always like someone--I don't like to lose anything.  So I wanted a program, my math, my Ph.D. to encompass all those different aspects.  So I took communications and signal, and communications and signal processing are very closely related now in the industry.  I mean, you know, those are the two hot topics to do a lot of research and development cause signal processing enhances communications.  Communications give applications for signal processing.  And without, you know--
Speaker 1: All of these of technology, all of these sciences aid and abet cell phones?
Speaker 2: They aid everything from cell phones, video cameras, you know.  When you think about, you know, video cameras, when you think about a picture being blurred.  We talked about compression techniques, like, you know, things can be compressed and send (unclear) across and the compression, in the compressed format.  You know, you always need, ZIP files, ZIP files are that.  The same thing to do hard drives, use the exact same technology and the same programs.  All of these are the same programs.  Your CD-ROM, you know, the whole technology behind CDs and how CDs were, you know, kind of scratch resistant, you know, that you can have a scratch in a CD and the quality of the music doesn't go down.  It has to do with communication and signal processing theory.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 29685
Speaker 1: So it's a lot of aspects of our everyday life that, you know, are impacted by these technologies, but we're unaware of them.  And so I'm, at the time I didn't realize how rich and full a feeding ground this was gonna be.  It was just something that I was trying to put together in order to justify, you know, getting full salary, you know, and going to Georgia Tech [Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, Georgia] and working on that.  So when I came, you know, to Georgia Tech, I actually didn't, I got there and I actually thought, this is pretty damn hard.  I, I'm like that was really hard.  I mean I had really grown as an engineer.  I mean I was much, much better than when I first came out of Old Dominion [University, Norfolk, Virginia].  And I was like, this is still pretty damn hard.  I mean I was, and I wasn't sure I was gonna--it was the first time that I wasn't sure if I was gonna be able to complete it.  I mean I was really doubtful.  It's like when you try out for a team, you're like, you know, there're some really good players out here.  I don't, I don't know if I'm gonna make it, cause like you really don't know.  And, and I didn't know if I had what it took to make the cut at Georgia Tech.  I really didn't know.  And up until, almost until I graduated, I really didn't know.  I mean, but I kept pushing hard, and that's what I wanted.  I wanted, I wanted to be challenged like that.  I wanted to know that failure was easily imminent if I didn't give my hundred and, you know, ten percent [110 percent].  I wanted to really push myself like that.  And Georgia Tech was that, has, Georgia Tech has this whole different way of teaching you to think.  They, they teach you to think smart, you know, and in essence that, they think that before you start writing down, you know, when I was, all my other classes, in most schools, you know, you get credit for work, just, just writing down a lot of stuff, you know, whether it was cohesive or not.  It just, you just write down a bunch of stuff.  And Georgia Tech professors, they don't like that.  That's wasting their time.  If you write a bunch of stuff and as soon as you start deviating from what's right, they'll just give you a zero, just zero, just zero it out.  So it took me like almost a whole semester to get used to the whole process of Georgia Tech's way of thinking.  And, and so, and actually, they say that's why Georgia Tech engineers rank number one in terms of productivity in industry.  They teach to think about the problem first and try to find out what's the essence of what you're trying to solve.  And then only once you understand the essence of what you're trying to solve, then use the tools that they've given you to solve the problem, whereas, we, you know, typically you will have people who just go out, you know, like my son will go, he'll just start writing the equation.  And I was (unclear) stop, think about, relax.  What is it that, what is the essence of the problem that you're trying to solve?  And even to this day, I use that approach and when I'm, and even in all the patents that I, and I can. All the patents that I have, I can go back to this, I call it the Georgia Tech approach.  And the answers typically are like, that long.  The answers are that long.  If you take longer than that, you know that you didn't, you didn't think it through.  So always try to look for the essence of the problem.  And that was really the key, you know, one of the key experiences from Georgia Tech that I learned that, you know, you, there is, you know, there's a high level thinking.  And this is the kind of thing that people like the Einstein's [Albert Einstein] and the Aristotle's, they thought about what is the essence of the problem that you're trying to solve?  And then you about attacking it.  And then they say Einstein knew at an early age that was something wrong with Newton's [Sir Isaac Newton] laws and mechanics.  He couldn't formulate it mathematically, but he could do this thought process that he knew that, you know, relative motion couldn't be absolute.  It has to be something else because he's saying, he knew the concept of electrons moving in space.  And they said that two electrons are moving in space and they're moving relative to each other and they would literally oscillate back and forth in space, but he knew had to propagate so he said there had to be some problem.  There was something wrong with relative motion.  So he knew without, and they put him in Special Ed [Special Education] class because of saying something like this, but he knew fundamentally that there was something wrong with, you know, this.  So that's how I attack problem now.  So when I look at situations, if for instance, this camera was blurred, I would look to say, okay, what is, what is happening?  What is the thing that's happening where it's defocused or it's too much scatter of lights.  And then what is it that you, what is the thing that you want?  You can look to see that the image you want it to be clear, and you want to the light to be separated from the images within it.  And so there are techniques that allow you to take out the characteristics of the brighter lightness, you know, like you can see on these different monitors, the different intensity levels.  And you can build filters that says that the things that are above this intensity level, subtract it out and just give them the things that are below.  And then this is how you pull out energies out of noisy things.  This is how people recreate all analog, you know, tapes, and making--all this, analog tapes and digitizing when you see, when you have people digitizing, the process of digitizing is just allowing them to use computers to use algorithms that I'm describing to you to look at the salient features to extract the thing that you want from the thing that you have.  And so that's, so it's the essence of the problem.  It's just like when I was in college, we looked at trying to monitor the baby's heart rate within the mother's heart rate.  Well, the baby, the baby's heart rate is much faster than the mother's so it beats faster.  So if you look on a spectrum analyzer, you'll see that the baby's heart rate is higher and has a higher frequency and the mother's has a lower frequency.  So you can build a filter to listen to either the lower half or the upper half.  So this is the essence of, you know, the theme that I do, you know.
Speaker 2: Okay, I actually understood that (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay, (laughter). (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: But I did, I actually, I have hope for whoever listens to this.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I hope so too.  So, and then I can tell you how it relates to wireless communications in general, you know, which is my field of expertise, you know.
Story_ID: 29686
Speaker 1: So what was the title of your paper, I dare ask what the title of the paper was?
Speaker 2: My paper was called "Blind Adaptive, Array Techniques for Satellite Communication".  It's in my bill, you can, probably have to write it down.  It's just the title and it's considered a book, considered my first book.  That's what I like to call it, but, yeah.  And blind meaning that the techniques basically exploit properties of the signature, of the signal.  It knows that maybe the signature, like I said, the signature of the baby is higher, has a higher beat but I don't know the actual frequency.  So I try to create algorithms that look for heart beat tones that, and reject anything of lower beat.  In terms of array processing, say I know that my signature of interest is in this direction and I got energy coming from all directions, all I need to do is I can write an algorithm that moves to point in this direction, ignore everything out.  So just, so those are called blind in a sense because you don't actually know what the thing that you're looking for.  You just know which, you might not know what you're looking for, but you probably, you might know what you're not looking for.  So you create programs that, to exploit those types of properties.  You might know that the signature only takes on a couple of values, one, you know, plus one or minus one.  You can use that knowledge to reject anything that's not plus one or minus one.  So those are called blind programs as opposed to constrained programs.  Constrained programs say you know exactly what you're looking for, and you constrain the problem to search for that solution and only that solution.  Well, that's a lot of technical mumble-jumble, but in essence, it's that the way your wireless land and things like that work is that they know that you have, that all the signals originated from the same source.  So they all are related to each other, right.  And so then they look to correlate each signal that comes in and gather that energy, and any energy that doesn't have a similar signature, it rejects it because it knows it did not come from the same source which but I mean it makes sense, right?  If I, if my voice, if it reflects off a wall and gets to your ear, if it comes off the floor and gets to your ear, it's still my voice that's the originating source.  It's just gone through different types of media.  Then it's changed it a little bit.  And typically it changes its amplitude a little bit and changes its phase a little bit.  But there's a high corre--so you can take those signatures and you can, what's called correlation, it's just a matching. It's like an identity, it's like fingerprints, how fingerprints work, where they're just trying to take two different patterns and match them against them.  Correlation is the same thing.  You have, we have a reference signal, and you're just trying to see how close one thing is relative to that signature that you have.  And so if you take, you have multiple copies of things coming in, you could see how close they are to each other.  And if they're close, you keep it.  And if they're not close, you reject them.  So, that's the essence of how people now combat things called, you know, that was considered destructive interference.  Now, they're able to capture all the energy associated with a single source and combine them to get this, to give its best response.  In the past, what they would do is try to find the strongest signal of all of them and reject everyone else.  And that would lead to poor quality.  That's the difference between old digital technology and, as you see the phones and things improve, and that's the thing that you'll hear this terminology a lot, you know, even if you don't what it means, MIMO [Multiple Input Multiple Output] technology.  You hear that.  It's the buzz word now.  There are new technologies coming out, like this WiMAX [WiMAX Technology] that Intel is bringing out and it has MIMO technology.  You'll see, you have extended range.  You have three times the range and five--and ten times the speed.  You'll see those kind of buzz words on these products that you buy from Best Buy and Circuit City.  But all they're doing is they're capturing all the energy, the essence of it is they're captured all the energy that's related to each other and summed them up, which enhances the performance.  And so therefore, you can go further or you can go further which extends the range or you get better quality at the same distance from where you were because the more, the more copies of the thing you have, the energy you have of it and the better your signal strength is relative to the background noise.  And that's, that's the name of the game, increasing your signal strength to the background noise.  So that's, in essence, all future communications are really about that, increasing your signal strength.  And so sometimes they play games with creating, putting special properties in it so at the other side you can easier, more easily identify that signature as opposed to, say, if, for instance like, in the unlicensed band, like your microwaves working unlicensed band, your cordless telephones cordless cell phones, working unlicensed and your Wi-Fi.  With this all this energy floating around, how do you pick out the thing that's of interest to you.  What they do is they embed signature which are nothing but a special sequence of patterns that seem like, if you don't know any better, it just looks like a sequence of random numbers to you, if you don't know.  But if you know the key, then it's a pattern that you can predict very easily.  So each of these different technologies use different patterns and keys so that when you have all of them being operated in the same area, you can search out your key from amidst the others.  And that's all signal process.  It's nothing, it's pattern rec--, it's the same as pattern recognition, the same fingerprint, you know, identification.  It's the same as retina scan identification, all of the same type of algorithms where you take a reference pattern and you compare something, a test pattern against it, and you find how closely it matches it to it.  And depending on how close it is, you determine, you know, whether or not it's a match.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 29687
Speaker 1: Now, so when--you finished your Ph.D. in what year?
Speaker 2: '99 [1999].
Speaker 1: It was '99 [1999].
Speaker 2: So I was working full time from, so it took '93 [1993] to '94 [1994] off, middle of '94 to work on my coursework, went back to NASA for a year, did some research, then got a job at Texas Instruments [Texas Instruments Incorporated].  They said you can continue your research at Texas Instruments (TI) within this area, in adaptive arrays because they had a solid, in fact, they were building rays for NASA to be flown on the shuttle, and so I was work--and so I left NASA to go to work at TI in the private industry, to work on that type of work.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So, in that, and so it's listed as Raytheon TI Systems [Raytheon TI Systems Incorporated, Raytheon Company Subsidiary].  It was TI when I got there.  Raytheon ended up buying the defense, and then they called it Raytheon TI Systems.
Speaker 1: Okay, and after you got your Ph.D. you moved on to Nokia [Nokia Corporation, Nokia Research Center, Dallas, Texas]?
Speaker 2: Actually, I started at Nokia just before I finished my Ph.D.  So I started at Nokia January of '99 [1999] and got my Ph.D. in May of '99.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, it says here you were principal scientist for Nokia Research Center.  What does principal scientist mean at--?
Speaker 2: Nokia?  That's a good question.  Nokia, at the time that I was working there, they said something like they had like thirty--Nokia's is like 50,000, 55,000 people worldwide, employees.  And they said, estimated somewhere in the neighborhood of thirty [thousand] to 35,000 were involved in technology.  That's why Nokia's such a, you know, giant in the cell phone and just technology in general.  And Nokia has classifications of, you know, anybody on the technical, so you can either be on the management ladder or the technical ladder.  And Nokia had principal scientists, and principal scientist in Nokia means that you had to have a reput--, a national reputation in a field, meaning that if you say your name out there in industry, people knew you nationwide, outside of Nokia, and internal to Nokia.  So you had to have expertise in one field where you had company-wide recognition and nationwide recognition.  And then Nokia, of all the 30,000, thirty [thousand] to 35,000 employees, at the time that I got my principal science, there were only 100 principal scientists and I was one of them.  So that's a, that was probably my crowning achievement in my career.  So it was something that I worked really hard on.  It took me, you know, I had to write a book, co-author a book and at the time, I had five patents pending.  At the time, I was a vice chair of the standard that you can buy today.  So when I was vice chair, the standard that you go to buy your Wi-Fi [Wireless Fidelity] products, all the Wi-Fi products you buy today, I was the vice chair of it at that time.  It was still the development stage.  In the book I wrote at that time, it's on the technology today, but, you know, no one knew how, you know, how big Wi-Fi was gonna be.  You know, we didn't, we, we, even the people who were working on it didn't know it was gonna be as big as it is.  But I was known, I mean I was on the I-Tripoli [iTripoli, Incorporated] website, you know, I was on, you know, had name recognition.  I had, you know, doing a speaking engagement, you known, when people asked me about Wi-Fi technology, I was, you know, one of the key contributors in coming up with some of the patents and I was helping direct how the standard was going.  So I was pretty, you know, pretty hot at that time.  And--
Speaker 1: So, I mean I would say that Starbucks owes you a lot of money (laughter).
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Yeah, you know, at the time we didn't know how, and the people were still trying to figure out how to make money with, you know, with the Wi-Fi.  And Starbucks was one of the first adopters, you know, of the Wi-Fi technology.  It had, it was, the Internet cafe is extremely big in Europe, Asia and Africa and things like that.  It's not quite as big here because not every, you know, everyone here has a high-speed connection at home.  Like if you go to France, I travel abroad a lot, you know, it's easy to go to an Internet cafe.  I just went to see the movie "Born Ultimatum", and it goes into this Internet cafe.  You know, you're thinking about, you know, Barnes and Nobles and things like that, but there are a lot of mom and pop shops that basically just buy some bandwidth and then they distribute it to their users and you pay for the time that you're on.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I know the one in Atlanta [Georgia] near The King Center we (unclear) right up the boulevard.  And they're all over the place now.
Speaker 2: They're all over the place.  Now, they're making cities Wi-Fi enabled.  In fact, the, you know, in the Minnesota tragedy [Minnesota's I-35W Bridge 9340 Collapse, 08/01/2007], they said that Wi-Fi was key in keeping the crisis down.  They called out that technology specifically, that it was the thing that helped maintain communications amongst the different branches.  I'm currently involved with the government, helping them to understand, looking at these kinds of scenarios that when  you have a catastrophe of this magnitude and communications break down, you don't want to happen what happened with Katrina [Hurricane Katrina, 08/29/2005].  What are the things that we need to do?  How do you study these scenarios?  What are the plans you can do?  What new innovations in technology do you do?  What backup plans do you need?  So those are the kinds of things that I do now, help the government to understand how you take all my experience with communications and technology and how they work, and tell them how you can make them work for us.
Story_ID: 29688
Speaker 1: How would summarize your experience at Nokia [Nokia Corporation, Nokia Research Center, Dallas, Texas] though?  I guess, you left in 2004, but, to form your own company?
Speaker 2: Actually, I left to go to a start-up company, but, yeah, my experience was very positive.  I mean I, leaving Nokia was the hardest thing I ever did because when I left, I was extremely happy.  I mean I was, you know, I had just, you know, I had really just got my principal scientist.  You know, I was trying to work on being a Nokia Fellow.  I, you know, I was hot.  I mean everyone knew me.  There was, you know, even the guy, there were people on the board of Nokia that knew my name, you know, when I left.  And so I wasn't unhappy.  I mean I was quite, in fact, I was quite--all my friends were there, people I had worked with, some of my friends that I worked with at TI [Texas Instruments Incorporated] came over.  So we had been working together, ten, twelve years.  Then this, but I was, again, never quite one to just sit on my past laurels.  And the guy who was the vice chair of the standard a S111G (unclear) which is the current Wi-Fi [Wireless Fidelity] products that you buy today, he started, who had, he started a start-up company and said, John, I need you, and I need you.  And at the time, I thought, and I had a lot of respect for him at the time as an individual, as a, you know, as a technologist.  And we had worked through some critical battles doing the standard procedure.  And I thought it was somebody I could trust.  And so I decided to take a chance and start the start up thing.  I would get offers all the time from people who wanted to come to their start-up companies.  I still get offers from people to come work for their start-up companies.  So he wanted me, he, he said, I could be, you know, you pick whatever position you want, you know,  You can be vice president and anything but president because he was the president.  I could be anything I wanted, you know, I had like free rein because he needed my reputation to give the team credibility because I was known in the industry.  And everyone knew, you know, I had the book and things like that.
Speaker 1: So this is the WiQuest Communications [Allen, Texas]?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And they're in Allen, Texas.  So you had to move from--
Speaker 2: Really, it's not that far from here.
Speaker 1: All right--.
Speaker 2: So, and it wasn't a move so to speak.  I just started driving to a different location.
Speaker 1: Because Nokia's in the area too.
Speaker 2: Nokia's is the area too, just in a different direction.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: WiQuest is probably about five or ten minutes somewhere--they moved recently, somewhere from this location.  And Nokia is a good hour away.
Speaker 1: All right.  So, well, how did things go at WiQuest?
Speaker 2: It didn't, it didn't turn out as well I'd liked.  One of the things you find out when you work for people that are privately owned, a company, because it's privately owned, they can do what they want to, you know.  They can do whatever they like.  It turned out that, you know, the person that I left the company, left Nokia to go work for because I thought he was an honest and upright person, turned out that he wasn't as honest and upright as I thought he was.  And it put me in a situation where I had to make a choice that, whether or not, you know, could I continue to work with him?  He, there was a situation where the chip wasn't going out on time.  He had made promises to the board that I had no control over.  I was telling him, you know, if we were behind, that we needed more people.  When you get, you know, people working sixty and seventy hours, it's a breeding ground to make mistakes.  I was communicating to him that things needed, we needed help and I needed more senior people.  I had only fresh out (unclear) people in there.  And I was working to wire, and I'm tired, they're tired.  It just, we just need, you know, you just need more horses. You know, to pull this cart.  But they were trying to run the cart as fast as possible with as few horses as possible to keep the same money.  And so to me that was a conscious decision on their part.  And then my thought was, if you don't, do that gamble, and you get a chip out that, and with this reduced cost and you get bare gains at the end when the company sells, but if you, if it fails, then you take the responsibility as the management that decided that I was gonna play my card this way.  But they tried to have a scapegoat.  And so when it failed, for all the things that I said that might happen, did happen, and then they tried to get, point the blame on me, even though it was someone that worked on my team but wasn't working for me at the time.  So they just needed someone, they couldn't blame him.  He was too low on the totem pole for the board to say, well, why do you have a fresh-out determining why fifteen million is gonna be profitable or not profitable, right?  They weren't gonna tell the board that they made the mistake because then the board would replace them.  So they needed someone high enough up that, you know, to show that, and all they did, they tried to demote me.  Basically, I told them my requirements for me to go to work at this company was I would only report to the president because that's the only person I knew.  So he tried to demote me so he can show to the board that, you know, hey, I got this situation under control.  They didn't say it was my fault, but they tried to infer it was my fault.  He really knew I didn't do it, and the fact turned out, it was done before I even got there.  And he wanted to infer that he did that and that was coming right at the time where I took a seventy-five percent pay cut for six months to help the company through the troubled waters.  And that came right, you know, once they got the money, you know, you do these things because you think people are committed to you just like you're committed to them.  It taught me a valuable lesson and in the middle of our conversation, he couldn't even look me in the eye like I'm looking you in the eye.  But if you think I was the one that really failed you, you could tell me, John, you, you know, I brought you on, you're supposed to have been, you know, this hot shot guy, yada, yada, yada.  And he, he's looking down at the floor, looking at the ceiling, can't look me in the eye because he can't be proud of himself.  But see that goes back to lessons I learned when I was a kid.  Don't do anything that you can't stand tall and own up to later on.  You know, I could sit right there and look him in the eye and say, well, what is, what's going on?  And so then they had put me in this situation where this is the first point in my career I would have failed, my whole career.  I mean and then did it so haphazardly, they could care less how it affected me personally or whatever.  And, in fact, they did it with vengeance in their minds.  They really wanted me, they thought I, you know, up until that point I was hands-off because I was so important to the company.  In fact, I was on the web page at one point.  I mean I was, I was in their executive summary by name.  There were only two names in the executive summary, there was the president and my name in the executive summary when the company started, the only two names mentioned in the executive summary.  That's how important I was to start out with.  And here they were trying to put me in a situation where I was gonna report to somebody ten years less than me.
Story_ID: 29689
Speaker 1: Okay, well, tell us about it.  Now, you started you own business?
Speaker 2: Consulting.
Speaker 1: Yeah, consulting.
Speaker 2: Consulting and (unclear), yeah.
Speaker 1: Now, this is 2005?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yes, it's 2005.  Although I had the business for a while, I hadn't really done anything with it.  I just used it as a mechanism to teach and keep an amount of separation between John Terry an individual and John Terry as an employee of Nokia because, you know, I was being asked to do speaking engagements and things like that.  So I had to be careful that when I said something, I was speaking as John Terry, the person, not John Terry, principal scientist at Nokia, although I was a principal scientist.  And so I had the company so, you know, when I did things--
Speaker 1: (Unclear) mobilize--
Speaker 2: Right, and then I just went and made it my full time effort when I left the start-up company.  I said, well, I was, you know, a little bit, I wasn't interested in working for a large company or a small company because the experience I had just went through showed me that, you know, no one's safe, you know. And so if I'm gonna be in a situation where it's, you know, I can lose my job at any given day for almost any given reason, I might as well be out there doing it myself because the risk is no more but the gains are potentially much greater.  So that's kind of--
Speaker 1: It sound like a little bit more involved than just losing a job, like losing a reputation or--
Speaker 2: Yeah, well, it was, it was the thought of, you know, of losing my reputation.  See when I left, I was a director.  If I, and I left, as soon as they told me what they were trying to do, I walked out immediately, you know.  So I left as a director, you know.  And so my career credential remained as what they are.  So, yeah, it was, it was a matter of maintaining my reputation, I mean I could have left and then got a job with someone else.  I mean I could have went back to Nokia at any time if I, if I really wanted to.  But I never did.  I just tried to go and do my own thing.  I did like, you know, I did learn some things.  I learned a great deal though from that whole experience.  I learned how to be an entrepreneur.  Being in a large company, you don't learn that.  I learned, I mean the president passed by, I mean a lot of his thought process to me, what he was doing, what, you know, some of the things I agreed with, some things I didn't agree with.  So I understood the business aspect from a small company's perspective.  And having had worked on the large company perspective, I had this knowledge set.  And I thought it would be somewhat wasteful to just go back and go work for another company, you know.  It just, just didn't, I mean unless it was something really so lucrative I just couldn't walk away from  So I decided I'll go out there and beat the bushes.  So I, and so I'd try to do some consulting work.  Consulting work is not the easiest thing to get started and nor is it the easiest thing to grow for that matter.  It's kind of like a chicken or the egg.  If no one knows you, no one's gonna hire you, but if you, everyone knows you, they only want to hire you, right?  So they only wanna hire you, but if they don't know you, they don't want to hire you at all.  So it's this really strange thing.  And then another strange thing is that people will know you and think that you, you come in and you solve problems for them.  I'm only trying to get a pay day.  It's the politics of the, when there is a problem that needs to be solved, someone else couldn't solve it.  And so the people who couldn't solve it don't want me to come in because they don't want to take the chance that someone else can solve the problem they couldn't solve.  But the people who are higher up who only care about getting the problem fixed, wants the problem solved.  So typically I would be a person or the people higher up, but the people who were doing the work would always be a little bit adversarial and I couldn't, you know, so it's, you know, it's weird trying to do this in a commercial industry.  And even then I never really could quite grow the business because I was getting opportunities but we're never closing on the deals because of some internal conflicts within the company.  So I decided to, and that, so I started doing what's called standards work where you go and represent the companies on their behalf in the standards process.  I did the same thing for Nokia, but I was an employee of Nokia at the time, at Nokia at the time.  Now, I was just an independent consultant, and it's a lot of folks that do that for the big players like Intel [Intel Corporation], QUALCOMM [QUALCOMM Incorporated], Motorola [Motorola Incorporated], Nokia.  Everyone has consultants that go to these standards and represent their interests.  But then that required me to travel all the time.  And I actually flew over a hundred thousand miles last, not, year before last.  And I just never got to see my son.  It was, so it wasn't--to make money, I was always on the road.  And so I was like, well, I don't wanna do that either.  That's, that's not being able to influence, you know, be in my child's life and also provide for them.
Story_ID: 29690
Speaker 1: So I took the chance and went to D.C., knew there was, there were defense-related work where, you know, consulting is more a part of the whole nature of how the government works.  But I went there with really no reputation in the defense industry.  So it was kind of, somewhat of a risk, and so I went there.  I got, someone gave me a name of someone to contact.  And I had to go there, give them an interview of my capabilities and what my company can do and so on and so forth.  And the guy was really kinda hostile.  He kinda, was kinda giving me the business for a little while, just to see how I would react.  And at the end of it, he said, you know what you're doing.  You're really good.  I can tell that.  I said, I know what I don't know, and I know you know a lot more than I do.  So come down here.  We'll give you a three-month contract and see how you work out.  So I got a three-month contract.  And they really liked my work and I've since hired another person.  I'm in the process of hiring a third person and, for those same people.  They're thinking about getting me a big as ten people by next year, you know, for those, that same client.  I mean they just want, they just really want all my time.  And they've got me a little bit overbooked, like sixty hours a week.  I told them, no, I need, just give me more people.  I can bring you talent equally as good.  Just let me manage it.  And so I'm at a pretty good, you know, point.  I mean I can afford to, you know, be in any state I want to be in.  I, you know, I can kinda do, I can go still look for some other business.  When I get, you know, I'm hiring more folks.  When I get more people on, then I can do more design work and not just service-oriented work.  And then I can build products and things like that.  So the goal is to do a, you know, kind of boot-strap approach, have steady income to pay the salaries and then have a research and development effort on the side to create, you know, intellectual property and things to increase the value of the company.  And increasing the value of the company, people can, you know, directly benefit from the, you know, inventions that they provide to the company.  You know, as we work as consultants to a company, they own everything we do.  But I have to, you know, I have to be able to pay my people's salaries.  So we have to do that as a necessary evil so to speak, but don't be satisfied with that because I only hire people with Masters and Ph.Ds.  I don't hire any, I mean that do work for me.  So you don't wanna have these kind of people just sitting around idle.  You wanna keep 'em challenged, and, but you wanna also, people have family commitments.  They have wives, they have kids, you know; they want vacations and they want 401(k) plans and things like that.  So you have to be able to balance the two.  And I understand that because I've done everything they've done.  I know, and I've been at the big companies.  I know how that can get to be a little bit complacent.  I understand the excitement about a new company, but, you know, you have to meet your family needs.  I understand and I keep that in mind.  And I tell them, I'm a straight shooter.  I say, look, this is where we are; this is where we're trying to get.  This is what I can do for you now.  This is what I'm hoping to be able to do for you in the future.  Do you believe in me?  I'm a man of my word.  You know, a lot of them starting out are people who've known me for years.  And so they know that I'm a man of my word.  It's gonna get a little bit different when I start to grow beyond that when people have to deal with me on reputation only.  And, but hopefully, I'm in a better situation at that point to offer them, you know, better compensation and things.  I really do believe that the company will grow, not because I'm a minority-owned company, but just because we're good at what we do, you know.  And we're good, we're good by a long shot, I mean the kind of talent that we bring in.  We're much better than they are cause you have to be, because they don't care if I'm successful or not.  They only care that I'm able to do what I promised to do.  And I can do it well, you know.  Like, you know, I wanna charge premium price for my people and I wanna take care of them.  And so we all are in this together.  You have to do, I'm telling my people, you have to do a good job because my reputation, and your reputation, the whole company's reputation is on each and every person's shoulder, every time you go to deliver.  So I have to be extremely careful about who I hire, especially the first few hires, you know.  When it gets a little bit bigger, you can, you know, you can get a little bit more fat around the edges.  But in this very initial stage, because I want to be able to, you know, I want them to be able to do the work that's needed but have the ability to do harder work as well because we want to, we don't want to be--we're not gonna be satisfied with just having this one client who are just gonna spoon feed us so to speak.  And then we talked about, you know, some people get complacent because, you know, they're getting fed by higher ups, and then they try to keep everyone, you know, in check because of that.  No, I'm not gonna have anyone to do that to me.  I'm gonna have a diversity of sources of revenue so that I have the same freedoms that I feel that I had when the situation came up at WiQuest, that they were doing something that I felt that would jeopardize my career.  If I feel like a company's doing something that's jeopardizing my employees, I wanna have the freedom to go and do some other things to protect my people and not be beholding to one source.  So that's kind of like the business philosophy that I'm trying to grow.
Story_ID: 29691
Speaker 1: Have you considered like trying to attract some venture capitalists to--?
Speaker 2: Yeah, well, you know, the, yeah, I have.  And I go back and forth with that.  Venture capitalist is great in the sense that you get someone else's money, but then you lose the control.  So it's kind of, you know, you, and as soon as I take the venture capitalist's money, they can, they can take me out.  They can take me out and they can do whatever they want to with the company.  So all the promises I made to those people, I can't necessarily make do on.  So it's a little bit better to build it up first and then once the company gets to a certain point, there gonna be some sort of analysis done where I can't get the megabucks because I can't grow in this linear fashion fast enough.  And I'm gonna need to take an infusion of money.  But by the same token, I risk mitigate because the value of the company at that point is so much larger than the infusion of money that I need to go to the next, that they can never just take me out.  So--
Speaker 1: (Unclear)
Speaker 2: Yeah, so I'm not there.  When I get to maybe, you know, maybe six or seven people, you know, I'll have the company evaluation be a certain height.  And then if I had to, say if I got an opportunity to build a new product or something like that, I'd only need about five people or something more on the team as to get the infusion for that people's salaries and offload some of the other people's work.  And then, but I haven't taken so much, I haven't given up so much of the company that I can't, you know, keep my promises to my employees.  So at the end of the day, we still have most of the company left because the company that I left, WiQuest [Communications, Allen, Texas], after the first round of funding, they only had, the employees only owned thirty percent of the company, the very first round.  They have since taken two more rounds of funding.  So, you know, people, I mean the amount of money that I was scheduled to get, I had like a half a million shares, I mean the amount of--you know, it's well over a hundred million shares outstanding now.  I mean the amount of money that I would, you know, in order to get any money from that company, you might need to sell for 300 million dollars or some astronomical amount of money like that.  And the people on the bottom are barely getting chump change.  I mean, you know, at this point.  And that was two years ago, you know, that was two years ago.  So at this point, I'm much better off than I was at that point.  I mean my value was, you know, I own all of my company, and the value of my company is far more than that because I earn income.  They just take money in.  So, and so that's why I wanna grow--see, the more money you bring in, your valuation of the company is the percentage, not the percentage, is a factor times your growth sales.  So literally, I'm cash positive in terms of, from an investment standpoint because I have all cash coming in.  And I don't have any liabilities like, like investors.  So I wanna make sure that my cash is much greater than any infusion of money I get from investors to maintain that kind of independence that I need to, you know, to run the company the way I think is the best way.
Story_ID: 29692
Speaker 1: Okay.  I just want to mention here that you've been featured in "Black Enterprise Magazine", "Ebony".  You're one of the fifty most important blacks in research science in 2004.  "Biotech and Technology Magazine", so you've received some recognition.  There are other things in here too, but, so, and you're still, as I said when I came in, you're still young (laughter).
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: I don't know if you believe it, but you still are.  Now, what are your, so your plans, your future plans are to grow this business into?
Speaker 2: Right, because you know, with a company, you can do so much, so much.  I mean the number of lives you can impact is tremendous.  It's not about just the individual wealth.  It's about teaching our people how to create wealth, how to go about working hard to get ahead and working hard for yourself, not just working hard for someone else.  How to go, how to reach back into the community.  I'm not at that point where I can reach back right now and uplift people, but I'm not far from it.  I mean literally, I mean, again, if I had, if magically, I can get investors from like the entertainment community, some small fraction of money to them, I can convert this company into a multi-conglomerate with all the vast talent of minorities in going back and being mentors to other people in school, who can then go, in college, and have jobs waiting for them, and who can go into high schools.  And some of these programs are already in place, but they don't have the, they don't have the big feeding grounds to basically target, this is where, now, that's who I wanna go work for.  I mean the amount of money that people, at least entertainers and stuff, blow, if we could get some investment, and it's not, I'm not asking for a handout.  I'm like, this will grow into a business that will make lots of money for you, you know.  But, you know, and if it happens that way; otherwise, I just have to boot strap it the way I just explained to you, you know, growing and taking, making footprints to make, you know, before I can walk.  So, either way, it works.  In some respect, I would, if you took all that money and then you lose control and you don't, necessarily can guarantee things are gonna go the way you want to.  If you do it the other way, it might take you ten years to do it and how many lives are you gonna miss influencing over that period, you know.
Story_ID: 29693
Speaker 1: Now, who are your heroes in the black business world?
Speaker 2: You know, there, you know, I like Bob Johnson [Robert L. Johnson].  I like what he, I like what he did.  I like, you know, actually, I like Fifty Cent [Curtis James Jackson III].  You know, I, you might think that's surprising, but Fifty Cent, look what, he just netted himself 400 million dollars and didn't write a single lyric for it.  He just got 400 million dollars this past week because he invested in vitamin water.  He was ten percent investor and vitamin water, and they just got bought by Coca-Cola for 4.1 billion dollars.
Speaker 1: So he invested in that way back when it first started?
Speaker 2: He took his own money.  So he took his, and this was the same concept.  Should I take my money and invest it in something that can, you know, make more money for all people.  You know, and in this case, there's something, the thing I know is technology.  I mean I know all the players.  I mean I know the people, I was, I was interviewed by the U.S. Department of Justice wanted me to be an expert witness for the--there was a lawsuit between Intel [Intel Corporation] and QUALCOMM [QUALCOMM Incorporated].  It's a 600 million dollar acquisition, and they contacted me as being someone knowledgeable enough to be an expert witness to determine the outcome of this trial.  I mean I know, I know the guys that--QUALCOMM just bought all these guys from Aargau (ph.), your current, you know you go and buy, the guys that build the products today, I know them.  They know me, they know my name.  I mean I know all the players.  I know how to do this thing.  You know, I just don't, I need the opportunity.  So when I look at people like Fifty Cent just two years ago, maybe three years ago, you know, Eminem [Marshall Bruce Mathers III] and Dr. Dre [Andre Romelle Young] invested in him, and they let him grow.  Now, he's the most wealthiest, hip-hop artist.  He's more, he worth more than Jay-Z [Shawn Corey Carter] and Sean--
Speaker 1: Coffee and company or (unclear)--?
Speaker 2: P-Diddy [Diddy/ Sean John Combs], almost combined now, with that one deal.  But he didn't like, (unclear), I mean all of them got their own business ventures.  They've all grown because they've got clothing lines.
Speaker 1: It's just how he managed his money (unclear)--?
Speaker 2: How he manages his money and investing in other things outside, get money, get money one way and invest it another way.  So, then actually I really have a great deal of respect for him for taking that chance.  Yeah, I don't know how much he invested, but for him to 400 million [dollars], you better believe he invested at least forty or fifty million [dollars].  He put some money, maybe four million [dollars] or ten million [dollars] or something, a number of shares he bought that were worth some fractional or amount per share that then got, once it brought by Coca-Cola[The Coca-Cola Company].  And then he invested his time.  He was promoting this, wasn't writing any albums really.  You know, his album got delayed and all that sort of stuff, and look how it paid off for him.  And like, you know, so I like Queen Latifah [Dana Elaine Owens] too.  You know, I like, you know, the things she's doing.  You know, of course, I like Will Smith [Willard Christopher "Will" Smith, Jr.].  I like Bill Cosby [William Henry "Bill" Cosby Jr.].  Bill Cosby has an education program where he's helping folk who are trying to help themselves.  You know, so those are the, you know, the kind of big name people that I always look to see what people are doing.  And you make your money one way, but what are you doing with your money once you make it?  That's the key, you know.  How do you go to, no one wants a handout because all they're gonna do is blow it.  Like people who win the lottery, some large percentage and then end up being broke "x" number of years later.  What you want to do is you (unclear), you know, I've always like to think of the, you know, Jesus is one who taught us how to fish, you know, without giving us fish.  You know, he gave us parables to make us think about life lessons.  And that, those life lessons can be applied in a multitude of different situations.  I always look for folks to take that kind of approach to life; what can I do to teach people to do, you know, better than their current situation.  You can always give 'em a handout.  But the next thing, and when they burn that up, what happens next?  They're just come there to get the next handout--.
Story_ID: 29694
Speaker 1: Tell me this.  Now, what are some of your hopes and concerns for the black community in general?
Speaker 2: Oh, that's a pretty good question.  I think that, I'm really worried about our kids not understanding that life is not gonna be a handout.  You're gonna have to work hard to get ahead and that, and a lot of the hard work that your parents laid, you know, before you is not inherited down to you.  You're gonna have to do your own, your own thing.  And some of them don't even, we seem to be going backwards.   I mean it's like, you know, your generation and my mom's generation, we always were out there proving ourselves.  These kids are growing up thinking they are entitled.  That's a real dangerous mindset.  And that's a real dangerous mindset.  And, not all of them, but it's a great deal of them.  It's the generation of me, me, me, me.  I worry about I don't think we can, as a nation, can afford to have that.  And then you know, "x" number of young black youth, they're in, either incarcerated or dying; not enough of them investing in, you know, going to school.  I can see two generations ahead that, you know, the black male could be an endangered species.  You know, we need some, we need exhibits for them outside of the entertainment arena, to show them as a showcase, that they're other ways to make money.  You know, there're other ways to be successful.  And it's other ways to have an impact.  I really have a lot of respect for Tyler Perry [born Emmitt Perry, Jr.].  I mean look at the way he (unclear).  It's kind of like the same, my same business models, the way he did it.  He built his grass roots up, and then now he's branching out and he's helping out a lot of folks.  I mean that's probably the best business model I can say from my mentality, how I would like to grow my company in the same way.  He did it his own way, and he maintained control.  He still owns over fifty-one percent of his company, you know, even though, even he's doing movies now, he maintains over fifty-one percent ownership.  So he still has control of his company, which is very, very difficult to do in Hollywood.  So he hasn't, you know, so that's what I, you know, I really want our kids to understand.  And that the fight is not a one-day battle.  It's a lifelong commitment to getting ahead and have fun along the way too, you know.  So, all of those things.
Speaker 1: So tell me this now, when you look back on everything you've done at this point, is there any major thing that you'd do differently if you could?
Speaker 2: You know, I'm always afraid to say I would change something because I'm always happy where I am.  You know, I'm like, if I changed one thing, would I be here today?  So I'm always afraid to say I would change things.  I certainly admit that I did things that I could have did a little smarter, a little bit better.  But then would I have learned the lessons that made me smarter and better later?  I, you know, I don't know.  So I certainly wished to know if I coulda played pro ball.  I always wanted to know if I'd a really pushed hard, could I have made the, been a pro ballplayer?  But that's--
Speaker 1: Because when you were a kid, I'm just thinking, Dr. J [Julius Winfield Erving II] and George Gervin were playing for Virginia [Virginia Squires, American Basketball Association, 1970-1976] (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Virginia, that's right, that's right, Dr. J, George Gervin were there, you know.  So, I always wondered about that.  And just wonder, you know, it's just one of them kind of things that you wonder about.  I, sometimes I wish I, you know, when you asked that question, sometimes I wish I was further along than where I am now so that if we would be doing this interview today, that I would be, "I got twenty people working for me".  And some of the things you asked me, things I plan to do, I will already have instituted into my, in my company.  I would like to have a scholarship for inner city kids, you know, who have interests in technology and science.  You know, I wanted to get maybe, oh, about five, maybe ten scholarships, you know, enough so I can, so you can have different people.  I wanna hear their stories.  I want them to write an essay.  Tell me why you want the money, and, you know; tell me what you've gone through.  And it won't be all about grades.  It'll be about, I'm going be looking for determination.  I'm looking for their hunger.  I wanted, you know, I want to be able to reach back like that, and you know, I certainly, and then have influences, you know, in, you know, colleges.  I, I can get really, easily get influence in the colleges and things like that.  But, you know, getting to those kids that might be missing, missing an opportunity like I almost missed a opportunity.  In some respects, I was just lucky that people saw something in me, and took, you know, time and effort and out of their busy schedule to help me out.  So I would like to do the same.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 29695
Speaker 1: So when you look back at everything you've done at this point, again, what today would you consider to be your legacy, though you're still young?
Speaker 2: Oh, I guess my legacy is the impact on the Wi-Fi today, you know.  I can say that I had my, you know, Wi-Fi is not going anywhere.  And I was somebody who I mean, what you don't know is that they almost killed Wi-Fi.  I mean we were hours without, hours within it being killed.  And I was one of the members of people who helped, you know, get the bickering companies to work together and eventually come up with what is now the standard, that now lists this great business and technology opportunity.  They had small other businesses, like, you know, new types technology--new types of applications for the same technology that Wi-Fi is based on.  So, and I'm kinda proud of that in that respect.  You know, I know that, I mean, it's a, I had a clear in that.  I mean it's easily documented through the book, through the number of sales of the book.  I mean it's been translated into Korean and simplified Chinese.  And I wrote it in 2001 and people are still buying it today.  So, you know, that's, that's probably my greatest legacy at this point.  You know, at this point.  I think, you know, that's a singularity point.  I think it's gonna branch out and try to leverage, you know, that experience to help, you know, you know, people, the government, our people, you know, and educate people how this technology can be used in a way and grow business around it.  That's what I understand.  That's why I spend a lot of time working on it.
Story_ID: 29696
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, tell us a little bit about your family now.  Now, you're married now, right?
Speaker 2: Yes, I'm recently married.  Yes, I'll be celebrating my anniversary in November, and great wife [Barbara Terry].  She's really, really supportive.  We're both ex-athletics so we always laugh about how her body is falling apart, and although we're both young, according to you.  We're only, I think our birthdays are thirty-some days apart or something like that.  I mean she's an avid, a gym rat.  She's probably in the gym right now.  My son [Amiel Terry] just, now that I'm stable, my son has now moved up there with me so he might be, well, he will be going to school, obviously, in a technology school.  And, you know, my son is six foot, and he'll be thirteen on the, he'll be thirteen on the twenty-sixth of this month.  So he doesn't have my drive and ambition, but, you know, I just want him to learn to work hard and that sort of thing.  So things are, you know shaping up.  I mean, and my wife has a couple of kids.  And they're here in Texas, and, but they're always welcome to come up.  And, but we have a good time.  You know, we go biking together and we go shoot ball together.  And they support me as I, you know, move along this treacherous road.
Speaker 1: Now, is there anything we need to address before I ask my last question?
Speaker 2: No, I don't know, no, I don't think so.  I think we've covered quite a bit.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well, the last question is similar to legacy, but a little different.  Sir, how would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: Okay.  How I would like to be remember?  In the end, I would like to be remembered as someone who committed his heart and his soul to doing the right thing and helping people along the way, you know.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Thank you very much.
Speaker 2: Thank you
