Story_ID: 661262
Speaker 1: My name is Julieanna Richardson, and I'm the interviewer, and Matthew Hickey is the videographer.  And I want to have you start out by stating and--stating and spelling your name, including your middle name.
Speaker 2: Bernard James Tyson; B-E-R-N-A-R-D, J-A-M-E-S, T-Y-S-O-N [HistoryMaker Bernard J. Tyson].
Speaker 1: Thank you for smiling.  You are (unclear) be there long.  And I want your date and place of birth.
Speaker 2: January 20, 1959.  I was born in Vallejo, California.
Speaker 1: And today's date and our taping location?
Speaker 2: Today is December 17, 2015.  And you're at 1 Kaiser Plaza in Oakland, California.
Speaker 1: In your office?
Speaker 2: In the office of the CEO.
Speaker 1: And your occupation?
Speaker 2: Chairman and CEO of Kaiser Permanente.
Story_ID: 661263
Speaker 1: And I want to--we ask five People magazine-ish questions of everyone, so just short answers.  Your favorite food?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Spaghetti.
Speaker 1: Your favorite color?
Speaker 2: Burgundy.
Speaker 1: Oh, that's interesting, okay.  We don't have a lot of burgundy.  So okay, your favorite time of year?
Speaker 2: Thanksgiving.
Speaker 1: And favorite place to vacation?
Speaker 2: Italy.
Speaker 1: And favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: God bless America.
Story_ID: 661264
Speaker 1: I want to ask you about your family background and how far you know, how far back you know.  So, can we first talk about your father's side of the family?  So, can you give his name?
Speaker 2: Moses James Tyson, Sr. [Moses Tyson, Sr.].
Speaker 1: And can you talk about what you, can you describe him and what you know about his side of the family?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  He was a very interesting man and role model.  He was a minister, so he pastored a church [Rescue Mission Church of God in Christ, Vallejo, California] for many years.  He was a carpenter by trade.  He held many odd jobs, you know, between carpentry, but most of them were still in that area.  He was a quiet man most of the time, but then all of a sudden he was like a different person on Sunday morning.  He was a very present man, so he was present in my life, throughout my life.  And, you know, he was my role model.  In terms of, you know, my family beyond him--of course I know all of my aunts and uncles.  I only knew his mother when she was alive.  His father [Saul Tyson] passed away early, and I didn't know much beyond that, beyond my grandmother.  But--
Speaker 1: And her name?
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: (Laughter) You have to be careful with these interviews.  Don't laugh (laughter).  It just, it just left you.
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Oh yeah, it just left me.  In fact, what's on there?  Because I asked my mother [Billie Haynes Tyson], "What's her name?"  Because we always just called her grandmother.
Speaker 1: Okay.  It's on your father's--
Speaker 2: On my father's--
Speaker 1: Anna Belle [Anna Belle Tyson].
Speaker 2: Anna Belle, Anna Belle, yeah.
Speaker 1: Anna Belle.
Speaker 2: I--I've never called her Anna Belle in my life, right (laughter).  So, when you said--
Speaker 1: You called her grandma.
Speaker 2: We just called her grandmother, yeah, yeah (laughter).
Speaker 1: Or grandma.
Speaker 2: Grandma, we called her grandma, yeah, yeah.  I mean, she passed away while we were young.
Speaker 1: Okay, sure, sure.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So, did your father talk about growing up?  Did he share any stories, and--
Speaker 2: He sure did.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: My father--yeah, I was going to bring that up.  My father--years later I was grown, and at this time, this was maybe two years before my father passed.  My father called me and said, "You know, son, I need to talk to you," and he was really serious.  So, I said, "You know, dad, I'm about to go out of town, you know, I'll stop by over the weekend or something."  He said, "When do you get back?"  And I forgot what it was, but anyway he said, "I don't want to wait until the weekend.  Can you come during the week, and maybe we can go to dinner?"  So, we went out to dinner and sat down, and you know, did some small talk.  And of course, in the back of my mind I was wondering, oh, my god, what is he going to tell me because it was out of the norm.  So, he just, you know, he was nervous, actually.  And he said, "You know, we've never sat down and had a conversation like this," and he still didn't say what it was.  And he said, "You know, I just thought I should share more about me."  He said, "I know that you all probably wonder certain things."  And he said, "You know, I try to be a great father to you, my children."  And I was like, "Yeah, you're great."  And then he, you know, he went on to say, "Look, you know, I had it rough coming here."  And you know, he told me what life was like in Mississippi and Louisiana, and how he got to California.  You know, and he talked about, quite frankly, racism and how it impacted his life, and that coming to California was really a good thing for him, and that, you know, he didn't have an image of what an ideal father would do.  And so he said, "You know, I tried to do the best that I could.  And you may have felt that I wasn't there all the time, you know, and all that.  But for me, being a father was working and taking care of the family."  And so we had that conversation, and it was probably the best conversation that I've ever had (crying).
Speaker 1: That's okay, that's okay, we get that all the time.
Speaker 2: Yeah (makes sound).
Story_ID: 661265
Speaker 1: Where was he from in Mississippi?  Do you know where from?
Speaker 2: No, they grew up, I call it the backwoods of Mississippi.  We only went there one time.  I honestly can't even tell you where; you know, on a trip we went back there.  When I was growing up we used to go back to New Orleans [Louisiana] all the time, because my grandmother [Anna Belle Tyson] lived in New Orleans and most of his brothers and sisters lived in New Orleans.  But we went to Mississippi a couple of times, and what I remember so well about it--and this is where I learned storytelling.  People tell me all the time, you know, "Bernard [HistoryMaker Bernard J. Tyson], you're a great storyteller.  And how do you do it?"  And I never thought about it that way; I only know growing up, I used to watch my parents and relatives just tell stories, and they had fun doing that.  So, we went to Mississippi one time and we went to a graveyard.  And we were walking around the graveyard and we were literally stopping at, you know, tombstones, and my father [Moses Tyson, Sr.] and my uncles would sit there and just tell funny stories about the person.  And I'll never forget, this is a god honest, true story.  There's a story, and I've often told this, about this man in Mississippi who was buried by his wife after he died.  And there's concrete in front of the--on the ground, and there's broken glass in there.  And my father and them told the story that this man was so mean and cruel when he was alive, that when he died his wife had concrete poured on top of the grave so he never could get out.  And they said that if he got past the concrete, the glass would kill him again.  And I'll never forget that story.  And that has always stayed in my mind about telling a story that was funny, obviously not true, but you can visualize sort of like the humor in what really was a sad situation, you know, we're looking at someone who had passed away.  And I watched them go from humor to really talking about how he did great things when he was alive, but he was like apparently this mysterious person.  And so when I was growing up, most of my family would tell stories.  And I don't know if that was the thing about back in Mississippi and in New Orleans and also in Texas, because on my mother's [Billie Haynes Tyson] side, I noticed that they were storytellers as well.  And obviously, then I learned later that that was a way in our culture of passing on history.  And so, I know my history by remembering the stories--not because I knew everybody by name or knew what everyone did--it was an association to something that allowed me to appreciate, you know, the history and, and the, the background.
Story_ID: 661266
Speaker 1: Why do you think it was important that your father [Moses Tyson, Sr.] talk to you that day?  Do you know why he said that?  Was he, you know, was it sort of like preparing things for you (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, yeah.  I think--I think, you know, my view is that my father had come to terms with the fact that he was passing, which he--I think he lived maybe about a year and a half after that.  He had been going downhill, and he's--he was always a very realistic person.  And so it almost felt like he had unfinished business, because, you know, the way that I would capture it, it was a story of love, right.  And it was him sharing that with me, because he wasn't the kind of father grew up and hugged you and did all that stuff.  He was a man; he was a man's man, and that was the image that he projected throughout my childhood and adult life.  And so, I had this incredible respect for him and honored him as my dad, you know.  And it was one of those relationships where you truly, I truly looked up to him.  And so, he could do no wrong.  And so I never felt deprived, but I think whatever was going through his head, he was reconciling that.  You know, I never said--you know, one time he was--we were--I was just growing up in the company [Kaiser Permanente].  It was the first time I had a company car, and it was an old car, but it didn't matter; it was beautiful to me.  We were driving along and we were going--I picked him up and we were actually coming through Oakland, California.  And we were driving along and my father said, he said, "You know, son," and this was before I had any of my sons [Bernard Tyson, Jr., Alexander Tyson and Charles Tyson].  He said, "You know, son, someday I pray that you have a son, and that you're, and that you can sit where I'm sitting, and then you'll understand how proud I am of you."  And that was his--you know, he said it in a way that (gesture) it meant the world to me.  But it wasn't--and that's the way he communicated, right.  And then it just passed.  And so, there's no before and after.  He wasn't a man of many words with us, but they were words that you remembered.  I mean, you know, and then so I watched that, growing in the home environment, et cetera.  And then on Sunday morning I'd sit there, you know, and I was at church every Sunday whether I liked it or not, you know.  Growing up I used to say, "I'm not going to church this Sunday."  He said, "You still live here?"   And then he (laughter)--you know, "If you ain't going to church, you ain't going to live here."  And so I would go and sit in church and I watched this person transformed--that this person can take a word--he could take a word and spend fifteen minutes creating a story and a theme, and he makes you reflect on yourself.  And I used to sit there and go, "Wow."  And then, you know, at home it was--you know, I remember he said, "You know, two things you need to do, you're going to do."  And it was like no debate, no discussion.  He said, "You will vote, and you will go to school; you will go to college."  And he told me later how important voting was, that, "You know, your people suffered, and we suffered so that you can vote."  And for him, voting was everything, right.  And one time I missed voting, and I wanted to break the place down, because I missed it because my flight was late.  And I've been doing mail in vote--votes ever since.  But I'll never forget that experience.  And I'm grown, right, and I thought that I could get to the voting polls before they closed.  And the plane was late and I got on the road, and I was less than ten minutes late.  But as you know, once they close the door, that's it.  I was knocking on the door and I was begging, "Please let me in."  And I felt bad; I felt like I had just let everybody down.  And that's what I meant by--obviously it's very important to me, but it started with him saying that.  It started with him saying--you know, I've always dreamed of going to college, but it was when he said it, it was like, yeah, it's something you have to do.  And there was no discussion.  It was like, it is so.  And then there were other times that he would obviously communicate (background noise), and communicate in a more deliberate way.  But most of the time it was just a straight, you know, conversation that had a lot of substance to it.  So--
Speaker 1: What's endearing is just the relationship between you and your father that's important (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: It's really, because a lot of black men don't necessarily, or, you know, have those relationships.  I had one, too, but.
Story_ID: 661267
Speaker 1: What denomination?
Speaker 2: Church of God in Christ.
Speaker 1: Church of, oh, okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, yeah, Church of God in Christ.
Speaker 1: That's fire and brimstone.
Speaker 2: Fire and brimstone (laughter).
Speaker 1: And strict.
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, yeah, yeah.  I mean it was black and white; it was black and white.  It was, you know, I have to tell you, it was sort of--this may sound strange.  It was fun growing up in that environment, because it was, we had a lot of other young people, and our family is very musically oriented.  And so, you know, I used to sing, and I played the drums, and we used to travel.  And when my father [Moses Tyson, Sr.] went to places to preach, we had groups that, a group that would sing.  So, it was, I was active.  And given that that's what I knew at the time, it was very satisfying.  So, it was, it wasn't like boring.  And, but, you're right.  I mean it was a, it was a strict religion, if you will.  You know, it was heaven or hell, and you know, you're right or wrong.  But it was during that time--and I grew up, you know, during the time of, you know, Edwin Hawkins and Walter Hawkins.  And so it was, the music and everything was beautiful and it was lively.  And so, it wasn't like boring.  I don't have a memory that says, "Ugh, you know--God."  You know, it was very spiritual and animated.  And so it was, for me it was a positive memorable part of my childhood and upbringing.
Speaker 1: So when you--so what--do you know what year, around what time your father came, like, to California?  Was it in the--what age was he, do you think?  Or was it in the (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, he was--
Speaker 1: Was it in the '30s [1930s], '40s [1940s], '50s [1950s]?
Speaker 2: Yeah, because he was, he came right before he was eighteen, I think it was.  So, I guess it was in the '40s [1940s] or so.
Speaker 1: So this is really the Great Migration--
Speaker 2: Right, yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) you know, movement.  Okay.  And did he come here to work?  Is that--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Were there other family members here at that time?
Speaker 2: No.  I think they came after also.
Speaker 1: They came after, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 661268
Speaker 1: So, what about your mother?  Give her name and what you know about her background.
Speaker 2: Yeah, Billie Jean Tyson [Billie Haynes Tyson].  My, my mother was born in Denton, Texas.  Her mother [Betty Haynes] died when my mother was eight years old.  And so when my mother's aunt, who was my mother's mother's sister, moved her out to California to live with her sister, which we only knew her as my grandmother, and we used to call her big mama, and her name is Rosie Lee Garrett [Rosie Haynes Garrett].  And so when we were born, and grew up in Vallejo, she technically wasn't my mom's mom, but that's all we knew her as, because that's our orientation to her.  So, she was our big mama--and big daddy.  And so we grew up with them also, and I spent a lot of time with them.  And I was greatly impacted by my grandfather [Tyson's maternal great-uncle, Richard Garrett], that we called big daddy (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) You know, you talked about him.  So, can you talk about him and the impact, and what kind of person he was?  So, that's on your mother's side, right?
Speaker 2: That's on my mother's side.  He was, he was amazing.  I loved spending time with him as my grandfather.  I used to stay with them on weekends.  He taught me locksmith.  He taught me the joy of reading.  He read a lot and he enjoyed it, and so I started to enjoy it.  He was the one that really oriented me to--in essence you can--he didn't say it quite this way, but here's the translation.  You can read a book and go anywhere, because your mind can take you there.  And that has always been the fascination with me with reading and imagining.  He's the one that both encouraged me to be a doctor--and he's the one, that as the result of his illness and death ultimately, that I later said, "Oh, I don't know if I want to be a doctor now," because of the pain of death up close, because he was very, I was very close to him also.  He did, you know, he just did special things.  I mean they weren't big things, but if you're a kid--you know, to have your grandfather come pick you up and take you out to buy a hotdog or French fries.  There was a hamburger joint that we used to go to all the time called Pluto's [Pluto's Hot Dogs], and it's in Vallejo, California.  And they made the best hamburgers, and they were--I don't know how they cooked them.  But when you're a kid, you know, that was a big thing.  The--the hamburgers were so good that the wrappers--we used to keep the wrappers after the hamburger to smell it when we growing up, because they were just so, they were so tasty (laughter).  And when we finished the hamburger, it was like the best thing you could ever eat.  And oh, my god, when we would put cheese on it and the cheese was melting on the side of the paper, I used to not want to take the cheese off the paper.  But we used to rub the cheese off the paper, because that was the best part of that cheeseburger.  And that's what I remember, you know.  And so, he was very impactful.  My--big mama was--she and my mother are the reason why I love to cook so much today.  Because all I remember of her is this fantastic, strong, woman who just had the imagery for me of strength.  And she actually--for example, she had both legs amputated later on from diabetes, and she never said a depressing thing about it.  And I'll never forget when I used to stay with them after the second leg was amputated.  They had a bar in the bed, and she literally was doing weights, because she was building her strength back up so she could ultimately get back up and exist.  And we had a wheelchair at that time, but I mean she could still get up and walk around with help and assistance.  And we didn't have the kind of, you know, technology and things like we do today, but that's my image of her.  She used to make potpies for me, and the love and care that she put into that homemade potpie--you know, where she would cook the carrots and then put them in there; cook the potatoes and chop them up and put them in there; and then she made this kind of sauce for it, and then she would cover it with the dough, and then she would freeze it.  And, and I used to remember that, and, and to this day I will cut up stuff with  that kind of tender love and care, because that, that's the imagery that, you know, I had when I was growing up.  So she was just fantastic, and, and fun to be around as well.
Story_ID: 661269
Speaker 1: How did your mother [Billie Haynes Tyson] and father [Moses Tyson, Sr.] meet?  Because your mother comes here much earlier, right?
Speaker 2: Right, she--
Speaker 1: She's a Californian?
Speaker 2: She's a Californian.  They actually met through church.  My--I don't have the total story straight, but my grandfather, big daddy, was a minister also.  And he had, he had at the time one of the biggest churches in Vallejo, California, All Nations Church of God in Christ.  And my father came there apparently with some friends and met my mother.  And what I heard later on was the person that my father came with had a crush on my mother, or something like that.  And my father caught her attention and she caught my father's attention.  And apparently big daddy, my grandfather, liked my father, so he had him to come around.  And then eventually I guess whatever they--however they did it in that day, they dated and fell in love.  And you know, the rest is history.  So then my father later became a minister at my grandfather's church.  And so they, you know, they grew up that way.  And then my--
Speaker 1: So, he really groomed him in many ways.
Speaker 2: Exactly.
Speaker 1: He groomed your father into the church.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: I see.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  And so, wait.  Your maternal--is that Saul [Saul Tyson]?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: So, Saul was big daddy?  No.
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: No, no.
Speaker 2: That's on my father's side (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Your father's side.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Okay (unclear).
Speaker 2: On my mother's side is Richard Garrett.
Speaker 1: Okay, Richard Garrett, okay.
Story_ID: 661270
Speaker 1: Give me your siblings' name, and, and, and birth order.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  My oldest sister is Sheila [Sheila Tyson Jones], followed by Rosie [Rosie Tyson], and then Mosetta [Mosetta Tyson Woodson].  And then there's Bernard [HistoryMaker Bernard J. Tyson] and Moses [Moses Tyson, Jr.] and Kenneth [Kenneth Tyson, Sr.] and La Shan [La Shan Tyson Slaughter].
Speaker 1: So, you're the first boy?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: So, no wonder everybody was loving on you.
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Yeah, exactly (laughter) (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) No wonder everyone's cutting up the vegetables nice, cultivating you (laughter).
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: You were like the prized possession.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I was the boy.  I was, you know, I had three sisters and then there was Bernard, yeah, yeah.  In fact, there's a saying to this day.  My sisters, in particular Mosetta, would always say, "I'm older than you."  And my sisters used to say, "We're older than you."  And so it was kind of that thing where I was treated as, you know, the first son.  And my sisters would remind me where I'm at in the pecking order (laughter).
Speaker 1: Well, they'd have to be reminded themselves (laughter).
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, absolutely.  Yeah, absolutely (laughter).
Speaker 1: They're like, "We had existence before he came along," (laughter).
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Story_ID: 661271
Speaker 1: Can you talk about your earliest memory?
Speaker 2: Yeah, god, that's a great question.  I, it, I--it's kind of hard to answer.  I mean, where do you start?  I don't know, it just happened.  So I remember, I remember moving into this big gigantic home [in Vallejo, California], and it turned out to be the house that my father [Moses Tyson, Sr.] built.  And it just looked big when we moved into it.
Speaker 1: How old were you, do you think?
Speaker 2: Oh, I guess I was five, six, something like that.  Just, it's a great question in terms of--I'm foggy.  I remember I was a ring bearer in a wedding.  I remember that because I remember coming home that night and there were--a little candy under my pillow, and it was--I don't know if it really was that, but it was like Junior Mints.  And I remember how scared I was when I was a ring bearer.  I actually don't remember the details of it; I just remember that I had to walk before a big group.  And now my mama [Billie Haynes Tyson] has a picture of it, and I go, "Wow, that was me when I was that age."  Then I guess, I guess I sort of--you know, it almost feels like this fog, and then all of a sudden certain things start to come into play.  And I definitely remember growing up in a loud house where there was a lot of conversation, especially at dinnertime.  My mother was a stay at home mom, and being at the table for dinner was everything.  If I was outside playing and I wasn't in the house--let's say dinner.  My father came home maybe at five o'clock for example, and my mother would say, "You guys can--you kids can play, but you be in this house by, you know, 4:30 or something," or whenever, she would just call us.  And, because for her, it was all about washing up and being at the table.  We were going to have a family dinner, and my father would come in and wash up.  And he would pray over the dinner, and then we all just went after it.  And, you know, usually the kids, we were having arguments and fights and stuff at the table, and laughing and everything; we always did that.  And to this day, I love eating in the kitchen, and so I gravitate to the kitchen now.  The kitchen was also very important in my imagery of coming up, because my mom was always in the kitchen.  And when she had company over they tended to be in the kitchen, and so a lot of conversations were going on while they were cooking and, or preparing to eat.  And there's no question that food was the centerpiece in my life, because so much happened around food.  And I love cooking now; and I cook for people, and I cook for my family, and I cook for myself, and I enjoy it.  And it comes with conversation and it comes with good memories.  And so, that's how I was brought up; it was, everybody be at the table for dinner.  And dinner was the most important time and the most important meal in my family, in my upbringing.
Story_ID: 661272
Speaker 1: And I remember it so well, because that's just where everything happened.  It ju- it felt like we were all going in different directions, you know, the kids and stuff.  And my parents, my father [Moses Tyson, Sr.], was always doing the work.  I learned later that my father left the house every day, but he didn't go to work every day.  And that's why to this day I have such a warm regard and I honor unions, because I learned later that my father was getting up going to the union hall.  And the union hall was a place where he could go and sit and wait for, hopefully, a job to come through that day.  We didn't know that during the time as kids.  And what I later came to understand was it was a place where he could go, in my interpretation, and be a man.  So, for him it was--my assumption is that his calculation was that he didn't want to be at home sitting around waiting for a job, and then we start to get nervous or concerned about what's going on; you know, will my father get a job, et cetera?  Or, why isn't my father out working?  And so, he would leave the home just as if he was going to work.  And I learned later that it wasn't necessarily that he had a job.  In fact, he was the one who told me the story later; that some days he would go and literally sit in the hall for five, six, or seven hours praying and hoping that a job would come through.  So, he might--you know, they had jobs I guess coming through during the day--not I guess, he told me.  And so you could go sit in the hall, and let's say at nine o'clock someone says, "I need a carpenter to go out and cut some stairs across town," they would give him the job.  And then he would go and he'd cut the stairs, and then that took care of that day.  Then he used to describe--you know, the jobs were given out and then they would find a job for him, and he might work there for a month or two, or he may have had a job for six months and stuff, because he was a carpenter.  And so it was seasonal, and it was depending on what was going on.  And he did that, and later I learned that it didn't mean that he went every day.  But when he came home that was the time that my mother [Billie Haynes Tyson] made sure the whole family was, in essence, brought together.
Story_ID: 661273
Speaker 1: And you know, we haven't done a lot of--your age.  You know, most of our people, you know, are seventy and above--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --that we've interviewed.  So, these are--yours is sort of interesting, because it's very aspirational; your family is a very aspirational one.  Now, I wanted to ask you--now, what is the address where you're living?  So, your father [Moses Tyson, Sr.] took his talent and built the house, right?
Speaker 2: Oh, my father built his house.  He built a room at my grandfather's [Tyson's maternal great-uncle, Richard Garrett] home, so he did a lot of work.  You know, inside of Kaiser Permanente, what people tease about is that I love to have buildings built.  One of the things I'm most proud of in this organization--I have a lot of stuff, a lot things I'm proud of, you know, the people and everything.  But I literally walk--I may be driving and I'll look at one of my facilities and I go, "Yeah."  Because that's the image that I come up with.  And I have--my team--I have a particular executive who runs the Northern California region, as we call it at Kaiser Permanente, and he teases me all the time about, "Oh, Lord, don't jump in all of that."  He will try to build something.  I love buildings, and I love them being built, and I love afterwards being able to enjoy them.  But I'll never forget when I was growing up my father took me on a job, and he worked my butt off, and I hold to this day that he did it.  He was cruel, he was cruel.  I worked so hard I thought I was going to die.  And he made me work hard, and I think it was his way of saying, "If you, if you don't go to school, or if this is the life--this is an honorable life, but it's a hard life.  It is not kid's play."  And I used to--I think my mother [Billie Haynes Tyson] felt sorry for me.  I used to come home, and I'll never forget my father had a little remodeling job.  This family named the White [ph.] family--literally that's their last name, White, Mr. and Mrs. White.  And they lived not too far from our home, and my father took me there for a couple of weekends and I had to work with him.  And he had me nailing, and I didn't know how to nail.  He had me moving sheetrock.  And so, I'm watching with grace.  He had a way of hitting nails.  He could hit it like three times, (gesture) bam, bam, bam, and it wasn't where it went through the sheetrock.  He had a skill; he could just go along and he could do it.  And he was, he trained himself on how to cut stairs, because he said not everyone knows how to cut stairs.  So, that was a niche, if you will, that allowed him to get special jobs.  And then I came along and he started training me how to.  And I, you know, I almost hit my ha- my thumb.  And I would do like this, (gesture) and after a while your shoulders start hurting because, you know, you're doing that repeatedly, and he wouldn't give me a break.  And he had me moving lumber and he would have the names of--you know, 8 x 4 [feet] and all that stuff.  And I'm looking at this wood and I have no idea.  It was, it was cruel.  But it, but while I love buildings, if you told me I was going to build something--no, you know (laughter).  But I love buildings, you know, and he was able to drive me around when we were growing up, and we used to look at buildings that he built and stuff like that.  And he, you know, he had that, he had that skill; he had that kind of thing in front of him.
Story_ID: 661274
Speaker 1: I learned later my father [Moses Tyson, Sr.] used to drive a--nice cars.  He's always, he always, he loved cars, right.  So we, we had, we had, I remember the Oldsmobile.  We had a station wagon one time.  We used to drive across country a lot to New Orleans [Louisiana] and everything.  We drove to Chicago [Illinois], we had relatives in Chicago.  And one time we drove to Chicago, and my mother [Billie Haynes Tyson], you know, here we are a very religious family.  My mother--one time we had just arrived at our relatives' home.  My mother got out the car, and this lady was coming along, a young lady, and she said, "Ooh, I see your license plates are from California."  So, my mother, very nice and innocent, said, "Yes, darling, we drove all the way from California."  And the lady said, "Well, your asses must really be tired," and she kept walking (laughter).  And for the kids, we fell out laughing (laughter).  And my mother, she was shocked, right.  So, we drove everywhere.  And my father loved his cars, you know.  And then he graduated to the Cadillac, which, as you know, during that time, that was the imagery of a preacher really making it, so my father had a Cadillac.  But when my father got a job, he would have to park the car blocks away from the worksite, and he would walk to the job.  And I don't remember how we found this out, but then he told us.  He said, "If I drove up in a Cadillac or if I drove up in a good looking car--if I drove up, in essence, looking like I didn't need the job," he used to say, "the man wouldn't let me work."  And, you know, so I had to--obviously as a child growing up you start trying to process all this stuff.  And that's back to the, you know, lessons learned.  My father would just say, "I drove up in that Cadillac to--I can drive up in this Cadillac to the church," because in the church it was symbolic of--your pastor is okay, right, and it was pride.  And we had a Fleetwood [Cadillac Fleetwood] one time, and that thing was as long as it gets.  It used to feel like a couch in the back (laughter) because we'd drive it to church.  He used to hit a dip and it bounced and all that stuff (laughter).  And we--but we had a great time in it, right.  And so, here he is with pride driving up to the church with his family and everything.  But then Monday morning when it's time to go to work, you know, he didn't have it.  And then later on he bought this like beat up truck, and it was really bad.  But it was transportation, number one, but I think more importantly it was the imagery of, you know, I'm so grateful to have this job, and I'm so in need.  And he figured how to work the system, and the system at the time was, if you looked like you don't need this, you know, or if you look like--if you think you're better than me--I mean that's the way I interpret it--then, you know, I have the power not to, in essence, give you a job, and for you to have income.  So, we watched that.
Story_ID: 661275
Speaker 1: So, what address, where did you live?  What was your address in Vallejo [California]?
Speaker 2: It was 1722 Santa Clara Street.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, can you describe the neighborhood?
Speaker 2: Yeah, it was a, it was actually a mixed neighborhood; we had black families and white families.  I remember so well, we grew up in a mixed neighborhood, it was on a hillside.  The home was beautifully built, it--you used to have to go down this driveway into the garage, and the home was on the hillside.  It had a great view of the coas- city.  It was two stories.  We had something like five or six bedrooms in our house, it was a big house.  It had a basement, and my father [Moses Tyson, Sr.] was building out the basement over time, so we pretty much lived on one level.  And the boys had their room and the girls had their room.  And my parents, of course, had their room.  And it had a kitchen, a dining room, and a living room.  And so it was just a lot of fun, and there was a lot of great imagery.  I have one of the most precious gifts at my home that was given by both of my parents when they were alive, and it's a goldware set that is in my dining room to this day.  And my father I guess paid on that for years and then paid it off.  And maybe once or twice a year, maybe twice or three times a year, the goldware would come out for guests and for family.  And it was usually Easter, but in particular it was Thanksgiving and Christmas, and that was such a special time.  Thanksgiving was everything.  And every year I used to remember we were going to eat on the goldware, and I used to shine it and everything.  And so when I grew up one day my parents came over and said, "You know, your mom [Billie Haynes Tyson] and I, were going to will this to you, but we just decided that we'll let you enjoy it now, and then, you know, you'll have us over for meals and stuff."  And so, now, you know, fast forward to 2015, I mean I have that goldware set in my dining room, and I don't bring it out for everything.  It's only for special occasions, but I will set it up.  And so--especially Thanksgiving, of all the times of the year, Thanksgiving was the big day.  And of all the holidays, for me, Thanksgiving is the most important one to me, and it is just the time to be thankful, no matter what.  And so, that's the way I recall Thanksgiving.  And then there was always family and friends and food.  And the food was great, and it was always more than anyone can eat, and a great variety.  And I don't ever recall a bad Thanksgiving (background noise).
Story_ID: 661276
Speaker 1: While we're on this, and your neighborhood and, and growing up, can you tell me what sights, smells, and sounds remind you of, of growing up?  You know you've talked--there's some visual, but I would like you to take me through sights, smells, and sounds.
Speaker 2: I guess sights is families.
Speaker 1: Family around?
Speaker 2: Family around.  The sight is, I guess congregating.  People were never alone; there was always this association.  And so, I have sights of always being in places with people.  And so that clearly--to your question of imagery--that comes to mind.  Smell was actually more flowers and grass.  We played a lot during the summer months.  I used to--and I guess it's partly why--I used to love to--we had a hillside near our home, outside our home, that had these little flowers.  We used to call them flowers, but they're yellow.  They grow during the summer months and stuff.  They actually were weeds, but we didn't know, but they were beautiful.  But what I used to love about it was to go out and watch the bees.  And I--we used to watch the bees, and my mother [Billie Haynes Tyson] used to say, "Boy, you're going to get stung."  And I used to play with bees, and I was fascinated with what bees were doing.  And to this day, I love honey; I love honey, right.  But during the time--and I got that from my grandfather [Tyson's maternal great-uncle, Richard Garrett], because I was inquisitive a lot as a child.  So, I used to go out there and I used to play in the grass.  And then I was allergic to grass.  And so, I used to go out there, and I remember the--I used to call it--now, the smell of spring, and obviously going into summer.  And that's when things started to blossom and everything, and I had allergies later on.  But I remember so well the beauty of spring, and to this day I love spring; I love spring and fall.  Summer was always hot, but I love that.  So, that's the smell.  Sound is clearly music.  Always had music around.  Either in church, at home, at gatherings; there was always singing in all kinds of settings.  We used to sing at home all the time.
Story_ID: 661277
Speaker 1: My mother [Billie Haynes Tyson] played the piano, so there was a piano in the house.  She used to get on the piano while we were at home.  She would sing when we had a family group.  She would play, and we would practice.  And so, I remember that.  And then, you know, my relatives were into music.  Sly Stone is my cousin, so I used to be around him a lot and the family.  And so, you know, music just happened all the time.  Just all the time, there was music.  My middle brother, actually both my brothers were musicians.  But my brother right under me, Moses [Moses Tyson, Jr.], is a professional musician.  He plays the organ, the piano, the guitar.  And, you know, that's what he does for a living.  My younger brother who passed away a couple of years ago [Kenneth Tyson, Sr.], he used to play the organ.  And so, music was always around me.  And to this day I love music, all kinds of music.  I have an iPhone with four thousand songs on it.  So, I just accumulate music.  And I love all kinds of music--gospel, hip hop, classical.  My mother put my brother in quote (air quotes) music class one time so he could learn the keys and all that stuff, and it was boring to him, because he played by ear.  And, but what I remember is the first time I went to a symphony, and his music teacher was a lady named Miss Berry [ph.].  She was an elderly white lady who loved my brother, and loved us.  And one time she paid for us to get on the bus, the Greyhound bus, and she brought us over to San Francisco [California] and took us to one of the halls so we could hear a symphony.  And I was a kid, and that was the most beautiful night of music.  Because then, it was a bunch of players on instruments, and I didn't even know what the instruments were.  I mean it was a mystery, but I still remember that.  And there was a conductor, and the crowd went crazy.  And here we are kids, and we were up high and we were with her.  And she was trying to show us, and she wanted us to appreciate the different kind of music.  And it was the first time I had an experience with what today I know as a symphony.  But I didn't really know what it was, and I'll never forget.  I used to watch those instruments, and I was sitting there and I was just in amaze--with that.  And so to this day, I mean, one of my fantasies is I would love to conduct an orchestra.  And I walk around the house and do like this (gesture) around the house, and I'll grab a pen or pencil and do like this (gesture) if I have a song on my stereo system or in my ear.  I do a lot of this.  I do this (gesture) on the airplane, and sometimes people think I'm crazy.  I'm sitting on the airplane, and if I have something in my ear that really gets to me, I'll just--(gesture), because that's the imagery that I grew up with.  And it's interesting, because I'm also a visual person.  So, I think even in running Kaiser Permanente, it--with music--I think about that all the time, you know, things that have influenced me and become tools for me in running, you know, a massive organization.  And so, so, I mean, for example, if my, as I--to use a musical connotation--if I feel like one of my team is offbeat, that's the way I think about it, right, that no, your rhythm is off.  So if I'm having a team meeting and somebody stands out as--it's sort of like when I was growing up, you knew when somebody hit a wrong key.  So when my mother used to practice with us, she used to play.  And my sister in particular, Mosetta [Mosetta Tyson Woodson]--Mosetta is a great singer now.  But when we were growing up, Mosetta was always off key.  And she just has what today is a beautiful gift where she can just take a song and just go off with it, right.  And people love it, and I love it.  And she'll sing a song and she'll take a word, and she'll play around with the word, with the keys.  But when she was growing up, she used to be off key, and my mother used to hit that keyboard (gesture) and say, "Mosetta, hit the key."  And my mother would keep hitting that key until Mosetta's voice hit that key.  And I think about that as part of--you know, so if I'm working with someone--to use that imagery, if you're off key, I'm going to stay with you until you get on key.  And so I grew up that way, I grew up with music.  And sometimes if I'm like really having a great day here and I feel like everything is working--for me, it's like the orchestra.  I can go into an operating room and watch my team perform a delicate surgery and you see, you know, "Scalpel," they pass the scalpel.  You know, "Sponge," they pass the sponge.  And when I see that happening, for me, it's like an orchestra.  It's like, look at that.  And I view it this way, that's just beautiful.  You know, so I don't walk around telling people that, (laughter) but that's the kind of imagery that I have, that in some ways comes from the beauty of music, when something is really humming and working.  And that I give credit to this lady to this day, Mrs. Berry, who introduced me to real music, if you will, which was the orchestra.
Story_ID: 661278
Speaker 1: And she was one of your teachers?  Was she at--
Speaker 2: She was my brother's music teacher (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) His music teacher, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Now, now (background noise) oh my god.  Okay.  So, what happens--what about school?  First of all, in your neighborhood, you grew up in a mixed neighborhood.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: What about racial experiences?  Do you remember any racial experiences or differences, and what each were, that you became aware of?
Speaker 2: Oh, I was very young, but it was more of--it was probably was more during school.
Speaker 1: Now elementary school was--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And what was the name (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And actually--
Speaker 1: --name of your elementary school?
Speaker 2: Farragut Elementary School [Farragut Academy, Vallejo, California], and it wasn't too far from the house.  And you know, it was a mixed school that I went to, but you knew your place.  I mean, black people, you hung out over here, and white people hung out in the other areas (background noise) and you know, literally there was language about--
Speaker 1: (Unclear).
Speaker 2: The phone.
Speaker 1: The phone, okay.
Speaker 2: Oh I guess, I don't know if they can transfer it, it was ringing (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) They can disconnect the phone.  But let's keep going.
Speaker 2: Okay.  So, you knew that--you know, the school system.  It wasn't, it wasn't so blatant in terms of racism, but then when I went to junior high, I started out going to Vallejo Junior High [Vallejo Junior High School, Vallejo, California].  And for whatever the reasons were at the time, they had to do something at Vallejo Junior High, and we got quote, bussed to Springstowne [Springstowne Junior High School, Vallejo, California], and that was a, a real experience.
Speaker 1: And this is in junior high?
Speaker 2: Junior high.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, in--in elementary--let's--before we go there, in elementary school, what kind of student are you?
Speaker 2: More quiet, reserved.  I had fun, but I was more serious.  You know, that's what I remember.  I mean school was serious business in our house, and so it was, you know, straightforward.  It was--I remember the classes.  I remember walking to school every day.  I remember recess, which was fun, but recess was all about running and playing and everything.  But when it was time to go back to class, it was serious business.
Speaker 1: And your classes at--where was it?  Farragut.
Speaker 2: Farragut.
Speaker 1: Those were--I mean how many blacks?  I'm just trying to get an idea.  What was the percentage, you think? How many blacks in your classroom versus--?
Speaker 2: Oh, I--hard to say, but I guess I would say it was fairly even.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, it was very much a mixed school, yeah, elementary school.
Speaker 1: And do you know the white community--what aspect of--I mean where were they from?  Or, you know--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: No, no, nothing.
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 661279
Speaker 1: You said things changed when you went to, to junior high school, eighth (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah.
Speaker 1: So, talk about that.  That was--what's the name of the junior high school?
Speaker 2: Springstowne.
Speaker 1: Springstowne.
Speaker 2: I started at Vallejo Junior High [Vallejo Junior High School, Vallejo, California], but then we got--
Speaker 1: Bussed (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) bussed to Springstowne Junior High [Springstowne Junior High School, Vallejo, California].  It was quote, upper middle class what you would call it, but it was predominantly white.  And it really was the people from the other side of town coming to our school, kind of mindset.  It was, the experience was okay, but you had to be on your Ps and Qs.  And, it--it was a good experience; I mean, you know, I made it through it fine.  But it was--you had white kids, quote, trying to put you in your place, and it was my exposure to trying to treat me like I wasn't as smart as--it was my experience of someone trying to be superior in their--and not just superior in words, but literally trying to, as I recall, to stop me, right.  Trying to discourage me.  So, I remember that so well (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Was that--was that the teachers and the students, or the students?
Speaker 2: The students.  But the teachers were--you know, I had some good teachers.  Don't get me wrong, I had some real good teachers growing up, but I had others that wasn't like totally encouraging.  But those were very few.  And I can tell the difference, because I had other teachers that went out of the way to work with us and to make sure that, you know, it was equal treatment in the classroom.  But there's just no question that the difference was as palpable as you and I sitting here talking to each other.
Speaker 1: So, this is the mid-'60s [1960s], right, were in the mid?  No?  Or the early '60s [1960s]?
Speaker 2: The early '60s [1960s] (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Early '60s [1960s].
Speaker 2: Yeah, mid--yeah, early, mid-'60s [1960s].
Speaker 1: Sixties [1960s], okay.
Story_ID: 661280
Speaker 1: Are you aware, at this point in time in junior high school, are you aware of the Civil Rights Movement--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --and those things happening?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.
Speaker 1: So, tell me what is being, what is being discussed either in your home or around school, you know?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.  Obviously I used to hear it in church [Rescue Mission Church of God in Christ, Vallejo, California].  In church it was the paradigm of, you know, we live in this world, you know, and you're going to be suffering with trials and tribulations, and it was more of a spiritual slant to it.  And you know, your obligation is to, in essence, be a good person in the midst of this, and don't succumb to that.  It was talked about in spiritual terms.  But we had in our congregation the Brown family, Attorney Brown [Lewis F. Brown], and he later was the vice mayor of Vallejo [California].  But more importantly, he was the man who literally taught me and his son [Lewis G. Brown] about civil rights.  And it was in the moment, because obviously a lot of stuff was going on.  And he was a flamboyant lawyer, and he was outspoken and full of life and full of energy.  And he talked to us about civil rights all the time.  He talked to us about race relations, and during that time it was the Negro so he used to talk about the Negro.  But what I will always appreciate about him was he was a counterforce to what I was experiencing as a child, because he was teaching me pride in who we are a people, and the struggle, as he used to call it, of the people.  And so, he gave me a great sense of mission.  You know, he used to talk about the Civil Rights Movement.  He used to share his personal experiences, because he was very outspoken.  He used to talk about, "I'm going to be the mayor of this city," and he became vice mayor.  And to this day, we still honor him as vice mayor, because we were so proud of him.  And he used to, he used to be the one that I remember as a child who used to stand outside the church, and at times contradict my father [Moses Tyson, Sr.].  And he and my father grew up--they were best of friends until the day my father died.  And Attorney Brown is still alive and he's like my second dad, and I can call him and just check on him.  I had him come by my office one day, and it was--I was so proud, because he was proud, right.  And for him, it's like a dream come true, and that's where he's at in his life.  So I remember, I remember when we were, in particular when we were teenagers.  And when we were--we'd go to church on Sunday and we started, my parents started letting me go with them for Sunday afternoon and then we'd come back to church that night.  So when I was growing up at home, my mother [Billie Haynes Tyson] had breakfast and then she prepared dinner.  So, you ate dinner like at three o'clock when you got home from church or whatever.  When I went with them, they had lunch, and I was like, "Lunch on Sunday?"  And my--and he used to say, "Boy, you start with breakfast, then you have lunch, then you have dinner."  And so we had lunch, but it was only with them, because we never had lunch when I was at home.  And, he was, he was just that way.  So, he used to stand outside church, and, or when we were going for lunch, and he would contradict my father.  He said, "You know, your dad's preaching some good stuff, but let me tell you something.  The Negro people," (laughter).  And he used to just talk about, "Your father is right.  We're going to be spiritual, we're going to be good people, but we're going to have our voice heard."  And he used to say all the time, with the man, you know, that was the imagery.  And until I knew better, I used to think literally there was like this white man who just controlled everything (laughter).  So I had no--you know how it is.  Because I came into this movie, right.  So, when I used to hear things like the man, I literally thought there was like this universal man that just controlled the earth, controlled everything.  Because that's what I used to hear all the time was, you know, the man.  And, and Attorney Brown used to talk about the man all the time.
Story_ID: 661281
Speaker 1: And he said, he said--he was the second major voice in my life about education.  But the other thing that he said was the law.  He as a lawyer, and he believed in the law.  And he said, "The law," he said, "the law is what ultimately will create the," what I call today the equal playing field.  And he was, he used to talk about the law so much.  And he also helped me, because when I was growing up the law was the police, right, and that was it.  I knew nothing about laws, of course, but the imagery of the law was the police.  And we feared the police when we were growing up, and we were taught to fear the police.  We were taught to obey the police and to fear the police.  And later on in life my father [Moses Tyson, Sr.] was explicit, as I was quote, becoming a man, a real teenager on my way to manhood.  My father actually talked to me about, "If you ever get stopped by the police, if this ever happens to you, this is how you handle yourself," and I was trained.  And I had an experience in my young life when I was--later on, and just married and had an incident, and had an episode with quote (air quotes) the law, with a police officer.  And I hold to this day, it was because of my father's training that I shut up when that police officer was demeaning me and calling me, boy, and wouldn't--he told me to shut up and all stuff.  I was raging with anger, but my father's voice helped me through that situation.  But when I was growing up when I was a kid, I thought the law was simply a police officer, and I thought the man was like this universal white man, because that's the way they were spoken of, right.  So, my, my Attorney Brown [Lewis F. Brown] used to sit down with us for hours.  He made us read stuff about the law, and he talked about it.  And, he, he talked about--I'll never forget when Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] died, the sadness, just universally.  But I mean, in my home the sadness was incredible.  My mother [Billie Haynes Tyson], my father, my oldest sister [Sheila Tyson Jones]--I mean it was--whew.  The same thing was true when President Kennedy [President John Fitzgerald Kennedy] was assassinated, I mean, the sadness.  And then Robert Kennedy [Robert F. Kennedy].  And those are like, to this day, I don't even know if I necessarily appreciated everything about it, you know, because we were just teenagers growing up and everything.  But I'll never forget the--what it felt like to be there.  And we had this raggedy TV that had an antenna, you know, the clothes hanger that you had to--literally we had a clothes hanger and you had to move the clothes hanger around to get a channel.  The channel was foggy, and we used to gather around the TV.  And we thought, I thought the TV was just an amazing thing as a kid, just unbelievable.  And I remember one time my father bought a TV.  It was like a console set with the TV right in the center, and this big wooden cabinet was there.  When Martin Luther King was assassinated, my mother cried so hard.  It was--whew.  And, and same was true when the Kennedys were assassinated.
Story_ID: 661282
Speaker 1: --So you were talking about Martin Luther King's [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.], you know, that passing, and how the reaction of everybody--you know, the, the adults around--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --and the man, you know understanding.  So, I want to--what other was significant about--because this is a time that there's a lot of turmoil in society, and there is also a lot of expectation.  So, what is--so, summer--what is the, summer, spring--what's the name of the place where you were bussed, S- ?
Speaker 2: Springstowne [Springstowne Junior High School, Vallejo, California], Springstowne, yeah.
Speaker 1: Springstowne.  So, how long were you there?
Speaker 2: I was there--I would say two of the three years.  Because I did time--the first (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Seventh--was it seventh, eighth, and ninth?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I think it was seventh, eighth, and ninth. Because obviously elementary school used to be, you had K through sixth [kindergarten to sixth grade].  And then junior high was seventh, eighth and ninth.  And then senior high, high school, was ten, eleven, and twelve, yeah.
Speaker 1: So, now you--so when you go to high school, where do you go?
Speaker 2: Vallejo (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) It's Vall-
Speaker 2: --Senior High [Vallejo Senior High School; Vallejo High School, Vallejo, California].
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, how large is Vallejo at that point and time?  Is everyone--?
Speaker 2: About seventy, eighty thousand, I would say, in Vallejo [California].
Speaker 1: (Pause) No, I'm talking about the high school.  I was like (laughter)--
Speaker 2: Oh, oh, yeah (laughter).
Speaker 1: Oh, Vallejo was seventy or eighty thousand?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  But it was mixed?
Speaker 2: It was mixed, yeah, it was mixed.  Vallejo had the big naval shipyard [Mare Island Naval Shipyard], and so I think a lot of people migrated to the Vallejo area from all over the country.  I guess it was a thousand, maybe a little bit more, in high school; probably a little bit more, but I never even thought about it.
Speaker 1: So, how did you--were you--did you change much during that time, by the time you went to high school?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Story_ID: 661283
Speaker 1: Okay so who are you at that point?
Speaker 2: I'm black and I'm proud.  I had a big Afro, I wore turtle necks.  When I saw the 'Shaft' movie, my dream was to have a leather coat, and I got one later on.  I was, I wasn't militant, but I was black and I'm proud.  I was, I was just proud.  I mean I had, you know, I had experiences in high school [Vallejo Senior High School; Vallejo High School, Vallejo, California].  I loved to write, and I had an English teacher that used to try to challenge me all the time on writing, and I saw that as a great challenge.  Actually, it turned out to be a wonderful thing that he did to me, because he made me work at even a higher level.  And it's funny--well, I can tell you his name.  His name was Mr. Abram [ph.].  I can remember the teachers that really stood out and that were significant, whether it was good or bad, (laughter) because they always did something to me in terms of the inner Bernard [HistoryMaker Bernard J. Tyson], and I remember him.  I thought he didn't like me, but it turns out, I would say in retrospect, that he really liked me.  He saw something in me, and he was going to bring it out.  And so I took it as, this man is just trying to be hard and ride me, but I would say today that this man influenced me in literature.  You know, because I grew up obviously reading a lot of books, and being able to talk to family, and being in that kind of orientation.  So, then I went to Spring- junior high [Springstowne Junior High School, Vallejo, California] and left that environment in which there was no question about it, that it was a movement that, (unclear), "You're less than."  So now I'm in high school and I'm coming to myself, of myself, and so I have this, sort of like this shell that--of resistance.  And so I took it in the beginning, you know, as this teacher that's trying to quote, (air quotes) break me, and, but what he did was he actually forced me to take it even higher.  And I always felt like he critiqued my papers more than anyone else.  I had an outburst in his class one day and he sent me to the principal's office; it was that kind of relationship.  And the irony was he wasn't white, but he wasn't black; he was mixed.  So I also kind of felt like this is a confused man, you know, that kind of mindset.  And in retrospect, I would say he was very instrumental in how I think about writing and expressing myself on paper and making a point.  And he was a stickler on that, and he, you know, he also made me sensitive to grammar.  And so, so, you know, he had a--so I remember that experience.
Story_ID: 661284
Speaker 1: I got my first car when I was sixteen.  I was, I had a little job at McDonald's, and I turned sixteen, and, you know, and got my permit and then I got my license.  Actually, I was probably going on seventeen.  And my father [Moses Tyson, Sr.] allowed me to get a car that he obviously got, that I had to quote, (air quotes) pay for.  And it was the first car I ever had, a red Mazda, and I was so cool.  And, you know, I had to go to work and work hard at McDonald's.  And so, you know, I had that.  One of the worse experiences in my life, I was working at McDonald's and I was walking home one time, one evening, and there was a graveyard on the way home, Sunrise Memorial [Sunrise Memorial Cemetery, Vallejo, California].  And night was just falling, and some kids or adults were in a car, and they rolled the window down and they said something to the effect of, "Hey, nigger, where you going?"  And I ignored it and kept walking, walked a little faster.  And then I heard somebody say, "We're going to kill this nigger tonight."  And I took off and ran through the graveyard, and, and I mean I ran for my life; I just, it, it--and they played around the car as if it really was going to happen.  And I've never been that scared in my life, where I just knew I was in danger.  Whether or not they really intended it, it was said and done with such hatred.  I had been called nigger before, and that kind of stuff, but not with the issue--with the venom; you know, I'm going to do harm to you.  And I took off through that graveyard, so I remember all that during high school [Vallejo Senior High School; Vallejo High School, Vallejo, California].  And so that was my life in high school, but I was still a very serious student in school.  So throughout my whole life, school was serious business, serious business.  I think I only got in trouble maybe once or twice in school.  I remember, boy, I got in trouble, and then you come home and you have to face your parents.  And when I was growing up, you know, you could get spanked in class.  I mean, that was the time when they had permission to discipline you in class, you know (laughter).  And if you got in trouble in class and then your parent had to come to class, I mean, you know, (laughter) that was bad news.  But I was a very good student, a very obedient student.  But in my own way, I was a--an outspoken student.
Story_ID: 661285
Speaker 1: Did you ever feel, or rebel against being a preacher's kid?
Speaker 2: No.  I always felt--I didn't rebel against it.  Well, actually, honestly, I think later I did.
Speaker 1: In high school [Vallejo Senior High School; Vallejo High School, Vallejo, California]?  Or--
Speaker 2: Yeah, high school (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) High school.  Because I was just wondering.  You've got this car, you know--
Speaker 2: High school.  And it came in two major forms.  One was music.  I used to play rock and roll and blues and stuff, and my father [Moses Tyson, Sr.] used to come in and say, "Turn that music off," you know.  They used to call it the devil's music at the time.  "Turn that devil's music off."  And my father in the beginning was, "There's no such thing as you're going to a party."  I remember one time my father took me to a party because my mother [Billie Haynes Tyson] finally said, "You should let that boy go."  And my father allowed me to go to a party; he drove me to the party.  I was getting out of the truck and my father said, "You better not get in trouble."  And I said, "I'm not going to get in trouble, daddy, I'll be fine."  And he said, these were his words.  He said, "If you get in trouble and you go to jail, I'm not coming to get you."  And, and I didn't say a word.  I just said, "Dad, I'll be fine."  And then as I was getting out he said, "And they do bad things to you in jail."  Well, that scared me (laughter).  And so if there was any idea--if I had any notion of doing something bad, I wasn't going to do it (laughter).  But, so, he--I don't think he liked it, but I think my mother influenced him to say, "You better let that boy--."  And so, I got a chance to do those things, but it didn't come with--as a natural.  So I would say, yeah, later in high school, sort of the rebellious side started to come out, especially around always going to church.  So, yeah, that's, that's an accurate statement.
Speaker 1: So, now, you, and that's why--I think I read something about your father being really strict, he was very strict.
Story_ID: 661286
Speaker 1: Now, the other thing is that this is a time in this area--the [HistoryMaker] Angela Davis trial was, you know, is--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --has happened, or is happening.  And I mean, you said, you know, your cousin was Sly and the Family Stone.  That's free love and drugs and--(laughter).
Speaker 2: Oh, Sly, Sly, Sly Stone had a major influence on me, because he wrote songs of the time.  And he used to, he used to write songs, although that was later, even later in my life.  So when I went to college [Golden Gate University, San Francisco, California], for example--
Speaker 1: Is when you were--
Speaker 2: --is when I spent most of the direct time with him, although he was in and out, if you will, of our lives because he was getting started with the music in the late '60s [1960s], and then obviously the '70s [1970s] (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Right, '70s [1970s].
Speaker 2: And then on one song to this day that's still out, he actually put my brother [Moses Tyson, Jr.] on his album ['High on You'].  My brother is playing the organ on "I Get High on You."
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And my mother [Billie Haynes Tyson] had no idea that my brother was out doing that with Sly, and so when they told my mother, oh, my god, she was upset.  At first she said, "That record will not go out," and she really was not happy.  And then eventually, you know, everything worked out.  And so we just, you know, you know, we had that.  And so Sly I had an influence on me, especially with his songs, you know, "Don't Call me Nigger, Whitey," you know, and "It's a Family Affair" ["Family Affair"], and you know, "I Get High on You." You know, they wrote songs--"Hot Fun in the Summertime." And so I used to, at times when I was staying with my [maternal] aunt [Alpha Stewart] and uncle [K.C. Stewart], especially during my college years, I used to watch him make up songs.  You know, they used to have jam sessions, and--
Speaker 1: You know, this is amazing, because the person, you know, who helped do the research said that you went to the same high school [Vallejo Senior High School; Vallejo High School, Vallejo, California], but there was no connection.  And so--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --to hear this, you know, it's pretty--you know, I didn't know that coming into the interview.
Story_ID: 661287
Speaker 1: How is it decided when you're going to col- you know, where you're going to go to college?  And, and is that a, a definite thing?  Immediately?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  In fact, I decided where, and I picked Golden Gate University [San Francisco, California], because I was absolutely certain that I wanted to be a hospital administrator.
Speaker 1: Which is, where does that come from?
Speaker 2: Because I--my mother [Billie Haynes Tyson] was in the hospital a lot when we were growing up.
Speaker 1: Because she had diabetes (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Diabetes.
Speaker 1: But this is interes- because it was hereditary, right, because her--your grandmother [Tyson's maternal great-aunt, Rosie Haynes Garrett] had had it, right?
Speaker 2: Right.  And so, my mother spent a lot of time on health and health care.  So, my mother had a great set of doctors who were just passionate about her, at least from my view, and therefore, us.  So, I had this imagery growing up, that, you know, doctors in white coats were wonderful people, because of how they attended after my mother, and also with us as a result of that.  So when we were growing up, there were several times my mother--many times, but not many, many, many--but several times my mother would end up in the hospital.  And I remember going into that environment and the doctors were, you know, providing care, and there was obviously such a great respect for them, and I grew up wanting to be like that.  And then later on, clearly I began to, you know, gravitate in my own mind that I'm going to run my hospital, and I learned that from understanding what a hospital administrator did.  And so when I got to high school [Vallejo Senior High School; Vallejo High School, Vallejo, California] I was looking at going to colleges, and Golden Gate University came up, and I honestly don't even remember how it came up.  I started to do research, and I learned that the uniqueness of that particular school was that many of the students were already in the profession.  And I thought that was like a godsend that--you know, I didn't want to go to college, you know, to hang out at college.  I went to college on the mission of, you will go to school, and so I saw the benefit, in my mind, of being around people who did this every single day.  And whether or not that had anything to do with how I was oriented, I don't know, but it made sense to me.  And so I wasn't even sure that I would be able to get in, because I didn't have that experience.  So, I went through the whole process and then they accepted me into the school.
Speaker 1: And that--there were, as I had read, there're a lot of older students there, right?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And people were saying you shouldn't go there?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Did the--okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah, people were saying, "You shouldn't go there."  My father [Moses Tyson, Sr.] was encouraging, so he was just proud, as it turned out.  And, you know, I had people saying, "No, you shouldn't go there.  You should go to a junior college or a university."  And, and I, you know, I don't want to say I rejected that.  I think I viewed the whole decision of going to school--you know, I obviously got help from a lot of people, but it's sort of like, I did it, you know.  I felt like I had put myself in school.  And I hold to this day that that was a great--that was a great decision.  And I was scared and I was young, and, and I guess I was ambitious, but, you know, it, I had to get used to it, because there were so many older people there.
Story_ID: 661288
Speaker 1: Now, were you commuting?  Or where, where were you living?
Speaker 2: Yeah, it was a combination.  I was commuting in the beginning, and then I started to live with my aunt [Alpha Stewart] in San Francisco [California], my [maternal] aunt and uncle, Sly Stone's mother and father.  So I started staying with them, and that was great.  And my uncle, Uncle K.C. [K.C. Stewart], he was just terrific, you know, because he would ride the trolley with me to school [at Golden Gate University, San Francisco, California] when I went to school.  And at that time I was going full time, of course.  And he taught me how to drink black coffee, and to this day I drink black coffee.  And he used to have a saying that, "Someday, you're going to be this big hospital administrator, and if you want to be quote, tough,, if you wanna be tough, you learn how to drink coffee black.  That'll scare people."  And so, he taught me how to drink it.  And then, so, he used to have me eat a piece of donut and drink coffee black.  And then he later weaned me away from the donut and just drink coffee.  So now I can't take anything in my coffee to this day; it's black.  And he was telling the truth, though.  Later on, I used to love to say, "I take my coffee black."  (Laughter) So, he taught me that.  And then I used to--Sly Stone used to come over a lot while I was in school, and he used to always be downstairs playing music and stuff.  And my uncle used to tell them, "Turn that music down," you know, "Bernard's [HistoryMaker Bernard J. Tyson] in here studying."  He had that kind of reign over the house.  And so, I stayed with them a lot when I moved.  And also they were traveling a lot, and so they had big, beautiful, home in--right outside of Daly City [California] on (Unclear) Court in San Francisco.  And so, they used to travel a lot and had a big, beautiful, home.  And--
Speaker 1: You mean your uncle and aunt?
Speaker 2: My aunt and uncle.  So, I used to have the house also to myself a lot.  You know, they had really trusted me, and naturally I didn't do anything.  And that helped a lot, because I didn't have to go all the way to Vallejo [California] every day.
Story_ID: 661289
Speaker 1: So, what was their view of their son?  Did they believe that he was taking--or, had he taken off at that point?
Speaker 2: Oh, god, yeah, no, he was--he had taken off at that point, and he clearly had challenges at that point.  But he was, I mean he was a bigger than life star, you know, and they were very proud of him.  And my uncle [Robinson's maternal uncle, K.C. Stewart] traveled a lot with him.  I went to, you know, some concerts with them and it was quite an experience, you know.  I didn't know--until him I didn't know about limousines and, you know, groupies and all of that, you know.  But I knew something was going on.  I mean, you could start to see it.  I mean, he would go out to a concert and not do the whole concert.  But he was absolutely a genius.  I mean he used to, he used to just come and sit on an organ or a piano or a guitar, and he would just pick it up and he would just make up something, and it was great, you know.  I hold to this day that he made 'Family Affair' because of the family situation.  And then he started writing about, you know, "It's a family affair.  One child grows up to be somebody who just," you know, it just all came together.  And, "I want to thank you falettinme be mice elf"--
Speaker 1: "Agin."
Speaker 2: --"agin" ['Thank You (Falettinme Be Mice Elf Agin)'], you know.  And so you, the songs--to this day I quote one of his songs, 'Everybody is a Star.'  You know, I, I say that in the company [Kaiser Permanente] and everything, that everybody is a star.  And so his songs had that kind of effect on me also, because I was--in my case, I was privileged to have what I saw as a musical genius do his thing, his craft.  And I used to watch how he thought and how he made music, and he also had an ear for rhythm.  He used to have jam sessions, and I mean it was something to see.  Freddie [Freddie Stone] and Rose [Rose Stone] and Cynthia [Cynthia Robinson] on the horn, and Larry Graham used to be a part of it.  Larry Graham used to be there all the time.  Larry played the bass, and Larry had this wonderful baritone voice, if you will.  And Sly [Sly Stone] used to start jamming, and Sly used to tell them--different, you know, sections and stuff like that--and so I used to watch that kind of chemistry at work.  And so I used to enjoy that, and, you know, I thought he was great.  And then I grew up in the environment, and so, you know, I'm very fortunate that my aunt [Robinson's maternal aunt, Alpha Stewart] and uncle took me in and treated me just like I was one of their sons.  And I remember I started working part time.  I had a job at Williams Brothers cutlery [Williams Cutlery Company].  It was a cutlery store in San Francisco [California], and the Williams brothers hired me, Bruce [Bruce Williams (ph.)] and Brian Williams [ph.].  And I was going to school [at Golden Gate University, San Francisco, California] at that time.  Then, I was still full time, but I was going to school in the afternoon and evenings.  And I don't remember what I used to give my aunt, but let's say I got a paycheck and I would come home and I would maybe, you know, in an envelope give her a hundred bucks [dollars] or whatever.  And she made me feel so good.  She made that hundred--you know, what I gave her--she made it feel like it paid the house note.  She was like, "Oh, thank you Jesus!  Money!  Oh, my god, thank you, boy!"  And, you know, it was maybe fifty bucks or a hundred or something.  And I used to say (air quotes), "I'm paying on my bill," and, you know, that was fun.  You know, and I know that was from my upbringing; I always had this sense of responsibility.  So, even while I was in school--and they never charged me anything, but I just felt I needed to do something, because they were so good to me.
Story_ID: 661290
Speaker 1: So you were there, you were with them [Robinson's maternal aunt and uncle, Alpha Stewart and K.C. Stewart] for what?  Two years, two--
Speaker 2: I would say (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) The last--or the last three--two years?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, I would say probably a little more than two years, but--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --probably two of the four years.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So, what are you--so are you--during summers you're working at the cutlery [Williams Cutlery Company]?
Speaker 2: Yeah, the cutlery.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And then, so when you graduate, what are you thinking?
Speaker 2: I'm going to be a hospital administrator at the hospital that got me involved with that.  So I went to that hospital, and I met with the hospital administrator.  His name was Mr. Jack Manley, and I went in there and I told him my life story.  And I said, "You know, I want to do an internship here," and he hired me to do the internship.  He hired me from that day, and I started as an intern.
Speaker 1: So this is 1981 (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Eighty-one [1981], yeah.  I started as an intern, then I became like an administrative analyst.  And he took me under his wings; he was very influential, and--
Speaker 1: So, what did you learn under his wings?  Because you're all of twenty, I think twenty-two?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I'm watching the hospital administrator at work.  And he was, he had a great laugh and he had a great personality, and he was a people person.  And so, but he also taught me the beginning of really understanding analysis.  In fact, he made me an administrative analyst after I finished my internship.  And he was the one that really began to start--he started me down this path of understanding the importance of data.  And, you know, I had learned about it in school, of course, and knew about it growing up.  But I would say, in my own assessment, that I had an effective way of communicating an emotion.  And he taught me data, and so I had the honor and privilege of working for him, because I was able to see how he studied information, and that was very influential to me.  And to this day, it's influential to me in terms of studying data.  And so, I worked at Vallejo General Hospital [Sutter Solano Medical Center, Vallejo, California] for a couple of years and then I was, I enrolled into my master's program.  So, I went back to Golden Gate University [San Francisco, California].
Speaker 1: And so I mean this is--not many people have aspired, that I know of, to be a hospital administrator.  It's a unique area.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Right.  Now, he was, he was, he was not African American, right (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No.  No.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 661291
Speaker 1: When you go back--so you go back into this program to get your M.B.A., right?  What do you know about the industry, and what have you learned in those two years?  And why do you go back so soon to get your M.B.A.?
Speaker 2: Part of it was, it was clear I needed the higher degree.  You know, he and others that I met during the break period, which really wasn't long before I went back to school, they told me about the importance of the higher education, especially if I wanted to truly be a hospital administrator.  That, that probably what stands out the most.  I think the second thing is, you know, he was--they, we started to go through a financial crisis with Vallejo General Hospital [Sutter Solano Medical Center, Vallejo, California] when--I think I was laid off like in '83 [1983].  I was there for a couple of years and, for me, no matter what I was going to do later in life or whatever hospital I was going to go to, I needed to have my master's degree, so I was motivated.  Even when I was laid off, I didn't drop out of school.  I struggled to finish to get my master's degree, because I felt like that was important to becoming a hospital administrator.  And when I went and worked at Vallejo General Hospital, it was all that I had imagined in terms of like running this big thing, a hospital, and being in charge of it and helping a lot of people.  And he was perfect for me in terms of projecting that, as I watched how he moved through the hospital.  He knew everybody; how he treated patients; and how people respected him.  And then I used to remember how he worked in the office, and how he allowed me to see him working in the office, and how he studied.  You know, he studied the financials; he studied the reports and everything.  And so, in my mind, there was a match: yeah, this is, this is definitely what I want to do.  And, and so that (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And at that point, do you know of any other African American hospital administrators?  Is that even in your mind?
Speaker 2: No, but I met two African American hospital administrators in the master's program that--while I was in the master's program.  One of them was Tony Wagner [HistoryMaker Anthony G. Wagner], who at the time was at a hospital in San Francisco [California].  I think it was the Laguna Honda Hospital in San Francisco.  And Larry Brown [Lawrence Brown] was an African American physician in Vallejo [California] who was in Sacramento [California] I believe, and he came to Vallejo and he was with Kaiser [Kaiser Permanente].  And I actually went and interviewed both of them, and then I knew what I wanted to do, especially when I met Larry Brown, because he was cool.  So, he wasn't--Jack Manley was sort of stern, but friendly.  Larry Brown was smooth; he was competent and he was smooth.  So, his personality was more of, I'm in charge, and I love what I do, you know.  And so, he brought the human side, I mean the real human side of being an African American executive.  And at that time, I guess we were black.  So, we had gone from Negro to black, as I remember.  And he was great, and so I knew it.  Then when I finished--I was finishing up my master's degree and I wanted to work at Kaiser.  I wanted to work at Kaiser, and I knew it as Kaiser.  I wanted to work at Kaiser because we talked about Kaiser so much in Golden Gate University [San Francisco, California].  It was always this thing about Kaiser, "At Kaiser they do this."  And so I said, "Wow, man, I want to learn more about Kaiser."  So, I went and was interviewed in San Francisco by an African American female who was the administrator of Kaiser in San Francisco, and that's Alva Wheatley.  And I went in there and Alva gave me thirty minutes, and I told her that I wanted to be a resident here, and wanted to learn about the Kaiser system.  And you know, and she, she was tough, and she hired me as an administrative resident.  And I had every intention of doing the residency program for whatever the time period ultimately was; I think it was like six months.  And I made three of the six months, and then what I was thinking was I would go and learn the Kaiser system, do my time, enjoy it, but then go out and work in--someplace.  Community hospital somewhere.  I got into the Kaiser system; I started with the administrative residence, and then it took off from there.
Story_ID: 661292
Speaker 1: There were--you said two, two of the, two res- administrative residencies?
Speaker 2: No, I was an intern at Vallejo General Hospital [Sutter Solano Medical Center, Vallejo, California].
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: After my--completed my bachelor's degree [at Golden Gate University, San Francisco, California] (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And you became--
Speaker 2: And then I was a resident at Kaiser [Kaiser Permanente] in San Francisco [California].
Speaker 1: In San Francisco, okay.
Speaker 2: Completing my master's degree.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So, that's the beginning with--of your affiliation.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: But you were laid off at Vallejo?
Speaker 2: Vallejo General.
Speaker 1: Vallejo General, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So, and then Alva [Alva Wheatley], you mentioned her.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Can you talk about her a little bit?
Speaker 2: Oh, she's--if it wasn't for Alva, I wouldn't be sitting here at Kaiser, because she took me in.  She said, "I happen to have an opening for a resident, and you clearly qualify, and I'm willing to give you a chance."  And so, she hired me on as a resident [at Kaiser Permanente San Francisco Medical Center, San Francisco, California] and gave me full access to her and to her leadership team.  She gave me assignments to work with the team members, and one of the assignments she gave me was to assess the outpatient medical records department.  And so I went in as the administrative resident, and the manager had left the area, left the company, and I assessed the department, department, and did all his work, and I wrote it up.  And remember, writing was a big deal for me, so I mean I wrote this report, and at least, in my view, it was a beautiful report, very effective.  And it laid out the problem, it laid out my findings, and it laid out a set of recommendations.  So, she told me, great job, you know, and after a lot of questions and everything.  And she said, "Now go and implement your recommendations," and I said, "It will be very hard to do that as a resident, because nobody's going to really take me seriously and everything.  But as the manager, I think that I can effect a change."  And so, she put me through the interview process with the assistant administrator of the area and everything, and then I was hired on as a manager.  So I, my first official job at Kaiser was the outpatient medical records manager, and that was in September of '84 [1984].
Speaker 1: So (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And that was the start.
Story_ID: 661293
Speaker 1: So, tell me then what you do then as manager [at Kaiser Permanente San Francisco Medical Center, San Francisco, California].  And you said you were assessing?  How do you even know what to assess at that point?  Were you just--you know, I know you had said you had learned to look at data.  But were you just observing, you know, how to (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, yeah, everything.  I was observing, you know, what the workers were doing.  I looked at a lot of data, you know.  So, for example, they had a problem with--obviously this is thirty something years ago, but it's pretty accurate.  They had a problem with--during that time, every lab slip had to be filed into medical records, so they had stacks of lab slips and they were behind.  And it was a frustration for the physician, because you get the medical records and not all the medical information was in there.  And so, that was one of the areas that I studied.  And so I studied--I did a numbers count: how many of these slips do you have?  And I did a people count: how many people are here?  And then I worked with the lab techs--I mean the filers, and I would like at how many can they get done in an eight hour day?  And so I started to do the analysis, and then I came up with the recommendation that two things were broken: one, the whole system was broken.  Because why put the lab slip in the department when somehow you can match it to the record when the slip is available. So, you're just in time; that was my thought process.  But the second one, more importantly, was I just did a number count, and said, every day, in essence, at that time, the manpower available times the time that each of them will spend, times how many they can get done against how many are coming--I can tell you what the backlog is going to be.  And so, and Alva [Alva Wheatley] loved that work and that thinking, and so that was just one of maybe four or five areas.  So, I put together those kinds of recommendations and said, you know, the workers needed to be better allocated, if you will, in the areas of the file room.  So, instead of having someone going all over the file room, you pre-sort the lab slips into sections and you give Bernard [HistoryMaker Bernard J. Tyson] this area, because they're all numbered.  And so I used to put those things together, and I put together the recommendations.  And she said, "These are great.  Now, you go and do it."  And I was like, "It'll be very hard as a resident."  So, then they hired me on as the manager, and that was the start.  And then I turned that department around, and to this day, thirty something years later, I still go visit.  And I still have employees in that area that were there when I was the manager, and every promotion that I've gotten in the organization, I would go into that department.  And I have to say, those individuals are so proud of me, and I'm proud of them.  In fact, I was in there when--after I became chairman and CEO [of Kaiser Permanente].  I went in there and we took pictures and selfies and everything.  And I told them, I said, "As long as I'm here, you can--you are guaranteed that we're going to all leave together.  So, nothing's going to happen to you while I'm here."  You know, we had jokes like that, and they were wonderful.  You know, and that's when I really had my first experience in quote (air quotes) managing people.  And it was a great experience, and I had a great department, you know.  And, and here was a group of what they called unmotivated people and everything, and they were fantastic; I mean they were fantastic.  And I challenged them and we had fun, and we got the work done.  You know, we had meetings, I informed them what was going on.  It was just, you know, a very good time, and, and I got the work done.
Story_ID: 661294
Speaker 1: So, Bernard [HistoryMaker Bernard J. Tyson], at what point--you're still, you know, young--that you we- realized--you realize that Kaiser [Kaiser Permanente] is a different system?
Speaker 2: (Nods head).
Speaker 1: So, when do you realize that?  Or don't you have any perspective about that?  A different kind of medical system?
Speaker 2: Yeah, early on I realized it.  I mean that's led me to want to understand it, because I thought of being a hospital administrator, and the hospital was--everything was by itself.  I learned early on from the Kaiser system, that no, that's not accurate, because you can get so much done in the outpatient setting.  And growing up, the experience was--I want to do this because my mother [Billie Haynes Tyson] got real, real, real, sick and she ended up in the hospital, and they did some beautiful things to her and then she was able to come back home.  What I learned in the Kaiser system, early, early, early on, was that we want to do things to prevent, in my translation, your mother from ever having to go into the hospital.  So, the Kaiser system was clearly everything that I studied, which is it's more than this; it's all of that.  And so, I came into my administrative residency program with an inquisitive mind of wanting to understand the Kaiser system, because, as I said, in college [Golden Gate University, San Francisco, California], Kaiser was used a lot in terms of case studies.  So, early on I got that aha, because I was in charge of the outpatient medical records [at Kaiser Permanente San Francisco Medical Center, San Francisco, California], so I only thought about records in a hospital setting.  And now, here are these thousands and thousands of records, which was about how care was being provided, actually upstairs, which was the outpatient facilities, the outpatient medical office building in which the medical records department was housed.  And so, early on I knew that there was a difference between the rest of the world and the, the, quote, Kaiser system.
Story_ID: 661295
Speaker 1: Now, what is your next position after that then?
Speaker 2: They added to the outpatient medical records the X ray file room, so they added responsibility to that.  Then I was promoted, quote, unquote, to patient accounting in the Oakland [California] regional office.  So, my first promotion from San Francisco [Kaiser Permanente San Francisco Medical Center, San Francisco, California] was to come over to Oakland and work in patient accounting.  And that was a great experience, because that was about dollars and cents.  And so, numbers and accounting, and making sure that the systems of collections were in place and all that stuff.  So, I did that in Oakland, and then my next promotion was back to San Francisco as the assistant hospital administrator.  And by this time, Alva [Alva Wheatley] was no longer in San Francisco.  A gentleman named Frank Alvarez was the hospital administrator, and he hired me as his assistant administrator.
Speaker 1: So, wa- so, how large was that facility then?
Speaker 2: Oh, it was large; it was over three hundred beds.  It sits on a hill, and it had a nine or ten story medical office building.  It had other campuses; it was spread out.  It was large, and it is today, a big campus.
Speaker 1: So, what do you learn, and what are you assigned to do that point?
Speaker 2: I have facilities, so I was in charge of the buildings.  I had (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Janitorial services?
Speaker 2: Yeah, and the building program, the construction.
Speaker 1: Oh.
Speaker 2: At that time we had--facility services was regional, if you will, but also you had plant officers in your hospital, because we were going to do a major expansion.  And I was involved with that, and I loved that.  So, I had that.  I had the X ray file rooms and everything, and so as time went on, they added responsibilities as the quote, assistant hospital administrator.  That was the time when we also acquired another hospital, which is the French hospital that we now call our French campus.  Frank had put me on the negotiating team and I was part of the small team that even negotiated--that actually got to negotiate the deal and everything.  And so I guess during that time that was my first real acquisition, and we acquired the French hospital, that we then called the Kaiser Permanente French Campus [San Francisco, California].  So I did all of that, and that was just an incredible experience.  And then while I was in San Francisco [California], the assistant administrator became, I think an associate administrator, which was a higher level, and I had inpatient and outpatient responsibilities.  Then from there, I was appointed to run Santa Rosa Kaiser [Kaiser Permanente Santa Rosa Medical Center, Santa Rosa, California], which was the first time I became a hospital administrator.  So, that was incredible.
Speaker 1: Wait, this is what year?
Speaker 2: That was '92 [1992].
Speaker 1: Two [1992]? Nineteen ninety-two [1992].  That's when you became CE--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --CEO of Kaiser Foundation Hospital [Kaiser Foundation Hospitals, Inc.]?  No?
Speaker 2: In, in--no, that was (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Santa Rosa?
Speaker 2: Santa Rosa.
Speaker 1: So, the--we're talking about the same thing.
Speaker 2: Right.
Story_ID: 661296
Speaker 1: I mean running a hospital (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Running a hospital.  So, can you tell me--because your son [Bernard Tyson, Jr.], I think your first son was born in '91 [1991], am I right?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Okay.  So, the thing--what--how do I say this?  Are there other African Americans in the Kaiser system [Kaiser Permanente] running hospitals at this point?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: And were there people who predated you that you looked up to?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Okay, so who were they?
Speaker 1: I mentioned Larry Brown [Lawrence Brown].
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: There was John Rawls, he was a hospital administrator.  And--
Speaker 2: But, but Larry (background noise) Brown, he wasn't in the Kaiser system, though, right?
Speaker 1: No.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: No, Larry Brown was in the Kaiser system.
Speaker 2: He was in the Kaiser system?
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Okay, I misunderstood that, okay.
Speaker 1: No, there were two Browns.  Lewis Brown [Lewis F. Brown], who I talked about early in my childhood--
Speaker 2: Okay, right, right.
Speaker 1: Attorney Brown.
Speaker 2: He was an attorney.
Speaker 1: Larry Brown was at Kaiser in Vallejo [Kaiser Permanente Vallejo Medical Center, Vallejo, California].  He came from Kaiser in Sacramento [California].
Speaker 2: I see.
Speaker 1: And then Tony Wagner was at Laguna in San Francisco [Laguna Honda Hospital, San Francisco, California], not Kaiser.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Because Tony Wagner is Anthony Wagner [HistoryMaker Anthony G. Wagner].
Speaker 1: That's right.
Speaker 2: I think we've interviewed him.
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, yeah, that's him, yeah.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Yeah, oh, yeah.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: He's one of my role models.
Speaker 2: I see.  Wow, so, okay.
Speaker 1: Oh, he's been around a long time.
Speaker 2: Okay, okay.
Speaker 1: Yeah, oh yeah.  And so, those two stood out.  But in the Kaiser system, I mean Alva Wheatley is African American.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: So, I was hired by an African American female, so that was the other thing that stood out in the Kaiser system.  African Americans, black people at the time, they had positions of power.  I remember Alva Wheatley.  There was a Sheila Manderson who was the administrator of Kaiser in Richmond [Kaiser Permanente Richmond Medical Center, Richmond, California].  There was John Rawls who was the administrator at Kaiser in Redwood City [Kaiser Permanente Redwood City Medical Center, Redwood City, California].  There was Larry Brown, who was the administrator at Kaiser in Vallejo.  So, it was, wow, you can do this here.  And I was really inspired by that.
Story_ID: 661297
Speaker 1: And what are you learning about running--so you're in charge of your own hospital.  There are all kinds of things when you're running a hospital.
Speaker 2: Yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) It's almost--I mean we only see it on TV, some, you know, but there're the legal issues; there's the actual--the maintenance issues; there are the doctors.  Right?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: So, and the nurses.  And, so how do you handle all of it?  That's what I'm--
Speaker 2: Well, by this time, I clearly am learning how to lead and work with people and hold people accountable.
Speaker 1: And how large was the staff?
Speaker 2: Oh, it was several hundred.  When I went to Kaiser in Santa Rosa [Kaiser Permanente Santa Rosa Medical Center, Santa Rosa, California], the beauty about that assignment--that was that was my first hospital, and it was in a predominantly white area, and it was a brand new hospital.  And it was having some problems, you know, startup problems and everything, and I was sent there to both fix it and to be the hospital administrator.  And so here you are, this young African American going into this brand new hospital.  And that just--you know at the time, I mean, and to this day, it spoke volumes about the philosophy of this organization [Kaiser Permanente].  If they felt you could do it, and you're competent and capable--I mean that was Henry J. Kaiser that had, I think, instilled that philosophy.  To this day, I believe he didn't care about race and all that stuff.  He only cared about can you get it done, can you fill the need?  Can you do it?  And if there was a sense of confidence you could do it--you know, forget it.  I mean he treated women like that and he treated people of color like that.  I never met him personally; I wish I had, but I mean that's his legacy, right.  And so inside of the organization it was not unusual to say, "No, he doesn't have to go work at Kaiser in Richmond [Kaiser Permanente Richmond Medical Center, Richmond, California]," which was in a predominantly African American area, very important.  Here was a brand new hospital that was literally just built, so can you imagine how I felt?  Here I am, you know, a young whippersnapper, my first hospital, my first dream come true.  This is a brand new hospital, so what was important to me was the people in the beds, the patients, and the people who were providing the care.  So, I went around two or three or four times a day.  I'd just walk around and talk to the nurses, talk to the doctors, and talk to patients.  I used to give my business cards to patients.  I used to go tell the patients, "These people are gonna take great care of you, but you're in my hospital.  If you need anything, you call me directly."  I used to give them the card.  I used to drive some of the staff crazy when I did that, you know, especially the managers, (makes sound) you know.  But I think they came to adjust to the fact that this wasn't about they were doing something wrong.  It was just something that was personal to me that, you know, you can contact me personally.  And I used to walk around the hospital, and I did this in San Francisco [California]; I used to walk around the hospital [Kaiser Permanente San Francisco Medical Center] all the time, and to this day, I love to round the hospitals.  When I go out on site visits, which, now, unfortunately it's like a big production; you know, the CEO is coming; and I try to play that down.  I love to go and walk through hospitals and talk to the staff, the nurses, the doctors, the housekeepers--everybody, and talk to the patients.  But one of the things I used to think about a lot in the hospital environment was I had the whole continuum of life right here in the four walls of the hospital.  And what I used to think about is, I used--you know, is you go on one floor and you see a father and a mother crying for joy because their beautiful child was just brought into the world, and that was the third floor in the labor and delivery department.  Then I would go down to the second floor and you can see a family crying because somebody had just died.  And that was the critical care unit, where somebody was at the end of life.  And so, for me, it was the whole spectrum of life inside of a hospital.  And when a loved one was in a hospital bed, pretty much the whole family drama happened inside of that environment.  And so, there was like this window of four or five days that a family member of a loved one would be in one of my beds, and then we were called upon as a medical team together to do something to help this person.  But then there--most times there was also family that was obviously a part of this, and I understood that, and obviously I resonated with that as being very much family oriented.  And so, I viewed myself as part of the family while they were in, if you will, my care, as I used to call it in the hospital.  So, I had that, I had that wonderful experience.  And then ironically, I was asked to come to the regional headquarters--
Story_ID: 661298
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So you did that for a year?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Before being asked?
Speaker 2: Right, yeah, yeah.  But I mean, it's interesting you say it that way.  I, I would say I was only technically a hospital administrator for a year, because I was then asked to come down to the regional office and to lead a group that ultimately was tasked with re-designing the Northern California region.  And so I had an agreement with the leader of the region that this was quote, an assignment, and that my hospital administrator job would remain mine [at Kaiser Permanente Santa Rosa Medical Center, Santa Rosa, California], and that after I did this I would go back to that area, and of course, I never did, because I came here and then I learned more about the company.
Speaker 1: So, what was the position here, and who were you reporting to?
Speaker 2: I was asso- quote associate regional manager, and I reported to the regional manager.  The regional manager then is a regional president today.  So, this person was in charge of a large geographic area, in this case the Northern California region.  But in the organization, they were called a regional manager.  He--he actually was the top gun of this region, and I reported directly to him.  And he was the one that drove the re-design, and then I drove the actual work of re-design to what.  And then very similar to my San Francisco experience [at Kaiser Permanente San Francisco Medical Center, San Francisco, California], I and the team, the team and I, gave this set of recommendations, and then he charged me with the task of implementing it.
Speaker 1: So, what recommendations did you have?
Speaker 2: We went to local markets, so we called them service areas.  And so, instead of thinking about this as one geographic area, we had the Golden Gate service market and we established the Alameda service market and the Sacramento Valley service market.  And it was a belief that you needed to spread the leadership into geographic areas to have a focus and a concentration on a population in an area.  And, and he, he clearly bought into it, and so he wanted me to go and start implementing that.  The other thing was, it was also the beginning of--and then there were shared services--that there were some services that did not need to be divided up into the geographies; it needed to be provided across the organization.
Speaker 1: So, give an example.
Speaker 2: IT [information technology] and facilities.  Remember, before I was a hospital administrator I had facility services in San Francisco [California].  In my later role, it was like, that makes no sense; you know, I'm not building all the time in a geographic area.  We should use these resources and spread them across the program, and then you have more of the plant operators in the specific facilities; you know, the maintenance type roles, but construction and all of that would come from a regional service.  And so, and then I had these graphics and charts where I showed markets, you know, the local areas, and then the services that would go across them.  And so, he asked me to implement those, and so I started working on the implementation of the reorganization, and that was a terrific job.  Then after I finished that, I started diving into some of the areas at the regional level, so I actually had a role as the IT executive for a while.  I had to go in and do the IT work, really run the area.  And I had the HR [human resources] area for a while, so I actually tell people all the time that I've done most jobs in this organization in my career at Kaiser Permanente, and those were just incredible years and experiences of, of doing that.
Story_ID: 661299
Speaker 1: This is during the Clinton years, right?
Speaker 2: (Nods head).
Speaker 1: And managed healthcare was already initiated before that.  But can you talk a little bit about Kaiser and its history, if you can do that.  Because the northern region [Northern California] is the largest, right?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Okay--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --of the regions.  But I just would like you to give some historical context here.
Speaker 2: Yeah, we were clearly--our brand was very strong as an HMO, a health maintenance organization; we were known that way.  It was during the time when you either loved Kaiser or you hated Kaiser.  And you hated Kaiser if you had a bad experience, or if your loved ones had a bad experience.  And so there was like two worlds of Kaiser at the time, Kaiser Permanente, was, "I love them; they have great, great care."  Or it was, "I'm not going to get trapped in that Kaiser system."  You can't have--we had the reputation of "You can't have your own doctors.  You have to see any doctor that's available," those kinds of belief systems.  And (clears throat) at the same time, it was very affordable.  And, they used to describe it as--you go to one place, sort of very convenient.  The positives far outweighed the negatives, but the negative stories were clearly there.  I was working in the organization in which, in reality, what I was seeing was wonderful people trying to get better and better.  So, it was like that was going on.  But then during the Clinton period, Kaiser Permanente, before and after, was obviously swept up in the movement of HMOs, and moving to quote controlling costs, and we got a black eye, because what was being invented was nothing like who we are.  And so, fortunately, fortunately, as you know, when the HMO--the country rejected HMOs, because then you started having these stories about, "I couldn't get care; I couldn't get seen.  I couldn't get this."  And what started to happen over time was, "But Kaiser Permanente is different."  Because, as you know, the HMOs started to just collapse, and everybody totally rejected the model, the idea, that you're going to have somebody quote (air quotes) working to control costs, and physicians could not make their own decisions, and all the stuff that was the negative outcome of what I thought President Clinton [President William Jefferson "Bill" Clinton] and them were really trying to accomplish, which was to make healthcare accessible and affordable for everyone.  So, it got into the swirl, and what obviously started to happen was that physicians and providers started to accept the risks for taking care of populations.  And then they're not insurance companies, and so they started to lose a lot of money.  And then the bad reputation of HMO just, just, as you know, just swept over the country, and we were at a time of growth and building out the Kaiser Permanente model.  We were moving into other states; we were looking at getting bigger all the time.  And so while we were challenged by that backdrop, we continued to show that we are different, and we got credit for that, no, at Kaiser, you were different, and we were getting much better in all the things that we were doing at the same time, and so we did, I think, dodge the collapse of the HMO by everyone, almost saying as if there's an asterisk, but Kaiser is different.  And so w- we struggled during that time, but also we prospered during that time.
Story_ID: 661300
Speaker 1: I didn't realize that the HMOs [health maintenance organization] had had a bad rap, because they're still around today.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Okay.  But the thing that--so the next position that you have though, is you are made chief operating officer; I have that.  Right, in 1999?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: For outside of California?
Speaker 2: Right.  We were going (clears throat), we were going through a very difficult time at Kaiser.  We almost went bankrupt, we almost went out of business.  We bought a lot of regions and markets, and, you know, ultimately we didn't really have a strategy, except for we just bought a lot of stuff.  And we had major contention inside of the organization between the health plan hospital organizations and the medical groups; we were not on the same page for the strategy.  We have an exclusive relationship between the organizations, so the medical group cannot contract with any other health plans, and the health plans cannot contract with any of the medical groups unless there's a mutual agreement, so there's an exclusive relationship.  We sent the medical group a clear signal that we wanted to break that; that we wanted networks, because we had to grow.  So we, some would say we lost our way in the '90s [1990s].  And then the money started to burn, in California in particular, and at the same time we lower our rates.  And we got great membership growth, but we didn't have the capacity to care for everyone, so we had to go buy beds on the market and it was very expensive.  So, just major financial problems.
Speaker 1: Who was the CEO at that time?
Speaker 2: Dave Lawrence [David Lawrence].
Speaker 1: Okay.  So (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) He was the CEO.
Speaker 1: So, how many CEOs had you been through at that point and time--under--at that point?
Speaker 2: That was the second one that I had been under.  Jim Vohs [James Vohs] was the first one when I joined Kaiser Permanente.  Dave Lawrence was the second one.  George Halvorson was the third one, and then myself.
Story_ID: 661301
Speaker 1: Do you think Kaiser [Kaiser Permanente] just cut--'cause your regions--that's why I was wondering.  You were sent out--the areas that were--I know in 1998 I think Kaiser sold operations in Texas and Charlotte [North Carolina] (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right, right.
Speaker 1: I mean, it was trying to.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  And so the board of Kaiser Foundation Health Plans and Hospitals [Kaiser Foundation Health Plan, Inc. and Kaiser Foundation Hospitals, Inc.]--David Lawrence was still here as the chairman and CEO, but they hired a president who was the turnaround officer, and he was brought in from the outside.
Speaker 1: And his name?
Speaker 2: His name was Dale Crandall.  Dale was charged with turning around the company.  Dale hired--Dale had a small group of people that he turned to, to assist in the turnaround; I was one of those individuals.  So, I actually thought they would let me go, because I was simply part of the previous administration that was part of the teams and stuff that went out and bought stuff, for example, and everything.  But it turns out he thought that I would be ideal for helping with the turnaround, because I stood--I understood the organization.  I knew about turnarounds, because in most of my career I went into bad situations and turned them around.  And so, he and Dave asked me to relocate to Maryland, to Washington, D.C., and to turn around the East Coast.  And at the time it included the New York [New York] area that we were going to get out of, the Washington, D.C. area, and the Cleveland, Ohio area.  So, I relocated my family then back to the East Coast and we lived in Maryland, and I became the--ultimately the regional president for outside of California--I mean the president for the regions outside of California.
Speaker 1: Well, that is spread out though, right, the regions outside?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Because it's Maryland, and you have a little--was Boston [Massachusetts]--I mean, you know, Massachusetts--
Speaker 2: No, Baltimore [Maryland].
Speaker 1: Baltimore?
Speaker 2: Right.  So you had Virginia, Maryland, Baltimore.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And then there was Ohio.
Speaker 1: Right, Ohio.
Speaker 2: And then we were getting out of the Connecticut, Vermont, and New York area.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  So, what do you--but you're a small potato there.
Story_ID: 661302
Speaker 1: So, what are you learning at that point?  And then what is this about you being also head of Kaiser's brand strategy?  So--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So, the regions that I was at, the East Coast, was obviously very different from Kaiser in California, because we were smaller, to your point; smaller in size and less market share.  And so, there were a lot of similarities of the Kaiser model outside of California, but there were clear differences.  And depending on which market--like Ohio, or like Georgia--it actually felt different, because the health plan still contracted with the medical group on an exclusive basis, but many of the physicians were contracted physicians that didn't belong to the Permanente Medical Group [Permanente Medical Group, Inc.].  And so the patient care aspect of it could be provided inside of the Kaiser system, or we'd just send you to, you know, Dr. Jones down the street like any other--in this case--insurance company would.  So, there was a different feel for it at that time.  And that's something, as you probably know, we've changed dramatically; it's now the Kaiser brand everywhere.  And then it made a difference also, in that in Northern California I was used to--you know, at the time, maybe every one in four--one in four and a half of Californians in Northern California belonging to Kaiser Permanente.  That same calculation in Maryland, for example, was something like one in twenty-five.  So, I used to visually tell people to look out my window when I worked in the regional office, and I used to say, "Count to four," around the cars on 990, 980, the freeway, that you can see from my old window.  And I used to say--they'd say, "One, two, three, four," and I'd go, "Kaiser."  And that was my way of implanting in their mind that every one in four belongs to Kaiser.  You go to back to Maryland, it was every one in, I think at the time it was one in eighteen.  So, you have to count eighteen cars to say Kaiser.  And so, that was a big difference in the markets.  But I worked so hard in the turnaround.  That was the hardest I've ever worked in this organization, and, night and day, nonstop, to work hard to turn it around.    Then in the midst of all that, I got appointed as president of all the regions outside of California.
Speaker 1: I see.  Because in that job--even when it seemed to me almost like it was a, a step down sort of--but it--a lot of times people send people in--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --in the, right, you know, into the hardest situations.
Speaker 2: That's right, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 661303
Speaker 1: And it truly was--the--the work was, turn this around and get out of these other markets.  And so, so, I would divide my work up into two--one was, I had to shut down the regions that we knew we were not going to continue in, and then for the ones that we were going to stay in, save those regions.  So, it was a big job in the geographic area of the East Coast.  Then, as had been my history at Kaiser, in that job it started to expand even more.  So then it started out with, specifically, to turnaround Mid-Atlantic and Ohio.  Then Georgia was added, and then, and then, and then Colorado was added, and then the Northwest was added, then Hawaii was added.  So then it went from president I think of the East Coast or something, title we had, to president of all the regions outside of California.  So, there was a president in California for north and south, and a president for outside of California, which were all the regions.
Speaker 2: Now, you're traveling--are you having to travel to--?
Speaker 1: I was all the time traveling, yeah, all the time.  I mean I was, I stayed on planes during that time, during that whole time period, because I have always been a visible person.  To this day I'm that way, and so it was nothing for me to get on a plane.  It was nothing for me to get on a plane and travel to a region and just stay there for that day and fly back home that night.  When George Halvorson joined the (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So, why--what was the--I'm sorry.  Why did he join then?  Was he recruited in?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Because he came from--
Speaker 1: Yeah, Dave Lawrence [David Lawrence]--
Speaker 2: He was the turnaround guy?
Speaker 1: No, Dave Lawrence was the chairman and CEO, Dale Crandall was the turnaround guy.  Dave was--now, we're into Dave being here like ten years, and he was ready to retire.  So the turnaround was actually, technically over under Dave.  So, we went through the turnaround.  We went from the red into the black, and major work.  We had sold the regions that were unprofitable and not part of the perceived future of Kaiser Permanente.  And so we were on the upswing of the turnaround now, and stabilizing it for the organization.  In the midst of that, Dave retired, and George Halvorson was recruited in, and that was in 19--I mean 2002.
Story_ID: 661304
Speaker 1: But (clears throat) during that time, what I'm told, you know, what I've read, was that you also had this internal effort to build this--what you're known for now--but to build your own electronic records system.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And that failed.  I think it was, it was failing when George Halvorson started.  I read that it was Cerner [Cerner Corporation] versus Epic [Epic Systems Corporation] and you (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, yeah.  George came in, and as an organization, we were struggling to implement the medical records of the future.  We always had an ambition to have all of our patients on an electronic health record, and George conducted this massive study.  And he concluded, and we concluded as an organization that there's got to be a better way to implement this, and we ultimately selected Epic.  And at the time, Epic was a very small organization, and we said we should make the bet.  And so we hired Epic, and together we evolved the, what is today the Epic organization, because they were very small and we were their biggest, by far their biggest client ever--ever.  And we, in fact, put them on the map.  The second thing that George did was he felt strongly that the world really didn't know--and he used to always talk the world--the world really didn't know who Kaiser Permanente is, and that we needed a strong brand strategy for the organization, and he asked me to lead that effort.  And so after a lot of conversations and everything, I took on that assignment, and it was in that role that we created what is today Thrive, the brand positioning for the organization.  And it is in that role that we clearly told the world that we are about health; that people don't aspire to be sick; that people want to live healthy lives; and our DNA is about health and prevention, and working upstream to partner with people to keep them healthy.  Should you need care, it's all about evidence based care.  What's the right way to care for you to get you back to health?  But the energy of the organization is geared around keeping you healthy, and so we were able, with a wonderful advertising company, to reduce all of that to one word, and that's Thrive.
Story_ID: 661305
Speaker 1: Who was the advertising agency?
Speaker 2: Campbell Ewald.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Now, this, this, even this messaging is still--I mean it's coming more into the, the public mindset, but it was still relatively new, right?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: I mean medically.
Speaker 2: It was new, it was different.  It was, it took off like wildfire.  It was so anti what everybody else had been doing, right.  It was nothing like what was going on at that time in the advertising of healthcare.  You know, healthcare advertising was about showing a doctor and showing a sick patient and, you know, talking about, you know, the code words, "We stand for quality, and we're this."  And here we come along with a broccoli, and we affirm our position, which is we stand for health, and Thrive.  And we hired this wonderful voice from this person, Allison Janney, and she becomes the voice of Kaiser Permanente.  And she--literally the first ad that we ran was like an anthem.  It was: "We stand for health.  We stand for people not driving without their--riding in cars without your seatbelt.  We stand for--," I mean, it was just a wonderful salute to what we stand for.  And then we, you know, ended on, "We stand for health, and at Kaiser Permanente you can thrive."  And we did that, and everybody took note.  And so, there was no physician in a white coat.  It was, "We stand for health."  And then we started adding great music to our commercials.  Bob Dylan we pulled back up, and ran an ad with Bob Dylan.  We used 'Saturday Night Fever,' and showed an African American elderly man full of life.  And it was all about thrive.  Then we started to show physicians in our messaging, but it wasn't, you know, depressing imagery.  It was, if you belong to Kaiser Permanente, you don't have just a single physician; you have an entourage, and so, we showed an entourage; that you don't just get a physician; you get a therapist, and a receptionist and a nutritionist.  I mean it was beautiful, because it showed the holistic approach of health.  And so, we, no question about it, our impact to the industry was the reframing of the narrative.  It was not talking about healthcare; it was talking about health.  And we were tapping into the aspirations of people, as opposed to the fear of people--that you're going to get cancer, and we're the best center for you to get cancer.  In fact, when we ran that cancer commercial, I mean, we have some of the best programs at Kaiser Permanente.  But what we did, we ran a cancer commercial and we said, "You have cancer, cancer doesn't have you."  And what we showed was a person living their lives, and thriving with cancer was the imagery.  And we got thousands of letters where people were saying, I have diabetes, but diabetes doesn't have me.  I have cancer, but cancer doesn't have me.  So, it was that kind of messaging that was totally different from the rest of the industry.  And as you know now, the industry has tried to outdo us around something that we actually put in place.
Story_ID: 661306
Speaker 1: Your visibility was becoming known, right?  Now, at what point and time do you join the Executive Leadership Council?  What--is that later?
Speaker 2: Yeah--
Speaker 1: That's later.  So, I'm trying to understand--during your time in the Maryland area, are you engaging with anything on the Hill [Capitol Hill, Washington, D.C.]?  Does that--
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, very engaged on the Hill.  I was very fortunate that, you know, I was back there during the time when things were thriving.  You also had the transition from the Clinton administration to the Bush [President George Walker Bush] administration that happened.  It was a different feel, obviously.  I mean when Bill--when President Clinton [President William Jefferson "Bill" Clinton] was president, people used to walk around acting like they knew him on a personal level.  Bill--they used to call him Bill.  "Is Bill--?" They used to say, "Is Bill in town this weekend?"  (Laughter) And he was like the president of the United States.  But he had that kind of--
Speaker 1: Approachability.
Speaker 2: Approachable, yeah, and so you just expected to see him.  The very first time I met him was at the black congressional caucus [Congressional Black Caucus] dinner, and he was actually going through the Monica Lewinsky situation.  And he came to our dinner, and he was just like this superstar, this celebrity.  He just walked in the room and he felt totally at home, you know.  And I remember that, you know, his speech was great and the introduction of him was great.  And, you know, I remember Representative Diane Watson [HistoryMaker Diane E. Watson], you know, did some--talked up for him, and she got the crowd all revved up, you know.  You know, she's wonderful, and a fireball.  And she was saying, "In this country you are innocent until proven guilty," you know, and she had a way of saying it that everybody was resonating with.  And so, it was, it was an exciting time to be there.  And I was the face of Kaiser Permanente that was well respected in federal government, so I spent a lot of time on the Hill and with politicians, and that was really enjoyable doing that during that time.
Story_ID: 661307
Speaker 1: That also gives you that experience too, right, 'cause you hadn't had that experience.  Now, had you had the experience on the state level?
Speaker 2: Yeah, but nothing like Washington, D.C.  It was just night and day different in Washington, D.C.  You know, the whole culture is different in Washington, D.C.  In--in California, for example, you know, it was all about doing business, right.  In Washington, D.C., you learn it's all about relationships.  So, you go to dinner with someone; you don't rush the business.  It's about family time, and how's everything going, and all of that?  You ease into what the issue or request, whatever it is.  It's not like a business dinner.  And I learned that.  In D.C., I learned how politicians worked, and the skillsets required as a politician.  You know, and I enjoyed being in the, you know, the backyard of the federal government, and saw that at work--at work.  And I was involved, and very fortunate, to be involved at multiple levels where I worked with individuals.  I was a part of the board of trade in Washington, D.C. [Greater Washington Board of Trade], and that was a very important group, because it was a business community working with the federal government.  It was actually in the board of trade that early on they started talking about the African American Smithsonian [National Museum of African American History and Culture, Washington, D.C.] that they wanted to see built.  I was on the board of trade (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) That was under Bush [President George Walker Bush] though, right?
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: Under Bush, because Bush is when it started.
Speaker 2: Right, absolutely, yeah, it was under that administration.  During the Bush administration we were going to open up the White House for him.  And then, you know, the attacks and everything happened.  But early on, there was this whole argument about Pennsylvania Avenue.  The stuff that people cared about in D.C. and the federal government--it was interesting that in some cases--obviously, it was to look after the nation--but so much happened inside of the epoch of Washington, D.C.  So, I got a chance to meet amazing people; I mean [HistoryMaker] John Lewis, you know, and people that I'd read about.  And then to spend time with him, you know, and just different people that we were very fortunate in meeting and being a part of.  And then I sponsored, through Kaiser Permanente, certain events in Washington, D.C. and, you know, Vice President Gore [Al Gore] and I were on a joint taskforce that had to do with health in Washington, D.C., so I got a chance to experience that.  And we used to have the, you know, the annual walks and the marathons and stuff like that, and those were all great experiences for me, and then working to get, you know, our voice on the table, and legislation.  And what I recall today as being just an honest broker of good information, I learned a lot of that working with them during that time period, where you're helping them to do their jobs, as opposed to just out of total self-interest.  And--
Story_ID: 661308
Speaker 1: So, who are the important people for you in [U.S.] Congress and on the Hill [Capitol Hill, Washington, D.C.] besides--I mean between those two administrations, between the Clinton [President William Jefferson "Bill" Clinton] and Bush [President George Walker Bush] administrations?  Because the Clintons brought healthcare to the fore, mainly because it was failed--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --their effort to--
Speaker 2: Yeah.  The Clinton administration, as an organization, we worked very closely with the Clinton administration.  And as you know, or may know, we were actually called upon quite a bit.  And Hillary Clinton [Hillary Rodham Clinton], who led the effort, was shaping it in her mind.  And that was very important, because the perception was she locked out a lot of the important people who should have been, if you will, at the table.  And there was some of the imagery of rejecting the industry and getting a lot of input from outside of the industry--the American people, and people on the Hill.  And then, of course, you had the Democrat and Republican things going on.  We were one of the few that was, in essence, allowed to speak to and influence--not influence out of self-interest, but just influence out of, how do you think about this, and how do you guys do this? To this day, when I run into President Clinton he will share stories about the importance of Kaiser Permanente in this country and in his administration.  And he would definitely, as he did recently, talk about the importance of us in the Obama [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama] administration and where we are with healthcare in this country.   And so, he knew us very well, and that really came about because he not only studied our organization, he and Hillary opened themselves up to, you know, really getting feedback that they needed as they were trying to move this country.
Speaker 1: And you were proposing a model, right?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And really, isn't Kaiser Permanente really more indicative of the single payer model?  The, is it a single payer--
Speaker 2: Yeah, no, I mean you get--Kaiser Permanente is more indicative of a holistic approach (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Approach to healthcare, okay.
Speaker 2: Right.  So, instead of--healthcare is very fragmented and siloed, and Kaiser Permanente brings all the pieces together.
Speaker 1: But you have your--well now you have your, going to have your own medical school, but you have your own doctors, right (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right.  They--
Speaker 1: And your own facilities?
Speaker 2: Right, yeah.  The doctors are in a separate organization which is managed and governed by them, but they all work exclusively with us.  And so, you have everything.  We have our own labs and we have our own pharmacy; we have our own hospitals.  We oversee all of the care as needed for the people who entrust their lives in our hands, which today is 10.2 million.  And then as you know, we have an acquisition that we are finalizing, and that will be another almost six hundred thousand.
Speaker 1: Six hundred thousand?
Speaker 2: New members.
Speaker 1: New members.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: So you'll be up to almost 11 million (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Almost 11 million, yeah.  When you look at the growth that we project for next year and the closing of this transaction, we will be actually above 11 million.
Speaker 1: So, how does your--so that time is when Halvorson [George Halvorson] is CEO, right?  So, when are you on the track that ends up leading you to being CEO?  When is that?
Speaker 2: Ah--
Speaker 1: He was, he was in office for twelve--
Speaker 2: Almost twelve years.
Speaker 1: Twelve years.
Speaker 2: Yeah, thereabouts.  Yeah, about twelve years.  He came in 2002.  I would say that--
Speaker 1: And where did he come from?  What sys- kind of system did he come from?
Speaker 2: HealthPartners [Bloomington, Minnesota].  It's a smaller health plan in Minnesota.  In fact, we were shocked in the beginning, because it was like six hundred thousand.  You know, at that time we were about maybe 8 million, and we were like, oh.  And he wasn't a--homegrown from the inside, so you know, we had that to deal with.  He was well known in the industry.
Story_ID: 661309
Speaker 1: You know, you were saying he's from a small system (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, yeah.  So, so he [George Halvorson] was from a smaller system [HealthPartners, Bloomington, Minnesota], and so we were wondering, you know, oh, what is this about?  But I mean he hit the ground running.  He had the right temperament, he had the right personality.  You know, he came in and he studied the organization; he talked to us.  Early on, he started moving people around.  He started making changes early on, which I think was really good, and then he engaged, like, he engaged me to do the brand strategy work.  At first, I rejected it; it was a very difficult conversation.  And you know, in fact, I was arrogant about it, you know.  I said, "I don't do that kind of work.  You know, I run stuff, you know.  What is this brand strategy?"  I said, "It's very clear to me that you're making a statement that you don't want me in your administration."  So, I told him, "We're adults.  I mean, this conversation--we're adults here.  And it just so happens that before you came, I have an arrangement with the board.  So, you know, if you don't want me here, I can just exercise my severance package and leave."  And then he said, "Well, it just so happens that before I came here, I also have an arrangement with the board that whoever I don't want here, I can get rid of them."  And he said, "I'm not here to talk about getting rid of you.  If I wanted to get rid of you, I would have sat here and told you that I don't need you here at Kaiser Permanente," and that caught my attention, you know.  And so I said, "Well, let's talk about it."  And so, he said, "I know you think this is some kind of communication and advertising job.  It is not.  You're going to have one of the most important jobs in this organization."  That was the conversation.  It was in Washington, D.C. at the Mayflower Hotel when we were eating breakfast, when we had this discussion.  And he said, "This is about you telling the world who we are."  And I said, "I don't," I said, "you know, I don't--you don't call that advertising and all that kind of stuff, but that's what it is to me, and that's not my specialty."  And he said, "Bernard [HistoryMaker Bernard J. Tyson], you'll be able to hire the best of the best, the smartest advertising companies around.  So, that's not the problem.  The problem is that I need someone who understands the heartbeat; who understands what this organization is about, what it stands for, and who we are.  And you're that person."  And he was right.  Because when we started, when the resurgence started, we were hiring people and all that stuff to help us, we--I was the filter.  I was the one to say, "No, that's not who we are."  And that's how I learned, to this day, the difference between answering what we do versus who we are.  And he hired me into that position to answer that question of who we are.  So, yes, if you have a heart attack, God forbid, we absolutely have the best heart programs you'll find in this country.  That's what we do, right?  We'll do open heart surgery, we'll do stent replacement; we'll do those technical things.  But who we are is, we're an organization that tries to prevent you from having a heart attack.  We're an organization that focuses on keeping you healthy, not an organization that focuses on waiting until you get sick to then provide you with care.  And so that's the contribution, if you will, that I made to what is now clearly our space of--Kaiser Permanente is all about health.
Story_ID: 661310
Speaker 1: So when, when is this?  Like 2006?
Speaker 2: (Nods head) Yeah.
Speaker 1: That's when you're senior vice president of health plan and hospitals operations?
Speaker 2: Right.  That's when I would say, to your point, in retrospect that's when I was, in my view, put in the lane.
Speaker 1: In the lane.
Speaker 2: Right.  And then it was you sink or swim, right?  But that's when I was, in retrospect, because when he did that, then I was back in operations and I had all the regions reporting to me.  It was an evolution, but it was in that role that it was clear to me that he was moving me into the lane, ultimately for at least consideration.  And so he and I had a very close relationship from day one, from day one.  In the very beginning I still lived back in Maryland and commuted to California every week.  And I literally told them, because I didn't know what my future would be in Kaiser Permanente, just--like, he didn't know, and I preferred to be on the East Coast if I had to leave Kaiser Permanente.  And so he said, "Live where you want, but I want you in this office every week."  So I flew every week.  Every Monday I guess it was, I flew to California, and then I would fly back on Thursday.  And he was fine with that, because actually he commuted for a while as well.  So, it was that.  And then it--and then I became the president of the company, and that was in like 2012, I guess it was around 2012.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: It was 2011, 2011.  So, that clearly was not only a natural next step, because he had maintained the president title all that time.  I think it was also symbolic that I was the president of the organization.  But he also did something else unique.  He had a three person team; it was me plus two other vice presidents, executive vice presidents at the time.  And for the organization, the feedback was there are three people in the race, so there was a perception.  So, that preceded the naming of the president.  So, there was some kind of perception that George [George Halvorson] had put three people in to see who was going to win.
Speaker 1: So--
Speaker 2: And actually what had happened was the evolution of that three person team actually happened, technically, because George had an illness, had an episode that happened to him personally.  He was off work for a while and the board assigned three of us, in essence, to watch over the company, and that model worked.  And when George came back, he wasn't ready to appoint a president, and so he solidified the three person team to continue to go forward.  So, we didn't dissolve.  We just morphed into now, in essence, the office of the CEO.  And it was George plus the three of us, and we worked very, very closely together.  And then from there, I evolved to the president.
Story_ID: 661311
Speaker 1: Was there competition among you, among the three of you?
Speaker 2: No, no.  And I think it was because we worked so well together as a three person team.  And by the way, the two executives are on my team today.  They didn't leave the company.  Very effective, and we work as a team today.  And so I think the noise, and who's keeping score was more outside of our little bubble.  But inside of the bubble, no, we just got the work done.
Speaker 1: And so what happens, what happens when you become president?  And then when is it even--when are the discussions happening that's there's a possibility of CEO?  And I looked at your board, and your board is all internal, right (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, oh, no.
Speaker 1: No?  I mean it's all Kaiser [Kaiser Permanente].  Okay, who--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Maybe I, maybe I--
Speaker 2: Yeah, you should get the--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: The (unclear)--
Speaker 1: Okay, so can you talk about the board?  So, how large is the board?
Speaker 2: At the time it probably was maybe fifteen.
Speaker 1: Fifteen?
Speaker 2: Fifteen, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And, no, in fact there are only two internal directors on the board.
Speaker 1: Oh, I see.  Maybe--
Speaker 2: The chairman and there was one of the board members.
Speaker 1: I see.
Speaker 2: To this day it's the same thing.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I'm chairman of the board, and Dan Garcia [Daniel Garcia] is management compliance.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Everybody else is outside.
Speaker 1: Is outside?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So, George [George Halvorson] continued to give me direct exposure to the board.  Then he made me president, and generally offloaded the organization to me.  And he kept the, as he called it, the external facing stuff.  So he kept government relations, PR [public relations], and legal, and community benefits.  Everything else reported to me.  So, he turned over the running of the organization to me as the president.  And because we had worked so well together, that was seamless.  You know, we had a lot of debates, and that's part of the reason we worked so well together.  We didn't agree a lot on anything, but we worked our way through it.  So we had a strong, solid relationship.  And so when I became president, and--and he was, of course, the CEO, that relationship, this, was already there, and so there wasn't anything we each had to learn.  Probably the most difficult thing we had to work through was just being clear about who's in what lane--lane, you know.  And, but, but, we worked very well together, and the organization saw that.
Story_ID: 661312
Speaker 1: When is it clear that you're going to be CEO?
Speaker 2: Honestly, so, to answer that question, one of my mentors that I had spent time with shared with me a story, and this was when Dave Lawrence [David Lawrence] was chairman and CEO.  I went to see this mentor and I got to know him, and I went to see him about something.  And the issue for--on my mind was do I stay inside of Kaiser Permanente?  And I had many job offers when I was growing up, but I've always had, you know, more to do in Kaiser Permanente, so.  So, I went to see this mentor and I asked him this question about, you know, staying in the organization.  And he sort of assessed it with me, and then he said, "Let me share a story with you."  So, he told me about his life and his career, and that he was slated as vice chairman to become chairman of the organization, a very famous organization, a known organization, and he really had the job, and he knew he had the job.  And after working through this, actually he got a clear signal that he was it.  And he said before they worked through this thing, the chairman of the board came in and said that the board has decided to select a different person, and a change of direction.  What he said to me was, "If you stay, always remember you are never entitled to anything."  He said, "Do not make that mistake."  He said, "I got to a point where I just said, 'That job is mine.'  Don't ever do that to yourself.  You get paid for the day, you get paid for what you do, and you work at the will of company.  And they can get rid of you at any time.  You can aspire to what you want to be in your dreams, but never feel entitled."  That was incredibly helpful when I became president, because I did not even think in terms of I was entitled to be the CEO.  My mindset was, if, if there's a match, it's going to work, and if I have what the board perceives as needed for the future of Kaiser Permanente and it feels right for me, then it'll come together in the right way.  And so, honestly, I didn't get caught up in the politics of trying to prove anything.  I kept my head down, if you--to use the analogy, and got it done.  I had the right exposure.  I wasn't stupid, so I knew that I was being watched, and everything was being telegraphed.  So I did more of being Bernard [HistoryMaker Bernard J. Tyson], and just everything that got me to where I was at, and I just continued to deploy that strategy and I didn't try to run for office.  And I give credit to--I didn't have the entitlement mentality that, I've been here, and I've got to be president, that this is a natural transition.  George [George Halvorson] helped me also, because at some point George said, "I just want to be real with you.  As the president, if you do a good job, this could be yours to lose."  And he said, "That's going to be a board decision."  And so I wasn't naive to what was going on, but I didn't fall into the entrapment of, it's rightfully mine.  And so I was the president, and I enjoyed that job a lot and was having a great time.  And then of course, we went through the transition to the CEO.
Speaker 1: And what--and CEO, that was big news.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: You know, there're not that many African American CEOs, and there're less now than maybe even--there're less now.
Speaker 2: Right.
Story_ID: 661313
Speaker 1: And so, I want to understand what your plans are for this organization as the CEO.
Speaker 2: Fortunately, a lot of it is building on the legacy of being the best that we can be, and helping millions of people in this country, if not in this world.  It is working hard every day to help people to thrive, to live healthy lives.  And beyond that--and that's the centerpiece--I work for them.  My job is to make sure we're bringing all the resources to bear with helping people to live healthy lives, to, both in terms of prevention, maintenance, and treatment as needed.  Then it is to work hard to build an environment where the best of the best want to be here and carry out their own internal mission inside of the mission of this organization.  And so, how do I make sure I have a vibrant organization where people are proud to say, "I go to Kaiser Permanente to work, and I carry out my mission at Kaiser Permanente," and for people to feel connected to me and to the organization and to each other, and that we have a common mission that we're here for, and here to do, and it's serious business and we can also have a good time while we do it.  And then it's to the communities--that we're not in an isolated zone; that we're part of the bigger community.  And so, the Kaiser Permanente spread is not just for the 10.2 million people; it's for all the communities in which we exist.  And it is an all-inclusive strategy that everybody is a star; that we owe it to every community to help those communities to prosper and to be even better as communities.  And so, we are passionate about the elimination of disparities of care, not just for our members, but for this entire country.  And we believe strongly it's possible, because we're proving it; that there's a difference between equality in care and equity of care, and that, yes, everybody gets equal access to care; that's a given.  So, what happens is the improvements happen for the whole population.  But the gap remains, and the gap remains because that's where equity comes in; that I might need to give you more, because this is your starting point.  I might need to give this other population less, because I'm overdoing something.  And so, all of that comes from a mission that says, "I want everybody to have the best health possible so they can carry their American dream, which is life, liberty, and the pursuit of happiness."  And so, if I can contribute to you being healthy and then you go out and contribute to the greater society, to me, that's harmony.  That says--and by the way, you get to define what that means.  So, your freedom might be, "I just want to get up every day and go interview people, and just have a good time and go back home."  You know, somebody else's freedom and liberty might be, "I want to be president of the United States."  Somebody else might be, "I just want to see my grandchildren wake up."  I don't get to define that; people define that.  What I get to work on is, how can I help you to stay healthy, to thrive, and to have the best possible chance to achieve your reality?
Story_ID: 661314
Speaker 1: What do you want--Bernard [HistoryMaker Bernard J. Tyson], you've had this amazing ride in terms of career.  What--when all is said and done--and at a time when there's been retrenchment among, you know, black CEOs.  You have the long standing-- you have Ken Chenault [Kenneth Chenault], you know, who's been at American Express [American Express Company] a long time.
Speaker 2: Absolutely.
Speaker 1: And then you have Don Thompson [Donald Thompson] who was head a short--and he had been homegrown like you.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So, what do you want your legacy as a CEO [of Kaiser Permanente] to be?  I want to ask two legacy questions, but I want to know about your legacy as a corporate executive first.
Speaker 2: I mean, you know, I guess it's said, very simply, that he helped; that he made a difference.  I get it, in terms of being very blessed to be a CEO of a company who would be in the Fortune 50 if it was a for profit organization; a massive organization.  I call it a mega health system that cares for 10.2 million people with a $60 billion budget, and two hundred thousand people.  I get all of that, and I sit in the role as the chairman and CEO.  That is a powerful platform to stand on, and one of the obligations that I feel is to leverage that for good.  And so, I guess if there's anything about the legacy, it would be people being able to say, "This is how I felt his impact, that he touched my life this way."  Or, "He did this small thing," or, "He did that small thing."   And it adds up to, "He made a difference."
Story_ID: 661315
Speaker 1: I want you to think about your grandfather, your father [Moses Tyson, Sr.], and the community you represent, and, you know, your family, and your kids.  I see here you have three lovely boys [Bernard Tyson, Jr., Alexander Tyson and Charles Tyson].  I want you to talk about that legacy, and what it represents also for the African American community.
Speaker 2: You know, I think that for me it represents a full circle, that, you know, I am the, quote, chairman and CEO of Kaiser Permanente, a massive organization.  And it's very important, and I take it very seriously.  But the most serious job that I have is to be a good father; being a father and being there for my sons and helping them to grow into responsible men and manhood.  Throughout my life, which parallels my career, it has been as important, if not more important.  So, so, just like in my life I've not been an ab- quote absent father that--you know, I've thought about being there in the centerpiece--family.  So, I think it boils down to family, and that's who I am, and proud of it.  And what I do is, I'm a CEO, but who I am is I'm a people person, and I'm about helping, and I'm about, you know, life.  And so, I have a clear marker about the difference in that.  So, I am a person who happens to be the CEO.  I'm not a CEO that is that person.  Do you know what I mean?  I'm not, I don't walk around as if I don't have a life if I'm not the CEO.  I have a life, Bernard Tyson [HistoryMaker Bernard J. Tyson], the person, and I'm average and I'm human like everybody else.  I just happen to have this massive responsibility called CEO of a multibillion organization.  But at the end of the day, I live and breathe and think and walk and talk like everybody else.  And that's how I want to be seen. Okay.
Speaker 1: Thank you.
