Story_ID: 485964
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) My name is Larry Crowe, I'm interviewer today for The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Scott Stearns.  Ma'am, could you please state your full name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: Which full name you want?
Speaker 1: Well, your given name first, I guess, and then we do all the names, we do.
Speaker 2: Okay, my given name is Irma Lee, my professional name is [HistoryMaker] Irma Thomas and my married name is Irma Jackson.
Speaker 1: Okay, and is--do you have a middle name?
Speaker 2: No, my name is Irma Lee.  I grew up with that name.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And, "Irma, what's your middle name?"  "That's my name, Irma Lee."
Speaker 1: Okay, and what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: I was born February 18, 1941 in a town called Ponchatoula, Louisiana, spelled, P-O-N-C-H-A-T-O-U-L-A, Ponchatoula.
Speaker 1: Ponchatoula.
Speaker 2: Louisiana.
Speaker 1: And what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: I am a professional entertainer.
Speaker 1: Okay, primarily singer, right?
Speaker 2: Primarily singer, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what is today's date?
Speaker 2: What is today's date?  Today is March 27, 2008 (laughter).
Speaker 1: And, and where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: We are now sitting in my sunken living room in New Orleans, Louisiana.
Story_ID: 485965
Speaker 1: Before we get started there--I mean go into depth, there are five lightweight questions we ask as kind of a warm-up.
Speaker 2: All questions are questions, none of them are lightweight as far as I'm concerned (laughter) (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay, well, the first one is, do you have a favorite food and what is it?
No: food (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay, do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: Yes, yellow.
Speaker 1: All right.  Favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: No, any time of the year is a favorite time of the year for me.
Speaker 1: Okay, do you have a favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Not really.
Speaker 1: Okay, favorite--the last one is, do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: I never thought about that. I probably do; yes, I do.  Whenever someone asks me how I'm doing, I says, "Everything hurts but thank God I can still feel it" (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 485966
Speaker 1: I'm going to ask about your family history.  I'm going to ask about your mother's side of the family and your father's side, but we'll start with your mother's side first.  Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: My mother's name is Vader Todd Milton, spelled, V-A-D-E-R, that's V as in Victor, A-D-E-R, Vader, T-O-D-D, Todd, Milton, M-I-L-T-O-N.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what is her date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: May 1st, 1916, I think.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I have to do the math 'cause she's going to be ninety-two May the 1st, so yeah, yeah, 1916 (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay, and where was she born?
Speaker 2: She was born in a little town called, Anacoco, Louisiana, that's in the southwestern end of Louisiana going towards Texas.
Speaker 1: Okay, now how do you spell Anacoco?
Speaker 2: Just like it sounds.  A-N-N-A-C-O-C-O [sic.], Louisiana.
Speaker 1: Okay, Anacoco, Louisiana.
Speaker 2: I think that's in Washington Parish [sic. Vernon Parish, Louisiana].  You know we have parishes here, we don't have counties.
Speaker 1: Now, now what do you know, oh, oh--
Speaker 2: (TAPE INTERRUPTION)
Speaker 1: Okay, now what, what do you know about the ancestors on your mother's side (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Very little.
Speaker 1: How far back can you trace them?  Are there any stories that are passed down about your, what your family was doing in the 19th century or were they, were they--
Speaker 2: The only thing I can tell you about--oh, no.
Speaker 1: (TAPE INTERRUPTION)
Speaker 2: Okay, I was asking you, what do you know about the ancestors on your mother's side?  Can you trace 'em back to slavery?  Can you trace them back any further than that or--
Speaker 1: I'm sure they could be traced back to slavery, but I couldn't expound on that because as a kid, I was basically raised a city girl.  I knew my grandparents on my mother's side as well as my father's side, and my grandparents didn't pass away until I was an adult and--but we, I didn't visit with them that much to get into, delve into their past.  They were farmers of sorts, but in terms of what they did or what their parents did, we know for a fact that they did come up on, during the slave time but what they did as a part of that era, I have no idea.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: They didn't talk about it when I was out there.
Speaker 2: So, no, no stories about no one out (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I have no previous stories about anybody doing anything spectacular or non-spectacular, they was just a family, a large family.  My mother's the oldest of eighteen, and I understand there was two sets of them so, that's about as much about them as I know.
Speaker 2: Well, we have to kind of assume here when we ask this that nobody knows anything when they watch this for the first time.  So what we're trying to do is trying to impart a sense of, you know, what life was like, I guess, you know, from what little we can know of for, yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Well, for me, growing up as a kid with my grandparents, I mean, with my, with my parents more or less, I didn't spend a lot of time around my grandparents because my mother left home when she was, I think she told me she left home when she was fourteen.  So, the only time I visited with my grandparents is when my mom would take me there during the summer months to visit her parents, and when I was there, I played with my mother's younger sister who was only about eight, maybe years older than I am so, you know, I didn't spend a lot of time talking with my grandparents about how their lives were back then.  I mean, I never figured it would be anything that I would need to know, but they had their own land.  They, at the time when I visited with them (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Now, that's important, that they, they had, yeah--
Speaker 1: They owned, they owned their own property and they had a huge house, I remember the house distinctly, being a very big house and they live--they lived on, near the highway.  The last time I visited with them, they were living near the highway, they weren't like way back in the woods or anything.  They lived right on one of the main thoroughfares in terms of where, this was in Leesville [Louisiana].  The last time I visited with them, they had moved to this area called Leesville and they were fun grandparents.  My grandfather, I remember him being a very tall man, light complexed, tall man, and my grandmother, I look a lot like my grandmother, the same color-age and high cheekbones, the whole nine yard.  In fact my mother, my grandmother and my uncles, all of us, we could pass for siblings, twins, in fact.  Our cheekbones, the whole feature structure is the same.
Speaker 2: Okay, so, these are your grandparents on your mother's side (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) This is on moth- on my mother's side.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: This is on my mother's side.
Speaker 2: All right, and--
Speaker 1: My grandparents on my father's--
Speaker 2: Well, we won't get to them yet--
Speaker 1: Oh.
Speaker 2: --until we get your mother's story.
Story_ID: 485967
Speaker 1: Did your mother [Vader Todd Milton] talk about growing up, and what it was like for her?
Speaker 2: All she would mention was the fact that she had a lot of brothers and sisters, and she left home early as a child.  She didn't really delve into their lifestyle or what she did as a kid growing up.  They just didn't talk about it.  I don't know if it was bad, good or indifferent.  She just never found the need to talk about it or tell me about it at all.  In fact, even her brothers and sisters who are, some of them are still alive, when you talk to them about their growing up in the country or, you know, where they grew up at, they don't really discuss it.  So, I'm feeling that maybe it wasn't something that they cared to talk about.
Speaker 1: Now, anybody on your mother's side talented in terms of singing or doing (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) There may have been, but they didn't show it, at least I never had that opportunity to, to see it so, other than singing in church, which everybody did, you know, growing up in a black family, that's, that was where you went on Sundays and that was a part of their lifestyle and so that, other than that, I don't know if anyone had any specific talent that stuck out as opposed to just being a part of the group.
Speaker 1: Okay, now did your mother have a chance to go to school in--?
Speaker 2: My mother's education was third grade and she did take night courses when I was a young lady, she took night courses and learned how to read better.  She was an avid newspaper reader for a while, and so she wanted to learn how to read better so she took some classes at night school to learn how to read better but I would say her total educational level would be about the fifth grade level (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay.
Story_ID: 485968
Speaker 1: Now did she, did your parents meet while, you know, in, in her hometown or someplace else?
Speaker 2: I haven't a clue; they never talked about it.  I do know that growing up, I remember this gentleman that my mother [Vader Todd Milton] was married to named L.J. Milton, but I was a wee baby and then the only person that I knew for a fact to be my dad, was my dad who raised me.  He and my mom were together from the time that I could remember I had a daddy.
Speaker 1: Now that was Mr. Milton?
Speaker 2: No, believe it or not, it was Mr. Lee, [Thomas' stepfather] Percy Lee.
Speaker 1: Okay. Oh, okay.
Speaker 2: I was told by my mom that my dad went in, was drafted into the armed services, he, he fought in Korea.  I remember my dad coming home in 19--it must have been '46 [1946], the same year he came home when he started working, my parents, you know, I remember them being together but they brought me to live with his mother, because they both were working and babysitters were kind of difficult to come by.
Story_ID: 485969
Speaker 1: Well can you give us your father's full name and--
Speaker 2: My father's name is Percy, P-E-R-C-Y, Lee, L, double E-E [Thomas' stepfather, Percy Lee].
Speaker 1: Okay, and what is his date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: June the 1st, 1915.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: No, '14 [1914], 'cause he was two years younger than my moth- older than my mom [Vader Todd Milton].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Nineteen fourteen [1914].
Speaker 1: And was he born in the same area?
Speaker 2: He was born in Louisiana, in Greensburg, Louisiana, that's northern end of the state, in St. Helena Parish.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Now, what do you know about his ancestors, anything?
Speaker 2: Well, I met his grandmother--his mother I met, which was my grandmother at the age of five.  I knew of his sisters and brothers but I never knew his dad, so I don't know my grandfather on my father's side of the family.  My dad was the oldest of seven.  There was two sets of them, same dad, different mom, but in terms of my grandfather on that side of the family, I never knew and I couldn't point him out to you if he walked in front of me today or tomorrow.  Of course, they're both deceased at this point, including my father but they, you know, and once again, they never talked about their parents and their upbringing.  I do know my grandmother was a farmer because when I went to live with them, the house was in the middle of the farm, and she was trying to teach me how to be a farm girl, but she died the same year that I was brought to live with her.  She passed on, but I stayed on with my father's sister who was living in the house with my grandmother at that time who had six children at the time I was out there.  So, but they never talked about their parents either, so, my grandparents on both side of my family is somewhat of a mystery, especially on my dad's side of the family.
Speaker 1: So are there no stories that you remember that are passed down about anything that they did (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) They didn't pass down anything because it was never a discussion and, and of course back then, if there was anything that was juicy, you were a kid, you were not, they didn't say anything in front of you, that their children were seen and not heard back then.  And so, anything that would have been of any value to me that I might have heard, I didn't hear anything, because you didn't--they didn't talk around kids.  Kids were sent out of the room whenever they had grownup discussions to talk about.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So I didn't get anything that was passed down.  There may be some historical people in my family on either, on either side, I would not know because they never discussed them.
Speaker 1: Okay, did they ever sit around at night and tell ghost stories or anything, stuff like that, yeah (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, they used to do that a lot.  My aunt, my aunts, on my daddy's side of the family, yeah, they would, they, and the sad part about it, they would always do it when they were visiting one and we had to walk through the woods to get back home and, of course, here I am a scared to death kid, I didn't know any better but, you know, that's what parents do (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 485970
Speaker 1: Did they ever discuss the race relations down there (unclear) (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No because, race relations never came up as a discussion because that's what it was, it was, it was a segregated time, you lived within your boundaries.  You knew you couldn't do certain things so you didn't, when--
Speaker 1: So were those things taught, I mean, formally?  I mean, did they say, sit down, here's what you can do, what you can't do?  Did you have to learn by bumping your head?
Speaker 2: Well, you--you learned by what you saw and, and if you made a mistake and did something, then you were corrected but basically you knew through instinctively that you didn't do this because you didn't see anybody else doing it, especially black people.  When you went into town, you had a certain part of the store that you would go to, a certain store that you could go to that you had free access, and you had other stores that you could go into, you didn't have free access.  There was this restaurant where we had an area in the back that was set up specifically for blacks to use.  So, you, you grew up in that era so you lived accordingly.  This wasn't a thing that you had to be taught.  You saw, it was by example that you knew that this was something you could or could not do.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Now, did your father [Thomas' stepfather, Percy Lee] talk about growing up and what it was like for him?  Did he--
Speaker 2: Never talked about it.  My father never discussed his childhood other than the fact that they were farmers.  He left home and put his age up, believe it or not, to go into the service.  I don't know--I don't think he was drafted because I, from what I understand him saying himself, that he put his age up in order to go into the [U.S.] Army, because he felt he would have a better life there as opposed to being on the farm and growing up in segregated times.  And knowing my dad, I could understand him doing that because he was a very outspoken man and even though he was quiet, sort of, he was outspoken.  So going into the service may have been his saving grace in terms of saving his life, because some things that happened back during that time, my father would not have tolerated, so he probably would have been hanging from one of those trees or something 'cause he would have said something and it would have gotten him killed.
Speaker 1: Now were there, there stories about people that did say the wrong thing and what happened to 'em?
Speaker 2: Oh, they, that stories were not stories it was facts.  I mean, I never witnessed or have had the opportunity, and thank God, to witness seeing someone hanging from a tree other than in the news or on, you know, on the news or in the newspaper back then 'cause we didn't have access to television.  But it was, it was a fact, and it happened in our area where we lived that you'd find people dead in areas that you know they didn't die there from natural causes and they just--it was just something they didn't discuss, especially around children.  A lot of things was hidden from us to keep it from being, I guess, traumatic to us, so we wouldn't have to sleep with nightmares and that sort of thing.  But we, we knew that we had our boundaries that were set that we couldn't do and say everybody, even people who were younger than my parents and my, and my grandparents and my aunts and uncles, they had to give a surname to like, Mr. this or Mr. that and these were children, Caucasian children.  You couldn't address them by their, by their first names or their only names.  You had to address them as if they were adults and this was stuff that was normal, was considered normal.
Speaker 1: So, the general feeling was that's what you had to do, but people weren't happy about it?
Speaker 2: Well, no.  I mean, you know, this was their way of life.  No, they didn't, they weren't exactly happy about it but you either do that or you die so, you know, if your choices are that, survival is more important than worrying about a name.
Speaker 1: Okay, well we ask these questions 'cause (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Sure.
Speaker 1: --it's not--
Speaker 2: Sure, sure.
Speaker 1: --you know, you want to hear what things were really like.
Speaker 2: Oh, life was life and it was, you know, we, we had, you know, given segregated times, yes, it was an oppressed time for everybody and not just our families but for all black families, southern-wise, but you had happy times among them.  We, we created our own entertainment in those days.  I mean, you know, we had our church to go to.  We had our family gatherings on the front porch and at each other's homes we would visit each other's homes.  We didn't do a lot of going into town because transportation was limited.  I mean, my aunt's husband had a truck that ran most of the time (laughter), and gas was inexpensive but they didn't burn gas for frivolous reasons.  They would use it for when they needed to go into town and get whatever supplies they needed and, fertilizer, or whatever they needed to farm with, you know, and we would ride into town maybe once a month as kids and they would buy us some candy or ice cream or something like that.  But we, you know, we as kids had happy times.  We made up our own entertainment in, in the yards.  We played the children's games that most kids play.  It was typical for us, you know, very normal.  We didn't have any idea of the oppression until we started growing up, of course, and then you realized just what oppression meant, and, and how unlikely you were going to be able to do things that you thought you would be able to do, and you accepted them.  You lived within them until things began to change.
Story_ID: 485971
Speaker 1: Now, did your father [Thomas' stepfather, Percy Lee] talk about the war, about the Korean War (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) You know, he, he, my dad, when he came back from the services, serving in Korea, he didn't talk about it a lot.  He would say, something would come up and he might say, "Well, oh yeah, I did that or we were there," like a city or something that he visited when he was in the service.  He would say, "Yes, I visited there," and that would be the extent of the conversation.  He didn't expound on it as to what happened there, how it happened, but I knew my dad had been on the frontlines because he would watch these movies and whenever there was, a car would backfire, he would, you know, jump or he would, you know, flinch or something of that sort.  So, I realized that he had been on the frontlines so he never discussed his war situation at all and mind you, he was in the service during when the armies were separated by color, the military people were separated by color.  So, he never had any great stories to tell but he told me.  Now maybe he and my mom [Vader Todd Milton] may have discussed some things but I never over--overhead the conversation.  So as far as I could tell and remember, he never discussed his war situation that much.
Speaker 1: Okay, that was a great time of transition.  They would try to transition the [U.S.] Army from segregated to integrated.
Speaker 2: Yeah, he, he was in, but this was in, he was in in the '40s [1940s], early '40s [1940s].  He came out, if I remember correctly, he came home in 1946.
Speaker 1: Oh, he was World War II [WWII]?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: He wasn't in the Korean War, yeah, he was World War II.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, that's a different thing.  Yeah, yeah, it was, it was completely segregated then.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah, okay, so I thought you said Korean War.
Speaker 2: No, he fought in Korea.  He said he actually, he said he fought in Korea but he came out in '46 [1946], yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay, all right.  So he was right at the beginning of the Korean conflict?
Speaker 2: Um-hm, yes.
Speaker 1: All right, okay.
Story_ID: 485972
Speaker 1: Okay now, you say there's not a story about how your parents [Vader Todd Milton and Thomas' stepfather, Percy Lee] met that they passed down?
Speaker 2: No, because as far as I can remember, they were together.  They never told me how they met.  All I, all my daddy would comment is that, because as my mother got older, she gained a few pounds, and he used to say she was so tiny that wind would blow her away.  So I asked my mother, tiny compared to what in terms of pounds?  He said, when she, when they met, she only weighed ninety-eight pounds.  Well to look at my mom and try to picture ninety-eight pounds, I don't see that (laughter) being--but according to my dad, she was a fine, brown frame, whatever that meant to him, he said it lovingly so evidently there was some chemistry there.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, okay.  So, now, so your parents got married.  Now, did they, at some point they, did they, did you grow up in the country (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) To be honest with you, my parents never married.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: They never married.  I learned later in life, when I went to apply for my passport, I had to get a birth certificate for a passport, I discovered two things.  One was, I was celebrating my birthday a day late.  Two, my parents never married because on my birth certificate, my name was Irma Lee Milton and I approached my dad about it, which he corrected, and he went to a lawyer and got that corrected, but they never married.  They lived together until I was a grown girl, over thirty-some years, but they never legally married and back in those days, you were married by common law-ship and they couldn't marry each other because they were both married to somebody else that they never got divorces from, but they stayed together and raised me as a married couple.  So as far as I was concerned, they were married.
Story_ID: 485973
Speaker 1: When you think about their talents and dispositions and personalities, who do you think you take after the most?
Speaker 2: Both of them because my mother [Vader Todd Milton] used to walk around the house singing a song called, 'Bumble Bee' which I'm dying to find the record on that one, and my dad [Thomas' stepfather, Percy Lee] used to love all of his John Lee Hooker, Lightnin' Hopkins, early [HistoryMaker] B. B. King records that, on the weekends when he were off, the house was lit up with music constantly.  So between the radio, regular radio stations in the mornings, you would get your early morning gospel shows which would be on from nine to about eleven and then from eleven thereon, you'd have your R--well your rock 'n roll, rhythm and blues music and when my dad would be off on his weekend days, he played all of his old 78s [78 rpm records] which were the early Lightnin' Hopkins, Guitar Slim, B.B., who was the other one?  Well we had some Mahalia Jackson records in our house.  He had a couple of the Louis Armstrong records in the house, Percy Mayfield.  This was the kind of music that he enjoyed.  So there was always music around and sometimes he'd whistle along.  I don't remember hearing my dad sing but my mother used to sing a lot and I would assume my father had a pretty decent voice but I never heard him sing anything (laughter), but I get that music, love of music from both of 'em.
Story_ID: 485974
Speaker 1: A lot of music on the radio and on--
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, constantly.
Speaker 1: --records and--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: What about, what about live music?  Was a--
Speaker 2: When I was growing up in, well after I got, you know, was brought back from the, the Greensburg [Louisiana] area back to New Orleans [Louisiana], the, the music scene, there wasn't a lot of live music in clubs at that time--I'm talking when I was like eight and nine years old.  There wasn't a lot of clubs that had live music that I can remember my parents [Vader Todd Milton and Thomas' stepfather, Percy Lee] going to, and the reason I said I could remember, because whenever they would go out, when they couldn't find a babysitter, I went with them.  Because they didn't, you didn't, there was no law that says children couldn't go in the clubs then.  So, a lot of times I would have my potato chips and Coca-Colas while they were having whatever beverages that they wanted, because I was carried along with them, and these clubs had jukeboxes but not any live music that they frequented.  Now I'm not saying that there weren't any around, because there may have been, but my parents weren't ones who, you know, that would go to these kinds of places.  I do remember when my parents lived on Thalia Street, which is an area of New Orleans, I would say the central city area of New Orleans, they lived in a rooming house that had a night club in the front of it, and this was before they took me to Greensburg to live with his parents and people like Cecil Gant, Louis Jordan, would play in this place.  It was called the Vogue Hotel [ph.], and it had a lounge in it.  And I had the pleasure of meeting Mr. Louis Jordan when I was a little bitty kid and I, you know, I don't, I couldn't describe him to you but my mother said he played with me as a baby so I guess, you know, I, and I met Cecil Gant, but, I mean, you know, I don't remember this because I was real young, I was--this was before I was five years old.  So, you know, I, I would be lying if I said I remember them as a person but I remember people and, yes, I remember being in the club and I remember folks playing with me but I, you know, I didn't know that they were big names at the time.  This is what my mom had told me about.
Speaker 1: Okay, yeah, Louis Jordan, that's a big name.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: He's a, yeah, he was really big then.
Speaker 2: In fact I recorded one of his songs.
Speaker 1: Yeah, Cecil Gant I'm not as familiar with but, you know, are they both from (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, but these were big names that were, they were popular, this was in the '40s [1940s], yeah, these were--
Speaker 1: Are they New Orleans musicians as such?
Speaker 2: I really don't know if they were, per se, New Orleans musicians but they played--
Speaker 1: Louis Jordan seems like he would be, I don't know.
Speaker 2: --they played this area a lot because we had clubs like that when the Vogue Hotel lounge and they had the Dew Drop Inn [New Orleans, Louisiana].  They had another place on Felicity Street called the, the Casin- it was a Keno place, the Blue Eight, I think it was, or something like that, I, Blue Eagle [Blue Eagle Hall, New Orleans, Louisiana], that's what it was, the Blue Eagle.  I should remember 'cause it's the first place I played when I had, 'Don't Mess With My Man' as a professional singer so--but anyway, but these were places that had live entertainment but, you know, like I say, I was a young kid then and this was prior to my going to Greensburg, and wherever there was music, that's where I was (laughter).
Story_ID: 485975
Speaker 1: How old were you when you went to Greensburg [Louisiana]?
Speaker 2: Five.
Speaker 1: Five, okay.  Well, we always ask this question and I guess it could, and, when did you go back to, when did you join your parents [Vader Todd Milton and Thomas' stepfather, Percy Lee] and, and--
Speaker 2: I was nine.
Speaker 1: In New Orleans [Louisiana]?
Speaker 2: In New Orleans, yeah.  I came back when I was nine.  I threatened my daddy--
Speaker 1: Oh, so that's four years--
Speaker 2: --if he didn't come get me, I was going to come back on my own, and he knew I would (laughter) because I left my mother in Leesville [Louisiana] at eight and came home by myself.
Speaker 1: Did you?
Speaker 2: Uh-huh, she gave me my bus ticket and she said, well here, here's your bus ticket, go home, and I did.  I had three buses to catch and I came home by myself.  So he knew if I said I would come home, he knew I would, so he came and got me.  I, I had had enough of the farm life, you know, four years was more than I anticipated being out there so I wanted to come home.
Story_ID: 485976
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now we always ask this question.  What were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up?
Speaker 2: Growing up for me, especially in the New Orleans [Louisiana] area, even prior to my going to the country, was music.  I can remember music being in the neighborhood on a regular basis.  I don't mean just on the jukebox, I mean, bands playing, and it wasn't until, you know, some years later that I realized that a lot of that music that I was hearing were jazz funerals or social clubs having their annual second line days.  There was a club around the corner from where my parents [Vader Todd Milton and Thomas' stepfather, Percy Lee] lived before they took me to Greensburg [Louisiana] that had a jukebox that had a, I guess you would call it a, it was like a video machine, but it--I don't think that's what they called it but you could put your money in and up on the screen like a, like a movie would be like a miniature movie, and I remember I used to love to go around and put my quarter in there and see this little clip called, 'Paper Doll' and it was the, I think it was either The Ink Spots or one of those had a song says, "I'm going to buy a paper doll just to call my own."
Speaker 1: Oh, Mills Brothers, I think, yeah.
Speaker 2: Mills Brothers, okay, but I used to love that and, and my mother said she knew where to find me when she couldn't find me in front of the house, just go around the corner and I would be up in the bar looking at that.  So music has always been in my life in New Orleans.  The smells was all kinds of smells.  We used to live less than three blocks away from a bakery which is still operating, by the way.  I'm not sure if I'm saying the name correctly; it's called Leidenheimer's bakery [Leidenheimer Baking Company, New Orleans, Louisiana] that baked French bread, New Orleans style French bread, and we lived around the corner from that, and I can remember on occasions my mother would go and buy this warm French bread and put butter on it and I would have coffee and bread for breakfast.  So these are the kind of smells that I grow up--grew up in New Orleans.  I mean, even today is, some of them are reviving but that was the kind of lifestyle we had.  Music was everywhere, all the time.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Somebody was always cooking something like beans and rice and you get all these great smells coming out of these doors and mustard greens, and we used to have something called, peppergrass that women used to combine that with mustard greens and you'd get these great smells coming out of the kitchens of houses all over the neighborhood.  So it was just one big pot (laughter).
Story_ID: 485977
Speaker 1: We were talking about the sights and sounds and smells of growing up (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: And, what are some others?
Speaker 2: Well, aside from having music everywhere and everybody's daily meals were being, the smells were coming out of the kitchens, well children played on the front and, and hopscotch and jacks and cowboys and Indians [Native American] and that sort of thing, it was just the flavor of New Orleans [Louisiana].  I mean, the smells that we, we smelled, they were so common place to us that, you know, it was just an everyday thing.  It got to the point where we were immune to it and other people would come in and ask us, "Well, what is that?"  And we'd say, "Oh, well, that's such and such a thing being cooked or so and so is cooking this today or that," you know, and it was just the way it was.  The neighborhood was that way.
Story_ID: 485978
Speaker 1: What about Mardi Gras?  What about the groups like the Zulus and the (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Mardi Gras (laughter)--
Speaker 1: --Wild Tchoupitoulas and all of them, what--
Speaker 2: Well, the Wild Tchoupitoulas came along some time later--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --but when I was growing up, Mardi Gras was a part of life.  You had, Zulu, that was, that was the parade to find, if you could find it, because it didn't have a regular route back then.
Speaker 1: Oh, so they were just, well tell us about that 'cause I like my, really realize that?
Speaker 2: Well for Mardi Gras, of course you had, you had your normal Mardi Gras parades which was the various organizations, Comus [Mistick Krewe of Comus], Proteus [Krewe of Proteus] and all these different, Rex [Krewe of Rex] and all these different organizations with parade on various nights.  Then on Mardi Gras day, as a little kid, a black kid growing up in the neighborhood, my Mardi Gras costume was blue jeans and a shirt and a cowboy hat, you know, a plaid shirt and cowboy hat.  That was my costume, but the big thing of the day was to find Zulu, because Zulu didn't have a regular route.  They didn't get a route until, I guess, in the last twenty years they've had a route but back then, they had no specific route that they would follow.  You just had to kind of hope they would pass in a certain area, you--there was areas you knew they were going to pass eventually, if the king didn't get too stoned to--get too drunk to make it (laughter) because they would make these hops at various clubs and at each club they would toast and have a drink.  Well, by the end of the day, King Zulu, if he was a drinker, was completely soused (laughter).  Thank goodness they would have the ball on a different night than the parade 'cause there's no way he would be able to parade that night, if he had a ball, after parading all day long and it was an all-day thing.  He would come uptown for a while, then the next thing he would be downtown for a while.  When I say uptown, downtown, Canal Street is the dividing line for New Orleans [Louisiana] and so if you're on the eastern end of Canal Street, you're in the downtown area, if you're on the western end of Canal Street, you're in the uptown area and, and he would be all over the place and that was, it was just--if you caught Zulu, and especially if you got a coconut, you, you had the prize, you had the prize.
Speaker 1: And they would throw the coconuts at you (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) They were actually throwing coconuts, yes, and they still do, they still do, but that was the prize--
Speaker 1: Now these coconuts are not, are hollowed out, right?
Speaker 2: No, these are real coconuts.  All they've done was taken off that outer husk, sand them down to the actual shell and paint them.  The milk is still in 'em.  They're live coconuts.  I've had, I've had one to grow.
Speaker 1: That's a heavy coconut.
Speaker 2: Yeah, oh yeah.
Speaker 1: Well, now I read once like some people get hit on the side of the head with the coconuts.
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, there was some occasions we've had some hickeys put on some heads from coconuts being thrown (laughter).
Speaker 1: Well--
Speaker 2: But that was the way it was and it wasn't until some years later they had to change, the liability insurance came into play and they had to change the way they gave them out.  So now they don't throw them, they hand them out.
Speaker 1: Now I can imagine a coconut, that's a pretty heavy missile.
Speaker 2: It is, it is but nobody, nobody complained.
Speaker 1: Okay, 'cause I thought, I thought maybe the coconuts had something inside of 'em or something but just the--
Speaker 2: Well, yes, they, they would, they would each, each organization within the Zulu organization, each person, I guess I would say captained each float.  They would chose whatever colors they're going to paint their coconuts.  Most of them were either black or gold with some, the Zulus' insignia, the Z on it and the year that would be on it and they would, some of them would use glitter, you know.  Some had a little bit more imagination on how they want to decorate them, because it's a time-consuming thing and it depends on which ones you got.  They would either be totally decorated, there would just be the Zulu with the Z on it, and the little eyes painted on it with the, with the white mouth and the white eyes with the little black dot in the middle show the eye and it was simple.  They would go from one extreme to the other.
Speaker 1: Okay, but any members of your family involved in any of the krewes?
Speaker 2: No, none of them that I can remember were involved in it.  I mean, later years, after I got a business, I started giving up the coconuts as a part of the, for the people who would come visit New Orleans so they wouldn't go home empty-handed, but none of my family that I knew of were in any of the organizations.
Story_ID: 485979
Speaker 1: When you were growing up, did you like to sing?  Were you singing?
Speaker 2: Oh, I can't remember when I wasn't singing.  I mean, as a wee kid, I'd sing along with the radio, with the records, what have you, but I thought everybody did it.  It was no big thing.  Like I said, when we, in the country, we, we sang sitting on the front porch.  We would sing various songs that we knew from church that was on if--we had a battery operated radio that played only on the weekend and, of course, the only, the only stations you could get you either get late night stations with, us kids could not stay up and listen to which was J.R., you know, midnight with J.R. on the, on the, John R. [John Richbourg] was his name rather.  On the late night he would play all the rhythm and blues and blues records and then during the day, on, we would get, what we'd call hillbilly music.  They didn't call it country music then they called it hillbilly music.  Don't ask me why 'cause, I mean, all the singers were not hillbillies (laughter), but that's what they called them.  It was country music and I can remember as a small kid liking a song called, 'Okie from Muskogee.'  I never knew all the words but the, one of the lines was, "I love to be an Okie from Muskogee," I mean, can you imagine a black kid singing that?  But it was a happy tune (laughter).  We used to sing, I mean, I can remember in, I guess I was in either second or third grade in school [New Star School] in Greensburg [Louisiana] and my teacher, Ms. Clovice Hurst who was, she taught first, second and third grade, she put on a play called, 'Cinderella,' her version thereof, and I don't know if I was the fairy godmother, who, but, I had my costume on and my part in the play was to sing "Tennessee Waltz."  And so I can't remember when I couldn't sing.  We all did it, everybody sang, and even the kids who didn't have great voices, sang.  So, I had no idea that I, my voice was anything special.
Speaker 1: So nobody had identified you as a talent at, at, at (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) They may have, they never told me.  I didn't, I didn't really get identified as having a talent 'til I was in junior high school.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: When I, well actually in the sixth grade, to begin with, was my sixth grade teacher which was Ms. Glapion, Fern Glapion [Fern Glapion Brady], I'll never forget her name.  She brought me to a talent show at a theater here in New Orleans [Louisiana] to participate in the talent show and I sung, 'Too Young' by Nat King Cole.  I won third prize.  She brought me back again and I won second prize.  I went back on my own, and finally won first prize (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay, so this is Miss--
Speaker 2: So then I realized that, um, I can sing a little bit.  I also auditioned for Mr. Battiste at his record place and he told me I was too young and--
Speaker 1: Okay, this is--
Speaker 2: --he admitted to me that, Mr. Battiste, I think you mentioned that you knew him?
Speaker 1: That's [HistoryMaker] Harold Battiste?
Speaker 2: Harold Battiste, yes, and he told me I was too young and he admitted to me, he says, "Irma [HistoryMaker Irma Thomas], you could sing back then," he says, "but you was just a little bit too young for me to fool with so I didn't want to, you know, have that problem."  So I didn't realize then, you know, I just, I knew I liked to sing and I sung along with everything that came on the radio.  I used to go and buy these music books that you could get the lyrics of all the popular songs in them, and I had them all at that time.  I wish I'd known then that they would become very, very valuable today but, of course, you don't know that when you're a kid.  But at school, I, I was, it was, a young lady that used to sing at school when I was in the seventh and eighth grade, Mary Howard [ph.] and, and one of the Corboy, younger Corboy brothers, Henry Corboy [ph.] and I, we used to always sing to represent McDonogh 41 School [New Orleans, Louisiana].  We also recorded the school song so it wasn't until I was right at pubescent years that I realized that I had a gift of some sort with my voice.
Story_ID: 485980
Speaker 1: Let me take you back to, a bit, the first part of school.  Now, what's the first school that you attended?
Speaker 2: I graduated from c- from a daycare called Sarah Allen [Sarah Allen Child Care Center] from Union Bethel A.M.E. Church [New Orleans, Louisiana] and then from there, I went to--
Speaker 1: Sarah Allen, that's named for the wife of Richard Allen, the founder of the A.M.E. [African Methodist Episcopal] church, actually.
Speaker 2: Possibly.
Speaker 1: Yeah, you know, I don't think, most people would probably know that but--
Speaker 2: Yeah, and then from there I went to a Catholic school called Blessed Sacrament [Blessed Sacrament School, New Orleans, Louisiana] for a semester, then I went to another school somewhere else for a brief moment before my parents [Vader Todd Milton and Thomas' stepfather, Percy Lee] decided to take me to Greensburg [Louisiana] where I started school all over again.
Speaker 1: So you had to start all over?
Speaker 2: Yeah, because I didn't--I had not attended a full year of school anywhere.  I mean, my parents were moving, they were like gypsies all over the city and whatever school was near them is where they put me in school.  So I went to Catholic school for about a half a semester and I went to a Lutheran school for another portion of a semester, and by the time I got to Greensburg to actually go to school, I could read and write better than the average first grader because I'd been exposed to this several times so I knew how to read, I knew how to write so I never went to second grade.  I went from first to third (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay, now that's in Greensburg?
Speaker 2: In Greensburg, yes.
Speaker 1: And what was the name of your school there?
Speaker 2: New Star [New Star School, Greensburg, Louisiana].
Speaker 1: New Star.
Speaker 2: New Star.
Speaker 1: Okay, and, okay.  So when you left Greensburg and came back to New Orleans [Louisiana] (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) When I came back to New Orleans, I was then in the fifth grade.  I left New Star after going through the fourth grade and I came to New Orleans the summer between my fourth and fifth grade year and I started school in New Orleans in the fifth grade.
Speaker 1: Okay, at what school was this?
Speaker 2: John W. Hoffman [John W. Hoffman Elementary School, New Orleans, Louisiana].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And we were going to school on the platoon system, as they call it.  I would go to school at seven o'clock in the morning and get out at noon; that's a half day.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Then you went to McDonogh?
Speaker 2: From there I went to McDonogh 38 [McDonogh 38 School, New Orleans, Louisiana] in the sixth grade and from there I went to McDonogh 41 [McDonogh 41 School, New Orleans, Louisiana] for the seventh and eighth grade.
Speaker 1: So you went McDonogh 38 (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Uh-huh, in the sixth grade.
Speaker 1: --they had a 38, a McDonogh 38, a McDonogh 41?
Speaker 2: They had a, they had a group of McDonogh schools because McDonogh, John McDonogh was a, was a philanthropist who gave money to open up schools and they had several numbered schools after John McDonogh.  They had 38, 35, which is a well-known high school here in the City of New Orleans, McDonogh 35 [McDonogh No. 35 Senior High School], McDonogh 38, McDonogh 28, I went to, I went to 38 and 41.  I didn't get to 35, but that would have been the school I probably would have attended if I had gone on to high school at that time.  They had a group (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So this is a philanthropist from around here?
Speaker 2: This was a philanthropist, I don't know if he was primarily from New Orleans or from the State of Louisiana, because, but New Orleans was the only school area that had all these John McDonogh schools by numbers.
Speaker 1: It's spelled, M-C-D-O-N-A-U-H, U-G-H?
Speaker 2: No, D-O-N-O-U-G-H [sic.] (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, right.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, McDonogh, yeah.
Speaker 1: McDonogh, okay.
Speaker 2: And so some of them were black schools and some of them were white schools.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And we had, there was an occasion during the course of the school year where we actually, as children, dressed up, the girls dressed up in white and the little boys dressed up in blue pants and white shirts and there's a statue of him in Lafayette Park [sic. Lafayette Square, New Orleans, Louisiana], at least it was, I don't know if it's still there, where on John McDonogh Day, all the schools would go to this park and honor him by putting flowers at the statue and it was a ceremonial thing.  I remember doing that at least three or four times (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So he's a big deal in New Orleans?
Speaker 2: Oh, he was, he was.  Well, of course now since that time, they've changed the names of several of the schools and, and changed the names to black leaders of various stages of history.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Now, where did you go to high school?
Speaker 2: I didn't.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So, went to John McDonogh through (unclear) middle school (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I went John McDonogh--I went to John McDonogh 38, which was called McDonogh 38 in the sixth grade, McDonogh 41 in the seventh and eighth grade and the summer between my eighth year and my ninth school, grade school year, I got pregnant.  I didn't discover that until I had actually started school in the ninth grade at Carter G. Woodson--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --and I went to school there for six weeks and I realized my, well my daddy [Thomas' stepfather, Percy Lee] had realized I was expecting.  So I, you couldn't go to school then when you were pregnant, it was not allowed.  So I didn't get to high school.
Speaker 1: Yeah, 'cause you said before we started the interview that you, you had graduation in kindergarten, that was the last time that you had grad- (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Um-hm, that was the last time I actually walked across the stage with a cap and gown on.
Speaker 1: --until, when you went to college, years later.
Speaker 2: Until I went back and got my, yeah--
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: --got my s- associate's degree.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Story_ID: 485981
Speaker 1: Now, we talked about--so, did you have any--what was your favorite subject in school?
Speaker 2: Well, I liked school in general.  I wasn't a great person in math.  I don't know why I would, but I would blank out when it came to math but I knew enough to get me through what I needed to get through.  I, I enjoyed English; social studies was pretty--I was pretty cool with social studies.  I liked home economics best when, because it, it allowed you to have that artistic freedom.  We made clothing.  They don't even have that anymore.  Now they've turned all that into trade schools, but when I was in school, we had home economics for the girls and we had manual arts for the guys.  And at McDonogh 41 [McDonogh 41 School, New Orleans, Louisiana], we'd have switch day, and switch day was the girls would go to manual arts and the guys would come to home economics and whatever the class was for that day, that's what Ms. Provost [Mary Carter Provost (ph.)] was the, was the home economics teacher, and she would teach the guys how to use a needle and thread to sew buttons and stuff on their clothing because she said, you know, that you can't assume that you're going to find a wife who can sew, and the girls would go to shop to learn how to use the various tools, like hammers and screwdrivers and learn to know what these tools were used for so if they didn't have a man around the house, they'd know how to use a screwdriver and a hammer.  So it was a, it was a good thing.  It gave you survival skills, but I enjoyed home economics most because being an only child, it taught me how to move, how to navigate in the kitchen without burning myself up, although my dad [Thomas' stepfather, Percy Lee] put me on a soapbox to learn how to cook when I was nine, so I knew a little bit about cooking but it taught me the names of the various utensils that I was using in the kitchen and what made life a little easier in the kitchen.  So I enjoyed that, I guess, out of all the classes I had (laughter).  I learned to sew, which came in handy as, as I became a mom.  I learned how to sew so I was able to provide my girls and boys with--my children with clothing.
Story_ID: 485982
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now, did you have, was there a favorite teacher or a mentor?
Speaker 2: I had several favorite teachers, yeah.  Of course, Miss, Dr. Mary Carter Provost [ph.] was one of them.  Ms. Pierre [ph.] was another one.  Ms. Trish [ph.], I, well, in my early days, I, I mentioned Ms. Clovice Hurst when I was in early elementary school and Ms. Glapion [Fern Glapion Brady] when I was in the sixth grade [at McDonogh 38 School, New Orleans, Louisiana].  These are people whose, whose--affected my life in ways that I, they became, you know, vivid memories of good things that happened to me in my life.  Ms. Trist was a very stern social studies teacher.  Ms. Pierre was my homeroom teacher who taught me some arts and crafts.  Mr. Murray [ph.] was my homeroom teacher in the seventh grade who was also the music director for McDonogh 41 [McDonogh 41 School, New Orleans, Louisiana] who told me I was a soprano, and I used to sing all the show tunes, you know, from 'Show Boat' and all that kind of stuff with, he, we'd put on the various operettas and what have you for the school.  So I had some lead roles as well as second lead roles and that, and this is where, I think, my stage presence, and I realized that I wasn't afraid to be in front of an audience in school, because when they put on these annual operettas and plays for the school where parents had to come in to see their children perform, I was never nervous.  I mean, it was fun for me.  I couldn't wait to get out on the stage.  I realized then that I probably would never, you know, have a problem being on the stage but I never thought about it as a living, because I didn't think you could make a living doing it, but I knew I liked being out there, I enjoyed that part of it.  I guess it was the ham in me or another way of getting a lot of attention, being an only child, I had no brothers and sisters.  So, you know, any way you can get some attention, you do it (laughter).
Story_ID: 485983
Speaker 1: Now, was--was church a big part of growing up?
Speaker 2: Church was always, I mean, in, in my mother [Vader Todd Milton] and father's [Thomas' stepfather, Percy Lee] house, you went to Sunday school or you didn't go anywhere else that day.  You could forget going to the movies or any special park or party, if you didn't get to church that morning to Sunday school that morning, then you could count everything else as null and void and, of course, it was instilled in me and I'm still an avid church person.
Speaker 1: Now what was the name of your church growing up?
Speaker 2: Well, as a, as a young kid, as I graduated from Sarah Allen [Sarah Allen Child Care Center, New Orleans, Louisiana], of course, I went to Union Bethel A.M.E. Church when we were living in New Orleans [Louisiana] and, and in Greensburg [Louisiana], there was a church out there which was an A.M.E. [African Methodist Episcopal] called Mount Everett Church [Mount Everett A.M.E. Church, Greensburg, Louisiana] out there and when I came back to New Orleans, I went back to Union Bethel for a while and then after I became a so-called woman or young woman with children, I decided to choose a church of my own liking, and I was baptized Baptist at Home Mission Baptist Church in New Orleans with--I became a Baptist after spending most of my life as a Methodist, and didn't know I was Methodist (laughter).  Nobody told you anything like that, they just said, go to church.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you didn't know the difference or any of that.
Speaker 2: I didn't--it was church to me and it still is that way as far as I'm concerned, church is church.  I mean, I got all the foundations of the dos and don'ts and the moralistic things that I needed to know to be a good adult in life and that's what was important.
Speaker 1: Okay, did, did they, did they, now did they recognize you as a talented singer in church?
Speaker 2: Not particularly.  I mean, I sung in the choir.  I was given assignments to do solos every now and then but not particularly.  It wasn't a big thing, nobody made a big thing out of it (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay, all right. So, the talent (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And I'm glad.
Story_ID: 485984
Speaker 1: So the, the talent show in, when you were in junior high school was the big (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, that was it.
Speaker 1: And Ms. Glapion--
Speaker 2: Yeah, in the sixth grade she--
Speaker 1: --identified--okay.
Speaker 2: --she identified the fact that I did have something somewhat special but even then I was so naive.  It, you know, it never clicked.  It was just something to do.
Speaker 1: Now, now is she related to the Glapion who was associated with the Zulus?
Speaker 2: I would imagine that that's a possibility, but I, I never delved into it to find out for sure.
Speaker 1: I know we interviewed Desiree Glapion Rogers [HistoryMaker Desiree Rogers] in Chicago [Illinois] whose father was a, the lawyer that got the Zulus together.
Speaker 2: Right, yeah, they may have been cousins or may have been, you know, brothers and sisters, I have no idea.  I, I have the--
Speaker 1: What was her name, her first name, I'm sorry?
Speaker 2: Glapion?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Fern.
Speaker 1: Fern Glapion [Fern Glapion Brady], okay.
Speaker 2: Fern was her name, Fern Glapion, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  So anybody watching this can check it if they want.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I do remember having to sing at her funeral, which wasn't very easy but, and I don't remember seeing any of them there.  If they were, I didn't pay that much attention, because I was concentrating on trying to get through that song without falling apart (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay, all right.  So, well, now what did you say--sing at this talent show?  What, do you remember?
Speaker 2: I did, 'Too Young,' was a Nat King Cole song of that era, and I, I did another one, not 'Mona Lisa' but there was another song he had out, but I was a Nat King Cole fan (laughter), 'cause his songs were easy to do, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, so, now when you won this talent show, what did you, did they give you some money?
Speaker 2: Yeah, they gave us some passes to go to the movie theater.  First place was the only time you actually got money.  You got five dollars and some movie passes, that's what they gave you as a prize but the--
Speaker 1: Okay. So the talent show was held where, at the--
Speaker 2: At the Carver Theater here in New Orleans [Louisiana].
Speaker 1: The Carver Theater.
Speaker 2: Carver Theater on St. Bernard.  It was located on St. Bernard Avenue [sic.] here in New Orleans.  I don't think it's there anymore.  If it is, it's some other building.  It's not a theater anymore.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So they gave you some movie passes and, now is that when you had the idea that you should talk to Mr. Battiste [HistoryMaker Harold Battiste] and other people?
Speaker 2: No, I never, I never--yeah, yeah, that summer, that summer when I was doing that, I went over and said I want to come and audition to make a record.
Speaker 1: Okay, he said you (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Not realizing that auditioning to make a record mean it was, you could, you know, you could actually make a living doing that but I thought it was a good idea since I had recorded one for the school at McDonogh 41 [McDonogh 41 School, New Orleans, Louisiana], I figured I can record one and have a record.
Speaker 1: Okay, but Mr. Battiste said you were too young?
Speaker 2: I was too young.
Speaker 1: And that was the title of the song you sung at the--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --when the time is right.
Speaker 2: Irony wouldn't you, it's the irony of it all.  Yeah, he says I was too young.  Of course later he's told me that I, that he felt that I had a talent that, that eventually would be reckoned with but he didn't want to have that, that job at that time.
Speaker 1: Okay, so this would have been 19, what--
Speaker 2: Fifty (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Fifty-six [1956] or--
Speaker 2: No, I was--
Speaker 1: No, fifty--
Speaker 2: --twelve so that had to be fifty--I was thirteen so it had to be '54 [1954].
Speaker 1: Okay, 1954.
Speaker 2: Fifty-four [1954].
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Story_ID: 485985
Speaker 1: So, well, you know, well shortly after that your whole life kind of turned upside down 'cause you have a--you're pregnant (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, yeah, I got pregnant that summer.  It's called being nosey and experimenting and not knowing what you're doing because back in those times, mothers nor fathers actually, had what we called the sex talk with the children and it was, it wasn't discussed in the house and no one told you anything, you were green behind the ears.  So as far as I was concerned, I was having fun.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I didn't know what the consequences were going to be.
Speaker 1: So, do you have brothers and sisters?
Speaker 2: I'm an only child.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I thought so, that's why I'm thinking, so--
Speaker 2: I'm an only child so I was--
Speaker 1: So you find yourself alone by yourself a lot or--
Speaker 2: I was always by myself.  Basically, I had some cousins on my father's [Thomas' stepfather, Percy Lee] side that I used to visit that lived in Algiers [New Orleans, Louisiana] but basically I was it, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, so, well were your parents upset when they found out or did they--
Speaker 2: Yeah, my daddy was very upset and, of course, he was, you know, he decided that I needed to be married and, of course, how you going to say who the dad is when you're not sure yourself.  I was a very promiscuous little heifer (laughter).  So, I said who I thought the father was and he took us in St. Bernard Parish [Louisiana].  I was fourteen, and he made us get married and I turned fifteen on February and my daughter was born in May.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you married at, so I don't suppose that marriage lasted but, yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It was sort of, kind of a shotgun wedding.
Speaker 1: So it didn't really last, did it then?
Speaker 2: Of course it didn't last.
Speaker 1: Okay, yeah.
Speaker 2: I mean, here I am, I mean, what did I know about marriage, please, yeah.  That definitely did not work.
Speaker 1: Now, well, what happened?  Did you have to, did you all live together or did, what happened?
Speaker 2: We, we kind of, sort of, set up housekeeping in the apartment complex where my dad and mom [Vader Todd Milton] lived in the front and we had a room in the kitchen in the back, and we thought we were playing house and that's exactly what we were doing, playing house, 'cause I haven't a--I didn't have a clue as to what was going on, and I don't think the young man cared one way or the other.  So, it, it didn't last.  I mean, I had my child and he pretended to be a husband, I, for whatever that was worth and I didn't have any idea what was, you know, what life was supposed to be like.  I was living this fairytale-type situation.  I'm the wife, I cooked the meals and the husband come home for lunch, you know, and eat and, well it didn't work out, needless to say.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: So I wound up moving back in with my parents within the same year, to be exact, of the marriage.  So it was just, it was my father's way of, of having me have a legitimate child so he did what he thought was best, and I don't, I don't fault him for it.  He was handling things the way he thought it should have been handled.  It didn't work but at least he was trying (laughter).
Story_ID: 485986
Speaker 1: So, what--what were your prospects then?  Did you, did you wonder what you were going to do next or (simultaneous)--?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, I didn't have any prospects because I couldn't go to school.  You, you were not allowed to go to school, especially being pregnant, married or no married, you couldn't go to school.  So I had that baby, and consequently got pregnant again and had another baby, and when I had the second one, I started trying to seek work which would, you know, that I could only work at night and the only kind of jobs I could hold was washing dishes at any, you know, various restaurants and I did that for a while and then my uncle found me a job.  He was a longshoreman and he told me about this packing company where you could pack pre- I guess you would say, prepackage soup bunches where you put together the ingredients to make soup in one bag.  He found me a job out there that was called piece work so I could work early in the morning and, and I found someone who could watch the kids for me and I worked there for a while and, of course, I started dating the supervisor and got pregnant again (laughter).  So, life goes on.
Speaker 1: Okay, so this is your third now?
Speaker 2: This was the third one, but it was, and it was, then after that one, when that baby was like, oh, I guess she was six months.  Well, she was young, and I started working at the Pimlico Club [New Orleans, Louisiana] and, as a waitress, and this was a (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) But still not as a talent, as a waitress?
Speaker 2: No, as a waitress, yeah, as a waitress.
Speaker 1: Now what was the status of the Pimlico Club at--
Speaker 2: This was a black club that had live entertainment, four days a week.  They would start on Wednesday nights through Sunday night I think it was.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I was a waitress there at night because I worked at nights so my parents [Vader Todd Milton and Thomas' stepfather, Percy Lee] could babysit for me during the day and I--when the band would play, I used to ask Tommy Ridgley could I sing with you and he says, "Well can you sing?"  I said, "Of course I can sing," and the song was, 'There Goes My Baby.'  Mind you, prior to working at the Pimlico Club, my cousins, whose names was Dee Dee [ph.] and Joanne [ph.], were dancers at another club here in New Orleans [Louisiana] called the High Hat Club, and they needed a third dancer.  So, prior to my third child, in between the second and third child, I danced for a while and I danced with, when, where Tommy Ridgley was playing at this club.  He was at the High Hat Club and he had his band, they were the performing band there, but I danced then and I asked him could I sing then and he said, no, 'cause he didn't think I could sing 'cause I was a dancer.  So when he saw me the next time, when he was playing at the, at the Pimlico Club and I was waitressing there, and I asked him, I guess he said, "If I don't let her sing, she's going to worry the hell out of me," so finally he said, "Okay, I'll let you sing."  So, then I didn't know what key I did songs in so I would, he said, "Well go over to the guitar player and sing a little bit and he'll find out what key you sing it in."  So I went over to the guitar player and I sung the song that I wanted to sing to the guitar player and he told him what key and I got up and I sang.  So they started asking for the singing waitress.
Speaker 1: Now, what, what year is that do you think?
Speaker 2: Let's see, Tina [ph.] was born in '57 [1957] so this was '58 [1958], '58 [1958] in '58 [1958].  This is 1958 (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Nineteen--1958, okay, all right.
Story_ID: 485987
Speaker 1: Well, we were talking off-camera about the Creole--the ordinary black folks and the Creoles and the differences in New Orleans [Louisiana], and you were telling me about some place called the Autocrat Club [Autocrat Social and Pleasure Club, New Orleans, Louisiana].
Speaker 2: That was the name of it, the Autocrat Club.
Speaker 1: And what went on in the Auto- could you get in in the Autocrat (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It was a society, it's a social club for whatever society, you operated out of the Autocrat Club.  It was, I guess, kindred to a men's organization of some kind that held their meetings there, parties there and you had to be a certain shade of color to go in, or you couldn't go in there.
Speaker 1: And you were telling me, now, people, everybody's heard this, they actually used a paper bag (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) They actually did this, yes.  Everybody's heard it but it actually happened that you had to, what they called the brown bag test.  If you were as dark as or darker than a brown paper bag, you could not go in there and, I mean, I personally didn't want to go in there.  The first job I got there, I was apprehensive about performing there I said, "Because I'm too black to go in there so why would I want to go somewhere, you know, that I'm too black to be in."  But eventually they broke down that barrier some years later which was in the '70s [1970s] before I actually went to the Autocrat Club (laughter).
Speaker 1: Well it's interesting, you know, it was interesting being in this part of the country 'cause those relationships in terms of color are so formalized but it seemed like over the years, some of this has broken down 'cause the--
Speaker 2: Oh, I mean, it, it, that, that broke down, yeah--
Speaker 1: --blacks and the Creoles seemed to live side by side, right.
Speaker 2: --they realized it was a stupid situation, of course, the younger generation of that same family people realized it was just ignorance and stupidity, but that happened.  I mean, it was a part of life back then.  So, like I said, it wasn't until the '70s [1970s] before I played the Autocrat Club, you know (laughter).
Speaker 1: So, in some, in some respects then, integration, within the black community was an issue (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, yeah, oh yeah, it was big time, big time issue.
Story_ID: 485988
Speaker 1: In 1958, you get a chance to sing (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) In 1958 I have a job as a waitress in the Pimlico Club [New Orleans, Louisiana] and I, I asked Tommy Ridgley could I sing and, once again, he said, you know, he finally gave in to my singing and he allowed me to do this song called, 'There Goes My Baby,' and after that they started asking for the singing waitress, and after several times of getting up there singing a few songs with Tommy Ridgley and, the boss, who was white, who owned the club, cautioned me and told me said, "Look, I didn't hire you to be a singer, I hired you to be a waitress and if you get up there and sing again, you, you know, you're going to get fired."  Well, some months later when I thought he wasn't there, and I felt like singing, I got up on the stage to sing and he walked in the door and pointed the finger said, "You're fired."  So I turned around and told Tommy, I said, "Oh, well, Tommy, I don't have a job no more, may as well sing with you."  He says, "Okay," and he hired me to be one of the singers in his band.
Speaker 1: Okay, so now Tommy Ridgeway, did he have a big band?
Speaker 2: Tommy Ridgley, he had a band.
Speaker 1: Ridgley, Ridgley, okay.
Speaker 2: His band was called the Untouchables.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Tommy Ridgley and the Untouchables.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: He had some records out.  I think he had something called 'Shrewsbury Blues' or something like that.  I don't remember all of Tommy's records but he had, he had a little record situation going on locally.
Speaker 1: That's interesting (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) He was somewhat of a star in this area.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Um-hm, popular.
Speaker 1: All right.  So, but it seems strange that the owner would want to fire you for singing.  It seemed like it, if the, if people liked the--
Speaker 2: Remember, we're talking about a white owner in a black club and he hired me as a waitress.  He didn't see the future.  All he was looking at is a black gal, as he would call me, up on the stage that we hired to be a waitress and that's not what he hired me to do.
Speaker 1: So he saw that you--
Speaker 2: He didn't care what the business was doing.  I mean, I was bringing the people in there, because they was coming to hear the singing waitress, but he didn't look at it that way.  That was not his mindset.
Speaker 1: Okay, he was looking at it that you weren't waiting tables.
Speaker 2: Right, that was my second time getting fired for singing on the job (laughter).
Speaker 1: This is amazing.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So you started tour--like Tommy Ridgley then would play a different--
Speaker 2: Tommy Ridgley, yeah, he--
Speaker 1: --places around town.
Speaker 2: --yeah, he started hiring me to be his, one of his singers, feature singers, with his band and I had--I hadn't even recorded then.  And so this went on, my youngest child at that time, when I was working with him, she must have been about six or seven months old, somewhere in there, and we're talking now 1959 'cause she was born August of '58 [1958].  So 1959 is when I actually started really delving into the music industry realizing that I could actually make a living doing this, you know, but Tommy Ridgley started booking me with him, and the first time he took me on the road with him, we played in a little town called Waveland, Mississippi at a club called the 100 Men's Hall [100 Men D.B.A. Hall], and he had booked it and all the advertisement was out, and I didn't realize that he was working what they call the door, and it had rained all that afternoon, by the time the show came, we barely made enough money to buy gas to put back in the car to get back home (laughter).  But it, I didn't, I didn't think anything of it.  I mean, you know, it was a gig that didn't come through.
Story_ID: 485989
Speaker 1: But after that, Tommy Ridgley decided to take me to audition.  At least he told me I should go to this place on Carondelet Street called Ron Records [New Orleans, Louisiana], and audition and I didn't go.  So I guess when he called the man and asked him had I been there and the guy told him, no, I hadn't been there, he came and got me and brought me to audition for Ron Records.
Speaker 2: Now why didn't you go in the first place?
Speaker 1: I didn't think--I thought he was lying.  I didn't think he was telling the truth.  You know, you hear these stories on TV and in the movies and stuff about people wanting you to be a star and all that.  I didn't think anything of that.  So he came to my house and got me and actually brought me to the studio to audition.  This was like on a Monday.  I auditioned that afternoon.  A lady was there named Dorothy LaBostrie who had written some songs for Johnny Adams and other people.  She had this song called, '(You Can Have My Husband But Please) Don't Mess with My Man.'  She wrote 'Tutti Frutti' for Little Richard and she had, she had several hits on the market and she gave me this song, she taught me this song called, '(You Can Have My Husband But Please) Don't Mess With My Man' and two days later I was in the studio recording it and less than, I'd say three weeks, I had a record out.
Speaker 2: Now that's a, the implications of that song are so many that--
Speaker 1: Well, yeah, it was, it was suggestive so it was told, because it, it was making it in the charts and then somewhere down the line they decided that it was too suggestive so they took it off the radio.
Speaker 2: Really, so--
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: --so was it a FCC [Federal Communications Commission] thing or what--
Speaker 1: I don't--all I know is that it was stated that they couldn't play it anymore.  A lot of the jocks [disc jockeys] who was getting, giving it air play, mentioned that, when they were getting requests for it, they couldn't play it because it was considered too suggestive.
Story_ID: 485990
Speaker 1: (Laughter) (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Now, these are the days when FCC [Federal Communications Commission] really--there's a controversy, I know around, black people's, race music--
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 2: --and what they called race music, and--
Speaker 1: It was called race music, yeah.
Speaker 2: --and they often--
Speaker 1: The lyrics, they, they started delving into what the lyrics was.  A lot of music was that, that was out at that time, you know, was double entendres, I mean, everything had another, another meaning, only the people who were singing it knew what it was, but, but that was the situation at that time 'cause music was crossing over.  The black music as we, as they were calling it, the race music, was crossing over during that time because less than two years later, I became a predominantly white artist.  I mean, my audience became white.  I mean, I recorded 'Don't Mess with My Man' ['(You Can Have My Husband But Please) Don't Mess with My Man'] which was what, late '59 [1959] when it came out.  I had been touring with that record and then later in 19--I want to say, '61 [1961], I switched labels.  I went from Ron Records to Minit, Minit label [Minit Records], which was a subsidiary of Imperial [sic.] and that's when I started working with Allen Toussaint, and the first record that came out with Allen was called, 'Cry On' and it took off.  I mean, the, the little, the white audiences was buying it.
Speaker 2: And white people bought it primarily in '60 [1960]--
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, was buying it and immediately after that one came out he released another record that I recorded for Minit called, 'It's Raining' and 'It's Raining' just took off.  I mean, it became a local hit like overnight and I started getting gigs in white clubs, playing for predominantly white audiences.  I used to teach 'em all the black dances that black kids was doing.  I used to teach all the white kids how to do the dances, and it's--my career has been predominantly a white audience career ever since.
Speaker 2: Now how, what do you account--how do you account for that?  I mean--
Speaker 1: Well, it was funny because I, I start--the first, after the records came out and got popular, of course, I started getting some gigs at various places.  I mean, I did some tours with different bands in the area and I had this engagement at this school, locally, and when they realized that I was black, it didn't matter to them.  It really didn't matter and then--
Speaker 2: So they, they actually thought you were white--
Speaker 1: They thought I was a white artist.
Speaker 2: --after listening to the record?
Speaker 1: Uh-huh.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Uh-huh.  I mean, you know, I had that generic sound, I guess (laughter), but it didn't matter to them because they, at that, by that time, they loved it.  I mean, they liked what they liked and they wanted to hear what they wanted to hear.  So they started having sock hops and, you know, different things like that for the school kids to go to and, and I played for them, with whatever band was there.  I mean, back then bands learned everything that was on the radio.  Any records that was popular on the radio, they would learn it and I could go and walk in with any band in the area and sing any of those songs and they would know 'em.
Story_ID: 485991
Speaker 1: I'm sensing something here, and you'd have to help me out but when you were doing, '(You Can Have My Husband But) Don't Take My Man' [sic. '(You Can Have My Husband But Please) Don't Mess With My Man'] in '59 [1959] (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It was basically a black audience.
Speaker 1: Yeah, black audience--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --and so when you made the transition to Minit Records with Allen Toussaint--
Speaker 2: Um-hm, um-hm, my audience base changed.
Speaker 1: --the style must have changed too, I would think?
Speaker 2: The style did change.  It wasn't--
Speaker 1: So you were singing more--
Speaker 2: --it wasn't hardcore R and B as it was more, for lack of a better phrase, to put it, more of a pop sound.
Speaker 1: Kind of like a [HistoryMaker] Dionne Warwick or--
Speaker 2: Not quite that popish but kind of in between, yeah, kind of in between that.  It wasn't hardcore blues, but it was considered a rhythm and blues song but it wasn't the standard hard punching, hard driving type of blues.
Speaker 1: And the lyrics weren't as double entendre (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, they weren't hard, they were, yeah, I mean, it's "Raining so hard, it looks like it's gonna rain all night," you know, "and this is the time I'd love to be holding you tight," I mean, you know, no double entendres in there; you know exactly what I was talking about.
Speaker 1: Okay, not like 'Kitchen Man' or something like that.
Speaker 2: Right, right.
Speaker 1: These other, yeah.
Speaker 2: I heard one the other day about a pencil and I thought I'd die (laughter).  I said, "They let that play on the radio?"
Speaker 1: Yeah, now that seems to be like a, you know, a lot of indigenous black, you know, club music has that kind of--even, I mean, reggae, rap music now, of course, you know, it had a lot of double entendre.
Speaker 2: Um-hm, oh god it's, oh--
Speaker 1: A lot of the reggae came out after Bob Marley--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --had with the, I can't think of the guy down there now that does it, was a pioneer of it, but a lot of double entendre reggae, that, yeah that--
Speaker 2: Yeah, oh yes, yes.  I mean that was the--
Speaker 1: --where they're saying, and they're talking so fast, you say, "Wait a minute, what's he--?"  You know.
Speaker 2: But I mean even before the Bob Marley era where you can go back, if you go as far back as early, John Lee Hooker and Guitar Slim, those folk, their music was a lot of, the words in their music was a lot of double entendres.  I mean, they would, you'd know what they were talking about but they would use some other inanimate object as, as the subject matter in the song but you knew what they were talking about, you know.
Speaker 1: Yeah, well Bessie Smith, Mamie Smith, Clara Smith, going all the way back to Ma Rainey and probably beyond, and so on and so on.
Speaker 2: Right, I mean, everybody, that's the way they recorded then.  I mean, they couldn't just come right out and say what it is they want so they found another way to express their feelings by using some inanimate object to describe that, you know, what they're talking about.  So, that was, that came from that era and it just brought it on into the '60s [1960s], on into the '70s [1970s].  And now, now in the year 2000, I mean, they just say anything and everything, they just come right out and say it.  I mean, there's no guessing at what they're talking about anymore.  To me it was more fun back then when it was double entendres, because it give you an imagination.  You had to think when you're listening to the song, you had to think.  Now you don't have to think, you just--there it is.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I've often reflected on the lyrics of songs that were popular when I was growing up and now I know more than, I mean I say, "Wait a minute," you know, I mean, when I was kid, I heard--
Speaker 2: Um-hm, you realize now--
Speaker 1: --I was singing them, along with them when I was a kid--
Speaker 2: Right, but you didn't know what they meant.
Speaker 1: Yeah, right.
Speaker 2: Yeah, because they, they didn't come right out and say it, you know.  Now that you're older and you realize what you were singing back then, you says, "They let me sing that?" (Laughter).
Speaker 1: Yeah, you know, there's a song, I know there's a song by even The Supremes [sic. Martha and The Vandelles] in high school where a Jewish guy told me that, when they were singing 'Jimmy Mack,' they're talking about a pimp, a mack.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: But I don't know if they were or not.  I don't know if he took it too far or what but I, every time I hear it now I wonder if that's what the, what it's about.
Speaker 2: It's possible, it's possible.
Speaker 1: I don't know but you--
Speaker 2: Because that's what, that's what pimps were called back then, macks, yeah, um-hm.
Speaker 1: Yeah, "So when are you coming back."  Well, I don't--
Speaker 2: Yeah, I wouldn't've wanted him to come back myself.  I mean, that's another--a whole 'nother story.
Speaker 1: But they probably want to know when he was coming.
Speaker 2: (Singing) Hey.
Speaker 1: But that's, yeah, that, so--
Speaker 2: That's how music was.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Story_ID: 485992
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And the nature of the venue has changed--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --'cause I know I've read that you, when you, when you're at a period of time you're doing gospel, you don't do secular music at the same time.
Speaker 2: I don't.  I don't sing the two together, unh-uh.
Speaker 1: At the same, together, yeah, 'cause they, and so, in your mind, what, yeah--
Speaker 2: I mean, I, I was raised, I was raised in, in church, and those were some of the things that was embedded in me about respect for the church and respect for the word.  If you're gonna talk about religion, you talk it to people who are of sound mind, not drunk, not inebriated from whatever.  You want them to understand what it is you're talking about and who it is you're speaking of.  So if I'm in a night club and I'm singing, 'Hip Shakin' Mama,' you know, and, and they're sitting there drinking their, their liquor or what have you, and then I'm going to start out singing 'Amazing Grace,' well they're not sure exactly what it is I'm talking about 'cause their, their head is one place and what you're singing is somewhere else so I don't mix the two.  When I'm doing gospel, I'm singing it to a sober-minded audience.  You know, I've done, I've done--last year at the jazz festival was the first time I actually performed a performance of gospel music at the Jazz and Heritage Festival [New Orleans Jazz and Heritage Festival] where 95 percent of the folk are sober.  Some of them may not be, but the majority of the audience is sober so then they understand and then the other side about that is that jazz fest, people who come to the gospel tent are coming there for that reason to hear gospel music for what it's presented to be, a soulful expression of spirit and prayer so they know.  So, you know, you don't, you're not giving them a mixed message there.  So I don't do gospel music when I'm singing my rhythm and blues, and I will politely tell a person who asks but, you want to hear me sing, come to 2216 3rd Street at Old Baptist [sic. First African Baptist Church, New Orleans, Louisiana] and I'll be in the choir, you know.  You can't wait 'til I do a gospel show somewhere, but I'm not going to sing it tonight, not with this, and I've gained respect for that.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, whether I did or not, I wasn't going to do it 'cause, I mean, I don't, I'm not out here to make a dollar at any cost, not at the, at, at, sell my soul to, to make a dollar, that's not, that's not how I was raised and I, I have became a firm believer that it should not be done that way.  Some people say, well you don't know, you might win a soul that night, well I don't know and I probably won't win one if I got to sing it in a nightclub where people are drinking, I probably won't.
Speaker 1: Well, it's interesting, I guess to note, that your talent was reculi- recognized more in a secular setting than in a gospel center.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: So you didn't, nobody at church really tried to put you up as their--
Speaker 2: No, I mean, they would ask me to sing solos, I mean, you know, I would, once again, my naiveness, you know, I didn't realize that I had anything special.  I was always asked to sing a certain song or, you know, I mean--but that was normal in church because as a kid growing up, and you hear this in a lot of southern families and it was apropos in my family and it did happen that, depending on what the Sunday was or what they were celebrating that Sunday, children got up and they said their little pieces that they gave 'em which would be a bible verse or something out of Sunday school and the other one would sing a little child song that was taught to them during Sunday school and all the kids participated at one time or another so I didn't feel that I had anything special, you know, because I was lumped in with the rest of the kids, we all did it.  So how am I supposed to know that my voice was any different than anybody else's?  I knew I could carry a note because I could sing.  You know, I sung and it wasn't all off key and nobody put their hands over their ears when I was singing (laughter) but aside from that, no, I had no clue as to what my singing abilities were and I don't feel that I, it really developed into anything unique or special until well into my career.
Speaker 1: Okay, until well into it, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So you--
Speaker 2: As far as I'm concerned--
Speaker 1: Okay, so at this stage--
Speaker 2: --because, I mean, I felt that when I first started out singing, even though I liked what I did and I enjoyed singing, I didn't feel that my voice was that unique even though other folks say, "I could recognize you if you, if you had your back turned and you spoke, I could recognize your voice."  I didn't feel that my voice was that unique and I, and it wasn't until later, in later years that I could listen to me in retrospect and hear the difference between the way I, the way I sound as opposed to the way somebody else sounded to see that I did have a unique sounding voice, but it wasn't until well into my career that I realized that I did have a unique sounding voice.
Story_ID: 485993
Speaker 1: Well when you were with--it says here that you had a hit called, 'Two Winters Long'?
Speaker 2: Yeah, that was one of the songs that Allen [Allen Toussaint] put together when I was with Minit Records.
Speaker 1: Okay, now what are these, are these mostly slow kind of ballads or--
Speaker 2: 'Two Winters Long' was a medium tempo song.  'It's Raining,' 'Cry On,' 'Ruler of My Heart,' which was covered by Otis Redding, he made 'Pain in My Heart' from that one, those were ballads.  'I Done Got Over' ['I Done Got Over It'] which was written by Ernie K-Doe, 'Two Winters Long', 'I Did My Part,' 'Hittin' On Nothing,' those were medium tempo or fast songs as we called them back then 'cause they were fast.  When it wasn't slow, it was considered fast but those were the up-tempo songs and they got played on the radio constantly here.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  So, now Minit was bought by Imperial Records in '63 [1963], I guess, right?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: So how did that change your music?
Speaker 2: Well, according to what I was told, that when Imperial was sold to, to--when Imperial bought Minit Records, my contract was one of the contracts that was in effect that they purchased at that time of the transition, so I was carried over from Minit into the Imperial family and they brought me to California to record out there as opposed to recording here.  So, I was, prior to that, I was doing all my recordings here in New Orleans [Louisiana] but when that happened, that transition took place, they brought me to California to record and that's when I recorded, 'I Wish Someone Would Care,' 'Breakaway' and 'Time Is on My Side,' and that series of songs that came out on the Imperial label.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, so, so you had to go--what was the name of the studio here in New Orleans?
Speaker 2: I did most of the stuff here in New Orleans at Cosimo Matassa studio.
Speaker 1: Cosimo--
Speaker 2: Matassa.  Don't ask me how to spell it, 'cause I haven't a clue.
Speaker 1: Matassa, okay, all right, okay.
Speaker 2: It's one of them Italian names, I would assume.
Speaker 1: All right, so this is '63 [1963], you know, through '66 [1966], years at Minit Records under Imperial, I guess.  So you had, you had to record out in California.  Now did you go out there to live or did you just--
Speaker 2: Eventually I did but not at the time that I was recording, I wasn't living there, I was still living here in New Orleans.
Story_ID: 485994
Speaker 1: There's a song called, 'Wish Someone Would Care'--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --that is noted here.  Now did you, did you participate in the writing of any or all?
Speaker 2: I wrote that one.  When I went to, when I went to California to perform, to do the recording session out there, they asked me, did I have any songs that I wrote myself and I said, yes, I have one that I wrote and it was called, 'I Wish Someone Would Care' and I sung it for them and H. B. [HistoryMaker H. B. Barnum] wrote up an arrangement on it, and to show you how naive I was, I had sung the song with the guy who played piano here called Sachs Carey [ph.], and I didn't know that he was supposed to get part of the writer's royalty for that and, of course, my naivete, he didn't call it to my attention back then so, of course, I became the sole writer of the song, but I give him credit, you know, now that he, that I was told that I was supposed to do that.  They didn't tell me that back then but, yeah, he helped me write it at the time but I, I came up with all the lyrics and he, at the time, was playing the piano when I did the song, but anyway, that was the first major hit I had in terms of topping the charts.  It went to number seventeen in the nation which surprised the heck out of me (laughter), and it was one that I came up in five minutes.  I blurted out the lyrics in about five minutes.
Speaker 1: Now, when I read, I've read here, this is kind of, this is an autobiographical song--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Reflecting on your own life.
Speaker 2: Um-hm, I was the--
Speaker 1: And the words--
Speaker 2: --person that I was living with at that time who was the husband I had at that time, was working on my little bitty nerve, and he wasn't doing what he was supposed to do as a husband, and I was just--I had had enough and I expressed it in the song.  I was wishing somebody would care because he didn't, he wasn't showing me very much caring at that time.  Eventually we did separate and get divorced, but at the time I was carrying his name when I started out singing and he was giving me holy hell and I was managing to get away.
Speaker 1: Well it seemed like you weren't sure how long any of this is going to last.  The lyrics are--
Speaker 2: And I was contemplating getting away then.
Speaker 1: Yeah, the lyrics are "Sitting home alone, thinkin' about my past, wonderin' how I made it, and how long it's gonna last," you know, that's how it opens up.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: So were you kind of thinking, well, I'm making records now and I'm doing but, you know, this really going to--
Speaker 2: Yeah, how long is this going to keep up because it was, it was a very trying moment.  I mean, you know, the record industry I had, I had, you know, I didn't realize that at the time I wrote the song, I didn't realize that my contract had been sold to Imperial [Imperial Records].  I didn't even know at that moment when the, when the song was being created that I even had a contract with them (background noise).
Speaker 1: (TAPE INTERRUPTION)
Speaker 2: Okay, we were talking about 'Wish Someone Would Care' and that song and, and the motivation for writing it now, its success, it went up to number--
Speaker 1: Seventeen.
Speaker 2: Um-hm, seventeen but it hit number two on the Cash Box R and B chart.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I didn't know that, learning something today (laughter).
Speaker 2: Yeah, it says it right--yeah, it says it right here.
Speaker 1: I'm learning something today.  I did not know that.
Speaker 2: Okay, you see, you'll have to go back and see what happened to the, you know--
Speaker 1: That's okay.  What's past is past.
Speaker 2: Okay, so, so you were divorced in '66 [1966].  Now this is, okay.
Speaker 1: From Andrew Thomas, yes.
Speaker 2: Okay, all right, and the, the flip side of the record was--
Speaker 1: 'Breakaway.'
Speaker 2: 'Breakaway' and, okay, and, that's an up-tempo kind of song?
Speaker 1: Um-hm, very up-tempo.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I think Jackie DeShannon did that and somebody else.
Speaker 1: Um-hm, that's the, that was the writer, yes.
Speaker 2: Okay, all right.
Speaker 1: She was an artist in her own right.
Speaker 2: Right, right.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Story_ID: 485995
Speaker 1: Now Imperial [Imperial Records] released nine singles and two albums during your three-year stay on the label.  Now, I guess it says, 'Anyone Who Knows What Love Is' and 'Time Is on My Side,' see, was a hit--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --and, was that the biggest hit on that, during that period?
Speaker 2: I--no, it wasn't the biggest hit but it was one of the chart makers, it made the charts.  I don't know at what, how high it came up in the charts but it would, it got the attention of a lot of the European acts, because the Rolling Stones jumped on it and of course it became one of their major hits--
Speaker 1: Oh, okay, so you--
Speaker 2: --but it was during the British invasion (laughter).
Speaker 1: So, you made a record and then the British invaded it and took--and took it over.
Speaker 2: Um-hm, I made it first.  I actually recorded the song in 1964 but they didn't release it until, I think, what, late '65 [1965], early '66 [1966], is when they released it, and then right after--well during 1966 is when I went to England and did a six weeks tour over there, and I met Mick Jagger and, and some of his guys and he told me then he says, he liked that song, but I didn't think he was going to record it but he did.  And, of course, that was during the time when, when The Beatles was taking over the United States and anything that was from British heritage was making records, was making hits.
Speaker 1: Now what was that experience like in, I've been told that the British fans know more about him--
Speaker 2: They do--
Speaker 1: --black music than--
Speaker 2: --the, but put it this way, European folk know more about the black history music and black, blacks in the business than a lot of the people in the United States, because they delve into their, their works, body of work.  They look 'em up and they search out their history background and when they, when they learn that they like a person's singing, they want to know what else did that person put out, and they'll hunt it down, go to whatever lengths they need to find the music, and they become an avid fan, I mean in every sense of the word.  They know your likes, your dislikes, everything, anything they can find out about you (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay, was that, did that kind of put you off when you went over there to find, find out they were that much into you (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, I thought it was interesting.  I thought it was interesting.  I found it to be fascinating that anybody cared enough to want to know that much about me (laughter).  I mean, I'm one of the few entertainers that I know of who really enjoy having fans.  I mean, I, I, I'm amenable and I'm accessible to my fans where most people, once they get a certain status, they get their people and you have to see their people in order to get to that person.  No, I don't have them people, it's just me and my husband and my band.  You want to see me, here I am (laughter).
Story_ID: 485996
Speaker 1: Says here, too, that the singles that you produced for Imperial [Imperial Records] were big productions, lots of strings and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh yeah, [HistoryMaker] H. B. Barnum was the, I guess for lack of a better word, he wasn't a producer but he was the band leader and writer and, and he, he had these huge arrangements on everything.  I mean, strings, what, six or seven horns maybe more, big orchestrations on 'em, yeah (laughter).
Speaker 1: So (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) But that was, that was the sign of the time, that was what was happening at that time of the, in the industry.  You know, everything was big band arrangements.
Speaker 1: Okay, did, when you went on the road, did you have like enough to--
Speaker 2: Unh-uh, when I went on the road, I carried a couple of horns, rhythm section, you know.  I mean, you can only put so many people in the station wagon (laughter).  Yeah, that's just the way it was.
Speaker 1: So you know I can't laugh out loud.
Speaker 2: You know, we didn't have the great big buses.  I didn't have the great big bus money back then so, you know, you, everything, including the instrumentation and clothing and the musicians and the audio all rode in the station wagon.  So, you know, you couldn't carry all these, all that in there.
Speaker 1: Your personal appearances in those days, were they mostly around here or where did you go in your station wagon (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, well, southern, the southern end of the United States.  We did Mississippi, Alabama, Georgia, Florida and, believe it or not, very rarely did I play Texas during that time, and Texas is right next door, but I always went east as opposed to going west and most of my gigs took me, took me east.  It was, we, we had a, at the time, I had a manager called Percy Stovall, and Percy used to have what we called the Christmas run and he would, he would book shows here in Louisiana with, that would take us to various little small towns.  We would start out, maybe the, the Friday before Christmas if Christmas was on the, on the weekend, it fell on a Sunday, we would start out that Thursday.  We would play one town to the next town to the next town and we would, wound up in Opelousas [Louisiana] on Christmas Eve or something like that.  And also he, we booked me to all the, what we call the [U.S.] Army towns or servicemen towns and he would book them around pay time for the, whenever the pay, the Army or the [U.S.] Navy or whatever the group was in whatever state we were playing, he would book a show in that area around that time so it would be Johnny Adams, myself, Robert Parker and all of us, we would have like a little small miniature show, you know, and we would all travel together and we would all be on the same headliners on the same show and Stovall would book us in Florida or we'd go from Pensacola, Florida to Tallahassee [Florida], down to Fort Lauderdale [Florida] or Miami [Florida], and this would be the run through that way, and then we would go up to Georgia, what was it?  I'm trying to think of the town in Georgia that we played.  Well, we didn't play Atlanta [Georgia] but that, where the station, where the, I think it's the Army base.
Speaker 1: What, Fort Benning [Georgia]?
Speaker 2: Fort Benning, we would play.  There was a club that was near there that we would play and he would do this during the year, it would be like a cycle.  We would go maybe in January, we'd come back again through there and the beginning of the summer, about every three or four months, that would be the, the lineup that he would take and we would play all these various armories along the way, you know (laughter).  And that's, that's the kind of shows we would have and we traveled in a station wagon.
Story_ID: 485997
Speaker 1: Did you ever appear with Fats Domino in any of these, during these days at all (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Not on the same, during that time, not on the same program.  It was always, Fats, Fats was more or less playing in Vegas [Las Vegas, Nevada] at that time.  Fats must have spent about twenty-some years in Vegas, constantly, so we didn't get to play together a lot but I did do a lot of theaters during that time when I had, 'Wish Someone Would Care.'  I played the Howard Theatre in Washington, D.C.  I did the Apollo Theater [New York, New York] three times.  I did--
Speaker 1: The Regal [Regal Theater] in Chicago [Illinois].
Speaker 2: The Regal in Chicago.  Well, I had done the Regal twice 'cause I did Regal when I had 'Don't Mess With My Man' ['(You Can Have My Husband But Please) Don't Mess with My Man'] out, I did the Regal and I did it again with 'Wish Someone Would Care' and then after that, I think, the Regal shut down and went to, went somewhere else or they just wasn't using it anymore.
Speaker 1: Yeah, they tore it down at one point, yeah.
Speaker 2: Somebody told me that they actually tore it down, but I played the, that was what you did when you were an artist coming up during that era.  You played all of the major theaters and you did your week here and your week there and you, you know, you did that and if you had any overseas tours, which I had that one in '66 [1966], you did that but, you know, for some reason I didn't, Stovall [Percy Stovall] was my manager, but he didn't really try to promote me or get me on a large scale show like 'The Dick Clark Show.'  I played that a couple of times due to the fact that Imperial Records had me on 'The Dick Clark Show' to promote whatever record was out at that time, but Stovall, as my manager, he didn't try to get me on any of those road shows like they used to have with, Dick Clark used to have his busload of show people that he carried with, then we toured, they would tour.  I never played that type of setup during the '60s [1960s] at all.
Story_ID: 485998
Speaker 1: Well, what I'm reading here is like your, your popularity started declining actually with people you really didn't know, you know, it wasn't a big (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Unh-uh, unh-uh, unh-uh.
Speaker 1: --there's one attempt that, here's a song called, 'It's a Man's--
Speaker 2: --Woman's World' ['It's a Man's Woman's World'].
Speaker 1: --A Woman's World,' yeah, it's kind of a response to James Brown's, 'It's a Man's World' ['It's a Man's Man's Man's World'].
Speaker 2: Yeah, James Brown produced it and, and he so-called wrote it and when I say, so-called wrote it, he, we're in the studio and he's playing this riff and he says, "Just sing some words that says, 'It's a man's-woman's world'," and then somebody wrote up some words and stuck 'em in the studio and said, well sing these and I have never liked that song and I don't sing it and if somebody asks for it, I said, no you don't, I am not singing it.
Speaker 1: So it kind of, it was kind of thrown together sort of?
Speaker 2: It was thrown together and it sounded thrown together to me, it just--
Speaker 1: Because it's just a response to his, 'It's a Man's World.'
Speaker 2: It was a respond- I'm thinking he wanted me to sing his song only from a female's perspective even though he wanted a totally different, and I discovered then that he makes it up as he goes along.
Speaker 1: Now that's how he actually--
Speaker 2: Um-hm, he just, he will get a riff, he'd get the band to play that riff and, and then he'd get in the studio and he'd make it up as he goes along and then he'd play it back to himself and he, that's how he, that's how he recorded it (laughter).
Speaker 1: Now that's, now see--
Speaker 2: It worked for him but, I mean, you know.
Speaker 1: You know, Eddie Murphy does a lampoon of him where he just starts, "Huh" and just singing, you know--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, right.
Speaker 1: --but that's how he--
Speaker 2: That's actually how he records, that's how he did it.  He would, he'd get a riff and he would play that riff over and over and over and over and finally he'd jump in the singing booth and he'd sing it and that's, that's how he created all his stuff but that was his way.  I mean, it worked for him.
Speaker 1: Well how was James (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It didn't work for me.
Speaker 1: --how was James Brown to work with?  I mean, he's a legend and in those days he was the biggest--
Speaker 2: He might be a legend in his, he might be a legend but he was hell to work with.  I mean, I'm just being upfront and matter of fact.  I did a show with him for a week in Baltimore, Maryland.  I was on, I was his opening act for a week and he had to go to Washington [D.C.] to do a TV show and while he was gone, during this week, I had to fill in and that's where I created this monologue that I, that I used to do on when 'I Wish Someone Would Care' [sic. 'Wish Someone Would Care'].  Well it got over, I mean, the audience loved it and his band, you know, when he got back, he asked the band how did I do while he was gone and the band said, "She did wonderful, she, you know, she did a show and she got house."  Well, he didn't like that.  He just wanted me to do my show and, you know, do my little two, three songs and walk out there and walk off.  Well, you got to do something to kill time.  I had to kill like thirty minutes when I only had three songs and three songs don't kill thirty minutes so I created this monologue.  Well when he got back, he was not satisfied with the fact that I did get some applause, and the audience liked what I was doing and he told me he says, "Well, no, you have to cut your show because I'm the star here."  I said, "Fine, you might be the star but, I mean, you know, I'm selling Irma [HistoryMaker Irma Thomas]."  And he says, "Well," you know, "you can go home." I said, "If you pay me the rest of the week, I'll go home."  He didn't want to pay me the rest of the week so I continued doing my monologue but he was not an easy guy to work for.  He, and if the band made a mistake, he would rehearse them, it would be one o'clock in the morning, he would have them there rehearsing at one o'clock in the morning, dog tired, but he didn't care.  It was all about what he had, what he wanted to do.  He was a, he was a driver.  He, he, I mean, he just would drive his musicians to no end.  I don't know how they stayed with him, but I guess they enjoyed it.  I would not have stayed.
Speaker 1: Several groups left, you know.  He had one group who left and then Fred [Fred Wesley], what's his name, came and they left and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, I can understand it.  I can understand it because he was a tyrant, he really was.  And, I mean, I didn't, I didn't enjoy that.  Well, he made my week miserable, he really did.  He made my week, and I didn't take any more gigs with him after that.  So, yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah, he was, I guess, he probably is the most popular and the most, he was almost, did he live up to the expression, the hardest working man in show business?
Speaker 2: He was, he was, and he tried to make everybody else the hardest working people in show business but, you know, you can only--I mean, I guess somewhere in there he had this drive to be the best and, I mean, he accomplished it in his own way, but he, he crossed, he burned some bridges in the process and, I mean, it ain't, to me it's not about that.  You know, if I can't have a bunch of guys working with me who enjoy what they're doing, then it's all for naught.  I mean, they have their talent and I have my talent of singing, theirs is playing their instrument and if they can't enjoy playing that instrument, then it's not, you know, to me it's not worth it.
Story_ID: 485999
Speaker 1: So in '67 [1967] your contract with Imperial [Imperial Records], it was over with, right, and you signed with Chess Records?
Speaker 2: For a hot minute, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: So, I mean, okay, so just kind of, well, just give us a rundown of the, your recording career, 'cause I think it all kind of just, you know, the recording (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It was, it was, it was kind of downhill after that.  I mean, I did a few songs with Chess Records, they were pretty decent songs.  I think I did, 'Cheater Man' and 'A Woman Will Do Wrong,' I covered, I covered one of Otis' [Otis Redding] songs in that session.  I can't remember all of 'em but they weren't bad songs, and for the life of me, well, I'll take that back.  I do know, they, they cut me loose because I wouldn't sign their--I wouldn't sign their management contract and I wouldn't sign their booking contract and because at that time, 25 percent of an artist was a whole lot of money, and how you going to take 25 percent of nothing, I wasn't making anything and you weren't guaranteeing me that I was.  So I didn't sign up with them and, of course, they released me.
Speaker 1: Okay, so 1970, here you are, at age twenty-nine, you move to Los Angeles [California].  Now, did you know somebody, any people?
Speaker 2: My mother's [Vader Todd Milton] brothers and sisters were out there, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, and you got a job with Montgomery Ward?
Speaker 2: I sure did (laughter).  When you have a choice of working for what they want to pay you in terms of, as an artist, I went to a few clubs and inquired about, you know, booking in those clubs, and they dictated to me what they were going to pay me as opposed to what I felt I was worth and I said, "You know, I'd rather get a day job," and I did.  So, I applied at Montgomery Ward for a sales job in the store. I lied on my application, but it worked, and I stayed with Montgomery Ward six years.
Speaker 1: Okay, and they didn't know that you were a singer or that you--
Speaker 2: It didn't matter, that wasn't important.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I told a few folk that that's what I did, and later I, I went back to personnel and explained to them why I lied on my application and if they still wanted me to work for 'em and they said, "Fine."  We did the corrections on my application and I stayed with Montgomery Ward six years.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I had proven my worth as a worker in the store so, you know, at that point, it was moot in terms of--and the things that I lied about was the educational background.  I didn't graduate from high school and that was what was on there, and as far as being a salesperson, I explained to the lady, "I'd been selling me for all these years so if I'm not a good salesperson, who is?"  You know, I've had to stand up in front of an audience and sell them a song so I'm a better salesperson than most folks in here and it turned out to be true.
Speaker 1: Okay, so, I think for a little while, you were on Atlantic [Atlantic Records] label.  You tried that--
Speaker 2: A hot minute.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: A hot minute and when I say a hot minute I mean a hot minute, less than a year.  A Shirley Goodman of Shirley and Lee, introduced me to the label itself.  She called someone she knew then, told them that I wasn't with anybody and so they signed me up and Jerry Wexler decided to put me with Arif Mardin and somebody else.  They flew into Detroit [Michigan] to do the recording session and the producer, which was Arif, decided that he wanted me to sound like Diana Ross, and I said, "Hell no," in those words.  "I am not Diana Ross and I'm not going to sound like Diana Ross."  So he in turn wrote back and called, I guess, Jerry and said, I didn't have it anymore.  I don't know what it was he was looking for but I didn't have it so they gave me my release.
Speaker 1: So, Diana Ross, that's--yeah, they were (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) (Laugher) Well you know The Supremes was the hot number during that time so he wanted me to sound like her.  I said, no, I'm not, I'm not Diana Ross and I'm not going to try to sound like Diana Ross.
Speaker 1: Okay, well I also have here that you sold auto parts for a while here, auto parts store?
Speaker 2: I sure did.  That was one of my jobs at Montgomery Ward.  I started out in lingerie.  I went from lingerie to sewing machines and vacuum cleaners and when I was working in the sewing machine and vacuum cleaner department, I used to cut out outfits at home for my kids and I would sew them at the, at the job to demonstrate the sewing machines, smart thinking, it worked for me (laughter).  And then there was a law, I think, that was passed in 1971 whereas if a female had the ability to do the job in a male dominant department in any job situation that they would, they were to be allowed to do the job.  So I volunteered to work in the automobile parts and, of course, the first few weeks that I was over there, men would come into the department and say they didn't want me to wait on 'em, and I said, fine, and whenever the other young people who was working in that department would call me, I said, "No, they don't want me to wait on them so don't ask me anything," and they says, "Well you--?" I said, "Yes, I taught them," and so then they would give in and say, okay, this is what I need and so on, et cetera, and I would get it for them but I had to go through that discrimination too.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, but in the meantime, though, you are performing--
Speaker 2: I started performing while I was working at Montgomery Wards, I started getting gigs in the northern end of California at some clubs in Oakland [California], the Oakland, Bay Area.  There was a couple of friends of mine who lived up there that knew some club owners who knew me as a singer, and wanted to have me perform in their clubs.  So it--I started traveling back and forth between Los Angeles and the San Francisco Bay Area [California] so much, I decided to take my vacation time and go up there and find me an apartment.  So I moved out of Los Angeles to the Bay Area in May of 1972, and stayed there until I moved back to New Orleans [Louisiana].
Story_ID: 486000
Speaker 1: Now, when did you move back to New Orleans [Louisiana]?
Speaker 2: In 1976, June of '76 [1976].
Speaker 1: Okay, and, you know, what brought you back to New Orleans?
Speaker 2: I started getting gigs here.  I started getting some calls to come back to New Orleans to perform.  In fact the first major gig was at a club called Uncle Sam's [ph.] on Carondelet Street.  It was a converted bowling alley that they made into a club, and I came back and I performed with Tommy Ridgley's band again and then after that, I got another booking back in New Orleans at the River Queen Lounge in the top of a Marriott Hotel [New Orleans Marriott, New Orleans, Louisiana] on Canal Street.  I was there for six weeks, and I got a return engagement there; I worked there three times.  So I started coming back to New Orleans so often I said, "Oh well, I may as well move back home."  And I met my husband who's, we've been together now thirty-some years and I met him while making those trips back and forth to New Orleans and he said, well, if you want to be together, you have to make up your mind if you want to live in California or live in New Orleans.  I said, well I can move back to New Orleans, I don't have a problem with that (laughter).
Speaker 1: That was unusual in some respects now, well your husband's name is Emile Jackson, right?
Speaker 2: Emile Jackson, yes.
Speaker 1: Emile Jackson, okay, but it's so unusual in some respects that people are, you know, they always say that people never honor the province of their own town and that sort of thing.
Speaker 2: Oh, I never gave up on New Orleans.
Speaker 1: But New Orleans seems to have been very good to you in terms of--
Speaker 2: Well, it was good to me in that when I left to go to California, I left because of a storm called Camille [Hurricane Camille].  Camille had wiped out all of my work along the coastal end of Mississippi where I had a lot of club dates lined up there, and, of course, you know what happened to Mississippi.  That time, Camille kind of uprooted everything.  So I moved to California trying to get a fresh start.  Well, I, about coming back, I, you know, coming back to New Orleans, while I was gone, I think they kind of missed me (laughter).  So when I started coming back, my popularity grew and I started working with a lot of charitable organizations around the city to help with whatever funds they could, you know, raising funds for the various organizations and my popularity grew and the rest is history, I'm back (laughter).
Story_ID: 486001
Speaker 1: So you made another album in 1980, was that RCA?  Is that RCA or--
Speaker 2: With RC--
Speaker 1: 'Safe with Me.'
Speaker 2: Oh, 'Safe with Me' was on RCS [RCS Records].
Speaker 1: CS, okay, so that's not a typo.
Speaker 2: RCS.
Speaker 1: I thought it was a typo.
Speaker 2: No, it's RCS label.
Speaker 1: RCS, okay.
Speaker 2: Gentleman named Mr. Vetter [Cyril E. Vetter] out of, out of Baton Rouge [Louisiana] who recorded it.  I did that whole album in one day.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Kind of, sort of, in one day but it was, it was, John Fred was kind of the producer.  He, he and I worked together.  We did it in about a week. I think we did a couple of the songs.  We went to Muscle Shoals [Alabama] to do one or two of them on that particular, it sold pretty good, it sold pretty good.
Speaker 1: Now there's one in 1986, from what I see, now tell us if this is correct or not.  This marks your big recording comeback, I guess, in '86 [1986], when you produced albums, 'The New Rules' and 'The Way I Feel?'
Speaker 2: Yes, that was, that was my, when I got signed with Rounder Records, whom I'm still with after twenty-two years, I'm still with them, Scott Billington was introduced to me by Jeff Hannusch when they realized I was not with a record label at the time.  They signed me up and we co-produced 'New Rules' and several albums since that time, we've co-produced, and I found I'm under the impression that if it ain't broke, you don't fix it and I'm still with that particular label, with Rounder Records after all these years, and I still use the same producer.  He and I will co-produce on some and he produced the last one that won the Grammy [Grammy Award].  He, he produced that one because the song selection he said, I said, "Scott you're on your own with this one," because the songs were all selected prior to the storm.  In fact, we were getting ready to go into the studio before the storm with these songs and then after we, after the storm, of course, we went into the studio that February after the storm and he brought, 'Shelter in the Rain' was a, was an afterthought song to put on at the last minute.  We did that one here in New Orleans [Louisiana], but all the other songs was recorded at a studio in Maurice, Louisiana, called Dockside [Dockside Studio] and when he found 'Shelter in the Rain' he decided, well we would just do it with a piano with David Torkanowsky at David's studio on Camp Street [New Orleans, Louisiana], and went in there and we put it on there and that's one of the popular songs off of the CD (laughter).
Speaker 1: It is, it's a beautiful song.  Yeah, it's a beautiful song.  We heard it just as we were coming in.
Speaker 2: Yeah, that's a Stevie Wonder song in fact and that's where Scott had heard it on one of Stevie's albums.  He says, "Irma [HistoryMaker Irma Thomas], you got to put this on there."  I said, okay. So he produced the last one on his own because I wasn't sure about the songs.  I, I didn't know where he wanted to go with them.
Speaker 1: So that's a Grammy Award-winning album?
Speaker 2: That was the Grammy winner.
Speaker 1: Two thousand seven [2007] you received the Grammy Award for that.
Speaker 2: Yeah, it was, it was for 2006 and they award 'em to you the year after so, yeah.  I was shocked (laughter).
Story_ID: 486002
Speaker 1: Now you were nominated, now (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That was my third nomination because when I got the--
Speaker 1: Yeah, now let me go, yeah--
Speaker 2: --nomination, you know, I said, oh well, here we go again 'cause that was the third one.
Speaker 1: So you were first nominated in what, eighty-ni- '89 [1989]?
Speaker 2: In ninety--no the first nomination came in 1990 in, in '91 [1991], in '91 [1991], the first nomination came 'cause I went to the Grammys [Grammy Awards] in New York [New York].  I got a chance to meet Roy Rogers of my childhood days (laughter).
Speaker 1: Roy Rogers was there?
Speaker 2: The Roy Rogers of Dale Evans and Roy Rogers, yes, that was the highlight of my, but if nothing else happened, I was happy (laughter).
Speaker 1: Now you were saying you used to dress as a cowgirl for the, for Mardi Gras, right?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, oh, I was a fan.  I was a fan and to actually meet the man, and he was as humble as he is on TV.  He was that same way.  So that was the highlight of my first nomination and then I have a second Grammy nomination with Marcia Ball and Tracy [Tracy Nelson] and I, we went to California for that one.  Of course we didn't win because Keb' Mo' beat us out again.  And so, I was expecting to get beat out this time because I was in the same category with Dr. John [Dr. John and the Lower 911], Keb' Mo', a couple other folk that had been on the same nomination list before.  I said, "Oh well, I'm going but I don't think I'm going to win it."  I just didn't have the feeling that I would and when I won, I was the most shocked person in that whole building that night.  I was sitting there with my head down, praying, so, you know, I just said, "Lord, let me be gracious in my disappointment.  Don't let it show on my face, let me smile through it all," and in the meantime, I'm hearing my name called and I said, "Did I just hear what I thought I heard?"  And my husband [Emile Jackson] was up and he reached me up, grabbed my arm and said, "Honey, you have to get up and go get it," and I had not moved (laughter).  I--it just hadn't sunk in that I was actually hearing my name called and I actually was winning the Grammy.
Speaker 1: Okay, now the, the--so yeah, so you really didn't expect that you, you know, suspect that you were going to win?
Speaker 2: I didn't, no, I had no clue, none whatsoever and, you know, once you get it you go through a series, a battery of interviews from various newspapers, magazines and what have you and during that series of interviews, one of the interviewees asked me, "Did I feel that I was given the Grammy because of what had happened to the City of New Orleans [Louisiana] with Katrina [Hurricane Katrina]?"  I counted to ten, swallowed very hard and took a moment and then I answered them.  I said, "Well, I don't feel that it did, but if it is, then I accept it graciously and hope it brings hope to the City of New Orleans."  But I was not thinking that deep down, I wanted to go off on them because the audacity of a person to stand up and ask somebody who's been in the business damn near fifty years that to think that that was the reason they was given me a Grammy was because of what had happened to New Orleans.  What about the talent that I've been working with and working on all these years to prove that I am worthy of something of this nature?  That never occurred to that person, I guess, so I had to think and be thoughtful in what my, before I say what was on my mind 'cause I could have gone ghetto real good (laughter), but I chose not to and I was sincere with my thoughts that if it was the reason they gave it to me, then I accepted it graciously, and I pray that it does bring hope to the City of New Orleans.
Speaker 1: But like prior to all this even, back before you even got your first nomination, you were known as the Soul Queen of New Orleans (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, New Orleans, yes.
Speaker 1: And you were telling me as I was coming in that we were talking about [HistoryMaker] Kalamu ya Salaam, the poet and writer--
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, he made it official.
Speaker 1: --that he did something to make it official.  What was that?
Speaker 2: Kalamu put together a program, a show of sorts with other entertainers and he got the mayor of the City of New Orleans at that time, which was Sidney Barthelemy, who came in and gave a speech and a proclamation and made it official, but Kalamu was the instigator of making it official but my drummer, Sir Wilbert Willis was his name, he passed away, had been with me for twenty-seven years when he died but he was the one gave me that monocle because he said, "Irma [HistoryMaker Irma Thomas], I don't want to introduce you as a singing grandmother, I want to call you the Soul Queen of New Orleans."  I said, okay, if it makes you happy, fine.
Speaker 1: The singing grandmother?
Speaker 2: Well, I was a grandmother.  I became a grandmother at thirty-five and so, you know, he started working with me in '77 [1977] and so he said, I have to give you some kind of title, and that was the title he gave and Kalamu was instrumental in making it official, so it's an official title (laughter).
Story_ID: 486003
Speaker 1: When you look back on everything you've done to this point, is there any major thing that you would do differently now if you could?
Speaker 2: Totally, over my entire life, yes, there are a few things I would have done differently.  I would have completed my education earlier.
Speaker 1: But you did finish it.
Speaker 2: But I did finish it.  Yes, I went back and I got my associate's degree, but I would have done it when I was younger and the brain matter was more open to learning, and I didn't have all these other things to deal with, life experiences, such as paying bills and raising kids, I didn't have all that.  I would have done that.  And as far as my singing is concerned, I may have gotten into the business, like I may not have 'cause my aspirations was to be a teacher.  I just felt that I could teach people things, you know.  I wanted to, I didn't know what capacity of a teacher but I wanted to be a teacher.  As it turned out, I am a teacher, I just didn't realize it (laughter).
Story_ID: 486004
Speaker 1: Through your music, a lot of people have reflected upon the Katrina [Hurricane Katrina] disaster and what, tell us what that disaster has taught you.  You lost your whole house and everything (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, thank God that I was never a materialistic person because I, it would have devastated me if I had to live through that again and being materialistic.  I, when, when Katrina came and the aftermath thereof, when the levies breached and the city was flooded, we were not here, thank you again, Jesus, for that.  We were in Austin, Texas, and we watched it all happen on the news and we were able to spot our own home in the news on TV, seeing my house flooded.  I made up my mind then that there was nothing that was going to be salvageable, and anything that I did find was going to be a plus.  So by having that attitude to begin with, I was saddened, don't get me wrong, I did cry, but it wasn't because of things I had lost in terms of material things but what had happened to the city as a whole and ironically, there had been a show some weeks earlier, that show, what if, a what if type of scenario and it almost happened exactly like the what if on the program that had been aired.  The levies breached, New Orleans [Louisiana] became lakefront property, and those of us who had memorabilia lost it all.  I mean, I lost my medals from the nominations that I had gotten prior to the last one, and when I came back to my house, I just accepted what I saw, which was nothing to be salvaged.  I was--I had left my jewelry and I was able to recover that so I count my blessings for that, that I recovered something of value out of it, but I didn't mourn the loss of anything because I'm, I felt that the God blessed me to have my life, I'm still singing, I can make new memories.  So memorabilia, I can, if I just had to have it, I could collect it from family and friends who wasn't living here.  Like I have a daughter who lived away that I shared a lot of my memorabilia with my children.  So if there was anything that I needed to have, say right now I could, you know, get her to give me a copy of it.  She would even give it back to me if I need it but I don't need it because I told her, 'cause she offered, she says, "Mom, if it's anything you need that you want, I'll, you know--." I said, "No, I'm going to make some new memories."  And so, I'm here to make new memories.  I, I lost everything.  When you think of it, I lost the club.  We had a business, I lost that.
Speaker 1: Yeah, the Lion's Den [New Orleans, Louisiana], right.
Speaker 2: The Lion's Den, I lost that.
Speaker 1: But you seem like you're sort of, that was all right.
Speaker 2: I was happy with that because we were trying to get out of that business prior too, so Mother Nature helped us along but in terms of things that I had accumulated throughout my career, trophies and, and medals and awards, certificates and what have you, that I had stored away that I had not framed and that sort of thing, most of that was destroyed and, along with the interior of my home and all the furnishings was destroyed but, like I said, being blessed and not being materialistic, I didn't mourn it, I just tried to figure out a way to just start all over, and that's what we're beginning to do, pick up our lives and start from there.  I--one thing out of that I've discovered that I don't enjoy shopping like I used to (laughter).  I used to enjoy shopping but I don't anymore.  I think it's, I'll, that'll pass, too, but it's because of Katrina that a lot of attention has been brought to me and others in the city, because they thought I was one of the missing people, along with Fats Domino and it's kind of weird you're looking at TV and you hear this person on CNN saying, "Well, we still don't know the whereabouts of Fats Domino and [HistoryMaker] Irma Thomas, two of New Orleans' great performers and we don't know where they are.  We know where the others are but we've located them," and I said, "I'm here, I'm right here in Texas," you know, but no one knew that 'cause I'm not the person who published or, you know, all of my dates and all of that.  I don't put it on, on the website and stuff like that.  I've started to now because people want to know but I didn't used to because it just wasn't the way I did business, you know, but to hear that, that is very humbling, very humbling.  I mean, you don't realize until it happened that there are people out there who really, really care about you, who cares not just about what you do but you as a human being and that made me realize that, you know, there's more to life than just stuff, you know, just keep being who you are and people will accept you for who you are and that has been proven since Katrina--
