Story_ID: 670652
Speaker 1: All right my name is Larry Crowe, I'm interviewer today with The HistoryMakers; our videographer is Matthew Hickey.  Sir, can you please state your full name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: You want my full name?
Speaker 1: Yes sir.
Speaker 2: My full name is Robert Dessherman Tutman IV [HistoryMaker Robert Tutman].  And that is R-O-B-E-R-T, D-E-S-S-H-E-R-M-A-N, T-U-T-M-A-N IV.
Speaker 1: Is there a story behind that name?
Speaker 2: It was my [paternal] great-grandfather's name and my great-grandfather [Robert Tutman I] was a freed Frenchman who came to America and he had that name and he came from France to Baltimore, Maryland and opened an ice cream parlor.  And that was the family name and my grandfather [Robert Tutman II] had that name and my father [Robert Tutman III] had that name and I'm the fourth one with that name.
Speaker 1: Yeah, that's something.  And sir what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: October 15, 1946, and I was born in Baltimore, Maryland.
Speaker 1: Okay, and wha- what is your occupation and title?
Speaker 2: My occupation and what I worked at for forty years was a cameraman, newsreel cameraman, and I spent most of that time working for CBS News.  I think of myself as an artist and I was fortunate enough to get a job doing what I love doing that I would have done for free.
Speaker 1: Yeah, okay, okay and what, what is today's date?
Speaker 2: I think today is October 22, 2014.
Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: We are at The HistoryMakers at 1900 South Michigan Avenue [Chicago, Illinois], in Julieanna Richardson's studio.
Story_ID: 670653
Speaker 1: Before we go into depth, Julieanna [Julieanna Richardson] wants us to ask five questions that just require a short answer, they're like a warm up.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: First one is, do you have a favorite food?
Speaker 2: Do I have a favorite food?  Yes, I think I might have a favorite food.
Speaker 1: And what is it?
Speaker 2: My favorite food is probably fish, some type of fish, seafood.  I love seafood.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: Blue.
Speaker 1: All right, favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Anytime I'm in, I'm happy to be alive.
Speaker 1: Okay, favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: St. Croix, U.S. Virgin Islands.
Speaker 1: Okay and the last one is, do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: Do I have a favorite phrase or saying?  Yeah, it might be stuck on stupid, SOS.
Speaker 1: Okay (laughter), okay.
Story_ID: 670654
Speaker 1: I'm gonna ask about your family history, I'm gonna ask about your mother's side of the family first and then your father's [Robert Tutman III] side.  Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: My mother's name is Theresa Aurora, or Theresa Allen Tutman, depending on who you talk too.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Wha- what was her maiden name?
Speaker 2: Theresa Allen.
Speaker 1: Oh Allen, okay.  And what is her date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: She was born in Baltimore [Maryland] and she was born on, I better get this one right, August the 22, 1922, August, I'm sorry, August 27, 1922.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, now how much can you tell us about your mother's side of the family?  How, how far back can you trace them and what were they doing?
Speaker 2: Well my mother's side of the family are from Virginia and my great-grandfather [Milton Allen], his brother, Walker Allen [ph.], a group of men came from Texas, they were a bunch of freed slaves that left Texas and they walked from Texas to Virginia, and the reason that his name was Walker Allen is because he walked from Texas to Virginia.  And in my family, there's always been a Walker in some family, some time that someone has been named Walker, and that's because of my uncle Walker had walked from Texas.  They settled in a place called Farmville, Virginia, and on the piece of property that they lived on was a cemetery and at that cemetery was a family name of Allen, so they took that name Allen.  Now they really didn't live in Farmville, Virginia, they lived about twenty miles up the road from Farmville in a little town called Pamplin [Pamplin City, Virginia], that's P-A-M-P-L-I-N, and Pamplin is where all the black people lived, Farmville is where all the white people lived and you lived up the road, up in Farmville.  And my mother's father [Claude Allen] had fourteen brothers and sisters and my father's father [Robert Tutman II], at, no my mother's father and mother [Minnie Magee Allen] both had fourteen brothers and sisters and they, my grandmother on my mother's side was from North Carolina, Oxford, North Carolina and they were a group of people, at that time they were called free issues, that's because they were partly white.  My great-grandfather was a Scotsman, his name was David Magee and my great-grandmother [Rose Magee] was part Indian and that was that side of the family, I know that much about them.  And I had a great-grandmother named Big Cindy [ph.], because she was part Native American, and (pause)--
Speaker 1: Okay, so there're a lot of different elements in the family.
Speaker 2: Lot of different elements.  Scott, African American, Native American, my grandfather's family, they were tobacco farmers and they had a tobacco fa- I would call a plantation, they had about seven hundred acres of tobacco and they got the farm as I understand it, sometime back in the 1800s, or something, one of the brothers was standing by the tobacco barn and this is the farm that they lived on and a hogshead of tobacco broke loose when they were loading the trick--truck, came rolling down the ramp and the man that owned the farm was standing by the garage or the truck.  And one of the brothers who was mean, who was Chester [ph.], he was mean, so he said, "Ah, he's gonna, he's gonna get crushed, leave him alone," so the other brother said, "Oh, look out, look out," the barrel missed him and he said, "You know you boys, I'm going to look out for you, I'm, I'm going to--you saved my life, I'm going to take care of you."  And when he died, he gave them the farm, he gave them seven hundred acres, and that seven hundred acres was split up between the fourteen brothers and sisters and they still have it to this day, and they still grow corn and tobacco, they grew everything but cotton.  The only thing that family would not work is cotton. We worked beans, corn, wheat, peas, tobacco, anything but cotton, they just wouldn't do it.  And I asked them one day, "How come we don't grow cotton?"  And they said, "No, not, not gonna do that." They just wouldn't do it.
Speaker 1: Did you, you know any--did you ever find out why, I mean actually?
Speaker 2: 'Cause slaves picked cotton and they weren't gonna do it.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  So they considered it like a demeaning job (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh it was the worst thing you could ever do, you just, no, can't, not going to do it.
Story_ID: 670655
Speaker 1: They were very proud people, they were educated, both grandparents went to college, my grandfather [Tutman's maternal grandfather, Claude Allen] got out of college in 1920, my grand (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Now where, where did he go?
Speaker 1: I, he went to a school in Virginia, I just don't know what, they had colored schools, schools for colored and that's what they were called.  I remember when my mother [Theresa Allen Tutman] went to Coppin State Teachers College [Coppin Teachers College; Coppin State University, Baltimore, Maryland] before it became Coppin State Teachers College, it was a colored upper school or middle school and my grandfather was very adamant about the fact that he was not African but he was colored.
Speaker 2: Okay, now did your--now what brought your grandfather to Baltimore [Maryland], I mean?
Speaker 1: He was a contractor, he was a carpenter, and there was not a lot of work in Virginia and he came up to Baltimore, and he had a construction company, he built houses, he painted houses, he did electrical work and brick work and he was, he was a carpenter, he was a contractor.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And when they first moved to Baltimore, as I understand it, instead of going to Baltimore, they moved to Cumberland, Maryland, and my grandmother [Minnie Magee Allen] was very light, she could have passed for white if she had wanted too.  And when they, one time they left the home in Cumberland and went to Baltimore to visit and when they got back to Cumberland, the house had been burned down and it was a note outside of the house that says, "Next time we're going to burn it down with you in it."  And after that, they moved to Baltimore and they never went back to Cumberland, Maryland.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah Maryland can be very rough, and Virginia too (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) They had twenty-six or twenty-seven counties in Maryland and with the exception of Baltimore City, you might as well be living in Mississippi.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  So, did, did your mother have any stories about growing up in Baltimore?
Speaker 1: My mother, my mother had a lot of stories about growing up in Baltimore, her girlfriends and, and the things that they did and how she met my father [Robert Tutman III].  My mother, my mother grew up at a time when young girls did not venture out, they didn't do anything, and all she ever did was sit on the front steps because that's what you were supposed to do.  And sometime around, I guess 1940, she was a teenager, my father came walking down the street and he saw her sitting on the steps and I guess he spoke to her and that was it and as I understand it, my grandfather caught my mother sitting on my father's lap one day and grabbed him and threatened to kill them because you just don't do things like that.  And my mother had to run around to her girlfriend's house and get her wedding, her marriage license to show my grandfather that they were really married to keep him from knocking him off.
Speaker 2: So they had pretty strict (laughter)--
Speaker 1: Oh man, are you kidding me?  Even to this day, they're strict, I mean just strict.
Speaker 2: Now, now what side of Baltimore did they grow up in?
Speaker 1: Northwest Baltimore.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Baltimore was broken up into--Baltimore was a very segregated city and you had West Baltimore, where you had an enclave of blacks living, you had East Baltimore where you had another enclave of blacks living, you had a section of Baltimore called Cherry Hill that was a black section, and you had a section called Turner Station [Dundalk, Maryland], and these four sections of Baltimore, that's where black people lived and you did not cross those lines and you did not go to visit and you did not hang out.  If you lived in West Baltimore, it was worth your life to get caught in East Baltimore, and if you lived in Cherry Hill, you did not go to West Baltimore and no one went to Turner Station, everyone was terrified of Turner Station.
Speaker 2: So Turner Station was the roughest part then?
Speaker 1: Hell's half acre was the nickname that they gave it.
Story_ID: 670656
Speaker 1: Let me go to your father's side.  Can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) His name was Robert Dessherman Tutman III [Robert Tutman III].
Speaker 1: Okay, same except the third.  And what is his date of birth and place (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) He, I'm not sure about that, he was born, I'm not, I'm just not sure, I think he was born in 1920, and I'm not sure of the birthdate, I don't know why, it just slips my memory right now.
Speaker 1: But he's from Baltimore [Maryland] too?
Speaker 2: He's also from Baltimore.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now what can you tell us about your dad's side of the family?  I mean we know we can go back four generations with the name so (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) My, on--I--my grandfather [Robert Tutman II] who I met and knew was a Sunday school teacher, but he was also a carpenter and a construction person and he had a construction company and he was a painter and the reason that the--my mother [Theresa Allen Tutman] and father got together is because my two grandfathers worked together, they both had construction companies, they were both contractors, they knew each other, they worked well together, my father had nine brothers and sisters and five cousins that lived with him, there were fourteen children in his house.  And what had happened was, my grandfather's sister died and she had five children and they were gonna put the five children in an orphanage and my grandfather said, "Hey, I got nine kids, five more not going to make that much of a difference."  And so, there were fourteen kids running around in the house and I asked my grandmother [Viola Tutman] one time, I said, "What was it like having fourteen kids in the house?  I mean, you know, just running around?"  She said, "That used to drive me crazy."  I said, "Well what was it like when they left?"  She said the silence made her crazier.  I said, "Really?"  She said, "The quiet just drove me mad."  She said (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) How big a place did they have?
Speaker 2: They had a three story house in Baltimore, three story row house in Baltimore and the way they did it and the way both parents did it, where the grandparents lived on the first floor, the unmarried girls lived on the second floor, and the unmarried boys lived on the third floor and that's just the way the house was split up, and when you got married, you left and went someplace else.  What my grandparents did was, they bought separate homes and if you got married, you could live in that house.  So we had a house about four blocks away from the main family house that one of my uncles and his family lived on the first, on the second floor, one of my uncles and his family lived on the third floor and they had a tenant on the first floor.  And when I asked my grandfather, "Why did you do this?"  He said, "Hey man, why do you wanna have five rents and five mortgages and five refrigerators when we could live in one house and pay one gas bill, one electric bill--," and they did it that way.  We used to go to the market every day, we had an ice box but we went to the market every day.  And when I asked, "Why do we go to the market every day?"  And pop said, "You know, why spend five hundred dollars on a refrigerator when you boys can go to the market and we get fresh food every day?  Because if I spend five hundred dollars on a refrigerator, I won't have any money to buy food to feed the family."  And it just made too much sense.
Story_ID: 670657
Speaker 1: Now what did you father [Robert Tutman III] say about growing up?
Speaker 2: My father, my father was supposedly as I understand it, one of the smartest boys in the Balti- Baltimore public school system [Baltimore City Public Schools].  But he grew up at a time when, if you talk about racism in a--this country that we know for a fact that people identified bright boys and they tried to hold them back.  So, when he was about the eighth grade, the teachers went to his father [Robert Tutman II] and said, "This boy knows enough, you need to take him out and teach him a trade."  So he, he was taken out of school in the eighth grade and he learned a trade and that trade was to be a carpenter.  He later went back to college, got his degree, because an engineer and he was a construction engineer and he built buildings and he put up parking lots and roads, he worked for the State of Maryland, and he was the chief building inspector for the State of Maryland and he signed off all construction that was done in the State of Maryland.  And when he was a younger man, he taught violin and so, he taught violin as a younger man, but he was an engineer by profession and he was a painter, as far as, he did a lot of beautiful art work, he loved to paint.
Speaker 1: And now, what college did he attend?
Speaker 2: American University.
Speaker 1: Um-hm, okay.  All right AMU in D.C. [Washington, D.C.], all right, that's something.  So, so he was a--was he the first African American chief building inspector for--?
Speaker 2: I don't know.  But he had, he had worked for the city and got this job, not as a building inspector, as an engineer to sign off on construction.  So when the state put up a new building it was his job to come in and make sure they complied to the contract and the blueprints and the specifications.  So we talked one day and I said, "Man, you know, what, what kind of job, you know, what do you do?"  He said, "Well, you know, I work for, I work for the governor."  I said, "What do you mean you work for the governor?"  He said, "I work for the governor."  I said, "Well I don't understand that."  He said, "The gover- I, I work for the governor and the only person I answer to is the governor and the chief of the state police."  I said, "What's that all about?"  He says, "My job is to make sure that the construction contracts are done correctly and they're not stealing from the state."  I said, "So, what do you do?"  He said, "Well, you know, I go and I, I--I'll show you."  So I get in the car with him and we go out where they're building a parking lot and we sat and watched them dump asphalt the entire day and he's just counting trucks, you know, one truck, two truck, three trucks, just counting trucks.  So at the end of the day, they finished the parking lot, he said, "Nah, this parking lot not, is not right." I'm like, "What do you mean it's not right?"  He said, "They didn't put enough asphalt on the parking lot to get the correct pitch."  I said, "What?"  He said, "You have to have this much asphalt to have it this thick, to get this pitch, to do this." He said, "I can show you."  So he calls up the fire department, calls up the chief and says, "We need you to come out and flood the parking lot," so they come out with about ten fire trucks and they show up and they flood the parking lot and the water just sits there, it doesn't drain, he says, "See?  Told you." I said, "Okay."  I said, "So how does this job work?"  He says, "First day on the job, a guy walks up and gives me an envelope with twenty-five thousand dollars in it and tells me to sign off on a contract."  I said, "What'd you do?"  He said, "I had him locked up."  I said, "You had him locked up?"  I said, "He gave you twenty-five thousand dollars." He said, "Yeah, you never know when it's a setup."  I said, "Oh okay," I said, "so what happened after that?"  He said, "Two days later a guy came up and gave me a check--an envelope with fifty thousand dollars in it."  I said, "What hap- what did you do then?"  He said, "I had him locked up."  I said, "Fifty thousand dollars?"  He said, "Hey, you never know when it's a setup."  And so, he did that until he retired from Maryland and he retired in the St. Croix, U.S. Virgin Islands and he went down there and after six months was doing the same thing in the Virgin Islands.  He built six hundred and so hurricane proof houses when he was in the Virgin Islands.
Speaker 1: That's quite a story, retired to St. Croix, okay.  Now wha- what?  Was he a veteran at all?
Speaker 2: Yes, he served in the Korean War and he was honorably discharged and when he died they put a flag on his casket.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.  And okay, and he, he met your mother [Theresa Allen Tutman] just walking down the street in Baltimore [Maryland]?
Speaker 2: Walking down the street, being slick.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay, so was he in his right neighborhood or was he in another neighbor?
Speaker 2: No, he was, he, he--it just so happens that my mother's younger brother and him were best friends and so he, he could go just about where he wanted to, you know, when you have nine brothers, you know, you--that's a lot of fighting, so you really don't have to wor- 'cause you fight one of them, you got to fight all of them.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right so, so they get, they get married and--so he has a really a fine career, in (unclear) (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah.
Story_ID: 670658
Speaker 1: When you think about your parents' personalities and their dispositions and what they look like and their talents and how they walk, everything, who do you think you take after the most?
Speaker 2: My mother [Theresa Allen Tutman] told me I was just like my father [Robert Tutman III], she told me I look like him, I, I know I look like him, I was walking down the street one night, I used to sale newspapers, I was about fifteen years old and I was walking down the street and a woman walked up to me and said, "[HistoryMaker] Robert Tutman." I'm like, "Do I know you?"  She said, "No but I know you."  I said, "Well how do you know me?"  She said, "Well I don't know you but I know your father and you look exactly like he did when he was fifteen years old. Tell him Ethel [ph.] said hi."  "Oh okay," so I told him this woman--he smiled and he--and I said, "Oh, oh okay."  And then I didn't understand what she meant until now, I know people and I see their children and I know who, "Oh yeah, I know your fa- you tell your father I said hi."  "How, how do you know?"  "I, I know your dad, you've got to be So and So's son," or, "You must be their daughter," or, you know, it's like I walked in this morning and I hadn't seen Julieanna's mother in ten years and I'm, "Oh hi, I'm glad you're still here," you know?
Speaker 1: Right, right they do, they do favor (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) They look, the--I know whose mother that is just by walking in the door.
Speaker 1: Their voices and everything--
Speaker 2: Voices--
Speaker 1: --yeah--
Speaker 2: --talk to them on the telephone--
Speaker 1: --um-hm.
Speaker 2: --you get them mixed up.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: So it's, it works.
Story_ID: 670659
Speaker 1: How many siblings do you have, and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I have a younger brother [Dan Tutman].
Speaker 1: --can, well can, is--is that, is that it?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Just one?
Speaker 2: One brother.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Well tell us about him.
Speaker 2: My brother is sixty-six years old, he's a cameraman for CBS News, and he still does that and he and I look alike, people get us mixed up all the time, he's about four inches taller than me and that's basically how you tell us apart because he's taller.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  Same line of work?
Speaker 2: Same line of work, same, he's, I think he's a better photographer but, that's just because maybe he's my baby brother and I just love him so much.
Story_ID: 670660
Speaker 1: Do you have an earliest childhood memory of growing up in the family?
Speaker 2: My earliest childhood memory that I can think about right now is when my brother came home from the hospital.  I was about three years old and they were arguing over what they were going to name him and I told him, "Hey since he's my brother I'm naming him Ludie [ph.], so that's the end of that."  And so, for my entire life I've called him Ludie.
Speaker 1: So, well wha- what did they name him?
Speaker 2: His name is Danarda, D-A-N-A-R-D-A [Dan Tutman].
Speaker 1: Okay, and you, you call him Ludie (laughter)?
Speaker 2: Yeah, his name is Danarda Lowell.
Speaker 1: All right and, where did you get the Ludie from at age three?
Speaker 2: Outer space, I don't know (laughter)?
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It's just Ludie.
Story_ID: 670661
Speaker 1: Can you tell us what your first memory of school was?
Speaker 2: My first memory of school was my mother [Theresa Allen Tutman] taking me to school and my mother took me to school and showed me where school was and after that I was on my own.  And my first memory of school was being in school and wanting to be in school and liking school and then the teacher told us that we had to take a nap.  And I'm like, "I'm not a kid, I don't take naps." I was about five years old I guess and, "No, you have to take a nap," and she turned the lights out and we're sitting in there in a dim room, all these kids are taking--I'm like, okay.  And my mother comes home from work and I'm home, and she's like, "What are you doing home?"  I'm like, "I quit."  "You quit?  What?"  "Hey, I'm not a baby, I don't, I don't take naps, are you kidding me?"  And so that is my first memory of school, that was P.S. 122 [Samuel Coleridge-Taylor Elementary School, Baltimore, Maryland], so she transferred me to another school, which was P.S. 111 [Frances Ellen Harper School, Baltimore, Maryland] that you did not have to take naps.
Story_ID: 670662
Speaker 1: Now what neighborhood did you grow up in, in Balt- (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I grew up in northwest Baltimore [Maryland] in a part of Baltimore called Sandtown [Sandtown-Winchester].
Speaker 1: Okay, now why, why do they call it Sandtown?
Speaker 2: Because the ground was very sandy and they had a bunch of cement factories around there, they used to dig the sand out and this is--dig down, and we thought we were rich because if you dig down about a foot, you get to this sand and man it was gold, it was bright yellow, man, so we were always digging in ya- the yard digging for gold, but that was just part of Sandtown.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And, you know, downtown East Baltimore where the slaughterhouses were, they called that Pigtown [Baltimore, Maryland], because they used to drive the pigs through the street.
Speaker 1: Okay, was there a main drag through town?
Speaker 2: Pennsylvania Avenue.
Speaker 1: Okay, and were there--was this a section where you had a lot of black businesses and--
Speaker 2: That's it, that is, that was the spot, are you kidding me?  Movie houses, bars, restaurants, entertainment, shoe shine parlors, barbershops--whatever was going on, went on on Pennsylvania Avenue.
Story_ID: 670663
Speaker 1: What was were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up?
Speaker 2: Food, music, noise, there was always--Baltimore [Maryland] is a very small community and because it was so segregated, you couldn't go out of that community, you couldn't cross North Avenue, you couldn't cross Fulton Street [sic. Fulton Avenue], you couldn't cross Baltimore Street, you couldn't cross Eutaw Street.  When I was a kid, if you went to the park, if you were sitting on the bench and a white person came and sit on the bench, you had to get up, you couldn't sit on--the bench might be twenty feet long, but you couldn't sit on the same bench, you just couldn't, you had to get up.  And the way our family protected us from that type of segregation is they told us that the best seats on the bus were the back seats in the bus.  So you didn't even think about sitting in the front of the bus because you wanted to sit in the back because that's where the best seats were.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: Because if you sit in the back, you can look out the window and see everybody.
Speaker 1: They couldn't sit on the same park bench with a white brother (laughter).
Speaker 2: No.  Kidding me?
Speaker 1: All right.  Well wha- what else are the sights and sounds or smells?
Speaker 2: Just like I said, the music, the hustle, the bustle, you know, people going, I mean, it's just sights and sounds, food, music, noise, just--
Speaker 1: Was there a theater nearby or?
Speaker 2: There were, they, there might have been twelve black movie houses in Baltimore City and they, you know, fifteen cents, five cent, ten cent hot dog, five cent soda pop.  I think the movie on Saturday you could go to the movies for fifteen cents, sit in the movie all day long, every theater ran four or five cartoons before the double feature and you could watch it over and over and over and over, it didn't matter, you'd go in the morning, and stay 'til it got dark.
Story_ID: 670664
Speaker 1: What's your first experience with the church?  Did you--was your family a church going family (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh yeah, my grandfather [Tutman's paternal grandfather, Robert Tutman II] was a Sunday school teacher--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --so he was very strict about that and as far as going to church, my family's attitude was, we have churches in the neighborhood, we don't care which one you go to, but you're going somewhere.  So, you're out of here on Sunday morning, so you go to church.
Speaker 1: So, so then it wasn't mandated that you go to your grandfather's church?
Speaker 2: No, you could go to any church you want, long as you went to church.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: And I started going to Emmanuel Christian Community Church [Baltimore, Maryland] because one of the deacons lived next door and he could walk me to church every Sunday.  And I went to church every Sunday, Sunday school every Sunday, and one day I hooked church.  I was going through the park and a bunch of my boys were out in the park playing and said, "Come on, hang out," so I hung out with them, I didn't think anything about it.  So, I went back home, and my mother [Theresa Allen Tutman] came up, said, "So, mister, you didn't go to church today?"  I'm like, "How, how did you--how did you know that I didn't go to church today?"  Somebody must have seen me playing in the park, so she said, "Okay, so you can't act like a grown up, you can be a boy, so here's your punishment," and the punishment was that she made me wear shorts and sit on the steps all day long.  And at that time, we're talking maybe 1956, only little boys wore shorts.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: And so that, that was her--that was harder than a whipping man, that was, that was brutal 'cause I had shorts on and I'm sitting up there with blue seersucker shorts on sitting on the front steps on a Sunday--that was hard man, I never hooked church again, never.
Speaker 1: Okay (laughter).
Story_ID: 670665
Speaker 1: --project is exactly what it says, a project; and the question that you have to ask yourself is what project are they running today?  A housing project is not necessarily a thing to live in, it is a thing that they study to see if it works or not, it's a project.  It's just like when you were in school and work on this project or you work on that project and if you look at the different projects around the United States, they're all different, you had the high rise project, you had the low rise project, you had the project that had a front yard and a backyard, and then they took these projects and they studied them for thirty years to see which ones worked.  And the ones that did not work, they tore down and the ones that did work they put them all around the United States and they found out that the high rise project with a front door and a back door does not work.  Baltimore [Maryland] was a model city and you have to ask yourself, what model are they running this week in Baltimore?  They ran the jail model in Baltimore, they run drug models in Baltimore, they run economic model--models in Baltimore, they run education models in Baltimore and every now and then they run models.  Dayt- Columbus, Ohio is where they run the traffic model for the whole United States, that's why when you go to Columbus, Ohio, every thing's a right hand turn, you can't make a left hand turn, you've been to Columbus, you've driven and that's a model city for the traffic model.  They've been running education model in Columbus, Ohio, for the last thirty years where they got back to the basic, they have discipline in schools, the kids have to respect adults, they can't talk back and once they get studied, once they get finished with this study model that they have been running in Ohio, they're going to apply that model to the rest of the country when they finish and it's almost finished, they're going to look at it maybe two generations of kids coming through the school system in Ohio, to see the way to get back the basics in education, check it out.
Speaker 2: Interesting, I, I hadn't thought of it that way.
Speaker 1: I'm a journalist by profession and I've covered a lot of news stories with a lot of things and what I've found out over the years is, I would go on a news story and I'll spend a week getting information and digging up stuff and finding out things and interviewing people and analyzing things and then we put thirty seconds on the air.
Speaker 2: That, that's the way it goes.
Speaker 1: And once you get enough five hours, six--I've done over ten thousand interviews with all kinds of people and those ten thousand interviews were interviews like you're doing where they were, some of them were ten minutes, but a lot of them were two hours and three hours and four hour interviews where we'd shoot ten, twenty, twenty minute tapes on an interview, sit down and talk to a person for three or four hours and put fifteen seconds on the air.  And when you get all of this stuff together and you start to analyze it and you get a broad view of the world, you go, "Uh-oh, wait a minute," (laughter), "wait a minute."
Story_ID: 670666
Speaker 1: Back to school, like what--what were you interested in in school?  Were you--?
Speaker 2: I--interested in school in, at what time in my life?
Speaker 1: Well, in the early days, let's start, let's start young, 'cause you said you quit the first day of school [at P.S. 122, Samuel Coleridge-Taylor Elementary School, Baltimore, Maryland].
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: But, but did you--when, when you finally--
Speaker 2: I didn't like school--
Speaker 1: Okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) at all, just--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --I didn't like--I felt like I was in prison, I felt like I was in jail and I felt like it was being locked up for a day and you got out for good behavior.  And the reason I felt out--that you got out for good behavior, because if you acted up they keep you in after school, so they keep you longer, so they'd only let you out, they let you go if you didn't make noise or give trouble.  So, I did not like going to school, I made good grades because I was, you had to, and, you know, that's just expected, you could not act up in school, that just, that was not, did not happen.  I got caught at a fight one day and my mother [Theresa Allen Tutman] came to school and beat me in class in front of the class.  And because, the rules were if two people were fighting, that's their problem and they're working it out, what are you doing here?  "Why are you here?"  "Well I'm watching."  "No you're instigating, you go home and get your mother and tell them you're starting trouble."  "Well they were fighting."  "Yeah, they, they, yeah, we know what their problem, why are you here?"  So what happened was, when somebody start fighting everybody scatter, you know, they by they self, no one was around because you knew that if you got caught instigating the fight you were going home, not the kids fighting, the ones watching the fight.
Speaker 1: Now, that seems--well it seems like an unusual thing for your mother to come to school and beat you in front of the class.
Speaker 2: You're talking 1958 too.
Speaker 1: So was that a (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Corporal punishment was normal.
Speaker 1: Yeah, but was that unusual for somebody's mother to come to school and--?
Speaker 2: No.  If you got in trouble, your parents had to come back to school the next day.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That just, you got in trouble, to have your parents come and see you, they were there the next day. That was across the board.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Different schools, different times, different life, different world.
Speaker 1: Okay, so the discipline that you had in your home was, wasn't too much different from the rest of the community?
Speaker 2: Oh no.  Yeah any- anyone could have fair game at you if you're acting up.  And you were--if you got a spanking out in the street, you would pray that they didn't tell because you're just gonna get another one.  If you got corrected by an adult out in public, you were just, "Oh please don't tell," because you knew that, that was two; it was not one, it was two.
Story_ID: 670667
Speaker 1: Now were there any--any teachers that, you know, made a particular impression on you in the early stages say of elementary school [at P.S. 111, Frances Ellen Harper School, Baltimore, Maryland] then?
Speaker 2: My first grade teacher, Miss Miller [ph.], I fell in love with her, I asked her to wait for me 'til I got old enough to marry her and she didn't.  She got married to Arthur Murray [ph.] and I never forgave her for that, I did not like her after that.
Speaker 1: Okay, so any--anybody else?
Speaker 2: Not, as far as influences, I had a teacher by the name of Mr. Ellenbogen [Lawrence Ellenbogen (ph.)] and Mr. Cimbolista [ph.], Cimbolista was a trigonometry teacher and he made a lot of sense and Ellenbogen was the photographer club mentor.
Speaker 1: Now is this in grade school?
Speaker 2: No this is high school [Baltimore City College, Baltimore, Maryland].
Speaker 1: High school, that's what I thought (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) You said any teacher--
Speaker 1: Well I said, I said grade school.  I was trying to get you to--
Speaker 2: Well I said Miss Miller, my first grade teacher.
Speaker 1: --before I got you to high school but--
Speaker 2: First grade teacher--
Speaker 1: --yeah.
Speaker 2: --Miss Miller.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Right.
Story_ID: 670668
Speaker 1: Did you go to middle school at all?
Speaker 2: I went to junior high school after that. I guess that would be called middle school (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, yeah, yeah that's basically it, yeah--
Speaker 2: Right.  I went to middle school after that.
Speaker 1: What was the name of that one?
Speaker 2: That was Booker T. Washington Junior High School [Booker T. Washington Middle School for the Arts, Baltimore, Maryland].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And the first school I went to was Frances Ellen Harper high school [P.S. 111, Frances Ellen Harper School, Baltimore, Maryland] and when I asked who Frances Ellen Harper [Frances Ellen Watkins Harper] was, I was told, "Oh some old white lady," and then I asked again to someone else and they told me that it was some old white lady and even the people at the school, when I asked them who Frances Ellen Harper was, told it was some old white lady and I did not find out who Frances Ellen Harper was until I was almost forty years old.
Speaker 1: That, that is really a shame, you know?  That, you know the, you asked adults, right?  That didn't--
Speaker 2: Yeah, no, I asked the principal at the school who Fran- and I asked the teacher who Frances Ellen Harper was, and they told me some old white woman that they named the school after.
Speaker 1: Well she was definitely not an old white woman.
Speaker 2: Well I was at the DuSable Museum [DuSable Museum of African American History, Chicago, Illinois] in case the people watching don't know, and was walking through the DuSable Museum and saw this painting up on the wall of Frances Ellen Harper who was the first black woman in America to have a book of poetry published [sic.] and I was like, "Whoa.  That's Frances Ellen Harper, that's the school I--," it's not an old white lady, it's a black woman who was--
Speaker 1: Yeah, she was a contemporary of Frederick Douglass and--
Speaker 2: Did not, they did not know at the school who that was.  P.S. 111.
Speaker 1: P.S. 111, okay.
Story_ID: 670669
Speaker 1: In middle school [Booker T. Washington Junior High School; Booker T. Washington Middle School for the Arts, Baltimore, Maryland], now were you a Boy Scout or anything?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Did you get anything?  Wa- was it a good Boy Scout troop?  Did you--?
Speaker 2: We had the best, we beat, we didn't have uniforms 'cause we couldn't afford them, but we wore jeans, Jack Purcells, and white T-shirts and we were really, really cool.  We, we won every competition, we won the rifle competition, it's--bow and arrow competition, camping, tent making, rope tying, we just--they could not do it.  We beat them in football, baseball, basketball, wrestling, track, we--they used to laugh at us because we showed up without uniforms on, but we put a stop to that real quick (laughter).
Speaker 1: So, so who did you compete against?
Speaker 2: Other Boy Scout troops.
Speaker 1: I mean, in those days did you compete against just black Boy Scout troops or against--?
Speaker 2: No, the beauty about it is we were one of the few black Boy Scout troops in our neighborhood so we could, we could actually compete against the white Boy Scout troops and we had the distinct- we thought we were really cool because we got to go down to the white YMCA [Young Men's Christian Association] because we were part of the Y and we got to swim in the pool at the white YMCA, that was a big thing, we told everybody about that.  "Man we went down to the Y and we got in the pool and we got to swim with white people," which you couldn't do in Baltimore [Maryland]. Even at the beaches they had a fence out at the beach, same water, but there was a gate that went out in the water and whites swam on one side and whites [sic.] swim on the other side and the kids used to go out past the fence and play, but once you came back in, you had to come in your side, same water same, same beach.  And the, and the thing that I remember most about the beach is that the best beach was the black beach.  And we asked about it, about it one time and said, "Wait, wait, wait, this is a better beach than the white beach, why?"  They said, "So you have nothing to complain about." (Laughter) So well, you just can't swim over there, but they don't have a better beach, you just can't swim over there; so it's one of those kinds of things.
Speaker 1: Yeah, it's one of these strange stories--
Story_ID: 670670
Speaker 1: Now did you have any particular talents you were cultivating in those days?  Were you--were you artistic then?
Speaker 2: Yeah--a photographer, that's the only thing I wanted to do.
Speaker 1: Okay, I mean in, in middle school [Booker T. Washington Junior High School; Booker T. Washington Middle School for the Arts, Baltimore, Maryland]?  I mean, I mean when did photography?  I know, I know you did, did you have a camera (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I got hooked on photography, I got hooked on photography in 1954, when I was eight years old.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And the reason that I got hooked on photography is my cousin Reggie [ph.] was a con man and he's also my best friend at the time but he was older than me and he knew all of these tricks that we did not know.  I learned how to count because my cousin Reggie hustled me out of a dime, he came up to me and he showed me a nickel and I had a dime and he said, "Look, I'll trade you the big one for the little one," and so I traded him a dime for a nickel and I came back in the house and I showed my grandfather [Tutman's maternal grandfather, Claude Allen] my nickel, he said, said, "Buck where did you get that from?"  I said, "I got this from Reggie." He said, "Well how how'd you get this from Reggie?"  I said, "We traded it." He said, "Minnie [Tutman's maternal grandmother, Minnie Magee Allen], the boy can't count," and the next thing I knew I was sitting down learning how to count money.
Speaker 1: So, in terms of the can- photography (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Photography?
Speaker 1: Yeah, how did Reggie--?
Speaker 2: Do you know what sun pictures are by any chance?
Speaker 1: Some pictures?
Speaker 2: Sun, S-U-N.
Speaker 1: Sun, oh--
Speaker 2: Sun pictures.
Speaker 1: --with a pinhole camera?
Speaker 2: No.  Sun--well that is another way of sun pictures, but what they used to sale was a little pack of paper than had photosensitive paper in it and negatives.  And they would cut black and white negatives out of 35mm movie film, old movie film that they didn't use and stick this in a little package and they'd sell this for a dime.  And you'd take this little pack of paper and you take this negative and put it on this pack of paper and sit it out in the sun and you'd make a picture, sun picture.  Well, my cousin Reggie knew about this because he was older and so, he said to us, "You give me a dime," back to the dime again, "and I'll show you a magic trick."  I said, "Okay," so we go down in the basement he's got this thing setup in the basement and he's got these three trays of magic water setup in the basement and he's got a light and he's got some magic paper and he said, "Now come here, give me your money," everybody give him, everybody gives their money out to Reggie, he said, "Now give me your hand," so he'd put your hand on this piece of magic paper and he'd turn the light on and turn the light off real quick and then he said some magic words over the pap- (makes sound), I don't know what he said, magic.  And now you're looking at this paper in the dark, he says, "Now," he says this magic over the water and takes the paper and he sticks it in the water and, and the hand comes up, and I'm, man that was it, done, I was hooked, that's it, I had it, that's what I want to do, magic.  So I go back and I try it and it don't work, I take a piece of paper and it just, it, man I said the same words, I did--don't work, he said, "I'm not gone show you my trick."  And what had happened is, my uncle Milton [Milton Allen], which was my mother's [Theresa Allen Tutman] brother was a professional photographer and Reggie had found a box of his photo paper back in the basement and Reggie had gone to the store, he got thirty-five cents somewhere and what was called a tri-chem pack, which were three chemicals for thirty-five cents which were photo chemicals 'cause that's how you used to buy chemicals back in the '50s [1950s], you just buy a pack of chemicals, go and mix them up, print a picture--most people that were in photography did their own work.  You had your own dar- darkroom, you printed your own pictures, you developed your own negatives, and so that's what he did.  And, it was magic and I just, I wanted to take pictures after that so I had a little Brownie Hawkeye and I ran around shooting pictures every chance I could get. That's all I wanted to do was take pictures. I spent hours in the darkroom, hou- I mean every day I was in the darkroom. That's just what I did: I didn't care about school, I didn't care about anything; I just wanted to be in the darkroom taking pictues (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So this is from age eight?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Magic.
Story_ID: 670671
Speaker 1: What was your subject matter (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Anything.  The cat, the dog, the family.  I have thousands of family pictures that I'm not in because I took them, and, you know, it's just--that's just what I wanted to do and fortunately because my uncle [Milton Allen] was a professional photographer, he hooked me up with another professional photographer who was named Reid Abney.  And he took me over this guy's place when I was about fourteen years old, twelve, thirteen years old, he said, "Reid, this boy claims he wants to be a photographer so, hey, take pictures of him."  So when I got to be around fourteen or fifteen years old I really got into photography because I wanted to take pictures of naked women, and I decided that was the best way that you could see naked women is take pictures of them.  So I worked as an apprentice in the studio and now I've gone through the darkroom process, the chemical process, the paper process, the lighting process, now I'm going to have a chance to start taking pictures.  So I show up at the darkroom with my girlfriend and the guy says, "Who's this?"  I said, "That's my girlfriend." He says, "And what's she doing here?"  I said, "I'm going to take her picture."  He's--, "No you're not."  "What do you mean I'm not gonna take her picture, why not?"  "'Cause the only picture that you're gonna take is me." I'm like, "I don't want to take your picture, why would I want to take your picture?"  He said, "Because you have to have some consistency in what you do. If you take this girl's picture this week or this girl's picture this week, you're not going to be able to tell when you're making a mistake. You have to take my picture every week and that way you can see what you do."  I said, "Okay," so he sits down and I have my first, this is gonna be my first professional photograph that I take, so I light it, oh man, it was a beautiful lighting job, it, you--I mean it was, it was beautiful.  And he looked at the lighting job and he said, "This, this is," he said, "you know, this is just, this is one of the prettiest lighting jobs I've ever seen." He said, "It looks exactly like I'd do it."  I said, "I, I've been, I've been paying attention." he says, "Yeah," and as he's talking he's pushing the lights away, he pushes them back, he pushes them back, he says, "Now, let's see what you can do with one light."  I'm like, "What?"  He said, "Let's see what you can do."  I said, "But you, you?"  He said, "Yeah I know you can use ten lights, but let's see if you can use one light."  I was stuck, man I, I finished lighting him, he looked like a raccoon, he was, his eyes were dark, the shadows were off, I didn't know what to do with one light, I can, I can use five lights, or six lights and I think he made me shoot with one light for about six months before we got to two lights, and then we got to three lights, and then we got to four lights; and once I understood lighting and because the word photography means to paint with light and so you just, you have to--you paint with light, so it just worked.
Story_ID: 670672
Speaker 1: So meanwhile now, now what's going on in, in high school [Baltimore City College, Baltimore, Maryland]?  Are you going--
Speaker 2: Nothing.
Speaker 1: Are you, are you doing well in school (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, I'm a good student.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Kidding me?  It's that or an ass whipping (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay so, I mean, so did, did they have a photography club?  I think you mentioned that, yeah (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh yeah, we ran the photography club.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: We, we took over the photography club and we had this professor who was a very good teacher, who let us have the photography club and we had two classrooms that we turned into a darkroom, we just took them over.  And we, to raise money, we decided that we would take over the class pictures.  So we went around to the school and we shot class pictures and we made everyone in that class buy a class picture, we sold class pictures for two dollars in a frame and you had to buy one, the school spirit.  And we made several thousand dollars and we purchased cameras and darkroom sink and photographic equipment and paper and enlargers and just all of this stuff and then the school found out about it, "Oh whoa, whoa, whoa, where you, you know?  What, what kind of criminal enterprise are you guys?"  I said, "Man we're not, we're not keeping the money, we're buying equipment for the school."  "Well why didn't you keep the money?"  'Cause we're into the photography, if I had money, I'd go buy paper.  I only worked long enough to buy chemicals and paper and once I got chemicals and paper, I spent time in the darkroom and I only worked again until I got more chemicals and paper.  So I did not ever plan on doing anything but take pictures.  Well that's not true, I was going to be a doctor and I was going to go to Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts], but my mother [Theresa Allen Tutman] told me we couldn't afford it and I needed to get that out of my mind, so I just said forget it.
Speaker 1: Well what inspired you to be a doctor?
Speaker 2: Well 'cause I thought that was cool.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, you know.
Speaker 1: Now, now you mentioned the, the head of the, the teacher who was in charge of the photography class--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --earlier, what was his name?
Speaker 2: Lawrence Ellenbogen [ph.].
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So was he really an influence on you then?
Speaker 2: Oh, he was an influence 'cause he let me get away with what--everything I wanted to do, he knew that I wanted to be in photography and so if I cut class he'd sign off for it and say I was in the darkroom.
Story_ID: 670673
Speaker 1: What else did you do in high school?  Were you, were you in--?
Speaker 2: I went to a s- high school called Baltimore City College [Baltimore, Maryland].
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: And at that time it was one of the top ten high schools in the United States and in order to get in the City as it--if you told someone you went to City, it was like, oh man, that was the cat's meow.  And in order to get into the City you had to be on the honor role, you had to make good grades and at the time I went to City there were about two thousand white kids in the school, maybe 100 black kids.  And this is 1961, every class had three black kids in it, that's just the way it was.  And I remember the first Jewish holiday that they had, you go to school and there're like twenty people in the school, and you're like, "Man, where is everyone?"  I mean it's holiday, they're all, they're gone.  And so we were the kids that got to go to school in Baltimore [Maryland] as part of the Brown decision [Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka, 1954] where you went to school with the white kids to see what happened.  I was like the third class that went there.  There was a class that went in '60 [1960], '60 [1960], another class in '61 [1961], I think I was in the class that started in '61 [1961] and you just, you got really broad based liberal arts education.  I mean, I, I got everything, I'm very fortunate, I got everything.  I got chemistry, science, trigonometry, math, physics, music, machine shop, welding, just everything, I mean printing, woodshop--everything.  And so, you come out and you look at your contemporaries in the Baltimore City public school system [Baltimore City Public Schools], they didn't get anything.
Story_ID: 670674
Speaker 1: Now did you pay close attention to photography in the media?  Like, I know those, those are the days when you have like Look magazine and Life and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, Look magazine, you know I met--I know [HistoryMaker] Gordon Parks, we used to sit around and chit chat about stuff and--
Speaker 1: I mean in high school, when you, when you were in high school [Baltimore City College, Baltimore, Maryland]?  Did you pay attention to that sort of thing (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah.  You pay attention to Ansel Adams, you look at that, you'd go to movies and sit on the side of the movie theater and close one eye and imagine how you would shoot that and make it better and look better.  And you read all the photo magazines, well you only read them for three years because after three years they start to repeat, so you get everything you need in three years and then you don't need to subscribe anymore.
Speaker 1: So you were deep into it in terms of knowing who the photographers were good, and that--
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, yeah.  You knew who was good, what, what good photography looked like, how to make--I made pinhole cameras, I made pin- cameras out of oatmeal boxes, and tin cans and stuff like that.
Speaker 1: So you, you were shooting?  Now did you upgrade in high school at all from the Brownie Hawkeye?
Speaker 2: No, no, no, no, never did.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: No.  I had a Pony 135, I had a camera that was a Kodak Pony 135, and that was a really cool camera.
Speaker 1: This is a 35mm right?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: The Brownie was 120 and I had this little Pony 135 that I found in a restaurant and kept it.  People never came back for it, so it was mine.
Story_ID: 670675
Speaker 1: Did you work in the school when you were in school?
Speaker 2: I worked, I--my mother [Theresa Allen Tutman] bef- my mother was a school teacher, she taught English, but before she started teaching school she worked as a waitress in a Chinese restaurant and from 1956 until 1960, I worked in the Chinese restaurant with her cleaning tables off and that way she could get more tips.  So she took a ten year old kid with her to the restaurant and she'd wait on the table and the table'd be dirty and she'd go to another table and I'd clean the table off and the customers would see her with a kid and she'd get more money in tips.  So I did that for four years until I got in junior high school [Booker T. Washington Junior High School; Booker T. Washington Middle School for the Arts, Baltimore, Maryland].
Story_ID: 670676
Speaker 1: So as a senior at Baltimore City College high school [Baltimore, Maryland], what kind of counseling did you get about college?
Speaker 2: None.
Speaker 1: Okay.  (Pause) Now is that typical for--?
Speaker 2: Don't know--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --I just didn't get any.
Speaker 1: You, you didn't get any?
Speaker 2: I didn't get any.
Speaker 1: And did--
Speaker 2: And you knew you were going to college, I mean it was--the school was on a college track so it was not, were you going to go to college and if you were going to go to college, it was just expected that that's what was going to happen.  So if you went to City, it was not, "Are you going to school," it's, "Which one?"
Speaker 1: So, so where were you, you, 'cause you said you thought about Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts], but (simultaneous)--?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Not thought about it. I was gonna go to Harvard ever since I was in seventh grade. That was just what I was gonna do.
Speaker 1: So did you apply at all?
Speaker 2: When I was sitting there filling out the application, my mother [Theresa Allen Tutman] came in and she said, "You got to get this Harvard idea outta your head."  I'm like, "Why?"  I said, "I've got the grades, I can go, I mean I don't see what the problem is."  She said, "It'd cost more money for you to go to Harvard, then everyone in the family put together makes."  I'm like, "Oh, okay, no problem," and that was done.
Speaker 1: Is it--so how did you decide on what college to go to, did--or what happened?
Speaker 2: Well I went to Coppin State Teachers College [Coppin State College; Coppin State University] after that because it was cheaper.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I could go to Coppin for thirty dollar a credit.
Speaker 1: Okay, so Cop- Coppin State was right in Baltimore [Maryland]?
Speaker 2: Right down the street, right on North Avenue, less than--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --fifteen minute walk from the house.
Story_ID: 670677
Speaker 1: All right.  So this is--you graduated from high school [Baltimore City College, Baltimore, Maryland] in '65 [1965]?
Speaker 2: Sixty-six [1966].
Speaker 1: Sixty-six [1966]?  Okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I got out in '66 [1966].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I was supposed to get out in '64 [1964], but I got out in '66 [1966].
Speaker 1: What happened?
Speaker 2: I stayed in high school.
Speaker 1: Okay, you said you were supposed to get out in '64 [1964]?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: But, but what?  What, what did actually happen?  Can you tell us?
Speaker 2: What actually happened?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: What act- I don't know if I should but I will.  What actually happened is I was ducking the Vietnam War, so I stayed in high school.
Speaker 1: Oh, okay so you just made sure you didn't graduate?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.
Speaker 1: By, not passing the--
Speaker 2: Had a teacher, I told you the teachers that influenced me were in a--I had a--I had a teacher by the name of Mr. Cimbolista [ph.] and he was a trigonometry teacher and in 1962, we're sitting up in the trigonometry class and the Cuban Missile Crisis was going on, I think it was.  It was the same week of the Cuban Missile Crisis, and this guy walks into the class and he is like upset, I guess he is--if I think about, he might have been about forty years old and he said, "Put your books away," he said, "I need to talk to you guys."  He says, "You're gonna get caught up in the Vietnam War and most of you guys are gonna get killed." He said, "That's just the kind of war that's going to--." I didn't even know what Vietnam was, I had not paid attention to the news, I was not reading the papers, it was not a part of my world.  And he said that, "A lot of you guys are gonna get killed. That's just what's going to happen." He said, "So what I would advise you to do until they figure this out is you need to stay in high school, if you don't have the money to go to college, if you can't afford to go to college you need to stay in high school," and he says, "What I would do if I were you is I would not go to the twelfth grade," he said, "because if you go to the twelfth grade they're gonna trick you and they're gonna pass you no matter what you do."  He said, "But if you stay in the eleventh grade, that way you can't get drafted and you can figure out what you want to do with your life and maybe by the time this war is over, you can get on with your life."  He says, "Now if you're smart, you'll listen to me, and if you're not, you're gonna get sucked up in the war and that'll be the end of your life, that's all I'm gonna say about it, take your books out, lesson's on page so and so," and--so I sat there and I listened to this guy and I'm like, hm, let's see if this happens.  So, I went to one of my teachers and said, "Look, I did not get trigonometry this year, I did not understand what's going on, I do not understand and I need to do the grade over," and then he said, "Okay, no problem," click, boom.  I did the grade over.  Three weeks later I got drafted.  I'm like, "Damn," I go up to the draft board, the woman says, "You got to report for active duty."  I'm like, "I'm in the eleventh grade." (Background noise) "What?  What do you mean you're in the eleventh grade?"  I said, "I'm in the eleventh grade."
Story_ID: 670678
Speaker 1: What did your parents [Theresa Allen Tutman and Robert Tutman III] think of this idea?
Speaker 2: They didn't know about it, I didn't tell them; and funny thing you should ask that because when you, when you, you asked me before was the family very strict?  I did not let anyone in the family know about this until about ten years ago.  And we were sitting around having Thanksgiving dinner and we were talking about stuff and we were having a conversation about things like this and one of my other relatives, said, "Whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, I got a question for you, hold on, hold on, hold on.  We're having a discussion about science and politics and government and I'm sitting here listening to you talk and that's one of the smartest analyses that I've ever heard on a subject.  How is it possible for someone that has an analytical mind like that to stay in high school [at Baltimore City College, Baltimore, Maryland] for three years?  I, I don't und- would you please explain how you failed eleventh grade?"  And I'm like, "Oh, I, I did that on purpose."  He said, "What?  What would possess you to do something like that?"  And when I explained the story, he says, "Well why didn't you tell anybody?"  I said, "'Cause I thought I'd get punished."  And my uncle Milton [Milton Allen] jumped up from the table and ran across--and he was about eighty years old at the time and said, "What makes you think you still can't get punished," and slapped me upside the head.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Now what a family though (laughter).  At any rate so, so you?
Speaker 2: Oh they were irate, they were, they were, I mean I was, you know, I was mortified, I had to listen to people call you names, make fun of you, you know, I mean it was just, it was awful.  "Hey man, your brother started the--you know, you were in the eleventh grade when your brother [Dan Tutman] got into high school and he graduated be- how could you be so stupid?"  And it's not--and the reason we did it--and I wasn't the only one, I mean it's not like I was the only one.  The reason we did it is the woman at the draft board we knew was in the Ku Klux Klan [KKK], she just--her actions, her ways.  So, if you went through the draft board where she were--was, you were going to be in the combat infantry unit, you had no choice no selection and we were not scared of going into the [U.S.] military, we were scared of the woman at the draft board that was sending us down for recruitment.  And if we had a different draft board, if we had a different draft board officer, it would have been a whole different thing.  But we were terrified of this woman, her name was Shirley Baer [ph.] and everyone was scared of her.
Speaker 1: You remember the name of the draft board?
Speaker 2: I remember everything.
Speaker 1: Shirley Baer.
Speaker 2: Right, yeah, God gave me a good memory, I remember stuff, I know.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 670679
Speaker 1: So, Coppin State [Coppin State College; Coppin State University, Baltimore, Maryland] in 1966--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --right?  Okay.  So, what was Coppin State like?  Did you like it?
Speaker 2: I loved it.  I had a teacher by the name of Guilbert Aloysius Daley [Guilbert Daley], who was an English professor and I met him and I walked to his class and I got into his class and he was different I should say.  And I remember the first paper I turned into him, he--I got an A on it but the paper had red marks all over it, I mean just, just red marks all over the paper and I looked at the paper, and I said, "How can I get an A with so many red marks on the paper?"  He said, "Well you can't spell, and your punctuation is horrible, but you write beautifully and had I given you a lower grade it might have discouraged you from writing and I didn't want to do that."  He said, "The fault of you not being able to spell, that has to do with teachers and that's not my problem, I want to develop your skills as a writer," and so he really inspired me to write.  I didn't finish college and the reason I didn't finish college is, I worked in the steel mill while I was going to school and I got my first check from the steel mill and I gave--came home gave it to my mother [Theresa Allen Tutman] and said, "Hey ma, here here's, here's check, you know, do what you want."  She looked at the check, she sat down on the bed and whistled.  I said, "What's, what's wrong with you?"  She said, "I've been teaching school for thirty years and I've never made this much money at one time."  That was my last day in school.
Speaker 1: Okay so you, you just stuck with the steel mill?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, I was a good machinist.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Oh so you got a job at, as a machinist instead of--
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay this is a skilled job?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.
Speaker 1: That skill you learned in bot- at, at Baltimore City College [Baltimore, Maryland] (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, I learned that--I, I, I went to the steel mill to get a job as an industrial photographer.  People at the mill told me that, "If you want a job as an industrial photographer, you need to apply, you need to take a job in the mill and when the job opens up you'll get it because you already work here."  "Oh, okay."  So I go to school and I get in their apprenticeship program, I go through the apprenticeship program and I learned lathes, milling machines, boring machines, I learned how to be a machinist and I was a very good machinist.  So, when I finished the apprenticeship program, and they put me back in the shop, they wouldn't let me run any machines and I'm like--, "Well you're black, you can't push the button, you can set it up, but you can't push the button," this is before Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] got killed, a whole different world.  I mean it's--different world.  So, I worked in the machine shop, I set ev- I worked on every machine in the machine shop, I set them up for the operators to run, I set up the big jobs, I finished them off, I got everything in order, I took care of the machines, but I never could push the start button to make them run, that's not your job, you set them up, they run them.  A job opened up as an industrial photographer and when the job opened up as an industrial photographer, I went to get the job, "Oh hey, here I am."  Guy says, "Oh well," (laughter), "we can't give you the job." I'm like, "But you promised."  He said, "Well you don't understand, economically it's not to our advantage to give you this job because we'd have to train you to be a photographer and then we'd have to train somebody else to do your job, it's just easier for us to train one person to be the photographer."  "Okay, see you," and I was finished with being a machinist and never went back to work there.
Story_ID: 670680
Speaker 1: So what year was this?  Had you been there very long?
Speaker 2: Sixty-eight [1968].
Speaker 1: Sixty-eight [1968]?
Speaker 2: Yeah, two years.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So this is before Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] was assassinated?  Or?
Speaker 2: This is--no.  The reason I, the day I quit was the day Dr. King got shot.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: And I was in the shop, I was the only black person working in the shop, that's not true, there was one guy who swept floors.  But I was the only person that was not a laborer that worked there, I worked for a place called Koppers Company and I worked in machine shop number one and I was up on the balcony doing something and I came back downstairs and I was working on a double cup planer it was called, I remember the machine I was working on, I was working with my partner George Smith [ph.].  And this guy came running up the shop and he stopped at every machine in the stop and you saw him running up the shop and every machine that he stopped at, the guy cut the machine off.  I'm like, something's going on.  He comes up to the shop he co- he's walking up to people and he's saying, "They got King, they got King, they got King, they got King, they got King, they got King," and it's like, "They got King?  Wait, what are you talking about?"  And he ran up to me, 'cause I mean it's just (gesture), "Hey man they got King," because he didn't even--and I'm like, "What do you mean, they got King?"  And the reason they all left their machines was to gather around the radio, 'cause they used to listen to baseball games at the radio.  So they got around the radio, they turned the radio on and it was the announcement that King had been shot and they were sitting around and I said, "Hey y'all better hope he don't die, that just--all right?  You better hope he don't die."  So, I left the floor and went up into the balcony and I get up in the balcony, because that's where the locker room was and I'm standing up in the locker room and I'm watching about sixty guys standing around the radio and they're listening to the radio and all of a sudden they said that Dr. King had died and when they said Dr. King had died, you know, how when you were at a football game and you kick a field goal and people--they jumped up and cheered and were hugging and clapping and stuff and I'm like, "I'm outta here, I'm done."  And I left, went home sitting on the front steps and phone rang and said, "They're burning up Gay Street," which was East Baltimore [Baltimore, Maryland], they'd started fires in East Baltimore, they're burning Gay Street.  And you could see the smoke in the sky and you could see all of this stuff going on, fire engines running back and forth and we're just sitting on the steps, like we didn't know what was happening and what was coming, and I was sitting on the steps and you could see the smoke in the sky, you could hear the noise and you knew something was going on but you didn't quite know what was going on yet.  And my grandmother was sitting on the steps and she's just laughing, just cracking up, I said, "Nannie wha- what are you laughing at?  What's so funny?"  She said, "Oh, I'm not going to tell you."  Say, "Well you're up to something, you're up to some mischief or something, wha- you know, what are you laughing at?"  She says, "Well, I was listening to the radio, I was listening to Stokely Carmichael [Kwame Ture] on the radio and Stokely Carmichael and Rap Brown [H. Rap Brown; Jamil Abdullah Al-Amin] said that when the riots start and fires, if you want to help out and you can't do anything, when the buildings start burning, turn on all the water in the house to make the water pressure go down in the fire line so the fire department can't fight the fires."  We went, "What?"  And we ran in the house and my grandmother had turned on every faucet in the house and I looked at this little old lady and I said, wow, here we are talking black power and stuff like this, but this is the only person that ever really did something proactive and stuff during that, and we sat back and watched them burn Baltimore down. And I guess two weeks after that I got a job at a TV station [WBAL-TV, Baltimore, Maryland], I started working for Hearst Corporation [Hearst Communications] (simultaneous).
Story_ID: 670681
Speaker 1: How did that happen?  I mean, had you applied at say the Afro [Baltimore Afro-American; Afro-American Newspapers] or any of the (simultaneous)--?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, I used to do stills for the Afro.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I, I used to do wedding pictures and I always was dropping pictures off at the Afro, dropping wedding pictures off at the Afro.
Speaker 1: Now, well that's why I wanted to mention that.  It seemed like that would be a natural kind of--
Speaker 2: Well Parren Mitchell [HistoryMaker Parren J. Mitchell, III] who was the head of the Congressional Black Caucus, he used to live next door to us and Congressman Mitchell was my uncle Reginald's [Reginald Allen] best friend.  And one day I was interviewing Congressman Mitchell and I said--my grandmother [Minnie Magee Allen] wouldn't vote for the congressman and we said, "You know, why won't you vote for this--?"  "Oh that boy say he's a rascal," says, "I caught them down in the basement and they were just drinking and acting up and I had to beat him with a broom."  And I'm like, "Whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa."  So I go to interview--I say, "Congressman," I say, "is it true that my grandmother beat you with a broom?"  And he just started laughing, she [sic.] said, "Yeah, me and Reg were down in the basement drinking and she caught us and she beat us both with a broom."  And so, you know, it's just, you know, Baltimore [Maryland] was a very closed, very small, very tight community.  My mother's brother, Milton Allen was the first black state's attorney in the United States.  He also had the first black law firm in the State of Maryland and he was the only black criminal lawyer in the State of Maryland.  So if you had a criminal case and you needed to get a black criminal lawyer and you wanted to go to a black law firm you had to go to Brown, Allen and Watts.  So politically the families were connected, they knew everybody, my mother [Theresa Allen Tutman] was a school teacher, all the school teachers knew everybody so, you know, had I stayed in Baltimore I probably would have been in politics or something or, you know, something, don't know what but, I came to Chicago [Illinois] to be a photographer, that's why I left home.
Speaker 1: So well let's, let's talk about Baltimore first.  See now, see okay, in (clears throat) what I, what I, what I have in research is that, Bob Matthews [Robert Matthews III] had something to do with your employment (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, how'd you know about that?
Speaker 1: I don't know, it's in the research (laughter).
Speaker 2: Really.
Story_ID: 670682
Speaker 1: Bob Matthews [Robert Matthews III] was the city editor for the Afro-American newspaper [Baltimore Afro-American; Afro-American Newspapers].  He also was the first black news director in the United States.  I was over to my uncle Milton's [Milton Allen] house doing something, cutting grass, I don't know what I was doing, and complaining about the fact that I could not get a job anywhere as a photographer.  So my aunt Martha [Martha Patterson Allen] says, "You know, I think Bob Matthews is working over at the TV station [WBAL-TV, Baltimore, Maryland], let me give him a call and see if he's got anything for you."  So the next thing I know, I go and I'm doing an interview with this black news director at the TV station, so we sit up there and he starts talking to me about, you know, "Tell me about yourself." I said, "Well, you know, I wasn't prepared for that question, I mean, tell me about yourself."  He said, "Tell you what, I'm gonna give you a camera and you go out and you shoot something and you come back and you show it to me and then we'll see if we want to hire you."  I'm like, "Okay."  So, he gives me a film camera and I don't even know how to load the thing, I don't even know how to put the film in the camera, he loads it for me, he gives it to me and tells me go out--I know how to push the button but I don't know how to load the camera.  So I go out and I've got to come up with a news story, what, what news story am I gonna come up with?  So I come up with this idea of how to mail a letter, what do you need to do to mail a letter?  And I do a minute and a half on how to mail a letter, you write the letter, you fold it, you put the stamp on it, you go down, you put it in the mailbox and the mailman picks it up and he takes it to your house and drops it, this is the process of mailing a letter, right?  He looks at, they hire me and now I know I'm gonna, I'm gonna get rich now, I'm gonna work in the movie business, I'm gonna be in TV, and he says, "Fine, we'll pay you eighty dollars a week," which was six cents below minimum wage, "take it or leave it."  I'm like, "Well I don't know."  He said, "But here's what we'll do, you get free film, you get a camera, you get a car, and as long as you process the film yourself, you can have all the film you want."  And I'm like, "Wait a minute, free film, a camera, and as long as I process it myself, I can have all the film I want?  Yeah.  Deal, done, you got me."  So, he hires me and I work for him and I don't know anything about film, I know photography, but I don't know film because it's the movies, it's motion, it's processing stuff, I don't know anything about it, so I spent the next three months screwing up every day.  I messed up everything, I'm, things were out of focus, I loaded the lenses wrong, I blew the film processor up two times, I flooded the lab, I'd catch hair in the gate filters, fingerprints on filters, wrong lenses, just--audio wrong, just mistake after mistake after mistake after mistake.  So they had a meeting in the newsroom and they went to Matthews and they said, "Okay man," say, "this guy is just screwing up every day, he's just messing up every day, he's just, you know?  You've gotta get rid of him."  And I'm like, okay, I'm toast, I'm done.  So Matthews says, "Hey I've been--I just--I've been waiting for you all to come to me hi- that's just what I've been waiting for," said, "but tell you what, I'm not getting rid of him, and what I'm gonna do is, he's gonna keep working here and he's gonna keep screwing up and every time he makes a mistake, I'm gonna put your stuff on the air and I'm gonna put it on wrong and I'm gonna put it on out of focus and I'm gonna put it on out of color until y'all start helping him."  And the same day, somebody showed me how to load the camera, somebody showed me how to fix a lens, they took me up into the lab and showed me how to load the processor, and that same day, people started helping me, teaching me how to do this.  Because up until that point, no one had taught me anything, I was just winging it, I was a good photographer, but I didn't know the equipment, I didn't know the processors, I didn't know anything about that.  So he--and he continued to be a mentor, he continued to guide me, he continued to show me what to do--I walked into his room--office one day and he says, "We need to talk."  I said, "We need to talk?"  He said, "Yeah, we need to talk."  I said, "What do we need to talk about?"  He said, "You do own a tuxedo, don't you?"  I said, "No, I, I don't have a tuxedo."  "No, no, no, no, you do own a tuxedo, don't you?"  I said, "No I don't." "Let's try it--you do own a tuxedo, don't you?"  I said, "Yeah, I have a tuxedo." He said, "Oh, I was just making sure."  I'm like, what the hell is that all about?  Don't know.  So, next day we have a newsroom meeting, there's about fifty people in the newsroom, he sits up and he says, "Okay, who in here owns a tuxedo?"  I look around, "I, I got a tuxedo."  "Okay, come over here, stand over here." He says, "Well, we're covering the inauguration in Washington, D.C., and the station can't afford to se- pay for or to rent a tuxedo, so the only people we're gonna send are people that own a tuxedo. Since he owns a tuxedo, he's covering the inauguration.  Now people--."  "Well man I'll rent a tuxedo if need be."  "No, we don't want you to spend your money; he's already got one, he's going."
Story_ID: 670683
Speaker 1: So, I got to cover Nixon [President Richard Milhous Nixon] in his inauguration in 1968.  But I also traveled with George Wallace, I covered Wallace, I traveled with Wallace, I, I've covered every president since Lyndon Johnson [President Lyndon Baines Johnson], and you know, it's just, it's been a--I've had a ball, been around the world six or seven times, finally did get to Vietnam as a photographer, not as a (laughter) as a soldier, but I did cov- I covered thirty-seven wars around the world.
Speaker 2: Okay now I, I, I--let, let--so what did shortly after you're signed by WBAL [WBAL-TV, Baltimore, Maryland] and you're, you're working there, you moved to Chicago [Illinois]?
Speaker 1: Yeah, I moved to Chicago.
Speaker 2: Within a year almost.
Speaker 1: With--almost year, right.
Speaker 2: Right.  So how, how did that take place?
Speaker 1: Fred Hampton and Mark Clark got killed.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And they needed a black photographer to cover the news, CBS didn't have any blacks in the Midwest.
Speaker 2: Now Fred Hampton and Mark Clark were leaders of the--
Speaker 1: The Black Panther Party.
Speaker 2: --Black Panther Party in Illinois, they were shot by Chicago police in the fall of--yeah (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) Ed Hanrahan [Edward Hanrahan] in a, in a Black Panther Party raid.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And they raided the house and the Black Panthers at the time would not talk to any members of the white press, in fact, no one that was black would talk to anyone that was a member of the white press and that way you had the--a lot of black men and women got hired around the country because of the Civil Rights Movement and black power and sticking together, "You, you want to interview me?  Send a black reporter."  "You want to talk to me?  Get a black photographer," and we had--every station in America had one, everybody had one.  CBS News had three, they had a Bert, a guy by the name of Bert Miles [HistoryMaker Bertrand Miles] was the first black photographer that CBS hired.  And they hired him during the Newark riots when they set Newark, New Jersey on fire I think in '67 [1967] or '68 [1968], and Bert Miles had a studio in New York [New York], in Harlem and they were trying to cover the riots in Newark and every crew that they sent into Newark got beat up.  And the people at CBS says, "Go find a black photographer somewhere."  So they go into Harlem and they're driving up and down the streets to Harlem and Bert is working late at night in his photo studio doing wedding pictures, baby pictures and stuff and they go knock on the door, say, "Hey man come here, we give you $100 if you go into Newark and take some pictures for us," and Bert said, "No I want a job," so they hired him.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: And he became the first CBS network news photographer, second guy was named Herb Austin [ph.], and Herb Austin was in Washington, D.C., and Herb Austin told me about CBS, that's how I discovered CBS News.  I was in Washington, D.C. covering the Days of Rage when they were having the anti-war demonstrations in Washington, D.C., and I was running through Dupont Circle [Washington, D.C.] with a gas mask on and I came through--(background noise) that's mine, it'll stop in a second.
Speaker 2: Okay, all right.
Speaker 1: I did not know I had my phone turned on.  I should know better than that.  So, I was--let, let me see what was going on?
Speaker 2: So you were running through--
Speaker 1: I was running through Dupont Circle, I was coming through Dupont Circle, full of gas, tear gas and they were fighting, riots, I'm running through Dupont Circle and coming on the other side of Dupont Circle was another black guy with a gas mask and a camera and he saw me and he says, "Hey young brother they're hiring at CBS."  And that's how I found out about CBS and that's when I set my sights on working for CBS News, shortly after that, CBS called me because Fred Hampton and Mark Clark had gotten killed and they gave me a choice between New York, Chicago, L.A. [Los Angeles, California], Dallas [Texas], or Florida, L.A. was too far from home, New York was too close to the bosses, Washington, D.C. means I would've had to live with my mother [Theresa Allen Tutman] and drive back and forth to work, and Chicago was just close enough that I could get home in ten hours.  So I picked Chicago 'cause it was just close enough.
Story_ID: 670684
Speaker 1: What was it like coming in on--now this was a pivotal, pivotal incident in--the marker in the, in the history of Chicag- of black Chicago [Illinois].
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: The murder of Fred Hampton, a brilliant young Black Pan- Panther leader and Mark Clark, other people would--
Speaker 2: Minister of information and the leader, right.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Attacked by the Chicago Police Department.
Speaker 2: Right, they were murdered.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  So and, I know one of the, one of the exhibits in the trial was a door--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --for their apartment that--and I saw it in the--it, it's displayed in the, the film, 'The Murder of Fred Hampton' and--
Speaker 2: They, they--when the cops came in they shot through the door, they filled up the door with bullet holes and when they had the trial they cut the door out of the frame and brought the door, not the frame, just the door.  So when they got into the thing, the bullet holes--one side says, "Well the door swung out," the other side said the door swung in, but since they didn't bring the frame, they couldn't tell which way the bullets came from.  After they did the forensics, they knew that all the shots were fired from outside and these two men were murdered in their sleep basically.
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, the police contended there was a shootout, was (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No it was--the police were shooting at each other, cops came through the front door, cops came through the back door and they opened fire and they were taking fire from each other, it was just a classic, classic screw up.  If you look at the murder of Fred Hampton, if you look at the trial and you look at all of the paperwork and if you look at what happened and then you finally see that the charges were dropped for lack of evidence and once you see that the official reason that the charges were dropped were for lack of evidence, the next question you raise is, wait a minute, if you look at the video of the pictures of guns and bullets and all this stuff, where did all these guns and bullets and stuff and--come from if they didn't have any evidence?  You know that those things were planted.
Speaker 1: So, was there, was there a--is there any aspect of this case where, where you think that you made a significant contribution to the truth (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)  No.  I just covered it as a news--
Speaker 1: No?  Just--
Speaker 2: The significant contribution that I made was we were able to cover it, we could--we were able to talk to people about it and they were able to talk to us about it and we were able to get into the house and see what happened and you could sit down with the members of the Black Panther Party and they would talk to you because they weren't going to talk to the white press.  So the things that they said would have been lost to history because they weren't going to talk.
Speaker 1: Did you work with a black reporter on this?
Speaker 2: That was the funny thing about it is when this went on, for one week, we worked with a black reporter, I had a black sound man and a black electrician, so for one week we went out with a five--with a four man black crew and I worked with Harvey Thomas and Bill Browne and [HistoryMaker] Harry Porterfield and we kind--we really hit it off, we really had a good time.  And later on when I tried to say, "Hey, can we work together?  Can we get together?  You know can we all work together?"  Say, "Oh no we, we can't let y'all work together."  I'm like, "Why not?"  Say, "Because we need to, we need to spread you around, we can't send four black guys out to one place at one time. If we send you to different places more people will see you and that way we can show that we have more black people."
Story_ID: 670685
Speaker 1: So you worked at WBBM [WBBM-TV, Chicago, Illinois]?
Speaker 2: I worked at WBBM for about a year and a half, and then I went to network.
Speaker 1: Okay, and the network took you to New York City [New York, New York]?
Speaker 2: No, I stayed in Chicago [Illinois].
Speaker 1: Chicago.
Speaker 2: In the Midwest bureau for CBS News.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, so you were still in Chicago?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: See, I thought I was working for the network when they hired me because CBS out of New York hired me, but for the first year or so they put in local news just in case I didn't work out and they wouldn't be stuck with me in the network.  But most of the work that I did wound up on network news so when I would go out and shoot something and see it on network news, I'm working for network TV but I was actually on the payroll of WBBM.  And then finally, I switched and I became a network news photographer for CBS network news and they sent me around the world covering news.
Speaker 1: Okay, so this is also in '69 [1969]?
Speaker 2: Seventy [1970], 1970.
Speaker 1: Sev- in '70 [1970], okay.
Speaker 2: Seventy [1970] (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) All right--
Speaker 2: Seventy-one [1971], '72 [1972].
Story_ID: 670686
Speaker 1: During this per- period of time did you go to Vietnam?
Speaker 2: Seventy-one [1971], '72 [1972], just covering the--I mean it wasn't like--you're just covering the war, I mean it's just another assignment, it wasn't anything special in my mind, it's just another assignment.
Speaker 1: Well, the Vietnam War was a special time for everybody during those days, so (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Not really, not when you're doing news, you don't even think about it that way.  You put it out of your mind because that's the only way you can't get killed, it's make believe, I'm looking at it through a viewfinder, it's not real.
Speaker 1: I know a lot of people point to the broadcast of Walter Cronkite as being like pivotal to how they felt about Vietnam, you know?
Speaker 2: Yeah, but I didn't watch the news (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah--okay.
Speaker 2: --because I was covering the news.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So, you know, I'm out doing the news and I'm shipping stuff back, I'm never--see it, I'm--I remember watching a program that had some footage, never be saw--never before seen footage of the war, never before seen, and I'm looking at it and I'm like, "Oh wow, that guy, that guy's gonna get shot right there and when he gets shot, that guy's gonna run out and try to drag him back and he's gonna get shot and then the two of them are gonna run over there and that guy standing over there, he's gonna get shot."  And the guy's like, "If this films never been seen before, how could you possibly know that?"  I said, "Because I filmed it."  He said, "You filmed it?"  I said, "Yeah but I never saw it, I filmed it and shipped, filmed it, shipped it, filmed it and--," so you never saw anything, you know, you never saw anything.
Speaker 1: So when you, when you went to Vietnam for the first time, I mean what was it just one time?  Or, or--
Speaker 2: One time.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It was just hot.
Speaker 1: How, how long did you stay?
Speaker 2: Three months.
Speaker 1: Three months?  Yeah, and, and where were you in Vietnam?
Speaker 2: I don't remember, just places.
Speaker 1: So you were, you were out in the field, you weren't in--
Speaker 2: Out in the field.
Speaker 1: --in Hanoi [Vietnam] or anything?
Speaker 2: Just out in the field.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Just stuff, you know, you just, it's just, it's a part of my life that I choose to forget about, you know?  And it's just, you just, it's just, you know, you see just a lot of people get killed, you know?  You're out with--you're out on a mission and you fly out somewhere, you get on a helicopter and the guys on it--I, I remember one time, I remember one time we were running through the bush and we were running and we were running and we were running and we were running and we were just running and we were running through the bush and (laughter) and we got where we were going and I was in front of a guy and I turned around to take his picture 'cause they were coming up and the guy's like, "You kept up." "What do you mean I kept up?"  I'm like, "You trying to lose us or something?"  He say, "Yeah you newsies are in the way."  I said, "What do you mean we're in the way?"  He say, "Man, every time one of you guys get on a helicopter that's a gun that ain't on the helicopter."  Oops, I'm a liability?  Oops, you don't know, you don't think about it that way.  We were tolerated and stuff; so I didn't miss it, I wouldn't go back.
Story_ID: 670687
Speaker 1: So you're working for, for the network [CBS] here in Chicago [Illinois] and--so, so you stayed at the network for?
Speaker 2: 'Til 1995.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  All right, so, so what were some of the, the, I guess the most interesting Chicago stories you covered during that period of time?
Speaker 2: I think the most interesting--and still to this day, the most interesting--the, the, the one story in my mind that--you know, people ask you that all the time, "What are your fav- if there's a story you had to say that you had to cover, what would it be?"  And Emperor Hirohito of Japan is the one that sticks in my mind that, that was the most profound news story I ever covered.
Speaker 1: This is the passing of Hirohito (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, the--he visited the United States.
Speaker 1: Oh okay.
Speaker 2: He was alive, and I got to see him.  And the reason that it intrigued me so much was that, you know, as a--I'm a Christian and I grew up my entire life hearing people sing songs about, "What will you do if your savior comes," and, "We are climbing Jacob's ladder," and, "When I get to heaven," and, it's just all of this stuff and, you know, "You got to be careful, you know, you don't want Jesus to catch you doing this," and stuff like this, you know?  And, you know, I've been with people, you know, he knows and you know all, you know, these just all of this religion in our lives and stuff.  So here you have a man who for five thousand years, you have a race of people that believe that this man is their god, this is, you know, we have our god, there's Jesus Christ, there's Jehovah, but this is their god.  And I've grew up saying, you know, "What would you do if God came in the room?  What would you do if Jesus came in the room?"  So I'm on a news story and I've got an opportunity to see how believers act when their god walks into the room and for me that was like, whoa, I don't know if I'll ever experience when I see my god walk into a room of people who I have my faith in, but I get a chance to see a people who have never met their god because these are Japanese Americans that believe and are faithful and they're going to meet their god.  And I got to see that and for me it just, it moved me, I mean it, it moved me.  I--we were setting up on the camera and this little guy, I mean this guy, I mean this guy walks into the room, he walks in, very humble, he comes in and the room went black and white and he was standing there in color.  And I'm like, "Whew, whoa, okay."  And I was scared to breathe and I'm rolling and I'm like, (makes sound) and I look this way and the room was in black and white and he was standing there in color and I'm like, "Okay, works," and everyone in the room was older, these are older Japanese Americans, very dignified, very--and everyone just took a deep bow and they started to bow and they bow, and they just--it was a deep reverent, no one--just as far down as they could bend and he just bent over a little bit and they talked all in Japanese and stuff and I'm like, "Okay, I, I saw somebody's god walk in the room, so okay, it works for me."
Speaker 1: Okay wha- and, and what year was this when--
Speaker 2: This was--
Speaker 1: --Hirohito?
Speaker 2: --eighty-ish [1980], somewhere back in the '80s [1980s].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: He ca- made a visit to the United States.
Story_ID: 670688
Speaker 1: And I've seen a lot of stuff, I mean, you know, I interviewed Nelson Mandela when he came to America, got out of jail and in fact (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) This is in like '91 [1991], '92 [sic. 1990]?
Speaker 1: Yeah, something like that, yeah, I interviewed him and we were sit- standing up talking and I've got a photograph, I'll get to you, of he and I and we were standing their laughing, cracking up and everyone wanted to know what we were laughing at and the interview was over and when the interview was over, you know, everyone's packing up and I guess in forty years I've only asked a couple people for photographs because I take pictures, I don't get my picture taken.  So I said, "Mr., Mr. Mandela can I have my picture taken with you please?"  He said, "Sure, come on, come on over here."  So he comes over and we're standing next to each other, you know?  We're getting ready to get our picture taken and the PR [public relations] lady comes up and goes, "Now wait, wait, wait, stop, stop, say we can't have this."  And he goes, "Well why not?"  Said, "We got two hundred people standing out in the hall that have paid ten thousand dollars a person to have their pictures taken with you today. We're not having any free photographs."  So Mandela looks at her and says, "If I don't have my picture taken with this black man, ain't nobody having a picture today," and we just crack up, and the photographer took the picture and we're standing there just laughing and he just, he said, "Can you believe this?"  I said, "Hey man it never stops."
Speaker 2: Gee, what a story.  So, this is in like, his visit it was in '92 [1992] I believe--
Speaker 1: It was right after he got outta jail--
Speaker 2: Ninety-two [1992], yeah--
Speaker 1: --he came--he came here and stuff.  And I asked him, I said, "You know, you were, you know"--
Speaker 2: Ninety-three [1993], yeah.
Speaker 1: --"they offered you a chance to get out, why didn't you take it?"  He said, "They took my whole life.  Why would I give up?  Why would I stop?"
Story_ID: 670689
Speaker 1: I interviewed Rosa Parks, since we're talking about people, and that is in 1972; and I said to her, "Oh what an honor to meet you, you know?  Rosa Parks and," blah, blah, blah, and she said, "You know, it's not no big thing, you know."  I said, "But, you know, what you did and stuff like that."  She said, "You know," said, "it's not--my feet hurt."  I said, "What do you mean your feet hurt?"  She says, "I sat down because my feet hurt."  I said, "Really?"  She said, "Yeah," she said, "and I was getting ready to move."  I said, "You were getting ready to move?"  She said, "Yeah, until he slapped me."  I said, "He slapped you?"  She said, "Yeah."  I said, "Wait a minute, at--no- nobody--nobody--." She said, "No, we decided after it that it would be better for the movement if it was just, I sat there and didn't wanna move," she said, "but I was getting--I was moving slow 'cause my feet hurt but he, he hit me."  And I'm like, "Whew, okay."  So that's the story she told me, that she was going to get up but he slapped her so she just sat there.
Speaker 2: Yeah and I've heard it also that she planned to do it because she had been to organizing school [Highlander Folk School; Highlander Research and Education Center, New Market, Tennessee], but.
Speaker 1: Well she been the organizer but it worked out that she was an organizer, but she said that--we were setting up in Detroit [Michigan], but she said that is not what happened.
Story_ID: 670690
Speaker 1: So these interviews that you're doing, are they being published?  Are they just--
Speaker 2: I'm just a cameraman (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) You're just a cameraman talking to them?
Speaker 2: --I'm not doing--I'm just sitting there listen- no, I'm not talk- I stick my mouth into anything I want to hear about because that's just part of what I do.  But, you know, I just--you know, I've heard all kinds of interviews from all kinds of people for all kinds of stuff.
Speaker 1: Who do they pair you up with from the national CBS?  What reporters (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Everybody.  I worked with Douglas Edwards, Walter Cronkite, Dan Rather, Winston Burdett, Doug Tunnell, every national correspondent in the world that you've ever seen on TV, I've worked with.
Speaker 1: Mike Wallace?
Speaker 2: Mike Wallace, Hughes--Hughes Rudd, I worked on '60 Minutes,' I did--I use to shoot six--stuff on '60 Minutes' and I'd always be on camera number two.  And camera number two is the camera that shoots the reverse shots, but the person that gets the credit is the person that's on camera number one.  So I made a complaint one time, "Hey man, you know, I'm getting sick and tired of shooting camera number two, I get tired of shooting these reverse shots, I get really--I want to shoot camera number one, I want a screen credit."  He says, "Tutman [HistoryMaker Robert Tutman], do you know why you shoot camera number two all the time?"  I'm like, "No why?"  He says, "That's 'cause you're the best cameraman."  I'm like, "Whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, if I'm the best cameraman, why aren't I on camera number one?"  He said, "Do you actually think that the correspondent cares about how the subject looks?  The only thing he cares about is how good he looks on the reverse shot, that's the only thing he cares about.  He cares about the ten seconds that he's on a reverse shot, that's why you're on camera number two."  I'm like, "Oh okay."
Speaker 1: The truth will out, that's (laughter).
Speaker 2: Truth will out, I mean you know what I'm talking about my brother (laughter).
Speaker 1: So--
Speaker 2: Yeah, I tell on them, you kidding me?
Story_ID: 670691
Speaker 1: Any stories about these different personalities that (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) What kind of stories--
Speaker 1: --you got everybody from Ed Bradley to Mike Wallace, to--
Speaker 2: What kind of stories--how do you--I met Ed Bradley.  I met Ed Bradley, I picked Ed Bradley up from the airport when he came back from Vietnam, that's where I got, I met Ed Bradley.  Ed Bradley worked for CBS Radio in Washington, D.C. and they told him he didn't have it, he wasn't good enough.  So Bradley quits working for CBS Radio and on his own dime, goes to Vietnam and goes to Vietnam as a freelancer and is a freelancer in Vietnam and all of these stories that he's doing in Vietnam are freelance stories, he is not working for CBS News.  So he's been in Vietnam several years and he's working in Vietnam and calls back to New York [New York] and he says, "Look, I need to get home and I need to do something and I need to do this," or something, I don't know exactly what.  And, "No, you have to stay in Vietnam," he said, "I don't, I don't work for you."  He's like, "What do you mean you don't work?  What do you mean you don't work for us?"  "Yeah, I'm a freelancer, I don't work for you, don't tell me to stay."  They say, "Man we better hire this guy before NBC finds out he's not working for us 'cause they're going to snatch him up."  So that's how he got hired for CBS News, he did not get hired--he got hired because they were scared of losing him.
Speaker 1: So he--they were using his reports but that he wasn't a full time (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) He wasn't a staff reporter.
Speaker 1: Oh, okay.
Speaker 2: No.  He was not a staff reporter at CBS News.  So I was teaching at Columbia University in 1973, I think it was.
Speaker 1: This is in New York [New York]?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I was in a Michele Clark journalism fellowship program [Michele Clark Fellowship Program for Minority Journalists], I had an associate professorship and was on the staff and faculty at Columbia and I knew some people in New York, and they said, "Hey man, we got--a buddy of mine is coming back from Vietnam, let's pick him up at the airport and we're gonna have a little party," so the guy we were picking up at the airport was Ed Bradley.  So, I meet Bradley, we get together, we hookup, but we still got caught up into--ain't going to let two black people work together, that's just not gone happen.  So, meet him, he comes to Chicago [Illinois] a couple months later and he sees me and he's like, "You were at the party." I'm like, "Yeah," say, "Let's hook up."  So all the executives at CBS are there in Washington, I'm sorry in Chicago to take Ed Bradley out to dinner and they say, "Hey Bradley we're going out to dinner," he says, "No, I'm hanging out with Tutman [HistoryMaker Robert Tutman]," and I'm like, "Hey man, it's, it's okay if you--." He's, "No I'm going to hang out with you," and I'm like, "Man do you know how much trouble I'm going get in," (laughter) 'cause we going out to dinner together and I got in a lot of trouble so--but, you know, that's just the way it is.
Story_ID: 670692
Speaker 1: Any stories about any of the other reporters (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Like what types of stories?
Speaker 1: I don't know.  Just, I mean there's so many things that can happen on a interview, and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) There's all kinds--I, I would not know where to start, you'd have to ask me a question about somebody or--I mean, just all types of stuff.
Speaker 1: I don't know.  Anything about Mike Wallace or?
Speaker 2: No, he was steady, I didn't care for him, but he was steady, you know.  Who was it?  I'll think of his name it's th- this older guy that used to always do these commentaries, had grey hair--
Speaker 1: Eric Sevareid?
Speaker 2: No, no, no--
Speaker 1: No?
Speaker 2: --he, he--Bri- Rooney, Andy Rooney--
Speaker 1: Andy Rooney.
Speaker 2: He was a cracker.  I couldn't stand him.  He was--you--he was, he was--Andy Rooney was--something, his son Brian Rooney was going with a black chick and they got in the car together and she got out the car because Andy Rooney said, "That nigger's not riding in my car."  I mean what you see on TV is not what you get, we could spend six hours talking about the stuff that you don't see.  I'll give you a for instance, who was the boy that died with ABC?
Speaker 1: Max, Max Robinson?
Speaker 2: Max Robinson hated his co-anchor, Frank Reynolds. Was it Frank Reynolds and--yeah it was Frank and Max, they hated each other, Frank Reynolds and Max Robin- they, I mean they hated each other with a passion, and if you look at the funeral, they still--you don't have to take my word for it, you go look at the funeral and there's the president's wife, the executives for the network, and there's an empty chair at the funeral that Max Robinson was supposed to be sitting in and Max didn't go to the funeral, that's how come he wound up not being on network TV anymore, that's what he got fired over.  He got fired over the fact that he would not stand up at his funeral and say good words about him, he said, "I hated the son of bitch, and I am not going stand up and be at his funeral and tell the world what a great guy he was, when I hated him."  And Max Robinson's last public engagement that he had was at the National Association of Black Journalists convention, I think in St. Louis [Missouri], Max Robinson was dying from AIDS [acquired immunodeficiency syndrome] and Max got up and said, "Look," he said, "I am at the end of my life, and the one thing that you need to understand that when you're dying, that the only thing that matters is that you keep your dignity."  And I'm like, wow!  He said, "The money don't matter, the job don't matter, you have to keep your dignity," and he said that, "If I'd have stood up and told the world what a great guy he was, that would have made dying real hard," that just, just--he couldn't have lived with his self, he could die with--they hated each other.  I mean, during the breaks they used to cuss each other out, and call each other names and say terrible th- and when the--cue time, "Hi there, what a great guy," you know, it was just.  You know about the Neelys [Gina Neely and Pat Neely], don't you?  The food couple, the couple that's on TV, there's a couple called the Neelys--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --they do southern cooking, they get on TV, "Hey sugar plum," and, "Baby how you doing sweetheart," I just--they just filed for divorce and they talked about the fact for the last nine years they've been on TV and they hate each other's guts; and they've just been on this cooking show ['Down Home with the Neelys'] because they wanted the money.
Story_ID: 670693
Speaker 1: Was there any national coverage of the Harold Washington campaign?  That was a huge story (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh yeah, Harold Washington--the Harold Washington, the national coverage for the Harold Washington campaign was, that they did not think Harold Washington would win, so much so, that they did not cover him.  I was at the Ambassador East Hotel, I'm sorry I was at the Ambassador West Hotel [Chicago, Illinois] covering the election, we did not even have a crew set up at Harold Washington headquarters, his campaign headqu- the--they didn't even have a crew, they did not think he would win, we did not even cover it.  I'm sitting up there, it's about twelve o'clock in the afternoon and this kid comes into the ballroom crying, he's just crying, he's about twelve years old, just, boo hoo, boo hoo, just crying.  "Hey man, what's wrong?"  I just, you know, "My daddy's a precinct captain and he's up here and it looks like Harold Washington's gonna win and we're just, we don't know what to do, my dad's gonna be out of a job and--it's--," and I'm like, "Uh-oh."  So I get on the phone and I said, "Look, I think we need to get a crew down to Harold Washington headquarters because I'm sitting up in the room, it's 12:30 and this kid just walks up crying 'cause he's been upstairs with his--in the room and he's scared that his daddy's going lose his job because early polls are back and Harold Washington's winning."  "What are you talking about?  What are you talking about?"  I like, "Hey man, I'm just, I think you better get a crew down there."  So because I'm working for network news, we don't play around, crew go, they go they and they start setting up and they, you know, get cables set up, you know, CBS News got a lot of money, their philosophy under David Bucksbaum was, throw money at it 'til it goes away, you got a problem, throw mon- I used to travel the world with forty, fifty thousand dollars in cash in my pocket, I had more money than a show dog could jump over (laughter) is what we said.  So we, we, we set up down there and statistics come in and Harold Washington wins and if you go, if you want to, if you don't believe me, you go back and you get some news footage from the night of the coverage when the returns came in.  WBBM [WBBM-TV, Chicago, Illinois], for instance, the anchormen, "What happened?  How did this happen?  Well what is going?  How, how could this hap- ?" They were just flabbergasted, they could not believe it.  Take, they couldn't believe it and Harold Washington was a good guy, I mean he was a good--we used to shoot pool together and, and the reason we started shooting pool together was one day, I was someplace with him and we were just talking, just some, "Hey Mr. Mayor, how you doing?"  "Yeah, man another one of these things, you know, press car, you know, I got to get outta here." I said, "Yeah, I get outta here, I'm going home to shoot pool."  He said, "What you know about shooting pool?"  I said, "I shoot pool every day." He said, "Yeah, I sure wish I could shoot pool."  I said, "Well if--you're the man, you can shoot pool if you want." He said, "Man, do--can you imagine what these crackers would do to me if they saw me in a pool room?  Sitting over a pool table shooting pool?"  I said, "Man I got a pool table," I said, "you can come over my place anytime you want and shoot pool and nobody will ever take your picture and nobody will ever tell on you."  And he used to drop by and we'd shoot pool, sit around, talk, hangout, he's just--he was a good guy man, he was a cool dude.
Speaker 1: Well what did you think of, of his, you know, when he--well, well first of all, what do you think--what do you attribute to his popularity?  I mean he, he squeaked by the first election, he kind of ran through Richie Daley [Richard M. Daley] and Jane Byrne, but he was elected a second time.
Speaker 2: He was smart--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --he was soft spoken, he was genuinely a likeable guy and he was a good guy, he was a good guy, he was an honest guy.  A guy dropped a microphone on him one time, and got Harold Washington saying some really, really critical stuff, really, the types of things that get politicians kicked out of office.  So they jammed Harold Washington up on this, "Well Mr. Mayor what do you have to say about this recording that we have of you?"  And Harold said, "You know, I thought that guy was my friend," he said, "and if I'd have known that he'd come in my house, and put a microphone on me like that," he said, "I'd have kicked his ass.  Next question."  That was the end of it and that was the right answer for the situation at the time and that's what he should have done.  And he was just, he was a genuinely good decent guy, he could have been president if he'd have lived.
Speaker 1: What other Chicago [Illinois] stories made national news or--
Speaker 2: All of them made national news, Mayor Daley, I, I was, when old man Daley [Richard J. Daley] died, I was walking down, I was near Water Tower Place [Chicago, Illinois]--
Speaker 1: This is like 1977?
Speaker 2: Somewhere around there (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Spring of '77 [sic. 1976]?
Speaker 2: --I was walking near Water Tower Place and these guys were outside and said, "Hey man, you know the mayor just had a heart attack."  "What are you talking about?"  He said, "The mayor was in his office upstairs," these are his police bodyguards, I saw them, "Hey man what's going on?"  "Hey man, the mayor just had a heart attack."  So I go (gesture), I say, "Man, Daley just had a heart attack."  "What are you talking about?"  I said--man, you know, when, when you're in the business, you just--you, you see things, you sense things, you, you stumble on things, you hear a word, and that word means a whole lot of stuff, you know?
Story_ID: 670694
Speaker 1: If you're a lawyer and somebody says, "Hey this case has to do, you know, section 69041," that's volumes of stuff.  So you hear a word, and you know the ramifications of it, you know where things are going.  I'll give you a for instance, in 1976, I'm in New York [New York], and we're at the Democratic National Convention, so Carter [James Earl "Jimmy" Carter, Jr.] has not picked his vice presidential candidate yet, so there are like seven or eight guys running for vice president, or that maybe are going to be picked for vice president, so they're going to assign a crew to each one of these guys just in case he gets picked, right?  So, we get a call, saying, "Hey man what are you doing?"  Say, "We're at lunch." "Okay, who do you want?"  I say, "What you mean?  Who I want?  What do you mean who do I want?"  "Carter is going to pick somebody and we've got seven guys we've got to cover, who do you want?"  I'm like, "Well, shit, who you got?"  Says, "Well, you know, we got Connally [John Connally]." "Oh no, he was with Kennedy [President John Fitzgerald Kennedy], I ain't, I ain't, you know, they might pick him, I ain't, unh-uh," 'cause if you get stuck with a candidate you're done for the rest of the year, I mean, that's it, you ain't getting home, you're on the road, your plants are going to die, your gas is getting caught off, you got a stack of mail, you don't see your old lady, you can forget it, right?  So, we're sitting in the car, "Who else you got?"  "We got so and--." "Nah, nah, nah, we don't want him, we don't want him either, who else you got?"  "We got Mondale.  "Mon- ?  Humphrey's [Hubert Humphrey] boy?  Oh yeah, great, there's no chance he's going to pick him."  So, we go over to The Carlyle hotel [New York, New York] and we're sitting in front of The Carlyle hotel for three days, and I'm making thirty dollars an hour, on overtime, eating, drinking, hanging out in front of the hotel, just having a ball, right?  Convention's going on and I'm on a stake out and there's no one there so I don't have to work, I'm just, it's--man it's just a stake out, so we're sitting there looking and all of a sudden [U.S.] Secret Service pulls up and starts blocking the street off, this is about ten o'clock in the morning, I'm like, "We're screwed."  The guy says, "What's going on?"  I said, "Secret Service," he says, "What's wrong?"  I says, "Carter's picking Mondale." I said, "Damn!"  Says, "What?"  I say, "Man, damn!"  So you get on the phone and you say, "Hey man, Carter's picking Mondale," it, "That, that's not 'til tonight."  "They blocking the street off," he says, "Are you sure?"  I said, "Man they blocking the street off."  So we get there, you know, two hours later it's five hundred members of the press corps out in the street, six o'clock there's a thousand people out in the street, I mean the street's just cameras and lights and stuff everywhere right?  So, they're gonna make the announcement who the vice president nominee is gonna be, but, you know, everybody knows by now but it's not official, so we're standing out there and the guy comes out and he says, "Okay we need one photographer in here as the pool crew for his announcement, who's it gonna be?"  I'm like, "Hey, how about me?  How about me?"  The cop turns to me says, "Yeah right, why should I pick--why should I pick you?"  "Because I'm the only black guy here."  "What are you talking about?"  Say, "Man, you've got five hundred white boys that you do not know and I'm the only black person here, if you pick me, I'm the only one you're not gonna have to watch," the guy looks around, "It's the black guy, everybody else stays out." (Laughter) So I go in, "Hey," and I can go in and out and in and out because they're stopping everybody else, no one else can come in, I've got--I'm in and out, fast forward, campaign's going on, so we're on the campaign plane, you wanted a story about reporters?  Okay, and this is where this is leading to, so we get on the campaign plane and I get a photograph of me, Walter Mondale, somebody else, and somebody--and the guy gives it to me, "Here's a, here's a picture of you and the candidate."  Oh, okay, I signed it, "Good luck, Tutman [HistoryMaker Robert Tutman]," I give it back to him.  About ten minutes later, candidate comes wal- says, "What is this?"  That's a sign--signed photograph, he said, "Wait a minute, I sign the pictures, you don't sign the pictures," I'm like, "Man, I take your picture a thousand times a day, what I need another photograph of you for?"  He's like, "Oh, okay," he takes the picture, turns around, walks away with it.  I don't think anything else about, right?
Story_ID: 670695
Speaker 1: Goes to the White House, wins, he's the vice president, blah, blah, blah; we go for- we move forward, we go fast--now he's running for president, fast forward, we're up in Minnesota at his house in Minnesota when he's running for president, Diane Sawyer is doing an interview with him [Walter Mondale] about who he's going to pick as his vice presidential candidate.  So we're sitting in his house and we're waiting for him, setup similar to this, I'm on camera number two again, I'm behind him because I'm shooting--no I'm on camera number--I'm on camera number two 'cause I'm shooting her and I'm at the back of his head, right?  That same setup that I told you about, they want, okay?  So, we're sitting here, he walks into the room and he sits down and he says, "Who's your crew?"  So she introduce--and he says, "Tutman [HistoryMaker Robert Tutman], hey Bob, how you doing?  What's going on?"  And we start talking about, you know, just stuff, "How's your mother?  And how's your family?"  'Cause I traveled with him for six months during the 1976 campaign, I was assigned to him, I was with him every day with his family, I never left.  Got up an hour before he went--got up in the morning, stayed up until he went to bed at night, every day.  So he's talking to me, laughing and chit chatting and she's getting hot, I mean, this chick is smoking, she's doing a slow burn and she goes, "Mr. Tutman, who's doing this interview?  Are you doing the interview?  Or am I doing the interview?"  And he goes, "Oh sorry," and he turns around, "What would you like to talk about?"  So they talked for about two, three hours, she asked him about all of this and stuff, and, "One chance to tell me who are you picking for your vice presidential candidate," he said, "Look, I haven't made up my mind yet, I really haven't made up my mind, I don't know who I'm tal- I have no idea."  So, she's like, wraps up the interview and says, "Okay show me around the house, show me around the house, show me what's going on around the house," so, "Okay let's take a tour of the house," right?  So, they're, they're around the house and his wife walks in, Joan Mondale [Joan Adams Mondale] walks in and she walks in and he says, "Joan, look who's here."  She says, "Oh hi Tutman how you doing?  How's it been?"  We wave and stuff and Susan Spencer [sic.] she's just like, (makes sound), so they walk around, walk around and they go into the family room and they're filming this and fam- and they got all of these family pictures on--he says, "Here's a picture of me and So and So, here's a picture of me--and here's a picture of me and Tutman," and this chick turned--I--you don't have anything in here red enough to show you what color her face turned right?  She is beside herself, right?  So, they finish, they go, she--he has his limo take her to the airport, she goes to the airport, she gets on a plane, guy comes back, he says, "She on the plane?"  "Yeah." "So she's gone?  Took off?"  "Yeah."  I said, "Okay."  We don't think about it at all, we're standing outside, he comes outside, "Press conference," this is a press conference in the middle of the day, "Press conference?  You don't have middle of the day press conferences," everybody lines up to get their stuff together, he comes out to the microphone, he says, "I would like to announce my vice presidential candidate, Geraldine Ferraro," and she comes walking out the house and I'm like, "Oops."  And then Diane Sawyer is flying back to New York [New York] after she's told the network she didn't get it and he and I talked, he said, "I'm not going to have anybody insult me in my own home, are you kidding me?"  Just, and he was, he was a good guy, he was a good guy.
Story_ID: 670696
Speaker 1: A campaign story is, we're on the campaign bus and--we're on the plane, and I'm on the airplane and I'm really upset, I mean just really, really upset, so he walks by me on--he being Walter Mondale--walks by me on the plane and says, "Man, what's wrong with you?"  I said, "Man, you know, it's my grandmother, she's in the hospital, she's really sick, they can't get a room for her, she's been in the emergency room all day long, they can't find a bed, they don't know if she's gonna make it, you know," I was just, "It's just really, you know?  Man, it's just, you know, it's just messed up."  He says, "Oh, okay, where is she?"  "Oh you know, she's in--," okay.  So we campaign stop, campaign stop, we were heading back to Washington, D.C., so he said, "Okay we're--we're not landing in--we're not landing in Washington, we're landing in Towson, Maryland, at the Towson airport." I said, "We're landing in Tow- why we landing in Towson?"  "Hey man we're landing in Towson, we're gonna drive to Washington, D.C." "Oh man, we got to drive to Washington, D.C. man?  We're not gonna get in bed 'til one o'clock in the morning and we're out at six tomorrow, man this is crazy."  So we land in Towson, we get on the buses, we drive in to Washington, D.C. [sic.], we come through Towson, we go down 94 [sic. Interstate 95], we cut across 94, we come down, we cut across Edmondson Avenue, we come down, and we're coming down Hilton Street.  So we're riding down Hilton Street, I'm like, "Damn, there's the hospital [Saint Agnes Hospital, Baltimore, Maryland] that my grandmother's in, damn!"  And just as we get to the hospital the motorcade pulls into the hospital, I'm like, "Why is the motorcade pulling in--?" Says, "This is not a press stop," and I look out the window and Mondale jumps out the car and runs into the hospital.  Like, what is going on?  He stays there about five or six minutes, comes back out the hospital, hops on the press bus and looks at me and says, "Everything's going to be okay now," gets back in--I'm like, "What?  Wha- what's going on?"  I still don't know what's--I get into Washington, D.C., I call home, talk to my mother [Theresa Allen Tutman], she says, "The strangest thing happened," she said, "we were sitting in the hospital and all of a sudden all of these people started taking care of mama, the doctor came in, they got her a room right away and they started working on her and things like that."  And what I found out later on is he walked in and said to the--, "Hey I came in to check on my friend Minnie [Tutman's maternal grandmother, Minnie Magee Allen], how is she doing?"  And that was enough, "I came in to check on my very good friend Minnie, how she doing?"  And boom, she get--lived another fifteen years.
Story_ID: 670697
Speaker 1: Yeah, go--go ahead, you were talking about (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I had the vice president call me on the phone one time, Walter Mondale, and I'm like, "Mr. Vice President?  You know, you call me on the telephone?"  He said, "Yeah," said, "Wow," he said, "You don't have to call me Mr. Vice--." I said, "Yes, I do."  I said, "Not only do I have to call you Mr. Vice President, I'm even standing up while I'm talking to you."  He said, "Why is that?"  I said, "'Cause I'm just overwhelmed at the fact that you would call me on the telephone."  He said, "Well you're a friend of mine, you know, I call my friends on the phone and stuff like that," and you know, he was--he--they were real people, they were real people, you know?  Jimmy Carter [President James Earl "Jimmy" Carter, Jr.], the night they got elected, Rosalynn Carter gets up and says, "I'm so happy to be with my old friend Joan Mondale [Joan Adams Mondale]," okay, so Joan Mondale, her turn on the mic, microphone, she gets up to the microphone and says, "Even though we have just met, I'm sure--," and I went, these are decent people because the political thing was, my old friend, the truth was, we just met, and because she told the truth, I just had the utmost respect and admiration for them the entire time that they were in the office, I mean just that little instant of just truth let you know that these were real decent, decent people.
Story_ID: 670698
Speaker 1: I know you, you ran for the presidency of the National Association of Black Journalists [NABJ]?
Speaker 2: Oh, several times.
Speaker 1: Okay, so, so when did you get involved in the association?
Speaker 2: I got involved in, when, when the National Association of Black Journalists formed, I was around, I was at network news and they got together to go to Atlanta, Georgia and one of the guys in the bureau who was a reporter at the time was on his way to Atlanta, Georgia to this meeting of black journalist from around the country.  I said, "Man where you going?"  "Oh man, we're going in a--we're gonna form this organization of black journalists and stuff like that, we're going to get together--." "Hey man can I go?  Hey, I'm coming too."  "No, you're just a cameraman and this is for the black intelligentsia."  I'm like, "Excuse me?"  Well, I won't tell you what I said 'cause we are on camera, I promised I wouldn't talk dirty today so, I'm like, "Fine, knock yourself out," so I paid my dues, never had anything to do with them but, "No problem."  So, the organization was around for a while and I got a letter from them and they were having a fundraiser at a club in Chicago [Illinois] called Faces and this was a club that did not allow blacks to come into the club, they would throw you out, couldn't join, couldn't get in, so I'm like, "Whoa, why are we having our fundraiser at a club that discriminates against black people?  We, you know, we can't do that."  So I was told at that time, "Just shut up and pay your dues and mind your business, you get to go, what's--," you know?  And, you know, I've got strong values and stuff that I believe in, strong sense of fair play and right or wrong, and nah, this ain't happening.  So, I was told if I didn't like it, do something about it, so I ran for president of Chicago Association of Black Journalists [National Association of Black Journalists Chicago Chapter] and I became president of the Chicago Association of Black Journalists so I could stop doing things like having our fundraiser in places that discriminated against us, I was just morally outraged at that.  I got involved with the national politics of the organization for some of the same reasons.  We would have conventions where--I remember one convention that I had a comment that I made that we gave out fifteen or sixteen thousand dollars in scholarships.  I said, "You know, I, I got a problem with this, we gave out fifteen thousand dollars in scholarships and because I didn't have anything to do yesterday, I sat in the lobby of the hotel and I watched 1,486 men rent tuxedoes at a hundred dollars a tuxedo."  I said, "You gave the white man over hundred thousand dollars in tuxedo rental and you give fifteen thousand dollars in scholarships?"  I said, "I've got a problem with that."  I said, "Company comes in and gives you seventy thousand dollars for lunch, why don't we buy our own lunch and take that seventy thousand dollars and give it out in scholarships?"  Earl Moses [sic. Charles Moses] who was president of ch- New York chapter [New York Association of Black Journalists] concurred with me because The New York Times gave seventy-five thousand dollars or seventy thousand dollars out for a luncheon and I said, "You know, you need to tell them to keep their money and instead of spending seventy-five thousand dollars on a luncheon, they need to hire two reporters and pay them thirty-five thousand dollars a year and give them a career, we don't need that type of thing."  We have a convention where three thousand members go to a convention and each member will spend two or three thousand dollars to come to the convention, so we've thrown 2 or $3 million into the pot and then you give out fifteen thousand dollars in scholarships--that's insanity.
Story_ID: 670699
Speaker 1: So I ran for president, one because I did not like the politics of the organization [National Association of Black Journalists] and I did not like the party mood of the organization and I did not like the fact that we were not really spokespeople for blacks with a medium or doing anything, 'cause a lot of people that were running the organization had made a lot of money had really good jobs, they made, you know, they're not going to rock the boat, in fact the last time I participated in anything with the organization, I was suing CBS on a discrimination suit [Tutman v. WBBM-TV, Inc./CBS, Inc.] and I was the chairman of--the convention chairman and the organization asked me to step down as being convention chairman because they didn't want to go against a big contributor, and I'm like, "Wait a minute, if they're wrong, they're wrong, it is not the fact that they gone donate some money."  And one of the members said, "Well, you know, we'll say anything for a party," and I just don't believe in that, I mean, I just--you know, I got involved with the Civil Rights Movement when Emmett Till got killed, I didn't know I was involved in the Civil Rights Movement, but I remember sitting there watching Superman ['Adventures of Superman'] and my grandfather came and turned the TV off in the middle of the show, "Whoa, what's going on?"  And he sat us all down and he gave us the copy of the Afro newspaper [Baltimore Afro-American; Afro-American Newspapers] and said, "Read this," and I read the paper and looked at the pictures and I was sick on the stomach, I couldn't eat anything soft for a couple months, it was just, it turned my stomach and my grandfather said, "You know where the guns are. If anyone ever comes to this home dressed up in white sheets dragging somebody out the house, open fire on them."  And so, I said to my mother [Theresa Allen Tutman], I said, "You know, we get in trouble if you shoot somebody," she said, "Hey I can get you out of jail, I can't get you out the grave," and my mind was set for that ever since and I still feel that way about it; I mean I'm just--you cannot burn a cross on my lawn and live, can't do it.
Story_ID: 670700
Speaker 1: Well I just have a note here that you grew up with [HistoryMaker] DeWayne Wickham?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Was he in, in the same neighborhood in Baltimore [Maryland]?
Speaker 2: DeWayne and I, we lived in the same project, followed similar career paths and if you want to talk about somebody about being a combat photographer, talk to DeWayne about that, he was a--I mean you--now he is the consummate combat photographer because that's what he did when he was in the service, he was combat photographer for the U.S. Army; he is probably, he probably knows more about the Vietnam War than anybody else you could ever talk to.
Story_ID: 670701
Speaker 1: Do you continue to be a part of NABJ [National Association of Black Journalists]?
Speaker 2: No, not since they turned their back on me.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: You know, when you have trouble and the organization that you have a part of deserts you and abandons you, you can't connect with them financially anymore and support them.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: All of things that they claim that they did they did not do.  I was at CBS and a manager [Robert Vasilopulos] threatened to kill me and called me a nigger.  And when I fought against it, he claimed he was only joking and I am sure that just during this interview you can tell that that's not the kind of personality that I have, I don't play about stuff like that.  And so, I said, "You know, y'all can do what you want but it wasn't a joke, he, that's just not what happened."  So the company treated it as a joke and I went all the way up to the supreme court with it, it took me five years, spent all my money, went through the court with it and at the end of the process, I was talking to my old lady about it, and I said, "Sweetheart, you know, I never, I never asked you when I sued CBS and when I fought them and when I went through this how you felt about it.  I know it's kind of late to ask you," she said, "Well, if you hadn't have fought them, I'd have left you."  I said, "Excuse me?"  She [sic.] said, "Why is that?"  She said, "'Cause you wouldn't have been the man I thought you were." I said, "Oh, so why didn't you say something?"  She said, "'Cause you were fighting them, so you were already fighting them so I didn't have to say anything." I'm like, "Oh okay."  So, you just, you have to stand up for what you believe in or it's just, it don't work, at least in my mind.
Story_ID: 670702
Speaker 1: I had this question earlier, and I, I was trying to think, like, when you are--when there's a big event, big press conference or event getting ready to happen, where do you like to position yourself (unclear) crew (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right in the front--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --right in the middle.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I want re- I'm right in it.  I'm always right in the front, I've always got to be first, always got to get the best picture, I can't--I'm not--I got to win, I'm number one, I'm the best newsreel photographer in the world and if I'm not the best, I'm in the top ten and since the other nine ain't in the room, I'm still the best one you've got.
Speaker 1: So, so how do you make sure, 'cause the other people are competing for those spots (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I'll fight.  I'll knock you on your ass (laughter).  I can fight, I mean really, I, I mean I don't have a problem where I'll push you out the way, I'll knock you down, I'll punch you in your jaw, I will beat your ass over a shot and stuff.  And even at my age--I, I was on assignment one day and a sniper was in the neighborhood, we were somewhere in Ohio or something, and I'm out on a ledge and this policeman, young cop comes up and says, "Hey, you can't be over there."  I said, "Man what are you talking about?  I, I've got to take a picture man I, I need to take a picture."  He said, "Oh nope, nope, you can't be there."  I said, "Look man, I don't mind," he said, "Look you could get shot," I said, "Hey that's what I get paid for, I don't mind."  He said, "Let me tell you something, I get paid $37,500 a year to not have you stand there."  I said, "Let me explain something to you man, I made $175,000 last year, I will beat your ass three times to get this picture," he said, "You made how much money?"  I said, "I made $175,000 last year just to get this shot."  He said, "Okay, tell you what, why don't I stand behind you and you take the picture."  So, the guy is shooting and I'm standing here and the cop's standing behind me, so the sergeant walks up and says, "Whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, this is supposed to be the other way around, you're supposed to be getting--keeping him from getting shot, he's not supposed to keep you from getting shot," the cop says, "We got it worked out, don't worry," don't care, that's what you get paid to do.
Story_ID: 670703
Speaker 1: I already asked you if you had a favorite shot but, when you look back over your career, I mean what's your relationship been like with--has it depended on the management that was present at CBS at the time that (simultaneous)--?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, CBS had, when Bill Paley [William S. Paley] ran CBS it was a true Tiffany Network, it was really great.  When Laurence Tisch took over the network went to hell, Tisch was just a businessman that did everything to destroy the network and take the money out of it, and Paley was in love with his TV station.  And so, under Paley, you had managers that were newsmen, you had people that were newsmen and that mattered and it made a difference. Under Tisch, he brought businessmen in and they came in and destroyed the network.  Under Paley you had nineteen of the top twenty shows on TV were CBS shows, under Tisch, they went to the bottom, they lost everything.  Tisch came in, stopped spending money and said, "We can make a billion dollars a year on momentum, so we'll do that," and they said, well what--you know, that's a thing that stops at some point, so what happens when it stops?  So, we went that way and I'll give you a for instance about people that ran the network.  Rapid City, South Dakota had a flood and the flood wiped out the town and the town was closed off for the rest of the world and we were in Rapid City when it happened and I'd been in Rapid City and I went to get some water, and I went up to a water truck and they wouldn't give me any water.  I'm like, "Man I'm thirsty, I want some water." He said, "You don't live here." I said, "What do you mean, you don't live here?"  He said, "You don't live here, you chose to be here and you can choose to leave. This water is for the people that are stuck here and live here, so if you want to get some water, you go wherever you came from and get some water."  Now I don't know if it's a black, white thing or not, but I just know that this is the reason that I was given, not to get the water.  So, I--we got in touch with the office and I said, "Man, we got to get some water in here man, we haven't had any water in three or four days man."  Say, "What do you mean you haven't had any water in three, four days man?"  "We been drinking soda pop, but that gets old, you know, but we haven't had a drink of water in three or four days."  He said, "Go to the airport in two hours."  You go to the airport, two hours later a Learjet lands at the airport, pilot jumps off with four one gallon bottles of water and said, "This is all we could find, we'll be back in an hour with some more, will this hold you?"  Plane takes off.  Can't leave but they'll send you four gallons of water on a ten thousand dollar airplane.
Speaker 1: (Pause) That's quite a story, I (laughter) (unclear) anything like that.
Story_ID: 670704
Speaker 1: They do it, they did--we had a guy get captured overseas in Iraq, Iran, somewhere, I don't know where it was, might have been in South America, I just forgot where it was and they were being held prisoner and CBS network television hired a team of mercenaries to go in and get this guy out and they went in shooting and got this guy out who was a reporter that was being held prisoner.  And when I heard about it, I had just come on board with the company and I got indignant, "How dare you go into a foreign country and, and (unclear) you shouldn't do any, that you don't have any right to do any--wha- what?  Are you people--who do you think?"  And a guy turns to me, "Hey, if you got captured, we'd come and get your black ass too, so what do you have to say about that?"  "Hey man thanks, appreciate it."  So, we never had any fear of getting in trouble, we never had any fear of anything happening because we knew that the company would bail us out.
Speaker 2: Now did, did you cover a story at any time, you know, whether it be in the Middle East or Asia, or Central or South--South America, or Africa where you thought you were going to get kidnapped?
Speaker 1: Oh got kidnapped, got captured.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Yeah, oh sure, that's happened before.  I got captured in Cairo [Egypt] when Ansar--Anwar Sadat got killed and when Anwar Sadat got killed he--we went to cover his funeral, so I'm out, I'm taking pictures and I walk out and I'm taking pictures and this guy said, "We told you not to take--." They grabbed us, took the camera, took all our gear, they're holding us--man, I'm like, (makes sound), and now, you know, now they holding us, shit, nobody knows where we are, we don't have any credentials, we don't have any passports, they're holding us, like, shit.  So, guy comes in, "Okay, I told you not to take pictures so you're going to be here."  "Wait a minute, you didn't tell me anything."  "Yes, I did."  I said, "Have you ever met a black American before?"  He's like, "Well no."  I said, "Then if you've never met a black American before, I'm a black American, how could you have told me anything?"  The guy was like, "Where are you from?"  I'm like, "I'm from Chicago [Illinois]." "Chicago?"  He said, "This is--Al Capone," he says, "Al Capone is a friend of mine."  I said, "Well he's a friend of mine too."  He said, "Man this is friends here, my friend here," and all of a sudden, he and I and Al Capone became friends and he let us go.  I said, "Well can I get my camera?"  "Yeah, take your camera man that's, we're friends," so because we fr- all friends with Al Capone, I got to go.  Now I'm in Nicaragua and we get captured in Nicaragua, so we get captured in Nicaragua, they're holding us and then they're getting ready to let us go, right?
Speaker 2: Now you're being held by the Contras or the Sandinistas [Sandinista National Liberation Front] (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Sandinista got us.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: So the Sandis got us and now they going to let us go, they ain't keep us but for two, three days that's all, not a long time.  So the guy says, "Okay, strip, take your clothes off."  I said, "Take your clothes off?  Man, I'm not taking my clothes off."  Said, "You got, man it's like--we need everything, we need shoes, we need clothes, we need socks, we need everything you've got and you're going back to your hotel but we gotta have your--." It's about eight of us they had, and, "Strip naked and get outta here."  I'm like, "Man, you cannot, you cannot take my clothes, now what--," I said, "let me explain something to you man, six white guys, black guy, if we walk out the jungle naked, the only person's picture that's going to be on the front of Newsweek magazine is me, they're not going to put the naked white guys, they going to put the naked black guy with the camera."  The guy looked at me, he looked at them, and he looked at me and we come walking out the jungle, I got all my shit, and walking with six naked white boys (laughter).
Speaker 2: What a story, that's--so now, wa- those the only two times that you got--?
Speaker 1: Those are the only two times that I got captured by people that I didn't think were going to let me go.
Speaker 2: Okay, okay but it's, it's, it's then it's a usual thing to be detained or, or (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Oh man, you get detained--I've been detained by all the ti- I was in Wounded Knee [South Dakota] when they took over the post office at Wounded Knee, the FBI [Federal Bureau of Investigation] grabs us sneaking out and they hold us and questioning you and stuff, "Man go away," you know, "free press," you know, they keep you for two hours, cops will hold you, happens all the time, you don't ev- you know, like they're gonna let you go, I mean like, you're not doing anything, you're not trying to hurt anybody, you know, free speech means a lot to members of the press sometimes.  Well used to twenty years ago, I don't know what it's doing now.
Story_ID: 670705
Speaker 1: Did you cover the Attica riot?
Speaker 2: I missed Attica by one day.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Now Herb--Bert Miles [HistoryMaker Bertrand Miles], the guy I told you about covered Attica, and when we talked about it, after it was over with, he said, "Yeah man, we were standing outside the wall and when they--before they gassed the guys in the prison [Attica Correctional Facility, Attica, New York], they came down and gassed the members of the press."  The helicopter came in gassed the members of the press, lifted back up and then gassed the yard, so, they gassed the press first.  I always carried a gas mask, I always carried four gas masks with me.  One for the cameraman, sound man, electrician and one for the reporter and during all of the Vietnam War, all the Days of Rage, all the demonstrations, everything going into Miami [Florida], we always--before you pick the camera up, the first thing you did was put your gas mask on because you knew--you'd strap it on your hip, you knew you were getting gassed that day, you knew you were going to get gassed that day.
Speaker 1: Yeah, well it was this summer, with all the upheaval in Ferguson, Missouri, with the tear gas being thrown at demonstrators, so the members of the press know to have a mask (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) The smart ones do, the older ones do, you know--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --I would never go anywhere without a gas mask, no.  Gas masks right now sell for about--good ones sell for about seven hundred dollars.
Speaker 1: Yeah, y- you ever been injured in one of these demonstrations (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh yeah, broken bones, broke my foot, I--broke my foot, a couple ribs, chemicals in the eye, broke my wrist, broke my finger a couple times, been in a bunch of fights, won all of them, you know, won one, one time I got in a fight with a guy, went to the doctor he said, "Who won?"  He said, "Somebody put a lick on you?  And you won?  You need to tell him come see me."  And, yeah, but, you know, people are mean, I mean there's stuff--you're out in the street, some people want you there, some people don't want you there, some people think you're the enemy, some people like you, you know.  I was at a demonstration one time that Rap Brown [H. Rap Brown; Jamil Abdullah Al-Amin] was speaking and I wanted to see what he was talking about so I put the camera down and I go in, it was at Morgan State University [Baltimore, Maryland], and went in to listen to the speech.  I--I'm just listening to the, I just want to know what they're talking about.  So, we--I come back out and a guy say, "Man that guy's with the press," so then this whole crowd of black, "Man you sold out, brother what you selling out to the man?"  I said, "Man, I'm not telling them I'm just--I just wanted--." "You stay outta here, we know you done sold out."  "Man I didn't--I just want to--," so, you, you're caught between a rock and a hard place, you either sold out to the man, or you working for the man or you just, you know, it's, it was a--it's a balancing act that you had to play, it was, you know it was rough.
Story_ID: 670706
Speaker 1: Now that was a common accusation in those days too though (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Always.
Speaker 1: --for members of the black press?
Speaker 2: Always, that you sold out.  Some of them had, some of them didn't, I always tried to keep my values straight and tried to keep my mind--I would not make black people look stupid.  I remember the first time I got into trouble at CBS, I was sent to cover a welfare office and, "We need some shots of welfare mothers."  Okay, so I was not into politics, I was into mischief, so I said, "I know what I'm gonna do, I'm going up to Uptown [Chicago, Illinois] and I'm gonna do Appalachian welfare mothers and--," 'cause that's mischief, it's just mischief, having fun, you know, what I mean?  So, I go up to the welfare office up in Uptown and get all these quote, unquote (gesture) hillbilly mothers, and they, you know, it's summertime and so from my mind, all these dirty babies, 'cause the dirt shows up really good on white skin in the summertime.  And I'm just, you know, women walking around barefooted, well because this is what people from Appalachia were doing, they walk around barefoot in the summertime, so I got me a lot of great pictures of people walking around barefoot and stuff like that, and I'm just (makes sound).  I get back to the editing room and I'm (laughter), "Wait 'til they see this," you know?  Not because of politics, mischief.  They look at this stuff man, "What is this?"  I'm like, "Well it's the welfare office, you know, department of children and family service [Illinois Department of Children and Family Services]."  "This is not what we wanted."  "Well, yes, it is, you told me to go get some pictures of welfare mothers, these are welfare mothers."  "Well, these are not what we're--." "Wait a minute, maybe you better tell me what you want."  "We want you to go down in the ghetto and get some pic- ." "Well I'm not going to do that."  "What do you mean you're not going?"  "I'm not going to do that."  "Well if you're not going to do that, you need to go home."  "Oh, okay," so I went out to the airport, got on a plane, flew back to Baltimore [Maryland].  So, about two, three days later, phone rings and my mother [Theresa Allen Tutman] says, "He's not here," click, phone rings again, next day, "He's not here," phone rings again, "I told you he's not here and I don't know when he'll be here."  So, fourth day a courier from CBS comes and knocks on the door, said, "Tutman you need to call the office."  So I call the office, they say, "Well where have you been?"  I said, "I'm at my mother's house," said, "What are you doing at your mother's house?"  I said, "You told me to go home, so I went home."  "We didn't mean for you to go to Baltimore."  I said, "Well that's home, I just have an apartment in Chicago [Illinois]."  They said, "Well we've been calling you there for three days and your mother said you weren't there."  I said, "Who did you ask to speak to?"  Said, "We asked to speak to Robert Tutman." I said, "That's my father [Robert Tutman III], and when my mother answered the telephone, you asked to speak to Robert, she told she [sic.] wasn't home," said, "Well what do they call you?"  I said, "I'm not going to tell you that, 'cause you're never gonna find out what my mother calls me, but you asked for the wrong person when you call here."  And--'cause my mother calls me Dessherman from my middle name because Robert is my father, if my mother had called me Robert I'd thought I'd lost my mind, I can't imagine.  Only time my mother ever called me Robert in my life, was--I was in the second grade, coming home from school [P.S. 111, Frances Ellen Harper School, Baltimore, Maryland], walking in a puddle of water with my new shoes on because I wanted to see how cool my new shoes were in water and she came to school to pick me up and I heard her say, "[HistoryMaker] Robert Tutman, have you lost your mind?"  And I looked up, and it was like, "Oh, I'm in trouble now."
Story_ID: 670707
Speaker 1: I asked you what your favorite was, but what was the toughest thing you had to cover--the thing that (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) What do you mean toughest?
Speaker 1: I guess the, the assignment that really tried you physically and mentally, emotionally the most?
Speaker 2: (Pause) Tough, I don't think anything was tough, I'm how--because I'm tough, so I didn't have any tough assignments.  I mean, I'm strong, fast, play football, wrestled, ran track, did all that, so, you know, and if you're strong, and aggressive and have that type A personally, I didn't find any of it tough, you know?  I was always on an adventure doing what I loved doing so it was not tough for me, I mean I was raring to go man, it's like, you know, as we used to--you know, it's like being in a horse race and the bell rings and you're off and gone and--so none of it was tough because it was always exciting.  I mean, you know, phone ring, "Where are we going?"  Air- catch--your flight's leaving at ten o'clock and you run out to the airport and your adrenaline is pumping man, because you're off on a network news story and it's an adventure, I mean it was always an adventure, I mean it was nothing--you know, I didn't cover anything dull, I mean wars, the world blowing up, stuff going on, I mean, it just, my phone did not ring for dull, it just (laughter), no, did not.
Story_ID: 670708
Speaker 1: --Tell us about this, your travel schedule.  You talk about the excitement of it but--you're, you're away quite, quite a bit, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah I, I would be on the road sometimes three hundred days a year, I mean that's, that's days away from home and catch six, seven hundred airplanes a year and that means a flight out, a flight in, sometimes two or three flights a day, campaign years were even more than that.  I can remember during a campaign year, you leave home in January and you get back in November and not set foot back in Chicago [Illinois], it--just, you know, I used to count interviews and I stopped counting interviews when we got over ten thousand.  And different hotels you stay at, you stayed at a different hotel every day, you rent cars and it's just a different airplane, a different airport, a different city, a different thing.  A lot of times, I can remember that you'd call the operator up and say, "Miss I'm not, I'm not making fun, I'm not trying to start any trouble, where am I calling you from?  What day is today?"  You know, "What's going on?"  And they'd tell you, "Well this is this city or where you are and--," just that's just a lot of travel a lot of interviews, a lot of, a lot of on the road, it was basically on the road.
Story_ID: 670709
Speaker 1: How do you maintain a relationship, you know?
Speaker 2: All of the women that I've had in my life, I met them when I was doing this and they knew what I was doing, when I was doing it and I've been with the same woman for the last thirty-five years so she understood and so that's a good thing, you know, and she's crazy about me and I'm crazy about her so that just works.
Speaker 1: Is there ever a time when--now this is your wife isn't?
Speaker 2: No, I've never been married but I've been with the same woman (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay.  Well is it--every time when you, you could fly her in to meet you somewhere?
Speaker 2: Oh, we used to, I used to work and take a month off and we'd be together and sometimes I've had her on news stories with me but, she didn't like it.  And the reason she didn't like it was because when I--we first met, "You never talk about your work, you never tell me about what you do," I'm like, "Baby I don't want to fill your head up with this shit, I really don't."  "Well I want to be a part of your life and I want--." "No you don't.  You do not want me to talk to you about what I do."  "Well yes, I do."  So, I started talking about what I want to do and then the next conversation, "Why did you tell me this stuff, I don't want to know about this, I don't want to--how do you deal with this stuff?"  So I don't have to tell her about this stuff because she don't want to know about it.  Because part of what I do is not normal and when I say it is not normal, it is--normal people, normal people, when you see tragedy and death and things like that, the normal response that human beings has is to look away, turn your head.  My job is to get in closer for a tight shot and focus and not blink and not turn away.  Somebody jumps off a building, people go like (gesture), I have to go all the way down and zoom in for a tight shot.  And not shake my hands and not blink and not turn away and that weighs on you after a time.  I mean it's insanity to have to do this stuff and you go to a fire where six or seven hundred people have died, and they lay the bodies out and you see them laying the bodies out, and you're in there as they bring all the bodies out from start to finish and everyone there, the firemen, the rescue people, the first responders, the family--they all get help, they all get intervention, they all get counseling; I get another assignment to go to another disaster.
Story_ID: 670710
Speaker 1: Now this is true.  This is important because, you're right, I've never heard of any counseling or anyone who's thought about what a reporter or, or a photographer (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Unh-uh.  I get another assignment.  I go to another disaster, you know?  You go to airplane crash, you go to an airplane crash and you see an airliner on the ground splattered and stuff and you get finished this and they say, "Well we want you to fly somewhere."  "Man would you mind if I drive?  I'd just like, if I don't have to fly for the next couple of days would that be okay with you?"  "Well okay, yeah, we underst- ." Sometimes they understand, sometimes they don't understand.  And then you have to pick and choose your flights, you have to decide on how you're going to fly.  A for instance is, I'm up in Minnesota and there's a storm, I mean it's just, I mean it's blowing, the wind's blowing and it's just carrying on.  So we jump on a helicopter, we fly in because we gotta get something, we get where we're going, we get out, we rent the cars, we film, we do what we had--and now it's time to go back and it's still storming, I'm like, "I ain't flying back."  "Why not?"  "There's no need to."  "What do you mean, there's no need to?"  "There's no need to fly back."  "Why not?"  "The story's not running until tomorrow, story's not running until tomorrow, story's not running until tomorrow, there's no need to fly back."  "Well you flew in."  "That's because we had to, we don't need to fly back."  "You're just trying to make some extra overtime."  "No, that's not the reason, the reason means it's dangerous."  "Well you didn't have a problem with flying in."  "Yes, I did, but that's--there's a difference."  So we decided to drive and everybody that flew back got killed, helicopter crashed, wiped out the crew.  And they called up, "Hey man the helicopter went down."  "Tough."  "What do you mean?"  "Hey, told them not to do it."   And you don't have sympathy for people that do stuff that's stupid, you really don't.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well, now you've covered a lot of natural disasters I--yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.  Hurricanes, floods, fires, explosions, all kinds of stuff, just--murders, just, you pick them, I've been there.
Story_ID: 670711
Speaker 1: Did you cover any of 9/11 [September 11, 2001]?
Speaker 2: No.  I'm sorry, you picked the one that I didn't go to, right.  And I knew better than to go to that, I knew to stay away.
Speaker 1: We- well explain.
Speaker 2: When you see a disaster like that that has never been happened before, and they don't know how to cover it, you know that there are a lot of health risks and you know that things are going to happen.  I talked to Harold Dow who covered that--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --and Harold told me, he says, "Tutman [HistoryMaker Robert Tutman] I--they got me."  I said, "What happened?"  He said, "Man, I breathed that dust in and it's killing me man," he says, "I was at that thing and I've got a late stage asthma and I think it's killing me man."  And he went to that thing, he breathed the dust in and it killed him.
Speaker 1: I didn't realize that.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Harold Dow, black reporter?
Speaker 2: Black reporter, CBS, goes in, first responder, covering it, breathed the dust in and stuff, they don't know what these things are and it killed him.  And I was in Chicago [Illinois] when it happened, and I was no longer working at CBS News so there was no reason for me to go to it.
Story_ID: 670712
Speaker 1: Did you--well Katrina [Hurricane Katrina] was some years--so, so you retired when?  In--?
Speaker 2: I never retired, I just--
Speaker 1: Okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) stopped working at CBS News.  I kept--
Speaker 1: Oh, okay.
Speaker 2: --I kept--I taught school, I worked for the Chicago Public Schools--
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: --I worked for the city colleges [City Colleges of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois], I've taught journalism, I've helped people--I've done documentaries, I did a feature film after I finished, I won six film festivals for the feature film I did.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you, you worked for CBS News--
Speaker 2: Until 1995.
Speaker 1: --ninety-five [1995], right.
Speaker 2: Right.  And I came out--
Speaker 1: So-- --I worked for the Chicago Public Schools for a couple of years, I worked for the city colleges for a couple of years, always in different--I worked as a producer for the city colleges, I worked for as a producer for the public schools and I did a program called 'Children First' [ph.] and it was documentaries on children in the public school system and they were having problems with the documentary and I went in and fixed it.  And the way I fixed it is, he had a documentary on children, named 'Children First,' and they never interviewed any children.  And I thought that was kind of stupid, I thought that the first thing we needed to see was children talking about what school did for them instead of teachers talking about what they do for children.
Speaker 2: These were the documentaries that appeared on public television, right?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: WTTW [WTTW-TV, Chicago, Illinois], that's--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah, my daughter was in one actually.
Speaker 1: What?  'Children First'?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I probably did your daughter, right (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah.  It was at Dixon school, I think it was.
Speaker 1: Probably.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: I wouldn't be surpri- about ten years ago or something?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: It probably was me that did it (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Or longer than that, Arthur P. Dixon [Arthur Dixon Elementary School, Chicago, Illinois].
Story_ID: 670713
Speaker 1: Well tell me about your film now.  You, you had a film that won a award (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I worked for, I did a documentary on Providence Saint Mel [Providence St. Mel School], which is a school here in Chicago [Illinois], called 'The Providence Effect.'  And we entered it in--I was the director of photography and I worked on this documentary and it got theatrical release and they entered it into different film festivals and it took first place in six film festivals.  I thought by winning six film festivals it would translate into more work but it didn't.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now we didn't mention another one called 'Common Enemy.'
Speaker 2: 'Common Enemy,' was a feature film trailer that we did to make a movie called, 'Common Enemy,' and the common enemy was ignorance, is what the common enemy was.  And this was supposed to be a movie about ignorance, it was based on something that really happened in Chicago.  Back in the early 1970s, there was a man by the name of W. Clement Stone, who owned an insurance company [Combined Insurance Company of America] and W. Clement Stone financed the Blackstone Rangers, he gave them a million dollars and the Blackstone Rangers took the money from W. Clement Stone and started an organization called Black Power Starting Now, the same initials are Black P. Stone Rangers, or Black P. Stone Nation.  And they took the money and used it to buy guns and weapons and drugs and types of things and they gentrified neighborhoods in Chicago, they were destroying the neighborhoods, killing people in the neighborhoods and the reporter that I mentioned, [HistoryMaker] Harry Porterfield, we did a news story on the fact that these businessmen were financing the street gangs to get people to move out the South Side of Chicago.  And after we did this news story called, 'The Gang in the Ghetto' [ph.], they broke up the street gang, they broke this businessmen up financing the gangs and they stopped--people stopped moving off the South Side, this stuff broke out and we talked about it and common enemy was the ignorance that people had of that.  So this movie that we were going to get together and do was called 'Common Enemy' about that, we never finished the project and it only got to the part of doing the trailer.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: The trailer won first place at the Chicago International Industrial Film Festival [sic.], but we didn't get any further than that with it.
Speaker 1: Is it--do, do you think you'll ever finish it?
Speaker 2: If I got the money I'd finish it.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, it's a great script, good people.  The guy that wrote the script wrote the movie 'Takers' and they made $250 million so, we got a good writer, so, I don't see why we--but, you know, if we had the money we'd finish but--
Speaker 1: But it's stalled right now?
Speaker 2: We don't have any money.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  Yeah, so you were a producer also for Monument City Films in Baltimore [Maryland], right?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And, a film that came out of that was a movie called, 'Party Boys' [ph.]?
Speaker 2: 'Party Boys,' was a movie about--I don't know what happened with it.  It was a movie about two or three college guys that were throwing these weekend parties to raise money to go to college and they were the party boys.  And what happened with these guys that were throwing these parties was, every venue that they rented to throw a party, when the owners of the building found out what kind of money they were making, they wanted a cut of it and these guys didn't want to give them a cut because they needed the money to go to college; it was a true story.  The party boys were real boys that were throwing these parties, now they call them raves and things like this, you know, one building they rented, they made about twenty thousand dollars in one weekend, the guy set the building on fire so they couldn't have it, another party.  Another place they rented, the city moved in and said that they closed them down because they were selling ice cream and ice cream is a food product and they can't sell food without a food license.  So every trick that they could use to shut the party boys down, they shut them down.
Story_ID: 670714
Speaker 1: Now you were a pr- producer at, at City Colleges of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois], right (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes.
Speaker 1: And, you received a Emmy [Emmy Award] nomination--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --for, a show called 'Bill Cosby on Parenting,' right?
Speaker 2: Yes.  I think we should have won, it was the best program that it had, and ever since then I've just been beside myself with--you had a film documentary ['It Takes More Than a Village'] that [HistoryMaker] Harry Porterfield had done on crime or something in the city.  I did mine, it was nominated with Bill Cosby and Jesse Jackson [HistoryMaker Reverend Jesse L. Jackson] on parenting which was, I thought, really good and they gave the Emmy to 'Check, Please,' which should not have been even in the category.  So here you have a show on food, where people are sitting around talking about what they like to eat, and you have two black documentaries about saving lives of children in the City of Chicago [Illinois], and they give it to 'Check, Please' and I'm sitting there going, you have got to be kidding me.
Speaker 1: It's that--that's baffling.
Speaker 2: I've shot films over the years on different reporters where they've taken those films and won over thirty Emmys with stuff that I've worked that they wind up getting the Emmy.  When they win an Emmy, they get the Emmy, if you're the producer you get the Emmy, if you enter it and the cameraman never hears about it and stuff like that.  So, being the producer on the program, I got nominated for the Emmy--not the crew that worked, not all the other people who worked, just the person's name that's on the top.  So you can, you can do shows that win Emmys but you never get recognized for it.
Story_ID: 670715
Speaker 1: Tell us about your involvement with The Africa Channel (unclear)?
Speaker 2: The Africa Channel, I--a guy by the name of Bob Reid who worked at NBC, who I worked with, I met him at a black journalist [National Association of Black Journalists] convention and Reid told me that he would--he had a program he was working on and doing something with The Africa Channel.  And I got a call from the owner of The Africa Channel, a gentleman by the name of Elrick Williams, who owns The Africa Channel and he told me that he wanted to do a show, he wanted to do a music program called, 'Soundtracks at Red Kiva,' it was a nightclub [Red Kiva, Chicago, Illinois] that he owned and he wanted to do a program on African jazz and African music.  And he wanted to know if I could put it together for him, and I'm like, "Yeah, I can do that for you, sure, you know, I can get my crew together and we could put this show on," and, he said, "Well, you know, if you do this, you know, I'll pay you for it," and I'm like, "Well yeah, okay so, yeah, I'll do the show for you."  So, he told me what he was doing the show for in California and I said, "I can do the show in Chicago [Illinois]," so I show up to do the show and I show up with five guys and he's like, "You--how you going to do this with five guys?"  He said, "You know I, I do this out in California, we use twenty people." I'm like, "Yeah but, these are my five guys and my five guys are all professionals."  And so, we come in and my five guys, we set up the lights, we set up the cameras, we shoot it and we do the sound and we tear it down so, on a normal production when the electricians are setting up the lights the cameramen are sitting around waiting and when the cameramen are shooting, other people are waiting.  When I work with my crew everyone works and we save you money and we get the budget done under time and the reason that I do it that way is the unions have never been kind to blacks anyway so I don't think I have to work under their rules and their guidelines and do things their way because they don't hire us when we--for working.  The only time they want us to participate is when we got a job and then they can get some money for us, when they got a job they don't hire us so I don't play by their rules, I do things the right way.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I mean, you have a man here, one man band doing this interview, on a regular shoot, there'd be eight people here.  So you got a guy doing the job of eight people, but you're only paying him one person, but that's the way it's done.
Speaker 1: I hear you, I hear you.
Story_ID: 670716
Speaker 1: So you continue to--now, now you're a producer at Chicago Film Works [Chicago, Illinois] too, right (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And, and well what is Chicago Film Works?
Speaker 2: Chicago Film Works is--I had a studio in Chicago [Illinois] on Hubbard Street and a still photographer had a studio on the third floor and I had a film studio on the fifth floor and one day this guy knocks on my door and he says, "You got a better kitchen than I have, can I use your kitchen to do a shoot?"  So I let him use my kitchen and he cleaned up my place when he left cleaner than I had it and, you know, decent guy, we became friends over the years and when he got out film--when he got out of shooting stills, he opened up a film studio and an advertising agent and they brought me on board as a technical consultant because I knew film and they didn't.  So I've stayed on board with them over the years to produce things for them and they have very good, good agency, I mean they do really great work.  I mean really, really good work.  And it's just a pleasure to work with people that like you and you want to be around, they turn out a quality product and it's just, just nice to be around.
Story_ID: 670717
Speaker 1: We talked about, you know, you starting off with the Brownie Hawkeye, but we haven't talked much, much about the equipment or, or technical aspects of this since.  What do you think about the transition from film to digital and do you have favorite piece of equipment that you work with?
Speaker 2: Favorite piece--my folks--anything that I work with, the lighter the better and, you know, I've had cameras weigh fifty, sixty, seventy-five pounds and I've also had people tell me that, "You know, cameras, you know, we--we've got dollies and we got cranes for that."  And I said, "You know, you might have a dolly and a crane but I'm always the chump that's got to pick the camera up and put it on the dolly and the crane so I just want it lighter."  And technology has advanced so much that you can get camera weigh under a pound that is as good as a camera that you paid seventy-five, eighty thousand dollars for it ten, fifteen years ago.  The first video tape camera that CBS made as a small micro cam, I demonstrated it in New York [New York] in 1972 and they paid a half a million dollars for that camera and it weighed seven pounds and I had it and I'm like, "Wow."  I didn't see the future of video tape at the time because I wasn't, you know, that's just not where my mind was, I was into shooting film and I didn't think that, "Wow, this is the future."  But, you know, half a million dollars for a camera?  You know, and then the first video tape camera that went into production, that was seventy-five thousand dollars, you know, then it went down to fifty-five thousand dollars.  I can go to Best Buy [Best Buy Co., Inc.] right now and I can buy a camera for six hundred dollars that is as good, if not better than the cameras we were using five, six, seven, eight, nine, ten years ago.  I went to get--I have a tape recorder at home that I save as a souvenir, it's a VHS [video home system] machine that I spent six thousand dollars for, and I went to get it fixed and the guy told me, he said, "Look, just to evaluate it, it's $195, just, just to evaluate it, it's $195," he said, "The repairs on this are going to be about 450 after we take it apart."  He said, "But, you can go right over there to Best Buy, you can get a quad core Dolby stereo VHS machine with a remote control for $79.95."  I'm like, "Man you got to be kidding me?"  He said, "Trust me, you can, you can buy a better machine." He says, "This is a dual head machine, you can get a machine with four heads for ninety bucks [dollars]," and I'm like, "Well I'm not going to throw it in the trash, but I'm going to keep it to remind me of what these things used to cost."  The first, the first plasma flat screen TVs?  Seventy thousand dollars. If I'd have purchased one of those, I'd still be paying for it (laughter).
Story_ID: 670718
Speaker 1: You're fine with digital photography and (simultaneous)--?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No.  I, I have a black and white darkroom in my house--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --that I use still.  I mix chemicals and I print pictures, I make pinhole cameras, I take pictures with pinhole cameras, I go out, I shoot stills, I develop my own film.  If I had to pick up a camera, the first camera I'd pick up would be a film camera.  I got--maybe I have a hundred rolls of film in the freezer right now that I'm squirreled away, that I'm precious--that I'm saving, you know?
Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite camera?
Speaker 2: Anyone I've got in my hand, it doesn't matter.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you're not (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It's not the camera, it's the cameraman.
Speaker 1: Okay, you're not partial to Nikon or--
Speaker 2: Nah.
Speaker 1: --or Hasselblad, or--
Speaker 2: Doesn't matter.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I think the tricks, names, dog and pony show--I'd like to have a Hasselblad, I'd like to have a seventy thousand dollar still camera with lenses.  You know, I don't believe that it makes a difference.  You can get a 4K [4K resolution] camera and that's four thousand lines to the inch. The human eye can't resolve much past fifteen hundred lines to the inch.  So, what's the point?  You know, you get a stereo microphone, you get a stereo headset, you get digital sound, and you put it on and you listen to it and you can hear things that the tape recorder can't record because the tape recorder doesn't reach that frequency.  And you can take cameras and you can put them up on charts and you can put them up on scopes and you can see electronically, "Aw, look at this, and look at that," but then you put them on the screen (background noise), it's the exact same thing so, you know, wha- what are we talking about?
Speaker 1: I, I hear you.
Story_ID: 670719
Speaker 1: (Background noise) What are your future plans?
Speaker 2: Try to stay alive and live to 125, stay healthy, still standing, still eating solid food.  I mean, my future plans are to stay healthy, as healthy as I can, spend as much time with my family as I can, and to, if some adventure comes by or somebody wants me to do a documentary or take pictures or do something like that, I'd like to do it.  But, you know, what I concentrate on is health, eating right, doing things like that, I mean, you know, it's--I had a debate about what to wear today, you know, what do you wear for an interview that somebody might see fifty years in the future, you know?  Do I, do I dress comfortably for three hours?  Do I put a suit on?  Or do I, you know--who do you want to interview?  Do you want to interview a cameraman?  You want to interview a politician, you know, who, who are you talking to today?  I could be, you know--what do you want to talk about?  You want to talk about the government and politics and how crazy Ronald Reagan [President Ronald Wilson Reagan] was?  I give lectures at Loyola [Loyola University Chicago, Chicago, Illinois] on the Reagan years, to journalism classes, and we talk about what Reagan was, that's a whole different subject and stuff like that.  But, if you want to talk cameras and news for three hours, we can talk about that too.  So, I probably could give you three minutes on any subject that you talk about just because I've covered it.  And so, I know I can give you three correct minutes on maybe any subject from gold mining to deep sea diving, you know, to chicken raising, to how to, you know dig a well, it just doesn't matter because it's only repeating information that people have told me about what goes on.
Story_ID: 670720
Speaker 1: Now, when you look back over the years, over your career and everything you've done to this point, is there anything major that you would do differently if you could change something?
Speaker 2: If I could do something different, I had an opportunity to become a billionaire and I didn't know it.  I covered the news story when they announced the Internet to the world and it was about ten o'clock in the morning and they said, "We're going to put this new thing on called the Internet and you can get domain names for thirty-five dollars and you could get WWW your name or W," and I'm like, "Hey man why don't we do this?  Why don't we get www.nbc.com just to piss them off because we're with CBS and then we'll get www.abc.com and ww- and we'll fix them man, we'll--," you know?  Because we were in competition with them and knowing about that, I didn't do it.  Another one, the guy calls me up and says, "Tutman [HistoryMaker Robert Tutman] buy Google [Google Inc.]." I'm like, "What?"  He said, "Buy Google, take all your money, take everything you've got, sell your house, do whatever you've got to do, buy Google."  I'm like, "Man what the hell are you talking about?"  He's like, "I'm in California, I'm editing a piece on this new company that's going to hit and it's called Google and everyone that's on board is going to become a multimillionaire, I'm everything in it, I'm cutting this piece and sometime today it's going to hit and buy Google."  And I'm like, "Man get off the phone," click, you know.  So different?  No, I'd probably do everything the same, just better.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 670721
Speaker 1: Likewise when you look over everything you've done to this point again, what today would you consider to be your legacy?
Speaker 2: In what way?
Speaker 1: Well, the things that you've done, that you're leaving behind?
Speaker 2: I--one of the things I--if I had to pick a legacy it would just be--I always try to conduct myself in a positive professional way, I'm, you know, a lot of kids, a lot of people around the world--saw me walking around the world and I was the first black person they ever saw doing what I do and--, "Oh wow, damn, look at that."  I mean, I made a big difference, I know it because you went to pl- place--I had a guy in Jamestown, North Dakota walk up to me and say, "Are you black?"  I'm like, "Why do you ask me that?"  He says, "Well I'm, I'm just curious, are you black?"  I'm like, "Well, I'll answer the question if you tell me why?"  He said, "Well you don't act like you're black."  I said, "Well how do black people act?"  He said, "Well I've only seen three black people in my life and you don't--no, I've only seen four black people in my life and you don't act like any of them."  I said, "Well what four black people have you seen?"  He said, "Well I saw J.J. [James "J.J." Evans, Jr.], and I saw Linc [Linc Hayes], and I saw George Jefferson, and I saw Julia [Julia Baker], and you don't act like them."  And I'm like, "They're TV characters, they're not real people, those--," and so, the only four black people he'd ever seen in his life were three clowns and a maid and I walk in acting like a man and he was troubled by that or startled by that or taken aback by that, he didn't understand that.  And I think if you say what a legacy would be is to always try to be what your idea of what a man was.  I worked with a group of men that were bigots and racist and did not like black people and I had a guy tell me one day, he says, "Tutman [HistoryMaker Robert Tutman], you know," he says, "I do not like black people but I like you."  I said, "Why is that?"  He said, "Because no matter what we did, no matter where we went, you were always a man about it," so, whatever his idea of what a man was, I met up to that standard and that made a difference to me.  I've been in situations where people threatened to kill you and the guy said, "You beg." "Man I'm not going to beg you, I'm, you know?  It, is begging going to change your mind?  No.  Well then I'm not going to beg," and then they said, "Well if you'd have begged, I'd have killed you."  So you have to stop and think and you being, you know, in situations like that, you know?  You didn't ask me anything about my mother, but you did ask me about my father [Robert Tutman III] and  there's one thing I wanted to tell you about my mother, she was a school teacher, she taught school for thirty years and she also worked for the Baltimore City [Maryland]--she was clerk of Baltimore, she worked as a clerk in Baltimore for thirty years.  She was the oldest person that worked at Baltimore City when she retired, she was the oldest city employee in Baltimore City and she was in the marriage license bureau in Baltimore City and at the time she was a clerk in Baltimore, she married over 750 same sex couples in Maryland.  And this is twenty years ago, and people would come to her and they'd say, "Ms. T [Theresa Allen Tutman], we want to get married," and, "Child you can't get married. It's against the law for same sex people to get ma- married in the State of Maryland and you cannot get married."  And, they'd say, "Well Ms. T, you told us that you could help us out."  She said, "Look, you come back tomorrow and as long as one of you is wearing a dress, I'll do the ceremony."  And they'd go like, "What?"  She said, "It's against the law for two people of the same sex to get married in the State of Maryland, but as long as one of you has got a wedding gown on, I'll do the ceremony."  So one day, she got caught, she said, "Theresa, isn't it obvious to you that these are two men?"  "Wedding gown, tuxedo--that's as far as I'm checking."
Story_ID: 670722
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Why'd you mention DeWayne [HistoryMaker DeWayne Wickham]?
Speaker 2: Oh, he was in the outline.  They said that you grew up with him.
Speaker 1: Oh yeah, we knew each other--we were adversaries for other reasons and stuff like that.  He pissed me off one time and I'm still pissed off about it so, you know, I'll never be un-pissed off about it so, you know.
Speaker 2: Did it have anything to do with NABJ [National Association of Black Journalists] or--?
Speaker 1: It had to do with--in 1968, '69 [1969], he got a job working as a producer on a TV program and he was the only black producer in the State of Maryland.  So, "Hey brother we got it, you a producer, I'm a cam- we going to all work together and we're going to do TV together," and he didn't hire any other black people to work on his show because--I was younger at the time and I didn't understand that he's working for the man and he's got to do what the man tells him to do, so his hands are tied, he couldn't, but that just made me very angry because I wouldn't have stood for that, I just--my personality such as, I would have said no.  And because my personality is such that I would have said no, we were just on the outs over it and I just couldn't forgive it and just, sorry, I just, I just--it's just not my stick, I'm sorry.  We struggled too hard and fought for too much to have you turn your back on anybody 'cause of that, we just--that, that's just not right.
Story_ID: 670723
Speaker 1: We always ask this question: what are some of your hopes and concerns for the African American community today?
Speaker 2: My hopes are that we get back to the basics and learn to be literate again.  I covered a news story of the second Black Caucus [Congressional Black Caucus] convention at--since Reconstruction they had a caucus in Gary, Indiana and this was in maybe '80 [1980]?  They had one back in '70 [1970].
Speaker 1: They had one in '72 [1972], yeah.
Speaker 2: Seventy-two [1972], and they had another one ten years later.  And they had that in Gary, Indiana, I covered both of them and at the second one, Ed Brooke [HistoryMaker Edward Brooke] from Massachusetts--have you interviewed him yet?  Yeah okay, he was there and he came out on the stage and he said, "We're tired."  I'm like, "We're tired?"  He says, "We have, we have solved all of the problems, we've got all of the solutions, the education and civil rights and drugs and everything that you need for freedom and independence and what you need to do.  We fixed all of those problems, and they're in books and they're here for you." He says, "But--," and he reaches in his pocket and he takes out a stick match and he lights it, (makes sound) and he stands up on stage with a match burning.  He says, "And this is the light of education," he says, "and if you don't watch it, (makes sound), they're going to blow that light out and it will never be lit again.  And we are old and we're tired and it's up to you young people to make sure that kids are educated, to make sure kids have knowledge, to make kids know--because once this generation coast out," he said, (unclear)--he said, "We have gone to college, we've been educated, and we're going to coast out and our children are going to coast out.  And once we coast out, you young people that are left, nah, you're never going to rise up, you're never--you're going to be down forever and that light will never be lit again."  And it was a grand experiment, it was a grand experiment to teach black kids.  Let's see if they're smart, let's see if they can learn, let's see if they can go to college.  Brown versus the Board of Education, 1954 [Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka, 1954] was a twelve year experiment.  They took it from 1954, to 1964, that was twelve years, and in--I'm sorry, 1954 to 1966, and those kids that went to school in '54 [1954], in the first grade got out of school in 1966, and that completed the twelve years because that's what the lawsuit was about.  Brown [Oliver Brown] that filed the lawsuit, her [sic.] children never benefited from it because they were out of school by the time it went on and if you interviewed her, she would tell you that her children never benefitted because I interviewed her and that's what she said.  The people that filed suit for the civil rights bill [Civil Rights Act of 1964], the lawyers for the suit said, "We made a mistake, we sued and we asked for the wrong thing, we asked for separate but equal [sic.], we should not have asked for that.  We should have asked for enforcement of the separation," and had they f- had, had they sued for enforcement, then every time they built a white school, they would have built a black school, every time they did this, they would have done that.  That was a mistake and the attorneys said so.  I heard the interview, I sat there and listened to them say that.  So, in 1966, they stopped teaching black kids, kids are functioning illiterate, they can't read, they can't write, that's why I told you earlier, we stuck on stupid, we are stuck on stupid, you get kids that can't read, you get kids that can't count, they don't know history, they don't know science, they don't know math.  In Chicago [Illinois], the average--literacy rate is what?  Third, fourth grade, fifth grade?  Half the black boys are not getting out of college, slipping through the cracks, they're gonna have kids, they can't help them with the homework, you got dummies teaching dummies to be dumb.  So, my hope is school, education, knowledge, reading, writing, arithmetic, books--I don't particularly care for computers because you can change the history in computers.  If you read '1984' [George Orwell], you will know that--change everything with the click of a button, books are important, so you have a society where kids can't read, where people can't read.  See, the one thing you didn't do during this interview, you didn't get me hot and I am so glad, whew--don't get--if you get me started, you got something really, I mean it's just--unh-uh.
Speaker 1: All right (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) But nah, it's, it's, it's, it's, it's a bad thing, it's a--and I see it every day, I see it every day in the street, I see kids that can't read every day in the street, you see it with crime, you see it with--every day, you know?  It's just, these people in Ferguson, Missouri, it's appalling what goes on there and it's not appalling for what goes on, it's appalling for the fact that they're marching and screaming and hollering about going on.  How come they didn't just go vote these people out of office?  That's the part that's appalling.  Why didn't they just vote these people out of office?
Story_ID: 670724
Speaker 1: How do you feel about the future of blacks in journalism?  I mean--
Speaker 2: They're lost, there are no blacks in journalism, there are very few.  You have people like [HistoryMaker] George Curry who's a black journalist, you have people like [HistoryMaker] Carole Simpson who's a black journalist, you have people like Walter Middlebrook who's the editor of The Detroit News, he's a black journalist.  But you have a lot of people now who are just people that hold the microphone, they're people who are sitting up there on TV that read whatever they read or told whatever they are told, you don't have investigative reporters or things like that before.  You had a black reporter by the name of John Davis [HistoryMaker John E. Davis], I don't think--you might know him, and John Davis worked at WBBM-TV [Chicago, Illinois] as an anchorman and the general manager walked up to him and told him, "You're too imperious," and fired him and here's a black man that--imperious?  You mean you--sit up--that's imperious, that's what that word means and we don't have any black people being imperious, we, we not going to have that, and that was the reason--that--that's an excuse they gave him, that's a real reporter, that's a real journalist.  So the future of black journalists is dim.  You're not teaching kids how to write, they're not doing research, they don't know how to do research, they can't spell, I mean it's just not--yeah, it's, it's--we're in trouble, we're in big trouble.  Oh, we don't have any newspapers that print anything, I mean, I mean, you know, circulation twenty thousand, fifteen thousand, the Defender [Chicago Defender] used to be appalling when you read it, mistakes in it, spelling wrong, punctuation wrong, diction wrong, things like that.  Where are they getting the information from?  No, no black TV stations, you listen to Steve Harvey in the morning, that's Boo Boo the Fool all day long, you know?  He talks about the good that he does with his mentoring programs, he does much more damage being a clown than he does being good.  So, you know, he's--these people that get on the radio, [HistoryMaker] Doug Banks, or whoever they--they're a bunch of clowns and you have the kids on the radio listen to them and all of the good that they do, it's offset by the harm that they do by being Boo Boo the Fool, I mean we just, we got to stop that, I mean--I just, just, I don't do Boo Boo and you hear these people, "Oh, you know, I've got a mentoring program where I mentored five kids."  Yeah, you mentored five kids but you damaged ten thousand by being a clown on the radio, you damaged ten thousand because you dissed this person and you talked about this and you play this music and, you know, Bushwick Bill and the people that do rapping, all of the profanity and provocative words they use and calling the women bitches and hoes and stuff like that.  Oh yeah, you have a mentoring program for six but you harmed a hundred thousand with your music so (gesture)--yeah, we're in trouble, we are in trouble.
Story_ID: 670725
Speaker 1: Do you have any children?
Speaker 2: No, none that I know of.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  I thought I'd ask 'cause marriage doesn't necessarily mean you, you know (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, none that I know of, I mean, you know--
Speaker 1: Okay.  And--
Speaker 2: Nobody, no women that I dated over the years before I met mine ever told me they had any children but--
Speaker 1: So, wha- what would you consider your family now?  You--your brother [Dan Tutman] and other relatives that you (simultaneous)--?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) My fam- I--cousins, I mean I have, I have a big family, I mean it's not a--I just have a young--I have a big family, I mean it's, it's a lot of men, I mean we have fourteen, fifteen cousins, I mean it's not a small family.  I mean, you know, we celebrate Thanksgiving, you know, we get together, it be thirty, forty people together and they're very close knit.  It's--my brother's a cameraman for CBS, my cousin Paula [Paula Tutman] is an anchorwoman up in Detroit [Michigan] on a TV station [WDIV-TV], her sister's [Lisa Tutman Oglesby] an anchorwoman in Virginia somewhere, her brother [Fred Tutman] is--has a television production company [Tutman/Michaels Teleproductions], he's a river keeper in Washington, D.C., my cousin Pete's [Peter Allen] a director in California, Milton's [Milton Allen, Jr.] an entertainment lawyer, Malcolm's [ph.] an entertainment lawyer, David's [David Allen] an entertainment lawyer, Chris [Chris Allen] is a director and lighting director for a company, Reggie's [ph.] a graphic artist, Tharen [ph.], is a graphic artist, Richard's [ph.] a graphic artist, Stanley's [ph.] a computer artist, so it's like fifteen of them are in the business that do this kind of stuff.
Speaker 1: Yeah it seems, it seems that the--there's been a lot of mentorship within the family--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --in terms of the media business, and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, we teach each other what to do--yeah, we teach others what to do and somebody has--you know, I taught my younger brother how to load a camera.
Story_ID: 670726
Speaker 1: And the way you load a camera is you take a strip of film about this long (gesture) and you open the camera up and just load it all day long.  Take the film out, put the film in close or turn it on, you just take it, open the door, put the film in, take the film out, put the film in, take the film--you just do it all day long.  And then the next day you do it again, and you just do it over and over and ov- and you do it a thousand times and then you do it two thousand times and then you do it three thousand times and after you do it about three thousand times, muscle memory kicks in and then you can do it with your eyes closed.  And it takes about three thousand repetitive moves to be able to do something from memory and then it becomes automatic.  So if you set a camera up, you set lights up, after you do it about three thousand times, it becomes automatic and you can literally do it in your sleep.
Speaker 2: Okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And, and if you don't believe that, call up any holster manufacturer for guns in America and they will tell you that you have to draw your gun out of your holster three thousand times before you can do it automatically and that is just what you have to do.  They tell you to do it a hundred times a day for thirty days and then every day after thirty days you do it fifty times a day and that's the only way you can walk around with a gun in the holster and get out and shoot it without shooting yourself in the foot.  You gotta practice three or four thousand times just taking it out, sticking it back in because it comes automatic.  Just like scratching your eye right there, it's automatic, instead of stabbing yourself in the eye, it's just, you've done it so many times, you didn't poke yourself in the eye; in fact, you didn't even know you did it.
Speaker 2: That's right.
Story_ID: 670727
Speaker 1: I've only got one last question, and--but before I ask my last question, is there anything that you want to say or before I ask my last question?
Speaker 2: I have been talking for three hours and I don't know what we talked about.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So, you know.
Speaker 1: It's been a lot, and we thank you for your time.
Speaker 2: So what is your last question?
Speaker 1: The last question is similar to legacy, a little bit more personal.  Sir how would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: How would I like to be remembered?  Don't know.  I will be--there will be so many different people that remember you in so many different ways, it's really up to the individual and how they impressed you.  I mean, you know, all my life I've had people, "Man he's crazy," and I've asked people over, "What does that mean?"  "Don't you know?"  "How could I know?  I'm the one that's crazy.  So you tell me."  So probably, people will remember me as being crazy, whatever that means, you know?  So, I don't know if that's the way I'd like to be remembered, but I'm sure that's the way they will remember it.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Well thank you very much.
Speaker 2: No, thank you.
