Story_ID: 74132
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe.  I'm the interviewer for The HistoryMakers today.  Our videographer is Scott Stearns.  Sir, could you please state your name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: Latta Roosevelt Thomas, first name, L-A-T-T-A.  I don't know where my sophisticated aunt got that name from, but she insisted that my parents name me that.  There's an interesting, a further interesting story behind that.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: See, they never did go back and change it.  And I found that out when about twelve years ago I had to get my passport to go to India, and found out that all those years I was not who I thought I was.
Speaker 1: Well, what was your name supposed to be?  What was it?
Speaker 2: It was supposed to be a junior.  See, my father's name was Pickett Roosevelt Thomas.  And, and I often wondered why my people called me "June," you know, as a nickname and so on.  And I, I just felt that they just pulled it out of the air somewhere, and found out that they--to appease Aunt Maggie, they said yeah, okay, yeah, sure, and never did go back.  You see, back then, many black mothers had their babies at home, you know, under the tutelage and the care of the midwife.  And this is what happened in my case, and they never did change it.  And here I found out about fourteen years ago that all these years I was Junior.
Speaker 1: And not Latta--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: That's right.  That's, that's a weird feeling.
Speaker 1: Especially when you thought the name was weird (laughter).
Speaker 2: Yeah, and, and thought--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --the name was weird--
Speaker 1: --was she--
Speaker 2: --in the first place.
Speaker 1: --did, did your aunt ever tell you what it meant?
Speaker 2: No, and the only place that I've seen around here named Latta was a little town back over beyond--on the other side of [Interstate] 95, on the way to Myrtle Beach.  There's a Latta, South Carolina.  And I, I never ran into that name as a first name anywhere else.
Speaker 1: Yeah, that's strange.  Well, get--could, could-- sir, could you give us your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: October 12, 1927; date, there's a little village outside of Union, South Carolina, called Buffalo [South Carolina], just like Buffalo, New York, but it was mainly a rural section.  That was cotton area there, and most of the people existed as workers of the cotton mill.  So that, that, that, that was the place of birth.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: Well, actually I'm retired now, but I wore two hats for a good while.  I was a college teacher and a pastor. Baptist pastor.
Speaker 1: All right.
Story_ID: 74133
Speaker 1: Now before we go into depth with the interview, there are five "People" magazine-ish-type questions that I am compelled to ask you.  And the first one--they just require a short answer.  The first one is what is your favorite food?
Speaker 2: Well, about any item of soul food, that you might want to mention.  I, I grew up on the farm, so I would say ham, red-eyed gravy, grits.  I, I don't where, where you want me to go beyond that.
Speaker 1: Those, those are good examples of, of the, of the genre of soul food (laughter).  All right, can--did--sir, do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: You mean in the category of clothing or anything like that?
Speaker 1: Well, anything I guess.  Do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: No, I never thought about it.  My mind went toward the ladies when you mentioned it.  But no, that never bothered me any either.
Speaker 1: Whatever they wore.
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Right.
Speaker 1: Okay, do you have a favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Yes, summertime.  You see, I was, I was born and bred, as I indicated, in the rural area here in South Carolina.  And many times we had to go and gather wood for your woodpile in the wintertime.  Many a day I had to break the ice off the axe handle and go down and chop down the wood and, and load it on the wagon and bring it back.  See, I think gradually I grew to dislike it, and see, it doesn't feel very good.  And so, I prefer summer.
Speaker 1: All right, now do you have a favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: No, not really.  I'd, I, I, I never took in swimming very much, but I suppose if I were rested up, I'd, I'd take in hunting.  And that was sort of a hobby of mine back in the days when I--before I became very sedentary.
Speaker 1: What would you hunt for normally?
Speaker 2: Well, where I grew up, generally we, we, we hunted birds, occasionally squirrels.  But I think rabbit hunting overshadowed everything else.
Speaker 1: All right.  Now, sir, do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: Never gave much thought to that either, except whatever goes around, comes around.  And I think I received that from some of my elders, who believed that one had to be very careful about how he or she treated people because you never knew when you would have to rely on somebody else for your existence.  And many of them would say be careful how you treat people on the way up the ladder because you may have to ask help from some of those same people on the way back down the ladder.
Speaker 1: That's good advice.
Story_ID: 74134
Speaker 1: Let's go into your family history.  Do you, do you have a, a an idea of where your family came from and how old your family--I mean how far can you go back?
Speaker 2: Well, not very far.  I have a picture that I secured not too long ago of my great-great-grandfather on my mother's side.  I had been looking for it for years, and I finally found it.  One of the relatives got it for me from somewhere.  I, as far as I know, Great-Great-Grandpa Al [Allen David Duncan] was a slave.  And of course he used to tell his children funny stories about what happened to him and so on.  But that's about as far back as I can go.  And perhaps the reason for that is that, as I said, he was born a slave.  We are told that he was 100 percent African, so that we, we, we traced him back.  And of course the young lady that he married from an adjoining plantation, her name was Dolly Anne.  And I understand she was one half African and one half of American Indian.  I've never been able to figure out what tribe.  But now when we come over to the father's side--
Speaker 1: Just, just to backtrack a little bit, your, now your great-great-grandfather was born in 1848?
Speaker 2: Eighteen forty-eight [1848].
Speaker 1: And he was born where?
Speaker 2: He was born somewhere in the Union County [South Carolina] area.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Inasmuch as names were passed on from slave to--from, from the slave owner to the slave, I have the sneaking suspicion that it was somewhere around the Duncan place.  That would be over just beyond Buffalo [South Carolina] going north.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: All right, he's your great-grand--great-grandfather on your mother's side, aright.
Speaker 1: He my great-great-grandfather on, on my mother's side.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Yeah, my mother's great-grandfather.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Story_ID: 74135
Speaker 1: Now the paternal side again you were (unclear)--
Speaker 2: Yeah, it's, it's difficult there because I think the, the racial crossovers were more from that side of the family.  And, and you're talking about a family tree getting clogged up.  And see, we know that, that the Scotch-Irish, again, American Indian, African naturally, and I, I, I, I have a feeling that we had American Indian coming in on both sides of their family, so you had the Johnsons.  My paternal grandmother was named Clorena (ph.), and of course she married Grandpa Arthur, who was a Thomas.  But there was American Indian coming in from both those sides.  But when, when we get beyond Grandpapa Arthur, we speculate after that.  And in some few cases, we may have a greater knowledge, but inasmuch as some of the groups didn't wanna own us, you know, sort of like what [President Thomas] Jefferson ran into, we decided we weren't gonna own them.  And see, but it gets complicated beyond that.
Story_ID: 74136
Speaker 1: Now did your--have you heard any stories--did you have any stories from, that have been passed down through your family that talk about what it was like during slavery or, or during the 19th century, during Reconstruction and--
Speaker 2: Yes, that, that mainly would come from Great-Great-Grandpa Al.  He would, he would tell stories to his children 'cause they got passed on down.  And not all of them were stories of tragedies.  Some were stories of humor.  It appears that he was a trustee of a sort.  And whenever the boss, plantation owner, would take long trips, he would put everything under his jurisdiction.  And then Great-Great-Grandpa Al would get all the slaves together, and they would imitate what the whites did.  And of course one of the, one of the main pastimes was to have a party, you know, and get people, both the black and white, to play instruments, you know, sort of like Fiddler did in "Roots."  And Great-Great-Grandpa Al would even imitate the sets.  You know the set was this little ditty that you say, you know, while everybody's dancing.  And he had made himself a set.  And when all the slaves would start dancing, he would say something like: Dance on children; have your fun.  Miss and Massy gone to New York, and everything mine.  And one time the slave owner tricked him.  They pretended that they were going long distance, and then slipped back right in the middle of one of the sets.
Speaker 1: Well, what happened?
Speaker 2: Poor, poor Great-Great-Grandpa Al pulled up a board, we are told, from the floor and went down up under the house.  He got whipped for it, but that didn't stop him from doing it.
Story_ID: 74137
Speaker 1: Now on the other side of the family, and of course you know you always have some in-betweens in there, and you, you, you had a strange of mixture, because sometimes--and I don't know whether they did it deliberately or just didn't care--sometimes kinfolk married each other, you know.  Nobody thought too much about marrying the third cousin, you know, that, that kind of thing.  And you know, every black community has what is often referred to in black literature as a High John the Conqueror, and that, that was a, a BN.  And of course, believe it or not, many, many of the, the blacks in the area looked up on this, this High John the Conqueror as a kind of buffer between them and you know, the Night Riders and the Klans and what have you, you know.  And this person would get the reputation of being a, a BN.
Speaker 2: Now BN meaning?
Speaker 1: Bad nigger.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Yeah, nobody bothered him, no matter what color, black white or anywhere in between.  And it didn't take, it didn't take but one half of a half pint of firewater, you know, to turn him on.  And, and I don't know, I guess he went into a kind of insanity when angered.  See, nobody bothered him. And of course, our High John the Conqueror was Uncle Pet Jones.  Black people nicknamed him Pet.
Speaker 2: P-I-T-T?
Speaker 1: P-E-T.
Speaker 2: P-E-T?
Speaker 1: Yeah, Pet Jones.  And whites nicknamed--well, I guess, I guess Jack was his real name, you know, Jack Jones.  And so the word would go out, no, don't bother Jack Jones, you see.  And then he believed, well, for one thing--and this was a big thing back then.  It doesn't seem so much of an interest now.  But he, he was the first person in the black community that many of us can remember who bought a 12 gauge automatic shotgun.  You know back in those days it would hold five shells.  And see, and that gave you pretty good firepower.  And he and many of his kinfolk were crack shots.  And he, he loved bird hunting, and we kids used to love to follow behind 'em as they went bird hunting.  We wouldn't get in front because that posed a danger, but he, he was a crack shot.  And, of course, there, there were others who were even better shots than he was.  Now he was good with the shotgun, but we had an Uncle George who--and I saw this with my own eyes--he could stick a match in the ground and back off, and take a .22 and light it without knocking the match down.
Speaker 2: That, that's pretty good.
Speaker 1: Yeah, pretty good.
Story_ID: 74138
Speaker 1: And not only that, the, the, the, the greater part of his life was spent, you know, as, as an alcoholic.  And we, we, and we used to use Uncle George as an example of the, the, the fact that we know that human beings can be changed, their whole demeanor and outlook can be changed by, by religion.  It became a community project every year during revival time to get Uncle George just to go to a revival meeting, because there was always the lingering hope that you're going to get him to go to what we called the mourner's bench.  Now, I, I don't know if you've ever heard of the, the, the, the mourner's bench.
Speaker 2: So you should explain all these things because whoever watches this tape in the future might not know (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Yeah, see, the mourner's bench was the seat in the church, usually the front seat or somewhere near the front seat, where all the sinners were supposed to come in the hope that they would commit themselves to God, you know, while the Evangelist is preaching.  And it became a community project to get Uncle George to go.  And Uncle George went to one revival meeting and came back and declared to everybody that God had saved him and--'cause we boys who were ver--who were very devilish, you know, we said yeah, un-huh, we, we know, he saved you as long as, as, as you can, you know, stay away from that gallon jug up under there.  But Uncle George, for the--he lived for thirty-five years or more and never touched a drop the rest of his life.  But now, since we're talking about the mourner's bench and the church experiences, in similar fashion, we all used to try to get Uncle Pet to go to the mourner's bench.  And finally he'd give in.  The only thing is that during the process of persuading Uncle Pet [Jack Jones] to go, Uncle Pet just may say something that wasn't very religious (laughter).  So we had, we had--
Speaker 2: In church?
Speaker 1: Well, yeah, he would say it in the church.  He, he was, he was just that mean.  He, he just went for bad, and--but he, now he loved the kids.  Now you're talking about a paradox, he loved--he hated to see a child get a whipping, you know.  He'd get crying himself - oh, leave him alone; for God sake, don't hit him.  And that's, that would be one of the few times that he would use the word God without putting the D word along with it.  And he would, he would say you know, for God sake don't him.  Remember how it was with you when you were little, you know.  And we used to love to see him come around to our house because that means that we had extra latitude.  We could do some things, you know, that daddy wouldn't, probably wouldn't whip us for while he was around.  But anyway, he went to the mourner's bench one night.  And there was an old lady in the church, and every church has about two.  They call them mother of the church or the lady who is supposed to be looked up to and supposed to encourage all the young people to get right with God, and don't wait on tomorrow's sun.  It may shine on your grave, you know, that kind of thing.  And her name was Aunt Anna Rae.
Story_ID: 74139
Speaker 1: And, and, and, and as strange as it may sound, Aunt Anna Rae believed in God and believed in root working at the same time.  And it's sort of like Dr. Buzzard [Stephaney Robinson].
Speaker 2: Now this is--is this fairly common?
Speaker 1: In certain parts of the state.  And I don't know whether it has some special connection with swampy areas or what, you know, like the lower part, you know, the Deltas and this kind of thing.  And of course, here, your lowland is Charleston [South Carolina].  See, you go down in Charleston and Beaufort [South Carolina], down in that area.  That, that ter--type of territory tended to breed in people with that belief for some reason.
Speaker 2: What is the name of the swamp that's--it's not Dismal.  No, that's in Virginia, isn't it, the Dismal Swamp?
Speaker 1: No down there you--of course Beaufort, you just go back into the bushes back out in there.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: But you see, Charleston has a lot of--Charleston itself actually is an island, when you look at it.  And, and, and Uncle Pet and Aunt Anna didn't get along.  He would do things to pick at her.  Of course, you know, he wouldn't hurt her or anything.  He, he just loved to keep her all worked up.  And she would say to him: That's all right.  I'm gonna get you.  I'm gonna, I'm gonna put--what did she--I'm gonna put the hant on you.
Speaker 2: The what?
Speaker 1: The hant.
Speaker 2: Okay, now, explain what that is.
Speaker 1: Well, that just, to make you believe that you had some special connections with the spirits and, and so on.  And I guess it's Vodun and Voodoo.
Speaker 2: Now and how would you spell hant?  I know it's a folk expression, and I've heard pe--people say it, H--hant (ph.), hant.  That means ghost spirit.
Speaker 1: Yeah, un-huh, and well, sometimes you see it spelled H-A-U-N-T, and other times you see it spelled H A-N-T.  See, but that had the connection.  And of course in some areas of Southern states, you know, people believed in them very strongly.  And some of the people like Roboto and folk like that believed that, that that was very strong.  It came up from the Caribbean, you know, and the people brought it from Africa.  And I understand that many religious scholars believed that, that this, this, this, this conviction, this belief, was stronger out there in the island, and, and then some of it came to the mainland, see.
Story_ID: 74140
Speaker 1: But Aunt Anna would tell him that she's gonna put this on him.  And he would make up some material which looked something like a mixture of hog hair and axle grease.  And she would put all that together, and she would go down in the woods and cut little slats.  Now we used to call it light wood because, because the, the heavy pine tar content would make it very easy to burn.  And you'd get up in the morning it's cold.  Many of those houses had cracks in them.  You get up in the morning, you had to make a fire quickly.  And you'd, you'd strike a match to it, and it would set right off.  But she would go down and cut those little slats and bring 'em back and split the end, and force some of that material in, in, in the, the, the, the slit.  And she felt that if she lined up Uncle Pet's--the path leading to his house with these, that her mojo, or whatever she had there, would work on him.  But you see, Uncle Pet, and many of those people back there, believed that if you didn't believe it, it couldn't do anything to you anyway.  And he would, he would follow behind her.  She was nearsighted.  He would follow behind her, and as she would move ahead of him, he'd pick up each piece.  And when she'd turn around to start back home, he would hand them to her.  Here, I believe you dropped something.  But, as I told you, she, she believed in God on top of all of that, you see, which really is a contradiction when you get right down to it.  Either that that you call Voodoo, Vodun, or the mojo, either you believe that has all power or you believe that God has all power.  And she, she would get in the church and start shoutin'.  Now you know, going all the way back to [W.E.B.] DuBois, you know, the, the, the religious historians talk about the shout, you know, and the moan and, and that kind of thing.  Well, Aunt Anna would get up about the time that the preacher really gets into, you know, he starts the crescendo rise.  And she would start shouting, and she would just start talking about how good God had been to her, and that he helped her to raise five daughters alone.  And nobody in the community could spot either one of them, and then she would go on and on.  Of course that caused quite a laugh, especially on the part of some of those boys who felt that they had done some spotting. But one of her, one of her activities during revival meeting was to go over and encourage the mourners while they are down praying on their knees.  And she had the knack of hitting them, you know, "pray children, pray"--bam, bam--you know, whatever she had, a fan or whatever.  Well, Uncle Pet went up one night, and he didn't like it, her standing over there hitting the mourners.  And he came out fussing - oh Ann--oh (unclear) Anna Rae up there hitting me in my good head.  Nobody hits me in my good head (laughter).  That's all right.  I'm going back, I'm going back tomorrow night if I don't--and we would draw up, because he could say anything, like, you know, if I don't go back, Jesus Christ is an SOB, you know, or something of that nature.  And--but that night, I don't know whether praying had gotten to him or what.  He didn't say that.  He said if I don't go back, God didn't make Moses.  And he said, but I'm, I'll tell you what I'm gonna do.  I'm gonna take me a safety pin, and if she comes over there hitting me in my head, I'm gonna stick her.  And he swore that the end of that night when we got ready to go home that Aunt Anna came over there and she was hitting the kids down at the mourner's bench.  And he claimed that he took that safety pin and stuck her.  And he was--(unclear)--everybody who wanted to listen, you know, he would be saying un-huh, see, I told you.  I told you she was a hypocrite anyway, didn't I?  Said, now here she was supposed to be happy, huh?  And, and, and she said she came over there hitting me in my head, and I took that safety pin and I stuck her, and said she never missed a beat, talking about her shouting, you know.  He said but she cut her head ba--back around to me and said nigger, quit that sticking me (laughter).  And, and everybody would be laughing at Anna.  'Course, he, he, he never did do like Uncle George though.  I don't think Uncle Pet ever got religion or anything else.  See, but tho--tho--those are some of the very funny things that used to happen within the community.  But he carried the reputation of being the big N.
Speaker 2: Well, did anybody ever challenge him on that?
Speaker 1: Yes, it, it's almost as if the whole matter was headed that way.  And believe it or not, it was his nephew.  And actually, you know, the nephew, who, who, who had to shoot him didn't, you know, it wasn't anything planned.  I mean he loved his uncle like all the rest of us loved him.  I mean he was our protector and that kind of thing.
Story_ID: 74456
Speaker 1: So, we're talking about--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yeah, ha--how--yeah.
Speaker 1: --trouble here.
Speaker 2: I mentioned earlier that Uncle Pet [Jack Jones] couldn't, couldn't hold his firewater.  And it, it didn't take but just a little bit.  But they were, they were at a house in the community once.  You know, people get together and hold little, little parties and that kind of thing.  But one other thing that the whole neighborhood, because of its admiration for him--he was the type of fellow that, you know, would make people stand off and that kind of thing--because of that admiration, many people didn't talk about too much, but it as a fact that he was a ladies man.  And I don't care what, you know, you heard people say that if it moved, Uncle Pet would chase it.  And, and, and Uncle Pet had been seeing a lady.  She was married, and I, I'll always believe that her husband knew it.  And she was a flirt.  And they were all at this house one night, and Harold had come down from Washington, D.C., to visit his relatives and his parents, so.  And this lady got to talking about how handsome he was.  Now Harold didn't start the conversation, but poor Uncle Pet didn't take that under consideration.  He, he got, he got quite angry, and he decided then to take on Harold.  And he--Harold was sitting in the chair, and Uncle Pet jumped straddle of him.  And Harold went back to the floor, on his back.  But, 'course I suppose you had to know how to fight to live in Washington, D.C., back in those days.  And Harold moved back and got his feet up and kicked Uncle Pet off him.  And then Uncle Pet hit at him and missed him.  And then Harold hugged him up close enough so that Uncle Pet couldn't get leverage.  And then when Harold finally maneuvered himself in a position, he hit Uncle Pet, and he really hit him, because the, the, the, the, the scar was on his face even in the casket.  And Uncle Pet felt doubly humiliated.  And he left out of the house vowing to go home and get his gun and come back and shoot--I guess he was particularly angry at, at Harold.  But that broke up everything.  Everybody just sadly moved on out and went to his or her home after that.  But he did, sure enough.  He, he went home, got that auto--five auto--shot automatic, and walked all the way back.  Of course the party had broken up, so nobody answered.  He went to the house where they had the party, nobody answered.  He came by our house because daddy was there, although he didn't get mixed up in the scuffle.  And, and, and, and the truth of the matter is that country people made moonshine.  And it was more or less for, for internal consumption.  You know, we didn't make it to the extent that we sold it or anything.  And daddy and I had decided that the number one still was ready to go, so we left out.  So when he came down to our house, there was nobody to answer.
Story_ID: 74457
Speaker 1: And then he decided then that they all must be up at his brother's house, Harold's father.  And he went up there, and would have shot him except Harold's sister deflected the barrel.  And then he backed out of the door and began to shoot at anything that moved through the door.  Well, Harold slipped outside and went around, using his father's double barrel shotgun.  Now you've, you've probably seen the make that had the hammers on the outside, look like two big ears sitting up there.  And Harold shot him.  And to show what a constitution Uncle Pet had, all of his chest was torn out, and he got up and walked about a quarter of a mile.  And of course by the time they found him, and he'd, he'd just--well, he had lost a lot of blood, and he died about 4:00 that morning.  And see, and, and the whole community, it was sort of mixed feelings because initially when something like that happens within the family, people tend to take sides.  But after everything moves along, you know, everybody starts to feel, you know, sorry for, for, for the whole group.  So that's how he left.  And I suppose deep down inside many of us felt that Uncle Pet, with his reputation, with his nerve and so on, was gonna end up that way.
Speaker 2: That's quite a story.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Story_ID: 74458
Speaker 1: Well, let's, let me backtrack a little bit and ask you can, can, can you give us the names of your parents?  Just start with your father, your father's--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --name, and spell it for us and-
Speaker 2: Yeah, Pickett--
Speaker 1: --his date of birth.
Speaker 2: Yeah, Pickett, P-I-C-K-E-T-T, Roosevelt, two R's--I mean two O's in the middle, Pickett Roosevelt Thomas.  He came from a very large family.  Uncle George had quite a family.  I think, I think the, they, they began, they started off with thirteen.  One, one of the girls was accidentally killed, shotgun blast.  Mother, mother's name was Alsie, A-L-S-I-E.  And her, her, her, her maiden name was Crenshaw, C-R-E-N-S-H-A-W.
Speaker 1: And when was your father born and when was your mother born?
Speaker 2: They were born in the same year, 1905.  Daddy was born February 21st, and mother was born April 7.
Speaker 1: Okay, and were they both born in Columbia [South Carolina] or?
Speaker 2: No, no, no, no, Columbia [South Carolina] is sort of my adopted home.  See, I came down here, did my baccalaureate at, at, at Benedict [College, Columbia, South Carolina].  See, after having done the first two years up at a little school called Friendship Junior College in Rock Hill [South Carolina], came down here and finished the second two years.  And then I left and went to Colgate Rochester [Crozer Divinity School, Rochester, New York].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But see, my home had always been Union and York Counties [South Carolina].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  And so both, both of my parents were born somewhere in that general area.  Many of, many of our relatives can still go and point to the place, you know, so and so was born here; this is where so and so was born.  I didn't--I couldn't actually go and point out my birth spot until about ten years ago.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: About to say close to the time that I found out I wasn't who I thought I was.
Speaker 1: Well, is the house there?
Speaker 2: Yes, it's been moved back farther from the road.  The road was called Tympe Cut, leading up to Riley's Place.
Speaker 1: How do you spell Tympe?
Speaker 2: I believe, I believe T-Y-M-P-E, Tympe and then cut.  And the, the main plantation down that Tympe Cut led to was called The Riley Place.  Man--many of us grew up not stating the town or the hamlet or village we were born in.  We just stated the county, see, because many of us were farmers, sharecroppers anyway, and, and that's about the closest we could come to it.
Story_ID: 74459
Speaker 1: Now can you tell us about your father?  What kind of person was he, and what did he do for a living?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: How did you all get along when--
Speaker 2: I often catch myself wondering that if mama and daddy both had gotten more formal education, what they really would have done.  Daddy went to the fifth grade, and he could read and write fairly well, very good at figuring.  Because in those days you had to know so you didn't get cheated.  You had to be right there when they weighed the cotton; it showed you if, if you were getting fifty cents a 100, that you know, the boss or whoever the, the plantation belonged to would have to have that fifty cents there waiting, ready.  But he, he, he bordered on genius in that he seemed to be able to do about anything he wanted to.  He was a blacksmith.  He, he, he, he put the shoes on, on the horses.  You know, you take and go in there, and you measure the horse's feet, and then you go and you had to fix that shoe to fit.  So, and he did that with the old, that old time forge.  It--
Speaker 1: The (unclear) board--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Um-hmm, and you would have to blow the fire, you see?  And he would make, make a piece of iron red hot, and then go to the anvil and cut off the piece or shape it in, into what he wanted.  He could build a house.  I never would take the chance driving a nail that he would take.  I mean he was just good.  He, he would build a house.  About the only thing he couldn't do was to build a chimney.  You know, he never did try to lay brick, but he could build a house.  They would first build the chimney and then, and then build everything around it.  He, he, he, he was very mechanical minded.  My mind goes back [clearing throat]--excuse me--it goes back to the days when the Fordson tractor was built.  You know, long before the John Deere and the McCormick, you had the Fordson.  I can remember the Fordson before they put tires on it.  It had great big cleats on the wheels.  And daddy could take that Fordson, jack it up and spread a sheet under it, and take out all the faulty parts, crankshaft and just about everything else, and lay each piece where it was supposed to go, and replace the parts.  And that thing was hard to crank after that, you know, for about a year.  And see, and you had to crank it from the front.  That was back before, before they even had starters on it.  He could do that, and yet he, he carried the status of a sharecropper.  Now before he passed on, he was the chief maintenance person for the high school, you know, kept the boilers going and kept everything fixed and what have you.
Story_ID: 74460
Speaker 1: Mama, on the other hand taught World War I G.I.s, and she wasn't that much older than they were coming back anyway.  See, I guess, what, the war ended in 18--somewhere--
Speaker 2: Yeah, 1918.
Speaker 1: Okay, and, and she, she, she actually got paid.  She drew a check for teaching there.  Now she had gone to the middle of the ninth grade, see, and that, that, that qualified her to get a certificate to teach them as they came back.  And she was good, particularly good in math.  I, I hated, back then in my early life, I hated long division.  I could do short division, you know, but as soon as one got to that, that place where you say put down this and carry that, I had a mental block.  And I remember one day she was going to teach me and I was rebelling, and I even faked a cry - I can't do that.  She says oh, yes, you can.  And what's more, you're going to do it this day.  And she reached up over on the wall.  Daddy had a razor strap over there.  He (laughter), he shaved with a straight razor, you know, long time.  But I don't think daddy ever bothered with a, you know, a razor with razor blades.  He'd go there and hit that thing several times, you know, with the straight razor and go and shave with it.  And when I saw mama get that strap, I think I would have done algebra at the time.
Speaker 2: 'Cause you know she wasn't gonna shave you when she--(laughter)--
Speaker 1: That's right (laughter).  Yeah, she, and she had a great big book.  It was called "Business Guide."  It was a kind of self-teaching book, had some of everything in it, include--including cursive writing, you know, how you're supposed to make that O and all that sort of thing.  It was pretty good.  And she used to make me study it.  I--but I, I find myself wondering what those two people would have gone on to do, had they more formal education.  And when people now talk about, you know, or insinuate that what happened back then has no bearing on the facts nowadays, that's simply not true.  You see, I remember--and 'course you know kids remember things like this.  I remember that the boss man's plow, you know, with those disks, those round disks on it.  Daddy suggested to the boss man, who had brought a machinist from, from the mill over to suggest what to do with it.  The, the, the hub would come off, and daddy made a suggestion as to how to, to make it stay on.  And the machinist looked at the boss, 'cause you know, you can see the, the, the scorn in his eye was evident.  You know, here's this guy, you know, this farmer, this sharecropper thinks that he can do that.  And the boss first had them to do what he suggested, and in two days the thing came off.  And then Mr. Dupree--that was his boss's name--told daddy to go ahead and do it the way he suggested and see what'll happen.  Daddy did it, and the thing wore out the plow.  And 'course the next day Mr. Dupree came back over.  I said well, now do you see?  You know, we got quite a kick out of things like that, yep.
Speaker 2: Okay, now, did, did your mother continue to teach, or did she--after the World War I mess--
Speaker 1: No, no, and I got an opportunity to, to see the grape die on the vine.  What happened to many people in a situation like that, where their dreams never became met, is that they, they kept--you know, each day the, the miracle is going to happen, you keep looking, keep looking, keep looking.
Story_ID: 74461
Speaker 1: And of course, the Depression made it even worse because daddy was caught up in the migration with mother's encouragement, you know, go north.  You can find--and you know, I thought about that when you and I were talking in there about those folk who said if you can just reach across the Mason-Dixon Line and you were free.  You're gonna find good work, high paying work, and other kind of things.  So mama would tell daddy or suggest to daddy, Pick, why don't you go north; go, go to Philadelphia [Pennsylvania]; go to New York City [New York]; go to Buffalo [New York].  What had happened was that many of the people who left in earlier migrations would come back and pretend that they were living the good life up there.  And we didn't know, until some of us went north ourselves, that many of them had just gotten their suits out of the pawn shop or had just put the first down payment on an automobile and, and shined it up.  And 'course we would stand in awe watching these shiny cars come down those dirt roads, and said oh, so and so is really living.  Well, daddy went up--well, daddy went to a lot of places up there trying to find work.  And usually when you lived on the Coast, like you sort of hugged the Coast going up, you know.  I used to hear 'em talk about Coatesville, Pennsylvania and Baltimore, Maryland.  And daddy went to all those places.  And he came back home, and he would say to some of us, some of the children, you know, whatever you do, get something in your head.  If you get it in your head, nobody can take it out.  He said, because many times you may be qualified to do something, you could actually do it, but usually showing some kind of paper precedes it.  You know, and he, he--then he would tell us about the times that he would sleep somewhere near the work window so that he could be the first or near the first to get to the window the next morning, in hope of getting a job.  And the boss would come to the window and say something like, all those with a high school diploma follow me.  My daddy says, I couldn't go; I didn't have a high school diploma.  And when the fellows who got the jobs would come back, we'd ask 'em what it was that they found and they would tell us.  He said, I could do that.  He said, but the fellows didn't say all those who can do this, you know, come and go with me.  He said all those with a high school diploma.  And he, he, he, he would, he would give us a good long talk about that.  And I remember one day mama was really heating up.  She wanted him to go back and try again.  And he walked on out on the porch, and some of us kids went out and saw down with him.  And he said, you know, kids, your mama just doesn't understand; said, she doesn't realize that many of the people who come down to revival meetings, you know, many of them would drive back to the revival meetings.  That was their opportunity to see all the kinfolk and so on.  He said, when, when they come down with those shiny automobiles and so, and he said, that, that, that gives a false impression as to how they're really living up there.  He said, because many of them are paper sack eaters.  And somebody like my sister, Dorothy, would ask, you know, daddy, what do you mean by paper sack eater?  He said, they have to go to the store prior to each meal, prior to their cooking each time.  He said, they, they have to go out and buy something.  He says now, we down here don't have any money, that's true; said, but look at all the food stuff we got out there.  We raise our own hogs; we have cows out there that we milk and so on; we have eggs and so forth.  We never have to worry about food.  He said, but they have to go to the store and buy a paper sack full of tomatoes or something like that.  He said, that--she just doesn't understand that you have to have a certain training level, a certain skill level, no matter where you go in this world.  And that stuck with most of us.  So, but, but mama, I don't think mama ever understood that, you know, those dreams were never gonna be fulfilled.
Story_ID: 74462
Speaker 1: Well, can you--did, did your parents have a story about how they met?  Did they talk about how they met?
Speaker 2: Yes.  I don't think there was anything very spectacular about it, but there, there, there were some humorous spots in it.  Daddy and mama married when they were very young.  They were, they were probably about seventeen, and daddy's mama didn't want him to get married.  And 'course, years later we teased Grandma Clorena, and told her that we knew the reason she didn't want daddy to get married.  It wasn't that she really thought that he was too young to get married.  We told her that you, you wanted, you wanted those kids to stay here on this farm (laughter) and remain farmhands, that's why.  And she would laugh and deny it, you know.  But she, she--that's the rationality she gave daddy, you know: you're, you're too young to get married; you don't know what you're doing.  And she wanted them to stay around there as long as possible to work in that field.  You see, my grandfather, Grandpa Arthur, was the recipient of that forty acres and a mule thing.  But, as happened in many case, the government didn't follow through on it.  And when the crash came in '29 [1929], he lost the, the plantation completely.  Of course he was de--he was dead though then when, when the crash came.  But to get back to the story between mama and daddy.  Grandma Clorena didn't want daddy to get married.  But my, my mother's mother liked daddy very much, and she was in on the elopement.  There was an elopement of a sort, and she was running around there helping mama get dressed.  And daddy couldn't get in his suit, you know.  You know, everybody had some clothes they called their Sunday-go-to-meeting.  Daddy had to put on a pair of clean overalls--and this was on a Saturday--and pretend--well, he was, he, you know, let her come up with her own thinking--he pretended he was going to a ballgame, and he was, he was, he was ambidextrous, you know, he could, he could pitch with one hand as well with the other one.  A. A. Sims used to get him to pitch two games a Saturday.  And back then $10 was a lot of money, and he could make $20 pitching two games.  And--
Speaker 1: So he'd pitch one game was one arm, one game was--
Speaker 2: Un-huh, come back pitch the next one with something like an hour's break between 'em.  And--but she didn't think anything.  Grandma Clorena didn't think anything.  She wasn't suspicious because daddy had on overalls.  Nobody gets married in overalls.  And lo and behold, daddy and mama got married.  'Course now, if you could pull it on them.  You know, they didn't talk about annulment or that kind of thing, you know.  You may have someone come in and say to you: okay, now you made your own bed; now you're gonna have to lie in it.  You know, but they didn't talk about, you know, go and gettin' marriage annulled and that kind of thing.  They said well, all right, you made, you made the decision.  But we teased both families about that.  We teased Grandma Sophie, my mama's mama, about her participation in it.  And, and we teased Grandma Clorena because we told her that wasn't the real reason that she didn't want daddy to get married.  But that's how they met.  I guess they knew each other, you know, generally, probably attended the same church at some time or another.  You know, churches were very close, because each church depended upon the memberships of, of the other churches in the general area for their audiences and congregations during revival meeting, see.  This week my church would visit yours, and you'd reciprocate, you know, the next week, that kind of thing.  So I guess they, they knew each other by having met up in such fashion.
Speaker 1: And that's what gives the communities a chance to, to intermingle and meet other (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yeah, and, and, and you remember [W.E.B.] DuBois in the, in, in, well, particularly in "The Souls of Black--
Speaker 1: Black Folks.
Speaker 2: --Black Folks," un-huh.  Yeah, you know, he mentioned about it was your social center, you see, as well as your economic center.  And, and he even said it was your financial center.  You know, you go--
Speaker 1: So, this was the case when you were coming up?
Speaker 2: Mm-hmm.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, it was the case when they were coming up and the case when I was coming up.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yep.
Story_ID: 75281
Speaker 1: Can you reflect back and tell us about some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up?  We always ask that question and --(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yes, the locust tree; locust was a kind of fruit, one, if you found one that was thoroughly ripe, you know, you'd bite into it, it had a jelly-like substance.  The pa--
Speaker 1: Was it--
Speaker 2: Locust.
Speaker 1: Locust tree.
Speaker 2: Mm-hmm.
Speaker 1: Right, and it had a, like was a pod on it or something?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, oh yeah, un-huh.  And when you--'course, you know, experience taught us to tell when they were ripe.  You know, you don't want to bite into a half ripe one, you know.  It's--
Speaker 1: Was it sweet or?
Speaker 2: Yeah, un-huh, thoroughly ripe, it was sweet.  You bite into a half ripe one, it give you lockjaw.  That was the persimmon.  Okay, now it was, you know, a little fruit so big, a little larger than a plum, and then of course the plum, the plum bushes all over the place, blackberries.  And many of the plantations had some type of orchard, fruit orchard, pears, apples.  And I often laugh now about the kinds of devilment that we kids got into.  Now, we never, ever thought of doing something like turning an Uzi on somebody's house or that--no, you didn't, you didn't injure your own community.  But we would steal eggs.  We would steal fruit out of the orchard, and of course, really, some, some of the owners would get after us, just on the principle of the thing, you know, you shouldn't steal period, you know.  But some didn't pay us any attention.  But for those who, who, who would try to shoot us out of the orchard, we always had a trick that worked just about every time.  See, we'd get up two groups instead of one.  And see, and while they're busy chasing one group, the next one would go in and, and get its share, you see, and then pull the same thing on the others.
Story_ID: 75282
Speaker 1: Now see, you may have heard people talk about a noted blues singer, because you--no doubt, you're too young to remember.  Peg Leg Jackson used to blow the harmonica, and he, he was one of those fellows that could, that could mouth the words and blow at the same time, you know, that kind of thing.  Well, Peg Leg Jackson's father owned one of those plantations.  You know, you had several plantations in that general area where my daddy grew up that were the result of that forty acres and a mule arrangement.  The Jacksons and the Murphys kept theirs, but there were, there were several other plantations that went under, you know, when they, they were speculating, you know, about the price of cotton.  And they were, they were assuming that it was gonna go up higher than fifty cents.  And the bottom dropped out of it and it caught all of that cotton at home, you see.  And then you had this run on the market, and it got cluttered.  You see, my grandfather's plantation got caught in that, but Peg Leg Jackson's family kept theirs.  But see, he and daddy grew up, you know, they were adjoining plantations, and they would work that on their own grandfather.  You know, you form a group over here and go and make Uncle Pete get after you, and then we'll go get ours.  And then you come back and we'll pull the same thing, you see.  And Uncle Pete didn't seem to realize what they were doing to him.  And he would say, "Good God, I ought to get my shotgun."  And he'd run in the house and get the shotgun, you know, and he would chase group one all down through the woods.  And group two would be up there gettin' all the pears and the apples they wanted.  They would do that to parties.  Boy, there's nothing like a Saturday night party or a Saturday night jippity (ph.).
Speaker 2: A jippity?
Speaker 1: Un-huh.  How did they spell that thing?  But what--the, the, the center of attraction was that you would, you would cook pork and beef in a great big wash pot together until it simmered down and became something of a stew, see.  And that, that, that was a centerpiece.  And then they would bring all the attending dishes and so on.  You know, somebody would bake several cakes and custards and so forth and so on.  But they would raid parties.  My dad and his group would now.  We weren't too much on raiding parties, but we'd get into all that other stuff, like your fruit orchard and your watermelon patch and that kind of thing.
Story_ID: 75283
Speaker 1: But daddy and his group--and sometimes we used to pull that back on him when he would be lecturing us about being good and so on.  We'd say now what about that time that you (laughter), you, you and Peg Leg used to do things.  And he'd hush and wouldn't say anything else.  But the--he told, he used to tell this one, and got quite a kick out of it himself.  He said they decided one night my Aunt Essie, Uncle George's brother's wife, who was the, the community's best cook.  Ooh, Aunt Essie could cook, bake all kinds of cakes, make the coconut stand up on 'em, you know.  And daddy, Peg, and some of the Murphy boys decided that they were going to raid that party that night.  And what they did was that they first went at the very beginning of the party to get a feel for where everything was situated, you know, the big hen is over here, the cake, the best looking cake is over there and so on.  And then they would go out and plan who was gonna get what.  But prior to your getting the food without being seen, they would designate someone to blow the lamp out.  See, you couldn't, you couldn't go in there and everybody knew who you were, you know.  And you'd get an inch on up and get close to the lamp and then blow it out.  Well, everybody is situated right by what he's going to steal.  And so you grab it and out of the door.  You can't tell who, who has what or who did what.  And now remember now, Aunt Essie is kin to them.  See, that's Uncle Ben's wife.  And daddy and, and those raided the party, and then had a predetermined meeting place where they'd all sit down and they would be down there eatin'.  And daddy said the next morning, he decided out of curiosity to go down to Aunt Essie's house.  And Aunt Essie got to talk about the fact that her party had been raided - I wonder what nasty, lowdown rascals would pull off something like that.  And daddy said he said, yeah, Aunt Essie, that sure was low down.  And daddy said that I had, I, I had grabbed the first dish.  They say, but they say Essie knows that no--they, they, would pull things like this.
Story_ID: 75284
Speaker 1: And I don't know if you've ever heard--I've, I've had the urge to look that up recently.  There was a formula that was called something like Nux Vomica.  And now I'm gon' check that out, that one could feed the hen and, and cause the egg to make the consumer sick.  And some, some of the people who found that, and they started to feed the hens this stuff.  And they could tell that who's, who's been raiding that nest, when you hear of somebody getting sick.  I understand that it, it, it would make you vomit all over the place, just by feeding it to the hen.  See, but oh, they used to raid those hen nests, you see.  Now those were the kinds of things that we did back then when we wanted to get into devilment--go in the watermelon patch.  Make sure that you use the same tracks so that there wouldn't be anything, like being able to trace you by your footprint or anything like that, and even if possible, walk in and then back out using the same tracks.  And there, there were a few things, I must admit, that many of us felt bad about, a few things that we did.  If a big enough crowd got together, you could really put a dent in somebody's watermelon patch.  See, because we were just at that age where independence was just joining hands with gregariousness, and you know how that can be.  You were with the group; you were part of the group, and yet each had to get his own.  You'd hear somebody, you know, say get your glad paws off mine.  And see, that means you had to get your own watermelon.  Now we could have gone in, and, and say, maybe pull five good sized watermelons, and it would have been enough for all of us.  See, but no, everybody had to get his own.  And see, and that, that, that's how we would do.
Speaker 2: Greed (laughter).
Speaker 1: Yeah, un-huh, yeah, just greed, you know--get your glad paws off mine; you should have got your own.  You see, and by the time we left out of there, you know, we, we would've put a dent in the poor fellow's watermelon patch.  But those were the things that we did back there for our devilment.  But shooting somebody or, or, or mugging, we, we didn't go in for that, yeah.
Story_ID: 75285
Speaker 1: Now, now tell me what kind of a little fellow were you?  What did you like to do?  And were you--did, did you like school or, or?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I loved school very much, and, and not simply because I dodged the field that way.  I must admit, though, that, you know, I didn't do any rejoicing over going to the field, but it was just something we, all of us had to do.  As a matter of fact, in many of the school districts a provision was made.  A time provision was made for gathering crops.  There was a period of time that you had to stay out and gather the crops, and then you went back.  And when I came along, blacks in the State of South Carolina had only years years to go to school.  We graduated after eleven years.  And see, they, they just tacked that--when, of course, desegregation came of course then.  It became twelve years for everybody.  But we had, we, we had to come home and labor--gathering time we called it--and of course go back after all the corn was pulled and the cotton was picked and that, that kind of thing.  I--but I loved school, and I credit probably mama's activity, with daddy's concurrence of course.  You know, it was he who told us put something in our heads anyway.  But I, I, I credit mama with the work that she did with the "Business Guide" to cause me to like school.  At age--between ages four and five, I was saying the alphabets and doing my figures.  And I got bored, because something happened and they didn't move fast enough, and I got bored and started to see how well I could say them backwards.  But by the end of age five, I could read.  Let's see, now how did those books go?  One was the "Dick and--"Dick and Jane."  One had to do with the dog by the name of Spot.  And then I--"Little Red Hen," you know, who tried to get people to help her, you know, harvest the wheat and grind it, and so on and so forth.  And nobody wanted to help until she got to the table, you know, and then everybody wanted in on it.  Well, we, we passed that one.  And then there was a book with the gingerbread boy and the old scroll.  So we, we moved, we moved very fast up through that. And I think somewhere along the way I skipped too, but because of many of the things that happened, mama getting ill occasionally, I, I was very old when I graduated from high school.  I graduated from high school in--when I--let's see, in 1947, and you remember I was born in '27 [1927], so I graduated from high school that June, just before.  You see, I, I was twenty--
Speaker 1: So you--
Speaker 2: --years old.
Speaker 1: --years old.
Speaker 2: --un-huh, yeah.  And I think I got--I, I developed the attitude that as old as I was, I didn't have any time to play around when I finally did get a chance to go.  And see, and I think that was a factor in my moving on through without any difficulty.
Story_ID: 75286
Speaker 1: Now, now let me backtrack a little bit, and can you tell me, like, did you have any teachers or mentors in, in school or in the community that--
Speaker 2: Oh, did I!
Speaker 1: --took interest in you?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.  Did you see that little newspaper that the "Union Daily Times" ran?  The young lady didn't--
Speaker 1: Tell us--
Speaker 2: --share that?
Speaker 1: Tell us.
Speaker 2: Okay.  The, the two teachers that I remember with, with a lot of fondness, one--and I think she taught me, if there was such a thing as kindergarten back then.  I don't recall now what they called it.  But her name was Aziley (ph.) Gilliam.  And she took so much care and pain with the children that she would even come over and take my fingers and help me make the cursive letters and so forth and so on.  And she had us writing--reading and writing very early.  Then there was a lady over in Chester County [South Carolina].  We moved over in Chester County for a short while.  And Mrs. Bennett, who was very good, she broke me out of faking the multiplication tables, and so I really got serious about those.  You know, when students get up to that blackboard with that sing-song method, it's easy to fake unless the teacher's watching very closely.  But she broke me out of that.  And Mrs., Mrs. Bennett taught us the Roman numerals right on through.  Of course, I found out later that I didn't, didn't have to use them very much, but I was just proud of the fact that I could, you know, the C with the 100, and I believe D, 500, and so on and so forth--L, 50, and what have you--but then, when we--of course, I have to mention Ms. Brown.  We went back to Union County [South Carolina], and a teacher by the name of Ms. Brown, and although I know I was a pain in the neck to her, and, and, and of course she took the time to tell me as much from time to time, I think she had a liking for me.  And I remember I used to worry her quite a bit by asking her did she think I had what was required to do high school.  And I remember one day she literally raked me over the coals.  She said I'm tired of you asking me that question.  She said of course you are.  You, you, you, you have what it takes.  Don't you realize that many rural students who get a chance to go to high school take it more seriously than many of the town's kids.  And she said when you get there, just make sure that you get your lesson then as you're getting it now.  And I remembered that when, when, when I got to high school.
Story_ID: 75287
Speaker 1: But one of the things that made me very disappointed, old A. A. Sims and all the speeches that he made.  And this is before I went to high school, where he was the principal, because actually, he was a principal when mama came along.  He would say he was an old classicist.  And see, and many of the people, many of the blacks who taught in the schools down here back, back during that period were classicist because many of those missionaries who came down here to teach, places like Benedict [College], and Shaw [University], and Virginia Union [University], and Jackson [State University], Morehouse [College] and so on, many--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--you know, W. S. Scarborough (unclear) a classist.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: [W.E.B.] DuBois was classist (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Right, yeah, and they really believed that a person was not educated unless he or she could high mathematics, Greek, and Latin.  See, they just believe--and they--I understand when I, when I helped Benedict[College] with its self-study, I found out some of those curriculums back there, in which those kids were--had--some of 'em had to read works like "The Iliad" and, and "Odyssey" and so on, and they had to read 'em in the original.  And here, we have students fussing because they had to read them English, you know.  At Morris College, about, about fifty miles south of here, Sumter, South Carolina, Morris College had a curriculum back then in which one had to take German.  See, now, just think back.  Now, those students whose, whose parents--many of them still had scars on their legs from the chains--had to go and take a curriculum like that.  See, so those, those classicist were rough on you.  They, they believed that you had to get in there and do that work.  And they were as rough on their students as those missionaries had been on them.  Because as far as many of the missionaries were concerned, they, they felt that they had to prove to the people down here that what they were doing was worth something.  And see, but when, when, when it came to our teachers, they just felt that you'd, you'd better get it or else you'd stay out there in that cotton patch the rest of your life.  So when I got to high school, they had just pulled Latin out of the curriculum, and I was so angry.  Man, I'm out there walking up and down the road behind that mule thinking about the time when I'm gonna be able to take that Latin and then become educated, you know, like A. A. Sims said, and then they pull it out just before I get there.  See, well, I took the next thing.  I, I don't think they had--I think the only foreign language that they had at that time was French.  I said well, I might as well go ahead and get it.  See, that's, that's the closest thing to it, since they have taken Latin out.  And then, as providence would have it, my English teacher, who happened to be the principal's wife, came in the school, came into our class, one of our classes, and asked if there were anybody that she could get to go down and cut up some stove wood for her.  She still cooked on those old--those big ranges you know, where you put the wood in there.  And I said yeah, you know, I'd, I'd, I'd cut wood.  I grew up on the farm, so I went down and it.  And from time to time, she would ask me to do it, until I--they sort of adopted me.  And the, the, the Sims's became my second home.  Now, I perhaps would have, perhaps, would have gone on to college anyway.  I can't be sure.  But I, I, I felt more of an impetus to go after I got close to the Sims's.
Story_ID: 75288
Speaker 1: Now, now tell me again the name of the school.  What was the name of the school you attended?
Speaker 2: Sims High School.  The school was named after him back somewhere around 1904.  When he came to Union County [South Carolina] to teach, they named the school after him.  And he used to brag.  And 'cause I guess, I guess Prof sort of became High John the Conqueror for many of us then.  Of course Uncle Pet had gone.  And he would say things before the superintendent of schools.
Speaker 1: Mr. Sims?
Speaker 2: Un-huh, he, he would say things.  You know, the superintendent would come in every once in a while to visit, you know.  Sometimes he'd just come to look in.
Speaker 1: Now this is a white man, right?
Speaker 2: Oh, oh, yeah--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --the, the superintendent.  Yeah, Sims is black.
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Okay, but Sims would say some things before T. C. Jolly that, that allowed us to know that, you know, he wasn't what we used to call "Uncle Tom," you know.  He would get up, and sometimes if he's in his mood, he get in there and get up on stage with--you know, you always had that few moments before you went to your classes.  You know, everybody had to assemble in the hall--in the auditorium.  And he would say things like, yes, once I get my hands on him, he never will go back to that cotton patch.  And see, and T. C. Jolly--we knew he didn't like for him to say that, because a lot of those plantation owners around there depended upon black labor, you know.  And Prof would be up there saying, you know, I, I ruined him.  Once they come in here, they'll never be satisfied any more out there at that cotton patch.  And you go ahead and you, you get all the formal education you can, because it, it--they're not gonna give you anything.  What you get, you're gonna have to get yourself.  You see, look at him sitting over there now.  He comes down here because that's part of his (laughter) job.  And we, we, we, we--
Speaker 1: Don't look at him (laughter)?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah, you know, kids be just screaming.  But, you know, he, he would say things like that.  And I think many of us got the feeling that we ought to go ahead and make it come true, you know, just go, go on to school, don't, don't, don't stop there.  But he, he, he, he became the, you know, the big wheel for many of us around there.  I, I think, I, I, I have the feeling that he and Reverend M. A. Zimmerman, and Reverend L. C. Sanders, who were three pastors in the area--see, he was a school principal and a pastor--I believe they got together and sort of made up with one another that they were gonna try to encourage me.  They, they didn't do it directly, you know, but they would do things and say things that were designed to, to encourage you to go ahead.  That's, that's the way most of 'em did it back then anyway.  You know, they'd say things like, boy, you might have something in you.  They'd say, you, you, you ought to go ahead and develop it, you know, that kind thing.  Well, that--although we didn't show it, we seldom showed it at the time, but that gave us the, the impetus to go on.
Story_ID: 74156
Speaker 1: When you were on the verge of graduating from high school, did you have an idea that you were gonna go to college?
Speaker 2: No, I had given up, really.  Interesting you should mention that.  I, I used to tell people that the cotton patch at night is a good place in which to pray so nobody will see you.  That was the big ambition of mine, to go right on through, inspired by some of my great teachers, and of course the Simses.  But I, I had absolutely no money.  Now when, when I say no money, I mean that.  I didn't--the day after I graduated from high school, I had convinced myself that maybe I had begged God enough, you know, he was gonna get tired of me, and I spent the greater part of the morning just walking back--just taking a last look around where I had spent roughly four years.  And I happened to walk up into the yard of a minister by the name of Reverend M.A. Zimmerman.  His, his son, parenthetically, just retired from the Army as a general, General Zimmerman.  He was chief chaplain of the United States.  I walked up in his yard, and of course we knew each other; I attended his church occasionally.  I was a very close friend to one of his members.  And we entered into chitchat, and then he asked me, "Boy, do you wanna go to school?"  And the question was so painful, until I wasn't very polite to him.  I said, "Now you know I don't have any money to go to school."  And he looked at me and said, "That's not what I asked you, is it?"  I said, "Well, yes, I want to go to school.  Now what?"  And I was--later I was happy that he didn't get angry at the way I was speaking to him because then in sort of subdued fashion he said, "Well, I know the president of a school who just may agree to giving you a work scholarship to college," and that he had reference to that junior college, which was then in Rock Hill, South Carolina.  And he said, "Would you--are you willing to work?"  I said, "I've done it all my life."  He said, "Now, it may mean, if he says yes, it may mean that you have to, have to leave right now and go there and work for the rest of the summer, and be there when the classes open up in the fall."  I said, "That'd be all right with me."  I didn't know that Zimmerman was that serious.  In about ten days, I received this communication from Dr. [James H.] Goudlock, the president of the school, offering me a work scholarship and asking me to come immediately.  And I packed my wooden trunk, I don't see any wooden trunks anymore, a wooden trunk, and one of the, the straps on it was broken.  And so I took a rope and tied it around and of course put it--they put it under--you know, the Greyhound put it in the compartment there.  And I went immediately to Rock Hill and I worked, plowed mule.
Story_ID: 74157
Speaker 1: And then when classes opened up that September, I entered class.  And of course, we had to always work out the schedule.  The teachers would set the classes, and then I would, I would go between classes.  Many times I'd have to break speed limits gettin' back so that I could get in class on time.  And one of my teachers, my French teacher--you know, I, I mentioned that I took French at Sims High--got to Friendship, the same textbook, the "Nous Chardonel" (ph.).  And you see, I, I, I, I think Ms. Barber (ph.) thought I was a good student.  But I came in late one day, and I really couldn't help it, and she was giving a quiz.  And I didn't make any noise.  I eased in the door, sat down--and period was about half gone--and looked up, and lo and behold, it was the same thing that I'd had in high school.  So I wrote the answers down, and got up, and left.  And when, when she gave the papers back, she had put up on my paper "A", and then marked through it, and then put "B", and wrote a little note saying no student comes into my class with the period half gone, and walks out with an A.  And so the next day, you know, I kept my pleasant demeanor and everything.  The next day I said, Ms. Barber, I saw what you put on my paper, but that's all right.  I'm gonna make an A next time anyway.  I think it wasn't until years later that I explained to her that Sims High School had taught French to any student who wanted it, and had used that same textbook.  So as a matter of fact, we, we were in conversational French before I left Sims High.  So that, that, later on, my sharing that with a lot of schools caused them to make provision, to give credit to students who had picked up the same level of French somewhere else before they got there.  But see, back then, they were sticklers to following the book and following the law, you know.  See, but I had gone beyond what they were teaching there in, in, in, in, in Friendship [Junior College].
Story_ID: 74158
Speaker 1: Really, Dr. [James H.] Goudlock was very cooperative, as well--let, let's just put it the way it was.  He and [M.A.] Zimmerman saved my life.  And when I finished Friendship, salutatorian, I went on to Benedict [College] here in Columbia [South Carolina].  And Dr. Goudlock and the then president here got together, and I never--they didn't tell, they didn't even tell me they were going to do this.  They got together and agreed that I would come back each summer to Rock Hill [South Carolina] and work on the farm.  And then the lump sum check would be sent back to Benedict when I got ready to go back for classes in September.  And they did that for the two years that I went to, went to Benedict [College].  As a matter of fact, he even, Dr. Goudlock even allowed me to come back and work on the farm just prior to my going off to the seminary.  See, so a lot of people had a hand in my going off to school.  I still didn't have any money.  I don't know to this day what my formal education cost, because the money never came through my hands.  Benedict [College] gave a work scholarship.  I don't know whether, I don't whether it was semi scholarship--semi-academic scholarship in there or not.  All I know is I kept working.  I had three jobs on campus.  And as long as I kept working, I went to class.  I don't know how much my formal education cost.
Story_ID: 74159
Speaker 1: And when I got to seminary, it was pretty much the same thing.  I don't know what--they told me that mine was a semi-work and academic, but at Colgate Rochester [Colgate Rochester Crozer Divinity School, Rochester, New York] was a dog.  You did not fall between cumulative 70--below cumulative 75, and they meant that; 74.9 would not cut it.  And of course, of course, you know, back then it had the reputation of being one of the tough schools of, well, I guess of the, of the world.
Speaker 2: Now who were some of the--you were telling me earlier, I mean before, off, off camera about some of the more famous people that went through--
Speaker 1: Un-huh, Mordecai [Wyatt] Johnson, the longtime president of Howard University; Chuck Botti (ph.), who became something of an authority on Bach and spirituals, Negro spirituals; the, the old mystic, Howard Thurman, graduated from Colgate Rochester; J. H. Jackson; a, a scholar by the name of Lucius M. Tobin.  Lucius Tobin taught at Morehouse [College] for about twenty-eight years.  Yeah, 'cause he and Benjamin Mays were friends before they went on their separate ways.  And see, and Mays came back and became president of Morehouse.  And Tobin was looking for a job, at one point thought that he had the presidency of Morris College at the time, but they found out that a second group nolle prossed what the, the first group had decided, that is give him the job.  And I think probably Dr. Mays realized the deal that he had gotten and, and invited him to Morehouse to teach, and he, he remained there most of his teaching days.  And so those are some of the people that I think of right off hand.
Story_ID: 74160
Speaker 1: And what kind of a place was, was Rochester, right, Rochester, New York?
Speaker 2: Rochester--
Speaker 1: Yeah, that's the--
Speaker 2: --the snow capital, a, a, aside from Buffalo [New York] and Niagara Falls.
Speaker 1: It used to be the home of Frederick Douglass in the 1850s.
Speaker 2: Yes, yes, Eastman School of Music.
Speaker 1: Eastman Kodak is--
Speaker 2: Eastman Kodak, right.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: It will snow at the drop of a hat.  Now you can imagine, a little country boy from South Carolina.  Now I'd seen snow.  There were a few times in my life that daddy had to make these burly (ph.) sacks and tie around our legs and feet whenever we went rabbit hunting.  We've gotten enough snow that he had to do that.  But you'd go to Rochester [New York], and go to sleep at night looking out of your window on the ground floor, and get up the next morning and you can't see out of it.
Speaker 1: Out of the window (laughter)?
Speaker 2: That's right.  Man,that was weird.  And it felt like Lake Ontario had been lifted up and dumped in the form of snow right down on Rochester.  And you see, Colgate, Colgate Rochester Seminary is up on a high hill anyway.  I don't know why they came up with that symbolism to build seminaries up on a high hill, whether that gave you a head start to heaven or what, you know.  But it, it would snow up there.  And they used to tell me that it was even worse up in a place called Water Town in, in New York.  Yeah, but, but I, I, I got used to it.  I got used to it after my first year.  You, when you get into the lesson and everything, you forget all that other stuff.
Story_ID: 74161
Speaker 1: Now did you think that since you'd cross the Mason-Dixon Line, you were free (unclear)?
Speaker 2: Yeah, that's what everybody had told me (laughter).  They--and I, well, when I went up there, my bags, you know, my suitcases and what have you, got misplaced, and it was about two weeks before they located them.  I had to buy me some used clothes, that kind of thing.  And my hair had grown way over my shirt collar.  And so, I didn't have an automobile, but whenever I got a chance, I would branch out and, and learn some of the city so I could walk and, and find what I wanted, and then go back to the seminary.  And I needed a haircut bad, and I went to the first barbershop I came up on, walked in.  There were three barbers in it.  And not having been there before, I didn't know whom to trust, but I just took a chance.  And I got in this chair, and the fellow did a good job.  And I, I had a little change in my pocket, got, got up and probably tipped him, and I was, I was sort of surprised that he could cut black hair that well.  And well, my hair grew back.  I went--this time I looked for--went to the same one and waited until my barber was free.  And I got in the chair and he did another good job.  I got up and tipped him.  As I walked on away from the shop, apparently the owner had exited through the back way and met me around to the front.  And the guy was actually crying real tears.  He said friend, I don't mean any harm about what I'm about to say.  He said I don't have a bigoted bone in my body, but please understand, if you continue to come, I will lose roughly 80 percent of my clientele.  Please understand what I'm trying to say.  I got a wife and three kids.  He said I'll you what I'll do.  I'll, I will even put you in the car and take you down to Clarissa Street so that you can meet some of the black barbers down there.  We're in the same union together, and I'll introduce you.  And I looked at him.  I mean, you know, I grew up on a--in a subculture where black men didn't cry unless their mamas died or something, you know, and this guy crying real tears.  I looked at him, had to really keep from laughing.  I said oh, that's all right, friend.  I understand; that's all right.  So I went on back, and it struck me as funny.  And I was telling some of the--my schoolmates about it.  And cause one little girl by the name of Pat, and 'cause women had just begun to go to a seminary along about that time, and she wanted to get up a group and go picket the place.  Because, you see, that was just before that, that whole thing, that protest thing, started to mushroom.  And I told her--
Speaker 1: About what year is this?
Speaker 2: Huh?
Speaker 1: About what--
Speaker 2: This, this was in 1952.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: See, I went up there in September of '51 [1951].  See, and that was the second haircut I had gotten, see.  I found out folk wore their hair long up there.  I can understand it, as cold as it was there.  But that was, that was the second haircut I had gotten, so this was, this was '52 [1952], early '52 [1952].  And I told 'em no, don't go down and picket that, that guy's place.  Man standing up there crying, I said maybe he does have a wife and three kids, and he's afraid that, that folk would stop--
Speaker 1: But--
Speaker 2: But they, they, they--I kept them from picketing him.
Story_ID: 74162
Speaker 1: Now, now, now this is an era where a lot of--I guess in theological schools, there was a philosophy of social responsibility being preached in the northern theological schools, in especially--
Speaker 2: Un-huh, and particularly in--at Colgate Rochester [Crozer Divinity School] because--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --you must understand that they were the beneficiary of, of that social gospel tradition.  Walter Rauschenbusch--
Speaker 1: Can you spell his name for us?
Speaker 2: Yeah, Walter, W-A-L-T-E-R, R-A-U-S-C-H-E-N-B-U-S-C-H.
Speaker 1: Walter Rauschenbusch.
Speaker 2: Walter--
Speaker 1: Yeah, I do--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --Rauschenbusch.
Speaker 1: Is he from Rochester or is he from--
Speaker 2: Apparently, he was--I think he was an immigrant's son over here.  I don't think he came over as a teacher.  I think he was an immigrant's son here.  And I understand he had, he had a very rough time, not only because back when he came out with that position that a lot of people felt uneasy about it, you know, you must apply the Christian principles to the social order.  Not only that, but you see, keep in mind, you see, that was right, right after the war with Germany.  And see, and here he with this big German sounding name, you see, so he, he, he, he, he caught it for both reasons.
Speaker 1: Now there's a--here's an interesting point, just--I don't know if you are aware of this, but when [Frederick] Douglass was in Rochester, there was a community of Germans who had participated in the German Revolution of 1848.  They were living in Germany.  In fact, one German woman was a close associate of Douglass for over twenty-eight years, and some speculation that they were going together (unclear)--but there's been a, there's been a book written about it.  But there's a long tradition of this German activism in Rochester.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah, well, he--and (unclear)--he could very well have been a, a part of that group.  But Colgate Rochester was particularly known for that social gospel tradition.  A lot of other people had been influenced by it, Washington, Gladden, and folk of, of, of that nature.  When I was there, there was a teacher on the faculty who personally had been a close friend of John L. Lewis, you know, the, the, the labor movement--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --and that kind of thing.
Story_ID: 74163
Speaker 1: So this was why I said to you earlier that it, it was difficult for us to understand J. H. [Joseph H.] Jackson's attitude toward the Civil Rights Movement, giving the fact that he had gone through--
Speaker 2: And just for the record--
Speaker 1: --Colgate Rochester [Crozer Divinity School].
Speaker 2: --yeah, J. H. Jackson was a leader of the--
Speaker 1: National Baptist Convention.  Sometimes I get mixed up with USA's and the Inc's and so on.  But he was of the biggest one--
Speaker 2: Yeah--
Speaker 1: --at that time.
Speaker 2: --it was the largest black organization in the world.
Speaker 1: Right.  And, and he, he, he, he had been the leader.  He had been the president for quite a while.  And the time came when many felt that he ought to step down, so some of the other fellows could, could become president.  And finally, the whole thing boiled over.  And I think one of the things that sort of tipped the boiling pot was the set to between him and Martin Luther King, Jr.  Really, I don't know, have you ever, have you ever looked at some of those documents in that thing that Gayraud Wilmore and Jim Cone did together called "Black Theology: A Documentary History?"  They got out volume II now.  As a matter of fact, I got it down there.  But for, for, many people who probably had not paid that much attention to what was going on in the organization, when, when, when he wrote a document, wrote an essay in which he virtually declared the Civil Rights Movement to be a heresy.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Um-hmm. Well, you see, that tipped it for a lot of other folk.  And I think that was about all that Taylor and, and, and, and oh, Booth--
Speaker 2: Reverend Gardner Taylor, right?
Speaker 1: Mm-hmm--Booth and some of the other fellows could stand.  They, they couldn't take it anymore, so they, they got together and formed the Progressive, and it's been well ever since.
Speaker 2: The Progressive National Baptist Convention, right?
Speaker 1: Yeah, un-huh, yeah.  Actually, you know, they, they fought, I mean physically fought at Kansas City.
Speaker 2: Nineteen sixty-one [1961].
Speaker 1: Mm-hmm, yeah, and the "Jet" photographer was there and took some very revealing pictures.  And I understand they were, they were actually throwing chairs back and forth from--
Speaker 2: Were, were you at that convention?
Speaker 1: No, no, no, I didn't, I, I, I didn't go to that one. 'Course we knew about the, the impending difficulties there, because we had it on Benedict's [College] campus, you see, loyalist to both groups.  See, the revered Dr. Maxie S. Gordon, Sr. usually would avoid controversy like that.  And I guess it was advantageous for him to do it, because Dr. [J.H.] Jackson would send him as a sort of his, his international ambassador.  Gordon was very close friends to Tubman of Liberia.
Speaker 2: V. S. Tubman.
Speaker 1: Um-huh, yeah.  And see, and [J.H.] Jackson had a lot of pull international, and he would send [Maxie S.] Gordon to Liberia and other places.  So Gordon never would--we would try to egg him into saying something sometimes.  He never--he, he would always back off.  But there were, there were others on campus that were quite adamant and vocal about their wanting J. H. [Johnson] to step down.  Yeah, and old E. E. Ryder (ph.) would say: I want him out now!  And the boys had a joke going.  You know, they would say--and of course you know who [J.H.] Jackson was, a, a noted speaker, and he had a kind of charisma that would catch up the crowd.  And the fellows would go to the convention with some sort of plan to oust him.  And the boys would get together and say, now let me tell you one thing: if you're gonna oust him, you'd better do it before he comes to the point of preaching.  They said don't let him preach first and think that you're gonna pull it off.  They said if you let him speak first, they're going to, they're gonna re-elect him by acclimation, you see.  So after, after the fight though, and after the splintering, I think it became rather easy then--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --to oust him, yeah.
Speaker 2: Well, he stayed around for a while though, didn't he--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Oh yeah, he was, he, he was--what was he, about twenty-five years or something like?
Speaker 2: A many of his works in Chicago have be decade of coming--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Mm-hmm.
Speaker 2: --the church is still there with the--
Speaker 1: Who's the pastor there now?
Speaker 2: I forget his name, but, but they're--they've--the philosophy has--I mean his philosophy has since been repudiated basically by the, by the members of the church.
Speaker 1: Oh.
Story_ID: 74164
Speaker 1: But that--the--so, at this time, during the time that you were in Rochester [New York], Dr. [Martin Luther] King was at Crozer [Colgate Rochester Crozer Divinity School, Rochester, New York] I guess.
Speaker 2: Mm-hmm, although [Marting Luther] King was younger.  King was younger.  He, he, he, I think he might have been two years behind me.  I think he, I think he was two years behind me.
Speaker 1: Yeah, he was born in '29 [1929] I think it was.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: (Unclear)--and he was influenced by Reinhold Niebuhr--(unclear)--
Speaker 2: Well, he was influenced by a lot of powerful fellows.  The Niebuhrs, you know, there are two of 'em.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And Richard, Richard--well, H. R., Helmut Richard Niebuhr, that was Reiny's brother.  Reiny, Reiny didn't teach at Crozer.  He was at Union, but he was very influential across the nation.  And King, of course, fell in love with his realism, his Augustinian realism they called it.  But see, Niebuhr actually had a system by which he advocated that one apply Christian principles to a social order.
Story_ID: 74165
Speaker 1: [We were] talking about the influences of [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther] King [Jr.] and some of these same--the influences--some, some of the same, of the same thought, same wave of thought was affecting you as well.
Speaker 2: Right, right.
Speaker 1: And so--
Speaker 2: He, he, he, he mentioned in many of his works the influence of [Walter] Rauschenbusch upon him.  Also, a person that influenced King quite a bit wa--was a person at ha--I believe at Boston, where he did his Ph.D. work, Harold DeWolf, capital D-E, capital W-O-L-F, I believe.  And 'course, that happens to theological students.  You, you find somebody in there that you like, and the first thing you know, you, you, you, you deem them someone that you, you wanna be like.  One of--I think the most influential professor in my first level seminary was a, a [E.J.] Goodspeed protege, you remember I mentioned when I was showing "The Enduring Dream," Benedict's [College] history.
Speaker 1: Mm-hmm.
Speaker 2: You know, I, I showed you the picture of Goodspeed, Sr., E. J. Goodspeed, Sr.
Speaker 1: Yeah, he was one of the presidents at the--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yeah, he was one of the presidents of Benedict [College] way back there.  Well, ga--my teacher, James Rodney Branton, was a Goodspeed protege.  Goodspeed and his very influential book called "Introduction to the New Testament" has a listing of his proteges in the back.  Branton was professor of New Testament and Greek at Colgate Rochester.  And the old, the A. A. Sims admonition came back.  I didn't get Latin, but I said now is the opportunity for me to get Greek.  And of course that was really exhilarating to Branton anyway, because for some reason Branton felt it his personal mission to get more blacks to, to take Greek.  As a matter of fact, he, he wanted to encourage more black scholars in the New Testament to, to encourage blacks to go ahead and, and do their Ph.D.'s in New Testament.  Of course, he really didn't have too much success.  We used to feel sorry for him after a while.  He had gotten--extracted a promise from Jim [James E.] Cheek, you know, who, who used to be at Howard [University].  See, Jim [James E.] Cheek, promised Dr. Branton that he was going on to Drew and do his Ph.D. in New Testament, and changed his mind later and did it in patristics, you know, the old church fathers back during the Christian period.  That broke Branton's heart.  He thought he had Channing Phillips.  Did you ever run into Channing Phillips?  I think he is a kind of token who ran for president at one time back there.
Speaker 1: Yes, right, right.
Speaker 2: Yeah, okay.
Speaker 1: The Republicans nominated--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Ut--un-huh.
Speaker 1: --right.
Speaker 2: And Channing, Channing's favorite professor, whom he grew up admiring, died right after Channing graduated from Colgate Rochester, Clarence Tucker Craig.  And that--I don't know--it did something negative to Channing, and he, he never fulfilled it.
Story_ID: 74166
Speaker 1: Really, I, I didn't have at the time any yen for going on doing a Ph.D.  I just wanted to go ahead and take Greek, probably because of the influence of A. A. Sims and because I thought it would help me to, to read the original, you know, Old Testament doc--
Speaker 2: That's, that's, that's what I wanted to ask about, the relationship between learning Greek and New Testament study.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Is it true that a lot of the original material is written in Greek--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Yeah, the New Testament--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --most of it, an overwhelming degree.  You may, you may find some Aramaic in some passage on--but most of the New Testament was written in Greek originally.  Now, of course, you go to the Old Testament, it's Hebrew.  But when, when, when you get to the, the Greek, it, it, it, it, it--or get to the New Testament, it's Greek.  And it was sort of providential that I did that, because it so happened that when I went to a third level seminary at Andover Newton, I ran into an interpretation in one of those commentaries that I, I took great issue with.  And I decided that I was going to write the book which turned, which turned out to be "Biblical Faith and the Black American," on that--my experience with white biblical interpretation in the South.  And so, I struck off on that.  I was, I was quite burned up at the time, so, that, that's what caused the book.
Story_ID: 74167
Speaker 1: Now what, what--can you give us an example of, of a point that you addressed that you, you know, straightened out the--I mean, you know, in that you took--
Speaker 2: That I took issue with on?
Speaker 1: --issue with, yeah.
Speaker 2: This fellow who was William Baird, B-A-I-R-D, probably was a pretty good scholar, as, as, as far as he went that is, until you actually came to the nuances of his interpretation of the New Testament.  He was at Brite Divinity School down in [Fort Worth] Texas.  I think that's connected with Texas Christian.  And when he got to Luke the fourth chapter, particularly the passage with Luke 4:16 through 21.  That's where Jesus said the spirit of God is up on me because he's anointed me to preach the gospel to the poor, and actually when one of the--one of the meanings of the Hebrew, to preach, and in some sense the Greek, was to, to proclaim--not only to proclaim, but also apply.  And he went on and said when it, when it got down to the statement where it says "and give release to the captives," he said what Jesus obviously meant was that he came to give people release from the captivity of sin and Satan.  Well, now, right away you can see that Southern nuance which fears saying all kinds of release which encumbers or enslaves human beings.  See, he wants to leave it in the church, see.  That wasn't supposed to be applied to the [Nelson] Mandelas of the world.  See, I took issue with that.  It so happened at the time that the Englishman who did the commentary on 2nd Isaiah, from where Jesus drew that scripture he read at his home synagogue, Isaiah 61:1-2.  This Englishman said that what the prophet meant was he came to release persons who had been held captive by other human beings against their will.  Well, now, what private conversation had William Baird held with Jesus to claim that obviously that's what Jesus meant, that you're restrict it to sin and Satan?  That's precisely what they had concluded at the, the Virginia House of Burgesses.  You know, you're becoming a Christian just doesn't change your physical being one bit.  And we used to make a joke about that, you know, said, what did massa say?  Massa said, "Nigger, take your soul to God, and bring the rest of you to me."  You see, so, I, I remember I was steamed up that day, I ran over to Phyllis Trible's office.  And 'course that was during the marching period.  And Phyllis saw me coming, and her poor little eyes seemed to say, now what?  And so I stomped in there and said why don't you biblical scholars correct people like this?  Y'all let them get by with murder.  She looked around--and I wanted, I wanted to pick a fight out of, but she wouldn't bite.  And that's a bad feeling, when you wanna fight and nobody obliges.  And she looked up at me, and she said, well, why don't you do something about it?  And so I wheeled around and shot back over my shoulder, by George, I will.  And seeing old, old Eddie O'Neal had been after me anyway about giving him a topic, you know, what I was gonna do my thesis on, you see.  And I went straight to him, said this is what I'm going to do.  I mean I grew up in it, and I, I have seen the mistakes and so on, and how people get away with it, and that's what I'm gonna write on.  So that, that, that, that book was my worked over thesis.
Speaker 1: That's something.  That's impressive. I'm-- you know.
Speaker 2: Mmm-hmm
Story_ID: 74168
Speaker 1: And I told you that, that [HM Reverend Dr.] Jeremiah [A. Wright] may, may, you know, he's got connections, you know.
Speaker 2: Reverend, Reverend Jeremiah Wright--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Un-huh, he--they may have some around Chicago [Illinois] there, you know--
Speaker 2: The name of your book once again is--that--
Speaker 1: Okay, "Biblical Faith and the Black American";  that's the first one.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: All right, that's something.  And it's interesting that you should use that--I mean the very same words about setting the captives free were used by, same words were used by Major Martin Delany in the free--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Oh yeah, yeah, yeah.
Speaker 2: --at St. Helen at, at the Brick Church.  He said I come to open the gates and set the captives free.
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 2: And quoted that same passage.  It was a black man, you know, quoted--
Speaker 1: Oh yeah, yeah, Martin R. Delany.  He said there's been too much waiting.  Yeah, it's been too much of the wrong kind of waiting up on God.  You see, old Gayraud Wilmore was at Boston [Massachusetts], see, when I was up there.  As a matter of fact, when I was working, working on that, on that thesis, I took a course under him.
Speaker 2: Gay--what's his name?
Speaker 1: Gayraud Wilmore.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: He's not--well, he's, he's now pretty much retired.  The last place where he taught was in--Interdenominational Theological Center in Atlanta [Georgia].  Yeah, he's still down there living in Atlanta somewhere.
Speaker 2: Now, now does he have a connection to Delaney or to this other--this--
Speaker 1: No, he was--he's, he's, he's a rather noted religious historian of the stature of the boy who died at Duke [University] not too long ago, C. Eric Lincoln.
Speaker 2: Oh--
Speaker 1: Yeah, he and C. Eric were good friends.  No, Gayraud Wilmore is the guy that sort of teamed up with Jim [James] Cone.  You see, they were, they were right on the cutting edge of that "Black Power" struggle.
Speaker 2: Right, James Cone--(unclear)--
Speaker 1: Yeah, well, you see, Wilmore was in there.  He--although Cone did most of the first writing when the National Black Churchmen first started to, to write their position.  But he's been, he's been with it right from the beginning.
Story_ID: 74169
Speaker 1: Now what, what, what is the National Black Churchmen.  Explain that to people.
Speaker 2: I don't know now whether it's still in existence really, at least in the same form that it was.  But that was a group of clergy persons and teachers who pushed off from the crisis that developed between the Black Power Movement, let's say, and Martin Luther King, Jr.  You see, SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee]--see, there was the Southern Christian Leadership Conference [SCLC].  That was basically the group that King pushed off from.
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: But then there developed a rather younger group of Young Turks who deemed King's pace to be too slow and the demands not strong enough.  And, and, and they, they started to really join hands more with people like [Stokely] Carmichael and [H.] Rap Brown, and to some degree Huey Newton, you see.  And that movement--you remember, Stokely was the one that really popularized the, the phrase--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: The "Black Power."
Speaker 2: Un-huh, "Black Power."  And of course old Adam Clayton Powell was in on it too.  And that group got together.  But now, rather than, rather than to repudiate the truth of what the Black Power Movement was saying, [James] Cone--people like Cone, and [Gayraud] Wilmore, J. D. Otis Roberts, they said look, there is a truth in there that we'd better not sidestep, because how do we know that the black--the whole Black Power Movement is not God Almighty's, no, N-O!  Two, white racism in America, how do we know that?  And they went on to make a case for that assertion.  And they found, of course, several pieces of material in the Bible that tends to say that, that when God gets tired of what's been going against His will, that God will sometimes even use a person or a group that doesn't necessarily believe in Him as his whipping switch.  Well, you gotta story in the Old Testament that Cyrus of Persia became Yahweh's whipping switch, to turn around whip Is--to, to, to, to, to whip Judah for disobeying.  See, and Judah was God's chosen people.  So they said suppose, the H. Rap Browns, and, and, and the Stokely Carmichaels, and the Huey Newtons that we, we going around here saying that we don't like.  Suppose God is saying that since you bypass Me, I'm gonna take them and use them as my whipping spit--switch.  And they pushed off from that.  And then they got Cone to sit down and write his first book, "Black Theology and Black Power."  And then they've been writing ever since.
Story_ID: 74170
Speaker 1: Now did you, have you--did you encounter Cain Hope Felder at all at--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yeah, I've got his book, as a matter of fact, in that list over there where I was showing you some of the things that I was cited in.  Well, see, he cites me in there as being one of the early starters of, of that.  And man, 'course, this, this is good for an old fellow who's been hidden behind the workbench like me.  I didn't know that so many folk had read that book and had become, to some degree, inspired by it until I went up to that conference that he called at Howard [University], called Stony the Road We Trod.  Yeah, he invited me up there personally and then hand--when, when I got ready, I gave, gave him a copy of his book to autograph for me.  And he said that you--did you notice in here that I mentioned you at the beginning, and see, I hadn't.  You know, I was just so glad that I got it, and I would turn to various chapters, you know.  I didn't start at the beginning, see, with the intention of going all the way through it.  And you had some, you had some young black scholars, male and female, in there who, who, who, who were not, who, who were not only taking Greek, some of 'em were going there actually digging up on Aramaic, you see, because they had read, they had read that.  And many of 'em told me that many of them had become a big disillusioned with the whole Christian movement until they picked that up.
Speaker 1: They could actually read for themselves what the original--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --works were.
Story_ID: 74171
Speaker 1: Have you--what do you think about the scholars who are now translating the Dead Sea Scrolls and some of the--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Oh, I think those will help, definitely.  Any, any scholarship that makes use of, you know, newly found materials and so on, you know, represent a plus.  Yeah, yeah, no, you'll, you'll never catch me, you know, drawing up and saying no, don't read it.  I mean let them do it.  I mean let's find out more.  As a matter of fact, I've been intrigued even before the popular books started to come out on it.  I've been intrigued with the question of what happened to Jesus.  What was he doing from age twelve to age thirty?  Nobody seems to know.  That's a long period.  Of course now various writers are claiming, some say he, he went to places like India; some said that he went down to Memphis, Egypt, and there, you know, got a, got a chance to look at some other secret stuff that they had down there.  See, well, who knows?  I mean you don't, you don't spend that long sitting down twiddling your thumbs.  And see, Jesus certainly relied upon and drew from the scriptures of his ancestors, but at many notable points Jesus disagreed with some of his ancestors.  As big a shot as Moses was, he disagreed with Moses.  He disagreed emphatically with Moses on the question of divorce.  You see, Moses, Moses agreed with the idea that the divorce should be a one-way street.  Man could divorce his wife, but a woman couldn't divorce man.  And now people like Jackie Grant, whom I talked way back then, and, and other feminist theologians are giving them a fit on that, yeah.  Say what was Jesus doing?  I wish I knew.  I wish somebody would unearth something that tells us what made him--with all of that leaning against the female, what made him take the opposite position?  Why was he so kind to children?  Man, in, in, in many of areas over there, woman and a child, you know, stand no chance.  I mean folk claimed that they were getting disturbed and so on when they found out that Afghan women were treated the way they were.  And so I said well, heck, you don't read?  I mean the leaning of the world has always been--had, had an anti-feminine bias, even our mythology.  Look who caused the evil to come into the world, according to myths, Pandora and Eve.  But those are myths.  So it depends on who's doing the writing.
Story_ID: 74172
Speaker 1: So as a, as a theolo--as a theologian, who's studied in, in the seminaries, you, you don't take the Bible literally then?
Speaker 2: No, and that was, that was one of the most devastating things to hit religious scholarship in America.  Actually, it's not scholarship.  But, you see, the religious veins in America were poisoned by the one issue, slavery.  That caused a lot of people to, to frown at genuine biblical scholarship, because they didn't want their views changed and so on.  I mentioned the Virginia House of Burgesses and what happened there.  Well, you see, that was over the slavery question.  They didn't want their property, you know, taken from them.  Say, if you become--if you believe in Jesus Christ, then you were, you, you were set free.  They didn't want that.  That represented their livelihood.  They--but, but you see, as long as people failed to do solid scholarship down in this part of the country, and for that matter, over the whole, the country, people could get by with all that stuff about the Ham doctrine and the Cain doctrine.  Of course you know the boy who, who, who did the appeal, David Walker.  You know, he, he messed up the Cain doctrine.  They said--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yeah, he said yeah, stop and think for a moment.  You got some sense.  Now you tell me which group acts more like Cain?  And see, so that one died, but the Ham doctrine actually to some noticeable degree is still with us.
Speaker 1: Yes, I, I heard the head of the Klan [Ku Klux Klan] was on a talk show, stumped Jesse Jackson with it--(unclear) didn't Ham curse, you know, the black race and--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --Jesse couldn't--I mean at the time, I don't know.  He couldn't form a response.
Speaker 2: Actually--
Speaker 1: David Duke is the one who--(unclear)--
Speaker 2: Actually, when you, when you really do genuine research on that, that passage, as a passage, has really nothing to do with, with color or origin.  That is a small piece of etiology.  Etiology is the study of origins.  That's a little piece of etiology, which reflects Israel's almost primordial suspicion of agriculture.  Look what kind of crop Noah decided to raise.  You remember?
Speaker 1: What--no, what did he, what, what--
Speaker 2: Grapes.
Speaker 1: Grapes?
Speaker 2: Yes.  So, (laughter) now, but--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--no implications of that (laughter).
Speaker 2: Un-huh, yeah, yeah.  But now, you see, one really to appreciate fully that whole thing, one has to understand that whole long saga of Baalism.
Story_ID: 74173
Speaker 1: But, but you see, there's one even more devastating there.  That's funny enough, but what about the, the person who not only writes about his own obituary, but the guy saying of himself, "Moses was the most humble man whom God ever made."
Speaker 2: Okay, this is Moses writing about himself--
Speaker 1: Un-huh, yeah, man.
Speaker 2: --in the, in the first five books of the Bible (laughter).
Speaker 1: Un-huh.
Speaker 2: Yeah, so, a lot of--I guess there's still a lot of research to be done.  Now, we, we were talk, talk, talking off camera the research that needs to be done on the, on the Bible--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Yeah, that's why I say--
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --don't stop, don't stop; let it go; all you can find out, do it.  That'll make the thing alive anyway, yeah.
Speaker 2: Right and let me ask you, what, what is your philosophy of God and, and, and what, what, what is your, your theology?
Speaker 1: Liberationist.  This is--I was rather proud of his saying that  But in volume II of [James] Cone and [Gayraud] Wilmore's book, Wilmore's writes that, when he says that I entered, I entered with them early although I was bogged down in teaching, yeah.  Well, as a matter of fact, you can see that my doing "Biblical Faith and the Black American" means that, you know, that's where I live.  And, and, and that is--I mean I can't see how, given the mentorship of people like [Benjamin] Mays and [Lucius M.] Tobin--that Tobin was something else--and, and then going.  You see, we had run into a lot of this liberating stuff before we went to seminary.  And then we got to seminary and had it corroborated by white scholars as well, you see.  So there's no way in the world that we could come out of there with an ultra-conservative position in theology.  So I, if, if it's possible, call me liberation plus; you know, that's what I am.  Somebody got on me once, and I decided to just open up since he did.  I told him God was a liberal.  I mean when you come right down to it, any way you look at what you call--what you pasting the label liberal on, God is it.  He's gonna forgive you of all your sins merely because you sincerely ask him, that's liberal.  You can't get any more liberal than that.
Speaker 2: I, I hear you.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Yeah, and, and, and you, 'cour--of course now, many ultra conservatives don't like for you to imply that Christian--the Judeo-Christian principles ought to be applied to the social order.  Well, how you gon' get around that?  And every once in a while, some student would raise his or her hand when I'm lecturing somewhere and says, but doesn't dirty the garments of the church that talk about social and political matters in conjunction therewith?  I said what are you talking about?  I mean you can't, you can't get any more political than the nation, Israel.  You were talking about a nation, and you can't get more social than the church.  I said God has used a political entity and a social entity as the chief conveyors of his will, and you're gonna tell us to duck it.  There's no way in the world you could do that and be true to at least what God is saying, you know, pushing aside the question as to how--whether we know all there is to know about God, which I believe the answer is a no to that.  But what we do know or what claims to be his will, see, says that He is Lord of all, A-L-L.  And that's what we call--that's what we mean when we say that God wants us to go after this thing holistically.
Story_ID: 74174
Speaker 1: So, for those who think that God is just Lord of America or Lord of South Carolina or (laughter)--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yeah, Lord of us and, and, and hate other folk, you see.
Speaker 1: Lord of some kind of Baptist, certain kind of--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Mm-hmm, mm-hmm, mm-hmm.
Speaker 1: --kind of Methodist.
Speaker 2: No, you see, that's where [Lucius M.] Tobin helped a great deal of us.  Tobin used to point out that we should strive as much as we can to understand God from the standpoint of revelation to human beings, rather than to try to impose the notions that human beings have about God upon God Himself.  In other words, it's human being who go around asking what is your preference, whether it's a Ford, or a Chevrolet, or Buick, or Plymouth, or Audi, and so on.  God is Lord of all the folk, and anybody who says the opposite is a heretic.  Speaking about my teacher, James R. Branton, he opened up this can of worms one day in class, when he, he, he talked about--and he, he, he got pretty close to [Walter] Rauschenbusch too.  He, he, he, he was, he was, he was talking about human beings truly ought to care for one another.  And he says when I say that, I mean all of us.  And he said and if that's, if that's liberalism, then we need more of it.  And I found myself rejuvenated by a poem that I recall from the days in grade school when teachers made you memorize poems.  They don't do that nowadays.
Speaker 1: Well, they--my, my daughter had to done last week.
Speaker 2: Oh, she did?
Speaker 1: I wanna see how she did--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Okay, tell her she's blessed.  I remember it back there and actually had to go around and, and, and do some digging to find out the author of it, because I'd forgotten the author, and that made it difficult for me to look up.  It's called "Abou Ben Adhem," a poem written by a fellow by  the name of Lee Hunt.  And I found that poem, and doggone-it, what it says--well, ac--actually, you, you, you read it somewhere back there, haven't you?
Speaker 1: I haven't.  What, what--
Speaker 2: Okay, "Abou Ben Adhem" and it go--it, it, it, it starts off, you know, like, like many Arabs, you know, you know, no matter what they're doing, they go into all that praise first, you know, whether they're doing it for Mr. Elijah Muhammad or whatever, you know, it--you know, however much real Muslim religion he had.  You know, they praise the living daylights out of him.  But it starts off "Abou Ben Ahem, may his tribe increase.  I woke one night from a deep dream of peace."  And it goes on to say that he had a vision, and when he got the, the conveyor's attention, he asked him what, what was he writing on that scroll.  And the conveyor said to him the names of all those whom the love of God has blessed.  And then Abou asked him well, is mine one on there?  He said the angel shook his head no, and said Abou then dropped his head, obviously disappointed.  He said to the angel, well, then at least write mine down as one who loves his fellow man.  And the angel, the conveyor, wrote and vanished.  And the next night about the same time it appeared again at the foot of Abou's bed and let Abou sneak a look at the list, and his name led the list.  And 'course the poem ends and lo, Abou's name led all the rest it say.  Now, when you get right down to it, I don't see anything greater than that on this earth.
Story_ID: 74175
Speaker 1: I remember we used to have a dean at Benedict [College] whose name was Gurney Nelson.  And Gurney got to arguing with some, some of us in class one day for humanism.  Well, you know, many of us had been told that if you're a humanist, you're the next thing to the devil, you know.  And Gurney said you, you, you, you, you people ought to be careful about saying stuff like that.  He said do you know that Jesus of Nazareth was one of the greatest humanists in the world?  He said that the Sabbath was created for man, not man for the Sabbath.  He said now you don't become a bigger humanist than that, see.  And that is--that was Jesus's position.  This human being here deserves to have the whole train stopped to take care of his misery, eradicate it, whether he's a leper, or Samaritan, or Syrophoenician, a, a sick person, a person who's been beaten half to death.  That's what it's all about.  And he went on to say that when judgment day occurs, that the whole eschatological axle of judge day is going to turn on the answer to the question: Did you feed me when I was hungry?  Did you even give me water when I was thirsty?  And when I was sick, did you come to minister to me?  And said some of the people he's gonna be talking with are gonna be surprised, saying in effect, but I don't remember ever meeting you.  Would you help me to remember when we met?  And said the son of man, 'course you know that was Jesus's self-designation--the son of man is going to say to him in, inasmuch as you did it unto these, the least of my brethren, you did it to me.  Now, you, you, you don't--I often find it difficult sometimes to see why that is so difficult for people to understand.  If want to save Jesus's religion, that's it, you see.  Old Nathan Soderblom, the old Swede, actually recommended that maybe we ought to get rid of doctrine and replace it with taking care of needs, human needs.  He, he said doctrines divide.  Taking care of human needs unites.  You don't say it any better than that.
Story_ID: 74176
Speaker 1: Sir, what are some of your hopes and concerns for the black community?
Speaker 2: That they themselves believe that more conscientiously; that they genuinely love one another in the new covenant.  The new covenant swears one to avoid the two tap root sins of the world.  And this is really the religion of, of Israel.  Ancient Israel said that the two tap root sins are the two capital I's, idolatry and injustice.  And when you, when, when you look at the whole prophetic strand of biblical religion--now take away from me all of that ritualistic stuff and how many cows you gon' burn or, or how, how high you're gonna build an altar, see.  I mean that's, that's limited to time and place, period.  But whether you are going to so live and advocate that every human being gets his or her due, and whether you're going to spurn, shun any system or policies that are going to lift something to the status and level of Godhead that doesn't belong there.  You see, it's idolaters and people who deal in injustice that mess up the world.  When you make a god out of yourself, when I make a god out of myself, I mess up the world, see, because I shouldn't.  I'm not God.  I'mma die just like everybody else.  I used to, I used to wonder why this deacon in the church in which I grew up used to always say in his prayer--now no matter what he says in it as the body of the prayer, he would always end up with when the time comes when I go to my sickbed to rise up no more, when the times comes when a fly is gon' be my friend.  And I used to wonder what the heck does he mean by when a fly is gon' be his friend.  And then it dawned on me, the poor fellow is saying, rather poetically, and rightly, that when he comes to the point where all of his strength is going to be sapped to the point that he will not even be able to lift up his hand to shoo a fly off his face.  Now, people actually advise us that we ought to get straightened out with God before that time comes, because it's gon' come, see.
Story_ID: 74177
Speaker 1: I was just writing out some--I'm trying to do an essay--I'm late with it--to give to that paper, that, that "Informer," a copy of which I sent to Christal. Jesus of Nazareth just messed up Pontius Pilate's name.  Pilate reaches a point there where he's got, where he's got the Jewish religious leaders mad at him and where he himself senses that he's caught in a jam because he knows that he has an innocent man up before him.  So he's angry and scared.  And when Jesus finally clams up on him, because he assumed it wasn't gonna do any good anyway, he yells at him: How dare you clam up on me?  Don't you realize that I have the power to execute you or to set you free?  And Jesus looks him straight in the eye and says, but you wouldn't have any power at all if it wasn't delegated to you.  Now that scared the living daylights out of that guy.  See, his wife had already sent a note to him saying that there's something about this man that's disturbing my sleep, see.  Now you can imagine that poor guy probably had to visit the bathroom after Jesus of Nazareth pointed that out to him.  See, and I've, I've talk to folk who have escaped--I guess that's the right word to use for it--you know, complete heart failure.  You know, they said first there's this chest pain, tremendous pain, like somebody is, is putting pressure from the inside out.  And they, they marveled at how weak they felt, you see, just before it happened.  And I imagine that the people who didn't make it back felt this, this, this sense of absolute dependence.  See, all this did I had that I called mine, I assumed it was mine.  My ability to raise my hand, do whatever I wanted to do, I don't really have it.  Somebody else has it.  And I remember I had a lipoma taken off my neck back there.  For years it gave my shirt collar fits, and I even wear an oversized one now.  And he had to take it off that bone that sits back there.  And he had to--see, was that--and I've had two of those things.  No, I believe this one was the one with the, with the--the doctor had to work on--what do they call that there when they have to sew you up down there?  Well, anyway, it was, it was an operation at the lower part of my body.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Yeah, and he had to find the exact place to put it, put that needle.  And I woke up with the strangest sensation I had ever experienced.  My legs didn't belong to me.  And at one point, I almost wanted to talk to it.  Yeah, now come on, move, toe.
Speaker 2: Trying to persuade it to--
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, I mean all these years you've been moving when I want you to move.  Now--oh, hemorrhoids.  Yeah, yeah, you got to hit the right place down there.  It's in all that down there, you know.  And I imagine that a good honest thinking about things like that will bring home to the average human being just how dependent we all are.
Story_ID: 74178
Speaker 1: See, it's like old--what was that old theologian back there that's supposed to be the grandfather of liberalism?  Schleiermacher, Friedrich Schleiermacher made that his, his, his central system.
Speaker 2: I'm gonna have to ask you to spell that (laughter).
Speaker 1: Huh?  Okay, S-C-H-L-E-I-E-R-M-A-C-H-E-R.
Speaker 2: Schleiermacher.
Speaker 1: Mm-hmm, Friedrich Schleiermacher, he made that as the, the, the central pen of, of his theological system.  He said everybody is, everybody is theological, no matter how much he or she tries to deny it.  'Course many of us had that suspicion anyhow.  Somebody said heed before--heap a atheist, so-called, yell Lord have mercy just before they hit the ground, you know.  Schleiermacher says that there is no human being alive, unless he had some big mental disorder, that doesn't feel that.  You know you're gon' die. Shoot, and you have nothing in you that you can tap or push that's gon' keep you there forever.  See, so, actually, he resurrected Christian theology, because as he called 'em, the cultured despisers had messed that up back there.
Speaker 2: And to who was he referring when he--
Speaker 1: The cultured despisers?  The, the, the intellects who had come to some kind of conclusion that God was now unnecessary, that Laplace and Galileo and people had not found any god in the sky, said that God was just unnecessary in the equation.
Story_ID: 74179
Speaker 1: Well, can a person love his fellow man and not, and not--and find God unnecessary and just (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: I've often thought about that.  That question has been put, like Bertrand Russell, for instance.  I've, I've often wondered about that.  If there is no god to love me, what are you?  I say, if this, if this whole universe is a joke, they--you know, I, I got problems.  We had an experience right-the hill--Colgate Rochester [Crozer Divinity School].  You can go up to the top and look down in the valley.  And one day, I don't know--something went wrong with the, the whole gas system down there.  And houses started to blow up one right behind the other, bam, and they just caved in like cards, about six of them.  And three children were killed.  I don't know whether the, the mama had stepped outside or what.  Three children were killed in there.  Now, you can imagine a bunch of seminary students already struggling with some of the new stuff that they have encountered and that the professors were throwing at them, you know, how do you know--our philosophy of religion teacher used to do things like bring the top atheist in class.  And back when I was in seminary, [Madalyn Murray] O'Hair wasn't the top atheist in the country, in this country.  The top atheist was Leslie White, and he brought Leslie White into our class and, and, and, and, and let him--and turned him loose on us, you know, to see how well we could handle ourselves.  But, man, that thing, though, that, that, that, that--those houses blowing up with those kids in there, now no way in the world you can justify that in terms of saying that somebody sinned.
Speaker 1: Yeah, because we are--what we are taught is we--at least most of us are taught that we'll--we are rewarded with things if we are good--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --by God.  And if we are bad, then God punishes us, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, right.
Speaker 1: So then when something like this ha--happens, then what's going on?
Speaker 2: Yeah, and 'course you know Jesus's disciples put the same question to him, you know, the man who was born blind.  They wanted to know, well, all right, give us some theology here.  Who caused this?  Was it something his parents did or was it something he did?  Well, how could he do it, unless he was in the womb if he was born blind?  You see, but you had that wisdom literature theology back then, which says that if you live right, you'll never have, have a bad day.  You see, that's wisdom literature theology.  Life isn't like that, I'm here to tell you.
Story_ID: 74180
Speaker 1: We were talking about why "Biblical God of Human Suffering,"--this is one of your books--and you're explaining what the thesis is--
Speaker 2: The, the, the main thesis there is that God did not make human beings to suffer.  I guess that's one way of--we could put it.  And because that point has never been completely cleared up, it has opened and left open the door for a lot of people to feel that there ought not to be great effort to eliminate human suffering.  I take the position that God knows what he's doing.  And if something misses a stitch in this universe, I have a feeling that it is most likely caused by human beings than God's creation.  I--but even if that is not the case, even if, let's say we are not to criticize God until the cabinet is finished and shellacked, sanded.  We human beings who side with God ought to do as much as we possibly can to eliminate as much human suffering as we can.  A lot of people I think make too much of this idea that human suffering is disciplinary.  And they take that and run off with it, and then turn around and say well, you ought not to worry about it too much, because just look what a human being God is making out of you by your suffering.  Well, if man knew, if the human being knew as much as God about me from A to Z, then I would trust them with that, but they don't.  So don't you stand up and say how much I ought to suffer.  You don't have God's vantage point.  See, so that's, that's basically what I'm saying there.
Story_ID: 74181
Speaker 1: I remember when I went down [Reverend] Zan Holmes ca--had me come down to Southern Methodist [University].  You know, there little seminary down there is called Perkins [School of Theology].  When I finished--and 'course back in those days, I usually rolled up my sleeves anyway--that was about two years after the biblical--"Biblical Faith and the Black American" came out.  And 'course, you know, being young and sassy, so when you go down with your sleeves rolled up, and I expected people like Perkins faculty to jump all over me, and I'm, I'm ready to enjoy it.  And when I finished my lecture, in which I brought out the major part of that, I saw a hand go up.  I said yes?  It was a black fellow.  He said he whom he loveth, he chasteneth Well, now that's what we had been given all our lives.  Don't raise any question about it, because God is laying it on you because he loves you.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Now, you know, with friends like that, who needs enemies, you know.  But, [clearing throat], but I didn't get caught like Jesse [Jackson].  I pointed out to him that every serious Christian maintains that God loves all folk.  Now the question that still hasn't been settled is, why do I get chastened more than the other group?  And see, and really, that's the linchpin of liberation theology in America.  See, you have to watch theologians about using symbolic language.  You see, a lot of, lot of folk just shake in their boots--'course some of 'em do more than shake in their boots--when you mention the term black theology.  God is colorblind, and you kind of--when did you paint him, you know, this kind of thing.  But that's not what Jim [James Cone] is saying.  We used to laugh about it a lot whenever we'd run into each other.  That's not what he is saying.  When he says God is black, Christ is black, what that symbolic language is saying is that inasmuch as the biblical God identifies with the person who is suffering the most, then in America he's black, any way you slice it.  Now in South America, they got it right.  They call their theology, their liberation theology, down there political theology.  They got the, the--they're having to worry about those fellows who knock on your door at midnight, and take a member of your family and you never see him again.  But in America, the person who is the man beaten by thieves is a black person, see, hence, black theology, black Christ.
Story_ID: 74182
Speaker 1: And I used to take--what's the fellow name who, who did that thing called the Black Christ?  I think that was the title of his book--Cleage.
Speaker 2: Albert Cleage, yeah, Reverend Cleage.
Speaker 1: I used to take him, but I never got a chance to meet him.  I've been wanting to meet him.  And I remember I, I criticized him one day.  And 'course the black students at Andover Newton wanted to lynch me.  I said well, (unclear) didn't I, didn't I state it correctly?  I said did my thinking Cleage is shallow in New Testament scholarship?  I said now I agree with what he's attempting to achieve or affirm, but I wish he had taken another route that reflected New Testament--the best of the New Testament scholarship.  I say oh, man, they wanted to string me up.  And one guy got me behind closed doors and says yeah, but that gives other folk an opportunity to get at him when you, being a black person, criticize him.  But the Colgate Rochester tradition didn't say that.  It says, you know, you, you, you stand up for the truth of, of something.
Speaker 2: So it's not so much just loyalty, it's--
Speaker 1: Right, right.
Story_ID: 74183
Speaker 1: I have had many folk want me to do something crooked, because--like, you remember, you remember the movie--what is that, Tick, Tick, Tick, you know, when, when, when Jim, the, the, the character played by Jim Brown was recruiting?
Speaker 2: (Unclear)--
Speaker 1: Yeah, what was that guy's name?
Speaker 2: He was the sheriff-
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA INTERRUPTION)
Speaker 2: What was that fellow's name that, that first came in, and, and, and Jim interviewed him?  You remember when he said tell me now, why do you wanna be a po--why you wanna be a deputy?  And the guy said well, they've been beating up on our heads all these years (laughter).  Here's the opportunity, you know, return the favor.  And the guy said I'm sorry, I can't use you.  See, I've had people to want me to do something that's crooked on the very face of it, because that, that, that'll put 'em in a jam.  That's what they been doing to us all these years.  No, that's why I've been giving 'em hell all these years too.  See, and you want me to turn around and do the same thing?  Say no, can't do it.
Speaker 1: You mentioned Jim Brown.  That kind of raised another person.  You, you, you knew Jim Brown and Ernie Davis, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, un-huh, I--Ern--Jim and who else?  What are--most--Rodell--well, the--it's been a good little while--came to the, the affair that we gave for Ernie to--
Speaker 1: Art Modell.  You're talking about the--
Speaker 2: Mm-hmm, yeah.
Speaker 1: --the owner of the Browns, Art--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Un-huh, yeah, yeah, Modell and, and, and, and--
Speaker 1: Ernie Davis was--just for those who are watching this--was a running back for Syracuse [University].  He, he was a member of your church in (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yeah, he was a member of the church.  I preached--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: -his funeral.
Speaker 1: Yeah, and he was known for, according to recent documentaries on him, for his moral strength and courage in the face of--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --some horrendous racism.  I mean they talked about the--what was done to him at the Cotton Bowl game his senior year and how he was treated and how he just--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: What, what, you're talking about Ernie?
Speaker 1: Yeah, Ernie Davis.
Speaker 2: Oh, I was watching that.  You know, they played Texas Longhorn.  Yeah, I saw that.  Do you remember?  You watched it?
Speaker 1: Oh yeah, I've seen the--yeah--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: I mean, but you weren't old enough to watch the game then, were you?
Speaker 1: I was about nine--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, oh, that, that--one of those guys--you know, how sometimes when, when you tackle something, you know, your feet get tangled up or something?  And one of the guys reached over and got his leg and just slammed it off him, you know.  See, but, well, we--that didn't work because Syracuse beat him, what, 21 to 14 I believe.  Yeah, and Ernie, what, would (unclear) first play scored.  See, so that, that, that was some interesting times back there too.
Speaker 1: But it--I guess the point of what they were saying about him, in retrospect, about his life is that he was--he was--he had so much integrity that even--
Speaker 2: So much integrity.
Speaker 1: --the players, the Texas players, after they tried to mistreat him on the field, would walk--
Speaker 2: Well, he would--
Speaker 1: --away with more respect for him after they--
Speaker 2: And he was that way around the house, around school, and so on.  The story goes, you know, he and Frank Cox, a buddy of his, were very close.  And he would literally whip up on Frank for mistreating somebody.  "I said that was enough."  And he'd take him and, and, and although Frank went for bad, he, he, he, he wa--he, wouldn't stand up to Ernie.  And he was a type of kid in class, you know, I taught Sunday school (unclear).  He was a type of fella that after you had scolded him, you felt sorry for him, you know, gee, I really shouldn't have said that to him, because he wouldn't do a thing but drop his head if you said something like that to him.
Story_ID: 74184
Speaker 1: But he, he was like that now. I know it's a tendency that when any hero falls, that you're gonna say good things about the person, but what they say about Ernie [Davis] is actually true.  It is actually true.  And we, at first we couldn't believe what we heard.  You know, the story got out--well, first, and I don't whether some doctors knew it then for sure or not, but you know, they first put out the story that it was mononucleosis.  And--but we found out--I guess don't know when, at what point they did.  We found out that the major newspapers of the country sat on the real story out of deference to him.  See, because it wasn't too long before they found out what he, what he really had.
Speaker 2: Which was leukemia, right?
Speaker 1: Mm-hmm, yeah, leukemia.  And they--you know, the, the illness gets progressive in terms of, of how often you have to treat it.  You see, and I think it moved to the point where he, his blood had to be changed two or three times a week.  And see, well, by that time, those close to him knew what, what was happening.
Speaker 2: Did, you advise him during, during this period?
Speaker 1: Only when he would come home, and of course, naturally, as he moved closer to death, he came home less often, but only when he would come home.  It, it was more like being with, because after all, here, again, ministers have to be careful about applying wisdom literature, religion even in doing pastoral counseling.  For me to sit up and look at a person in they eye and say you gonna be all right when I know that he isn't, see, that's irresponsible you see, and more or less a case of just being with when they sit down.  And if you can strike off on a conversation, you know, that, that has meaning to the person and so on, you do that.  But you don't sit there and mouth platitudes.  That's the worst thing in the world you can do.  And this is what we try to teach people who are gonna work in hospice programs and that kind of thing.  Don't get in there with all those platitudes.  Don't say everything will be all right.  Oh, no, no, don't--it's better to say nothing than to come out with all of that stuff that you say just because you think that you ought to say it--see, so, only when, when he would come home.  I don't think I went to see him in the hospital but just a few times.  But he, he, he was quite a kid, and he got his lesson.  He got his lesson.  Now, have you ever been to Elmira [New York]?
Speaker 2: No, no, sir.
Speaker 1: Okay, they, they put up a few reminders around there.  I think they named the school, named this high school after Elmira or Ernie Davis Free Academy.  I think they got a monument out there.  I don't think I've been back since they put the monument up.
Story_ID: 74185
Speaker 1: [Tell me] About African religion.
Speaker 2: Yeah, it's, it's one of the things that one is inevitably drawn to when one studies black theology.  And here, again, that just didn't start with the Black Power Movement, that, that taking a look at African religions.  Now, certainly it, it intensified it.  The, the, the Black Power Movement intensified our look at African religions.  But A. A. Sims would talk to us about African history and the contributions that people of Africa made to the world, and so on, that Greeks, they're, they're smart people, often went to Africa as their studies abroad, so to speak, and that Herodotus made the statement that the Ethiopians are the most religious people on the globe.  See, we, we, we would listen and hate for the bell to ring.  We would listen to Sims talk about Queen Hatshepsut and people like that, and the Queen of Sheba.  I remember A. A. Sims saying that the Bible says that she went back, went back home after her visit with Solomon and said to her people that the half has never been told.  And then he paused for a moment and said yeah, yeah, that's right.  She didn't tell him that she was pregnant with his child when she got back there either.  And, and, and we would, we would be just sitting there rapt, you know, you know, tell us more.  And he would talk about Melastania (ph.), old Ghana.  See, new Ghana got its name from, from an ancient empire, Songhai, see, empires like that.  And I used to think when I was coming--when I was growing up that Timbuktu was a euphemistic name for hell.  You know, somebody say I don't care if you go to Timbuktu.  And then we found out that Timbuktu was one of the most thriving city-states in, in human civilization.  See, so, we, we, we, we went into that, and of course, about the--one of the, one of the books that does that rather thoroughly now is Felder's book.  Have you been able to go through it much?
Speaker 1: Some, somewhat.
Speaker 2: Okay, you, you, you get into that in there.  The--what we have found cutting across all African states--see, many people talk of Africa as if it's a country.  Africa is a conglomeration of several countries.  But one of the things, one of the set, sets of beliefs that we find crisscrossing all of Africa is, number one--and here's where you get into the high god and all of that--is number, the ubiquity of the Spirit, capital "S"; number two, the solidarity of me with my people - "I am because we are"; and third, the respect for the elder.  Now you will find that all the way across.  Now, it is where you get into the ubiquity of the Spirit that you get into the conviction and the high god, and so forth and so on.  And Mbeki (ph.) laughs; you know, he said the--you know, you Westerners, you laugh at the African for bowing down before a stone.  Don't you know that af--that Africans got sense enough to know that that stone can't hurt him or help him.  He's not bowing to the stone.  He is bowing to the power that created, sustains, and will outlive that stone.  And he'd, he'd laugh about that, you know.  But those are the three great African principles for which we find all over the Bible, definite biblical parallels, everywhere you go, even if it's honor thy father and they mother that thy days may be long in the land which God gives you.  You're bone of my bone, flesh of my flesh.  See, that, that's, it's in there.  Where can I flee from thy presence?
Story_ID: 74186
Speaker 1: But sir, you pastored the church in Elmira, New York.  Now what was the name of the church?
Speaker 2: Monumental.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Monumental Baptist Church, yeah.
Speaker 1: You, you pastored that church for how long?
Speaker 2: Eleven years.
Speaker 1: All right, and then you, you moved back to--
Speaker 2: I moved to Newport, Rhode Island.  I wasn't there very long before I got the call to come back and wear the two hats at Benedict [College].
Speaker 1: Okay.  And you'd been teacher and, and pastored--
Speaker 2: Yeah--
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous)--and--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --as a matter of fact, for twenty of the thirty years that I taught at Benedict [College, Columbia, South Carolina] I was college minister and a faculty member, and at the same time, I pastored the church, Second Calvary Baptist.  And I retired from Benedict in '95 [1995] and retired from the church in '96 [1996].  And then Morris [College, Sumter South Carolina] asked me to come down to help them get a, a new curriculum off the ground in religion, and I went down there and stayed four years.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now you are still--are you still writing and doing research?
Speaker 2: Not, not the latter.  I want to.  I just got to get up enough interest, find something that will, that will drive me to get up each day and go work on it.  But you know--pastors or, or former pastors are called upon to write something one way or another all along.  As I mentioned, I'm trying to do an essay now for the "Informer."  But I think maybe at some point I'll settle down if I don't get feeble and so on, and might try to do something.  I haven't made up my mind in what direction I'm going though.
Story_ID: 74187
Speaker 1: And sir, at this juncture, what would you look back on and see as your legacy?
Speaker 2: I believe the "Biblical Faith and the Black American" and the people who got their hands on that and the students I've taught along the way and influenced to go off to seminary.  I think if, if I had to pick out something, those two would, would be what I'm most proud of.
Story_ID: 74188
Speaker 1: Okay, and did your parents to see you become successful as a, as a, as a scholar and as a--
Speaker 2: Not really as a scholar.  They, 'course they saw me, they saw me go through first level seminary, Colgate Rochester [Divinity School].  But, yeah, I'm pretty sure they were, they both were deceased when I went to Andover Newton.
Speaker 1: Were you the first person in your family to graduate from college?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  My, my, my, my oldest sister didn't--actually she raised her family and then went back to college, see.  And I don't think Agnes, I don't think Agnes ever went.  She got tied up with the telephone company and was made supervisor and kept moving up.  I don't think she went back and got her degree.  I--it's difficult for me to recall what Edith did.  She got into--I don't think, I don't think she was a member of the CIA [Central Intelligence Agency] or anything, but she, she--when you talk about those G2's and G4's and all that, I never did--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--or something?
Speaker 2: Un-huh, yeah.  Now she's just--well, she, she died oh, better than a decade ago.  And Dorothy just passed the first of the month.  See, I even have--down there with all that junk, I got her funeral program.
Story_ID: 74189
Speaker 1: Sir, now this question is a little bit different from the legacy question, but how, how would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: As, as a pretty fair teacher and as a caring pastor I guess.  You know, without having given it much thought, I, I, I think that's, those are the two things that I would cherish, I, I think.  I--now one of the things, one of the early convictions I had, and which I kept, was that one of the tasks of the church, of course, is to give a definite and solid leg up to young people.  Many churches unfortunately acted as if they felt that religion was something that somebody simply caught as he or she lived along.  There was very little effort to start off students with the basics and that sort of thing and show them how this is to be applied to living.
Story_ID: 74190
Speaker 1: It's, it's--I guess I saw a great deal of what [Benjamin] Mays and [Joseph] Nicholson talked about in their book.  And 'course the--one of the, one of the--well, the course that I took under Gayraud Wilmore, I mentioned earlier, had to do with the history of the black church as it had to do with Christian education.  And, and 'course the other had to do definitely with shaping up curricular for the black church.  Have you ever encountered Yvonne Delk, D-E-L-K?
Speaker 2: Yes, I can't--I'm trying to think of--
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, quite feisty.  The child knows her Christian education.  I took a course under her as well.  So two of the courses that I took during D. Min. program had to do with that.  And the things now that many churches are doing, many progressive churches are doing, even some to the point of, of creating and operating a K through 12 for their students.  I believe Bill Jones is doing it.  I think Johnny Ray Youngblood is doing it.  I don't--(unclear)--is Jeremiah [Wright] doing it?
Speaker 2: I don't think he has a school yet.  I don't--
Speaker 1: He, he doesn't have a school.  Well, many of us saw coming this need for some solid tutorial work because we knew that thing was--that, you know, that all of this concern that was forced upon a lot of people were gonna finally die down, see.  I was just looking at the paper today.  You see copy where the U.S. Supreme Court is gonna take up the whole [California v.] Bakke thing again.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Yeah, we knew it was gonna come around that--to that again.  So just as [W.E.B.] DuBois noted the things that the black church did for its members back in the depravation days, we knew were gonna come around again to some degree.  And black church congregations now should prepare for that, those tutorial programs, and as I said, the educational programs as well, not just restricted to Christian education.  I mean teach 'em some--have 'em knowing algebra when he leaves out of there, and whatever else that he's gonna need, calculus and what have you.
Speaker 2: Yeah, were, were not the first black schools in black communities in the black church really?
Speaker 1: Yes, yes, of course, of course.  Well, you see, this, as I said, this is what DuBois meant, that it was the center of everything significant in the black community.  And even many of those lodges and burial societies and so on got started either in or close to the black church.  The burial societies, where you put a few nickels in from time to time, and when you died, you got buried decently, as they put it.  See, man, buy you a casket, the one that would shine.  See, that's how burial societies got started or many of the lodges got started that way.  See, so yeah, they, they went in whatever was denied their members in the wider society, the church provided.
Speaker 2: Well, sir, it's--I wanna thank you--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: The pleasure is all mine.
Speaker 2: And well, the pleasure's been anyone who listens to this.  I think it was one--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Oh, thank you so much.
Speaker 2: Thank, thank you so very much.
Speaker 1: All right.
Story_ID: 74191
Speaker 1: All right, Latta R. Thomas with Dr. Walter Parrish II.  Dr. Parrish is executive director of what we call ABCOS, American Baptist Churches of the South, headquartered in Maryland.
Speaker 2: That's Latta R. Thomas in the pulpit.  And it appears that I may be just into my introduction.
Speaker 1: Now that is quite a while back.  This is when I was in Elmira, New York.  Obviously I'm involved on some kind of committee, and I believe that it's the Elma--Elmira New York Chapter of NAACP.  And if you look to the left bottom, you will see how small I was back in those days.  And this--the, the fellow on the right standing was my dentist, Dr. Kenneth Johnson, and the back row, Judge Donahue and Attorney Lawless.  These were officers of the branch.
Speaker 2: On, on, on, on the left this is a picture of Latta R. Thomas with some of the fellow pastors in the area.  And I am speaking at Watkins Glen, used to be known for as a raceway.  And over here, we have the director of the Elmira Neighborhood House, whose name slips me right now.  But you can tell that there's Latta Thomas along with him.
Speaker 1: All right, if you look closely, this is I right here.  And I sang "Botheration."  That is Colgate Rochester [Crozer] Divinity School's chorus.
Speaker 2: Were you, were you the only black person in the chorus?
Speaker 1: No, I think you have--
Speaker 2: Yes, here's one.
Speaker 1: I'm trying to-
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: All right, that Latta Roosevelt Thomas, Paul McDaniel, originally from Rock Hill, South Carolina, and this is William P. Diggs, who know pastors in Florence, South Carolina.
Speaker 2: You were all members of the--
Speaker 1: Members of the same class.
Speaker 2: Same chorus there at--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --Rochester Divinity School?
Speaker 1: Mm-hmm.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: That's my wife, Bessie.  She likes to be called B.  I, I'm, I'm, I'm not certain where that was taken, unless it was taken at the school where she worked, C. A. Johnson High School.
Speaker 2: In about what year?
Speaker 1: Probably about 19--probably about 1980.
Speaker 2: It's signed by Benjamin Mays, right?
Speaker 1: He autographed that to me.  Now this is when his portrait, Dr. Benjamin E. Mays, upon the, the hanging of his portrait in the State House in South Carolina.
Speaker 2: All right, this is the Mrs. and yours truly.  We, we have been married about six-
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: Yeah, we'd, we'd been married about six weeks.  And this was our formal appearance before the congregation.  We were married in Rochester, New York, as opposed to Elmira [New York].
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA MALE VOICE):  Okay, what year would this have been?
Speaker 2: Nineteen fifty-eight [1958]. (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: All right, I'm receiving a gift I believe I connection with my seven years as president of Elmira branch NAACP.
Speaker 2: That's a program honoring the burning of the mortgage at Monumental Baptist in Elmira, New York.  And by the way, the gentleman over to the far right with the glasses on in, in, in the front--
Speaker 1: Stripey tie?
Speaker 2: Un-huh, yeah, that's the famous Lewis H. Stark, a very, very close friend of Ernie Davis.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA MALE VOICE):  Could you spell his last name for us please?
Speaker 2: L-E-W-I-S, H, initial, S-T-A-R-K.
Speaker 1: Oh, that's the old classicist himself, Dr. A. A. Sims, principal of Simms High School.  He was sort of my second father.
Speaker 2: That's when I put on my first cap and gown, high school graduation, 1947.  And shall I point me out?
Speaker 1: Yes, sir.
Speaker 2: All right, right here, right here.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA MALE VOICE):  And did you tell us the year.
Speaker 2: Nineteen forty-seven [1947].
Speaker 1: This is junior college graduation.  I'm way--you may be able to identify me with the, with the marker, but goes, right here.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: All right, this is my Mrs. [Bessie Thomas] during her, her high school days.  She was a basketball star.
Speaker 2: There we go.  Yeah, that's, that's the Mrs. close to now.
Speaker 1: This gentleman here is my great-great-grandfather.  He was born in 1848.  He grew up in slavery, Mr. Allen David Duncan, pure African.
Speaker 2: This, this is my paternal grandfather, Arthur Thomas, a crack shot.
Speaker 1: This, this is my mother with two of her grands, Adrienne and Shermion (ph.).
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA MALE VOICE):  Year, if you can approximate or guess?
Speaker 1: No, too far back to remember.
Speaker 2: Now this group is the Martin Luther King, Jr. Memorial Committee, responsible for renaming the park after Dr. King.  The, the original name was Valley Park.  It was named after Dr. King.  And of course, eventually a monument was built near the building in honor of Dr. King.
Speaker 1: This, this is I.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA MALE VOICE):  April 1959.
Speaker 1: --taking aim with my .30-30 Winchester.  I'm-
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA MALE VOICE):  Did you hit anything that day?
Speaker 1: No, I don't know what even possessed me to even take a picture.
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, now, this is great-great-grandpa--Allen's son right here.  You know, every family has sort of a patron saint I guess in the family, and this is Reverend A. D. Duncan, the son of the person who was born in 1948.  This is Aunt Lucy to his right, and you can see that I'm next, reading to the left.  And then this is his baby sister over here, Aunt Ora (ph.).  And up here we have daddy, over to the left, Agnes, Edith and my mom.  My sister, Dorothy, isn't in that picture.
Speaker 1: Now, there's the whole family.  December '55 [1955], this is, this is right after I finished my first level of seminary, and I came back home on a speaking engagement.  And as you can see, starting from me over to the far left, Agnes, daddy, my mom, Dorothy, and Edith.
Speaker 2: All right, this, this gives a good idea of what I look like in the pulpit.
Speaker 1: You're in the office there I think.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: All right, yeah, I'm in the office there.  As a matter of fact, yeah, that same picture is, I think that same picture is right down the steps there.
Speaker 2: Okay, this, this a pulpit shot now.  All right, it appears that I'm about ready to end it, and maybe some of the members of the congregation will be glad.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA MALE VOICE):  Where and when was this taken?
Speaker 2: It was taken in Second Calvary Baptist Church here in the city.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA MALE VOICE):  Okay, and do you remember approximately when, recently or?
Speaker 2: That has to be, I think we will be safe in saying '95 [1995].
Speaker 1: All right, here is my family, starting from left to right, Ronald Jerome, the Mrs., me, and Latta, Jr.  Ronald Jerome is a computer technician in Las Vegas.  And Junior is a chaplain in the [U.S.] Navy.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA MALE VOICE):  Did you give us a date for this?  Even a rough guess.
Speaker 1: This would be--
Speaker 2: In the '80s [1980] or?
Speaker 1: I would say more like the '90s [1990].
Speaker 2: Early '90s [1990]?
Speaker 1: Yeah, because I am snow-headed, yeah, yeah.
Speaker 2: Uncle Pet in the middle.  Pet Jones, alias, Jack Jones.  Yeah, this--of course these are his two children, Nathalee, the daughter, R. J., the son--quite a man, quite a man.  Used to believe if he could just get the first lick.
Speaker 1: --found in a, in a home near Charleston, South Carolina, that was about to be demolished, and someone rescued it.  And since we were right in the middle of, of erecting the monument in honor of Dr. Martin Luther King, we thought that we could sell this.  We made copies of it, and the proceeds went to financing the monument.
Speaker 2: And this piece is circa 1870, published in Baltimore, Maryland.
