Story_ID: 136271
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe.  I'm interviewer today for The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Scott Stearns.  Sir, could you please state your full name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: Sure.  My legal name is Samuel Wesley Howze, S-A-M-U-E-L, W-E-S-L-E-Y, H-O-W-Z-E, aka Sala Udin, S-A-L-A, U-D-I-N.
Speaker 1: Now, is there a story behind the name, Sala Udin?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.  When I returned from--to Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania] from Mississippi, I got involved with an elderly gentleman who was a kind of a mentor.  And he gave me the name, Sala Udin, and I guess he said that the name meant "one who seeks knowledge" or "one who is a scholar or researcher".  And he said he gave me that name because I asked so many questions, and the name seemed to be appropriate.  He also said it was the name of an ancient North African and Middle Eastern king, Sala Udin [Saladin, or Salah ad-Din Yusuf ibn Ayyub (1137 - 1193)], who had become so much of a scholar that they inserted his name into the dictionary as a noun for the definition of scholar, or one who seeks knowledge.  So, I thought that was quite a compliment, and I kept the name since then.  I never got my name legally changed because as a security matter, if you were in and out of the South, and you have an African name, and you don't have an African accent--to the police in the South, it means you're a militant.  And you are certain to be in for some trouble.  But having to being able to keep my legal name allowed me the possibility of being able to escape with just a traffic ticket.  And so, I never, I never legally changed the name, so that I always had the ability to go back and forth.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, is--are you in any way named after Saladin, the ruler of the--I guess the empire that opposed the--
Speaker 2: The Persian Empire [sic, the Ayyubid Dynasty of Egypt].
Speaker 1: --yeah, the--he was the Kurd who opposed King Richard [Richard I "Lionheart" of England] in the Crusades [Second Crusade (1145 - 1149)], so is that about the same name?
Speaker 2: I believe, I believe that, that would be the same one.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, okay.  Now, what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: February 20, 1943, here in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And, sir, what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: I'm the president and CEO of the Coro Center for Civic Leadership.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And you also are an actor, and you do a lot of other things, too, I know, so.
Speaker 2: We do a lot of other things (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So, we'll get to all of that, I guess.  But what is today's date?
Speaker 2: Today's date is August 12, 2008.
Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: In Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania at the Coro Center for Civic Leadership.
Story_ID: 136272
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, before we go into depth, there are five lightweight People magazine-ish type questions that management compels me to ask of everyone.
Speaker 2: (Laughter) okay.
Speaker 1: And they only require a short answer.  The first one is do you have a favorite food?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.  A favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Spring.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: San Francisco Bay Area [California].
Speaker 1: Okay.  The last one is do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: Yes.  "Power concedes nothing without a demand; it never has and it never will." Frederick Douglass.
Speaker 1: That's right.
Story_ID: 136273
Speaker 1: Okay, now, I'm going to ask you about your family history.  I'm going to ask about your mother's side of the family and your father's side.  But we'll start with your mother's side first.  Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: Her name was Mary Ella Howze, actually Mary Ella Sutton Howze, M-A-R-Y, E-L-L-A, S-U-T-T-O-N, H-O-W-Z-E.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what was her date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: Her date of birth was August 23, 1910 in Savannah, Georgia.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, what do you know--I mean, how far back can you trace your side of the family, first of all?
Speaker 2: Only to her father and mother.
Speaker 1: Okay.  What do you know about--
Speaker 2: Well, it goes back--no, that's not true.  We know something about her grandmother.
Speaker 1: It would be your great-grandmother, yeah?
Speaker 2: It would be my great-grandmother, but not my great-grandfather.
Speaker 1: So, what do you know about your great-grandmother?  And what was her name and what did she do?
Speaker 2: I know she was a Cherokee Indian.  They called her Sally.  She inherited property.  And I believe my great-grandfather--well, she married my great-grandfather in order to avoid being sent on the "Trail of Tears" [1830 - c. 1850].  And because she was not African, she was legally eligible to inherit property.  And she inherited some property, and that property became the basis of them starting a family and to which my grandfather was born.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, this is all near Savannah in Georgia?
Speaker 2: This would have been around northern Georgia.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  Now, this is--are we talking about then a person who was born during the time, around the time of the Civil War [1861 - 1865]?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 136274
Speaker 1: Are there any other stories on that side [mother Mary Ella Howze's family]?  Was your grandfather--now, he was African, right, African American?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes, his name was Richmond Virginia Sutton.  And--
Speaker 1: Now, that's a good--is there a story by that name?  There should be.
Speaker 2: I don't know what the story is.  It has to be a story behind it and he, he was born in Richmond [Virginia].
Speaker 1: Okay.  It'd be hard to forget it, right?
Speaker 2: That's his name.  He was a preacher, a traveling preacher.  And he, he had a series of three wives.  And my grandmother was the last marriage that he had.  He had two other wives.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, what was your grandmother's name?
Speaker 2: Amy Beulah Royal.
Speaker 1: Royal?
Speaker 2: Royal, R-O-Y-A-L.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, okay.  Now, are there any stories about them and what did they--so, he travelled around--did he travel around when he was married to your grandmother ?
Speaker 2: Yes, he travelled a lot.  He was, he had a lot of different churches and communities that he pastored.
Speaker 1: He like a C.C. rider, they call him, circuit country preacher?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yes.
Speaker 1: Now, what denomination was he?
Speaker 2: Baptist.
Speaker 1: Baptist, okay, okay.  Were there any stories that--now, did your mother like travel, I guess, with the parents to these places?
Speaker 2: No, my mother stayed with her mother and sisters.  And I only know him, only knew him because of his comings and goings, but mainly, she stayed with the family.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Did--so did you know your grandparents?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So they passed before you--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --came along?  Does your mother have any--did she impart any stories about them to you--what they were like, and what they were doing?
Speaker 2: Only that he was a very kind and generous man, loving, and poor, and travelling.  Those are, those, that's the characterization I have heard about him.  We have a photograph of him, and he's very dignified, stately looking, slender man.
Story_ID: 136275
Speaker 1: Now, what did your mother [Mary Ella Howze] have to say about growing up?
Speaker 2: About growing--
Speaker 1: About growing up, yeah?
Speaker 2: She grew up primarily for some short time, she grew up in Savannah [Georgia].  Then, I think her mother [Amy Beulah Royal] passed away, and her sisters had already left the South and gone to Washington, D.C.  And she went to live with her sisters for a short time in Washington, D.C. which is where she graduated from high school.
Speaker 1: Do you know which one, school?
Speaker 2: It seems like it was Douglass High School, Frederick Douglass High School, or a high school--no, Dunbar [High School, Washington, D.C.].
Speaker 1: Dunbar, okay.
Speaker 2: Dunbar.  Then she moved to Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania].  She also learned to play the piano, I think, in Washington, D.C.--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --where she lived with her brother, Samuel, for whom I was named, and his wife.  Then she moved to Pittsburgh with another older sister, Annie.  And she and her sister, Annie, made a home in Pittsburgh.  And the two of them eventually married two other immigrants from the South.  Mary married Bill Howze.  And Annie married Lemon [ph.] Moses.  But they--the two sisters stayed very close to each other, both geographically and relationship-wise, and both of them had twelve children.
Speaker 1: So that--you have a lot of cousins then, I would think (unclear)?
Speaker 2: A lot.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: We just had a very large family reunion this, this week.
Story_ID: 136276
Speaker 1: I guess, let me go to your father's side.  Can you give us your father's full name?
Speaker 2: That'll be a short story.  His name was William Howard Howze.  He was born on June 5, 1909 in Hattiesburg, Mississippi.
Speaker 1: Okay.  That's down near the Gulf [of Mexico], but it's--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Now, I want to go, okay.  Now what do you know--how far back can you trace his family?  As far as you know, is Hattiesburg kind of a place where--
Speaker 2: He never allowed too much exploration of his family lineage.  He said his mother's name was Annie, and that's all he knew, and that's all we need to now, and don't ask no more questions.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That was usually (laughter), that was his genealogy.  It went that far, and we never knew her last time, and never quite understood why he was so uncomfortable talking about it.  But we've been doing some genealogy research of our own and just a few weeks ago, I got a call from a cousin of mine who we think may have helped finally crack the mystery of who his mother was.  We had been looking under the name Howze--I mean, yeah, Howze, or we were looking under the name Magruder [ph.], which is another name that he went by, but she didn't go by.  Apparently, she didn't go by either of those names. Apparently, she got married sometime after he was born and changed her name to her married name.  And so, we wouldn't have found her under the name that he was using, but we think we found some, some military records, and maybe some other birth records that may lead to who his mother was.  I'm not sure about that yet, but we're, we're, we're on a warm trail.
Speaker 1: Okay.  What's the name that--
Speaker 2: Harris.
Speaker 1: Okay, Harris, okay, all right.  So, he didn't talk about growing up in Hattiesburg or, or--
Speaker 2: No.  He only talked about his time in Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania], whatever happened in Mississippi.  I think he was, I think he was only nine or ten when he left the South to come to Pittsburgh.
Story_ID: 136277
Speaker 1: Now, I think before we started the interview, I was discussing the name Howze and if you were related to Bishop Howze, [HM] Bishop Joseph Howze, who is a bishop [Bishop of Biloxi] down in the Gulf [of Mexico], Mississippi--
Speaker 2: Yes, we discovered Bishop Howze sometime in the late '60s [1960s], and bits and contacting of him through the Black Catholic Ministry.  And we weren't certain about what our family connection was until recently when we discovered another Howze family here in Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania] who did not trace their lineage back to Harrisburg [sic, Hattiesburg, Mississippi], but traced their lineage back to Mobile [Alabama].  And that Howze family had a number of newspaper articles written about them because they were from a part of Mobile called Africatown.  And Africatown was a town, or certain section outside of Mobile, that was set up--the town was established by the slaves who were on the last slave ship to dock in the United States.  Right after slavery was abolished, there was a slave merchant who decided to try to see if he could sneak in a final boat load of Africans.  They were stopped, arrested.  The Africans freed themselves and went to set up this town.  Their name for the town was Africatown, but the name today is Prichard, Alabama.  And the Howze family that Bishop Joseph Howze is from, is from that direct lineage.  We didn't realize how--we, we couldn't find the direct link between the two Howzes, Howze families, until we happened to look at the distance between and Mobile and Hattiesburg.  And they're just right across the border from each other.  They're very close.  So, we are still putting together that family lineage, lineage that links us to Bishop Howze's family, and the Mobile Howzes, and the Hattiesburg Howzes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, that part of the country, the Gulf has--there are a lot of Catholics in the Gulf.  We have New Orleans [Louisiana], Mobile, Biloxi [Mississippi]--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --and some, of course, Bishop Joseph Howze, the bishop of--I think the bishop of that--well, the Mississippi region--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --and for many years, he's retired now.
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: But--and your family is Catholic?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: So that's another kind of a clue, you know--
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: --in this.  But your father [William Howze] didn't talk about any of that history or any--
Speaker 2: He didn't talk about any of it.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And did not allow much talk about it.  My mother [Mary Sutton Howze] used to try to talk about it, and he'd say, "Hush up, May [ph.].  You don't know what you're talking about--hush up." (Laughter).
Story_ID: 136278
Speaker 1: Okay.  So now, well, tell us about--did your dad [William Howze] talk about--well, he talked about his Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania] days though, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: So, he came here when he was about ten years old, you said?
Speaker 2: Yes, yeah, he came to live with his sister whose name was Della Carter.  She'd married a guy named Oscar Carter who was also from Hattiesburg [Mississippi].  And my dad went to school for a couple of years, but didn't complete high school.  He went to work, he went to work in the steel mills.  Then he met my mom [Mary Ella Howze] and married her, started a family, then became a worker in a large laundry plant.  It was called North Laundry.  It was on the north side of Pittsburgh.  And he worked there for many, many years until he became too ill to work standing up.  He was a presser.  And that kept him on his feet for long hours.  And it eventually began to compromise the vascular system in his legs and feet, and it eventually took his life.  He died young at the age of fifty-one.
Story_ID: 136279
Speaker 1: Is there a story about how your parents [William and Mary Ella Howze] met?
Speaker 2: I don't remember, except that I think he knew my Aunt Annie's boyfriend whose name was Lemon [ph.] Moses.  And I think Lemon Moses introduced him to Annie's sister, Mary, and I believe that's how they met.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, when you think about your parents' personalities, and their talents, and their dispositions, who do you think you take after the most?
Speaker 2: I think I draw a little from both of them.  I think my mother's sensitivity, and compassion, and generosity contributed a lot to who I am.  And my father's work ethic and sense of humor and discipline also contributes to who I am.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, do you have an--oh, well, let me, you got twelve brothers and sisters?
Speaker 2: Eleven.
Speaker 1: We got to talk about that.  Eleven, yeah, you're the twelfth so, so where do you fall in the order--
Speaker 2: Seventh.
Speaker 1: --and can you name them for us?
Speaker 2: Daniel, Delores, Della, Danny, Eunice, Beverly, then comes me, then Reggie, Thomas, Walter, and Mary.
Story_ID: 136280
Speaker 1: Do you have an earliest childhood memory?
Speaker 2: My earliest childhood memory would be in a big house that we lived in on a street called Crescent Street [Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania], 1876 Crescent.  And it was on a dirt road in the Lower Hill District, a road that ran under an incline, which is a cable-controlled car that went back and forth from the top of the hill in the Hill District down to the produce yard in Lardsville.  And the cable cars dropped oil down on the road.  And the oil droppings from the incline that went over the road after people would walk up and down the road, and cars would travel up and down the road, the oil created a kind of a blacktop finish to the road.  But that was as close to a paved road as it got.  That's my earliest recollection--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --living in that house.
Story_ID: 136281
Speaker 1: Now, can you describe your neighborhood?  Now, this is the Lower Hill District [Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania].  And I was asking you off-camera--how old is that neighborhood in terms of it being a black neighborhood?
Speaker 2: The Hill District has been home to, the primary home of blacks in Pittsburgh since the very early days the city was established back in the late 1700s.  And everybody who lived in Pittsburgh at that time lived in what is now called downtown.  Eventually, as the city grew, blacks expanded and everyone expanded, and blacks expanded to what became known as the Lower Hill District.  And that part that I grew into was the outer edge of the Lower Hill District.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So what, describe your neighborhood to us.  And what did it look like and what house, what did your house look like and--
Speaker 2: It was rural, it was--all I remember is that the house was--sat by itself with weeds and greenery on both sides, and a hillside in front of it that the incline ran over.  And behind it was a very busy boulevard known as Bigelow Boulevard.  The--there were other families up the road, but that would have been several hundred feet from our house before you got to another house.  So, for all intents and purposes, it looked very rural, although it was in an urban setting.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  Now, so your nearest neighbor was--how far did you say?
Speaker 2: Couple hundred feet.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Did people keep like farm animals in those days out there?
Speaker 2: Oh, yes, everybody had at least chickens.  There were rabbits, goats, and gardens.  Everybody gardened.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, what were some of the--well, what did your house look like?  Can you describe that for us?
Speaker 2: All I remember is that it was huge.  At least, it looked huge to me (laughter).  And the rooms appeared huge, sparsely furnished.  It was a wooden house built on a steep hillside with a large basement or downstairs, and a second level porch that overlooked Bigelow Boulevard.
Speaker 1: Was there a story by the name Bigelow Boulevard?
Speaker 2: I don't know who Bigelow is, probably another one of the generals [sic, Pittsburgh city engineer Edward Manning Bigelow]--
Speaker 1: Oh, Bigelow name, okay.
Speaker 2: --that came through Pittsburgh.  A lot of the Pittsburgh streets are named for Revolutionary War [American Revolution] generals--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --and other politicians.
Story_ID: 136282
Speaker 1: All right.  So, what were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up?
Speaker 2: The sights, I already described--the incline, the vegetation, the road, and the smell of the road was the smell of oil on a hot road.  There was--we often picked wild spinach on the hillside to eat.  We called it poke salad.  And we often went out on the porch to watch for a hobo whose name was Choo-Choo.  And he often passed on a little trail that went behind the house, and we were frightened to death.  And my sisters would tell us if we did misbehave that they were going to give us to Choo-Choo.  And that would straighten us out for some, for quite some time.
Speaker 1: Was there any particular feature about him that was frightening?  You know, where the--other than he was just disheveled generally?
Speaker 2: He, he was, he was just a hobo.  He doesn't have a face but he, he was not menacing.  He, and he didn't really pay a lot of attention to us as we paid to him.  He was really just kind of going about his business, but we loved going out on the porch looking for Choo-Choo.
Story_ID: 136283
Speaker 1: Was church a big part of growing up?
Speaker 2: Church was a big part of growing up.  My mother [Mary Ella Howze] worked as a house cleaner in the rectory and the convent.  And that employment--her employment in the church is what got us into Catholic Elementary School.
Speaker 1: Now, the name of it--this is St. Benedict's [Church of St. Benedict the Moor, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania].  Is this St. Benedict's?
Speaker 2: It was then Holy Trinity.
Speaker 1: Holy Trinity, okay.
Speaker 2: It is now St. Benedict the Moor.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  Holy Trinity Catholic Church in those days?
Speaker 2: Yes, and school.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It would have--they would have charged tuition.  And, of course, as we were beginning to start elementary school like around the, 1948, '49 [1949], '50 [1950], the whites were beginning to move out of the Hill District.  And the Catholic Church, which had been largely white, was losing its population to the suburbs, and became more liberal in their recruitment of blacks into the Catholic Church and the Catholic community.  And so, that combination of demographics and my mother's employment allowed us to get what my mother believed was a better education than was available in the public school, so we went to Catholic School.
Speaker 1: Now, do you have a memory of your first experience at school?
Speaker 2: It's not a pleasant memory.  My earliest recollection is my father, because he had so many children, cut our hair.  He had these painful clippers.  And we would go to school with these homemade haircuts.  And if you don't really, if you're not really skilled at cutting hair, the best thing to do is to cut it bald, so we went to school with these bald heads.  And there were a lot of us, the Howze kids, and they used to rub our head, and for good luck, and they would rub my head and call me Sambo, Little Black Sambo.
Speaker 1: Now, these are the other black kids or--
Speaker 2: No, these were nuns.
Speaker 1: The nuns--the nuns?
Speaker 2: Yeah, these are the nuns.
Speaker 1: These are the authorities then?
Speaker 2: Yes, these are the teachers and the staff.
Speaker 1: So, did--I mean, did you understand?  Did you feel you were being insulted at the time?
Speaker 2: I knew it, I knew it.  I didn't know--initially, I didn't know the story, and I learned 'The Story of Little Black Sambo' [Helen Bannerman] there in school.  And I was always associated with that story whatever it was read in class.
Story_ID: 136284
Speaker 1: Okay.  So the Catholic School at Trinity [Holy Trinity Catholic Church, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania] was integrated then?
Speaker 2: There were--it was mainly white, and there was an increasing number of black kids who were coming into the school--August Wilson, Rob Penny, Arthur Slaughter [ph.], and a couple other families.  There were not many.  It was overwhelmingly still white.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, these are--it's an interesting group of--now, I don't know what Mr. Slaughter did, but August Wilson, one of our most celebrated playwrights in the black community; Rob Penny, another playwright and director; and you yourself involved in the theater--I mean, what are, fortuitous confluence of theatrically minded youth--
Speaker 2: No accident.  We, we went to school together.  And then we met again later on when we were young adults influenced by the Black Power Movement.  And that influence of the Black Power Movement and the Black Cultural Movement brought us back together again as young adults, and brought us into the theater together.  But it was our childhood familiarity with each other that drew us together again.  That was, you know, the basis of us coming back together.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well, you all--I mean, was any inclination that you all were, all interested and going to be interested in drama at some point?
Speaker 2: When we were younger?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: No, no.  We, we had no interest in drama or in the--August was a--for all intents and purposes, you would have, you would have predicted that he would become some kind of scholar or writer because he was always very smart, and always writing off to the side.  We would be playing tackle, and it-tag, and football, and stuff like that.  August seldom participated in those games, but he was always there nearby, looking, and watching, and smiling, and writing, but not participating.  Rob Penny was a speedster.  There are still some high school track records that Rob Penny holds, so you would pegged him to be some kind of athlete.  You probably would have pegged me to be a comedian (laughter).
Story_ID: 136285
Speaker 1: So you had a good sense of humor, huh, so you--
Speaker 2: I'm afraid so.
Speaker 1: Okay.  What--
Speaker 2: Sometimes got me in trouble (laughter).
Speaker 1: Can you tell us a story about a time your--sense of humor got you in trouble?
Speaker 2: I just recall oftentimes that--I don't recall any particular time.  I just recall many times when--me making other people laugh, if it got them in trouble, or got us all in trouble, but I relished making people laugh, and relished getting people in trouble (laughter).
Speaker 1: 'Cause you were engaged in what we call in the community signifying--
Speaker 2: I was the "Signifying Monkey" right off the bat.
Speaker 1: (Laughter), okay.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: So, you're the guy talking in the back of the room?
Speaker 2: Talking trash, talking smack, and then try to have a straight face when the teacher would turn around to ask, who is that?  It would be me, but frequently I'd get caught because I couldn't hide my face.  I'd have a big grin on my face, but it was that kind of trouble that often got kids into.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, I tell you, you weren't caught as often as you got other people--
Speaker 2: Oh, no, that's right.  They got caught way more than I did.
Speaker 1: (Laughter).  Okay.  Now, did you have a favorite subject in school or did you like school?
Speaker 2: Not particularly.  History, I think, appealed to me more than anything and some science classes as I recall, but never particularly liked math, never particularly got English with all its rules.  But I liked the stories that history created and the magic that science created.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Were there any particular stories in history that you were drawn to?
Speaker 2: Not that I recall.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Did you have any African American history in those days?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you were taught basically by--these were white nuns at this point, right?
Speaker 2: Yes, all white.
Speaker 1: Okay, no black nuns?
Speaker 2: And Brothers.
Speaker 1: Okay.  White Brothers, yeah?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And so, now did you get good grades in school?
Speaker 2: I think I got above average grades to begin with early on.  And then, they became average and then eventually by the time I got into high school, they were below average.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So now, that's a pattern they describe now is happening to a lot of black people--young, young man especially.
Speaker 2: That's true--
Speaker 1: It happened in the sixth grade and they start going--
Speaker 2: --'cause I was a pioneer (laughter), yes.
Speaker 1: That's a way to (unclear) but, yeah, his grades start going down after sixth grade.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And so, in your case, do you, can you, you know, reflect on the reasons why maybe at this stage?
Speaker 2: As best I can recollect, it had to do with the declining interest in school, and an increasing distraction to other things, or attraction to other things--other friends, girls, sports.  And there wasn't much reinforcement of educational achievement other than from parents and adults.  There was very little reinforcement from peers.
Story_ID: 136286
Speaker 1: Now, were there any particular teachers in grade school [at Holy Trinity Catholic Church, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania] that you remember that were like a role model, or took a special interest in you, or that you admired?
Speaker 2: There was one that I took a special interest in.  I don't know much of a special interest she took in me.  Her name was Sister Herman Joseph.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: She would have been my teacher in maybe the fifth grade.  She was the first nun, who I ever smelled, who had a kind of perfumed scent.  I don't know if it was from perfume itself, or from her perfumed soap or lotion, but she smelled great.  And she was pretty and so, I think I did well in her classes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, she caught your attention--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --but you don't know if you--
Speaker 2: I have no idea of whether--well, I do know that she--that I did have her attention.  She stayed in touch with me even after I was an adult.  She watched my development from afar as I became more political in the community.  And even when I was on [Pittsburgh] City Council in the 1990s, she contacted me, and reminded me that she was my elementary school teacher, my fifth grade teacher, which I remembered quite well.  And it would have been, you know, 1953 sometime.  And so, we're all the way up in the 1990s, and she still knows who I am, and contacted me to let me know that she was still alive and doing well.  And I was very glad to hear from her.
Story_ID: 136287
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, so did you, you know, attend the services there on a regular basis in the--
Speaker 2: Where?
Speaker 1: Was it Trinity?
Speaker 2: Holy Trinity [Catholic Church, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania]?  I was an altar boy.
Speaker 1: Holy Trinity--altar boy, okay, all right.
Speaker 2: Yes, so that you attended every Sunday and, and participated in the mass as a convent assistant to the priest.
Speaker 1: So it wasn't--was there any effort on the part of your mother to attend Baptist Church 'cause her father was a minister, a Baptist minister?
Speaker 2: No, my mother [Mary Ella Howze] converted to Catholicism and, therefore, everybody in the house was also Catholic.  There was no discussion of it.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Now, you--
Speaker 2: Now, my father [William Howze] was not religious.  He was not particularly Baptist, or particularly Methodist, or particularly religious.  I don't even remember him ever going to church except for some event like a baptism, or a confirmation, or some other church-related ceremony of some kind, or celebration, but I don't remember him going to mass.
Speaker 1: Okay.  When you think back on your own development in terms of your values and morals and such, do you think you got them from the church, or from your family, or from the community at large or--
Speaker 2: It was from the environment.  The, the whole environment contributed different parts to that development, but what I do recollect is that everybody's job was to mold you, and shape you, and direct you in some way.  They were always telling you stories, or correcting something that you did wrong, or chastising you for something to--all directed toward shaping your outcome, so as to make it a successful and beneficial outcome.  So, that's what neighbors did.  They watched you, and they chastised you, and they corrected you, and they directed you.  That's what my older brothers and sisters did.  That's what my parents did.  That's what the church did.  So, everybody around me was always making input into shaping who I was becoming, and trying to give me the kind of morals and values that they thought I should have.
Story_ID: 136288
Speaker 1: Now, was popular culture a big influence on you--I mean, music, movies, television, that sort of--
Speaker 2: Well, it depends on what time.  Early on, I can remember in the early and late '50s [1950s], we probably got a television sometime around the late '50s [1950s].  And I remember being just enthralled with this whole notion of these stories on television, especially on Saturday.  I don't think we watched it during the walk, but I think we were allowed to watch television on the weekend, like on Saturday.  Saturday seemed to be--Saturday morning primarily seemed to be the time when I remember watching television.  And cowboy movies were very popular along with Spanky and the Little Rascals ['Our Gang' films].  And I remember, for some reason, whenever there was a black person on television, it was a big deal.  And whoever was watching television at the time when a black person came on, they would call everybody else to the television.  And so, if we were playing baseball, or we were doing something else, we'd hear the call--a black, a black, a black, a black on TV, a black's on TV.  And, no, we--colored, colored, colored on TV.  And we'd all coming running to see a colored person on TV.  Now, how that got started, or what was the meaning of it, I don't know.  I know that it was a rare joyous occasion, even if it was 'Amos 'n' Andy.'  Whenever there was a colored on TV, a call would go out, and everybody would come running.
Speaker 1: Now, that's exactly--when you said a black's on TV, I said he must have been colored--
Speaker 2: Yes--
Speaker 1: --'cause that's what my grandmother would say, "Coloreds on."  She, she'd yell out the window.
Speaker 2: Coloreds on, coloreds on, yes, yes, yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: And we'd run in to see who it was.
Speaker 2: That's right, that's right.  That was the earliest TV watching.
Speaker 1: Now, did you, did you get an impression of what social standing or political standing black people had from watching our appearances on television?  Any sense of that and the reactions that people had, too?
Speaker 2: I don't think that the blacks on television meant to me that, that was the social standing of blacks in general because the blacks that I saw on TV were not like the blacks that were around me that I saw.  And we lived in a relatively segregated neighborhood, so I saw a lot of different black people.  And the blacks who were on TV were not like them.
Speaker 1: In what way were they different?
Speaker 2: I didn't know anybody in the community who was like 'Amos 'n' Andy.'  I didn't know anybody in the community who was like the blacks on the 'Little Rascals.'  And so, they were--the blacks that were on TV were special for TV, but not real.  They were not real, and you wouldn't find people like them in the real community.  This was just television reality--it wasn't real.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, you're saying you were referring to a lot of, comic relief kind of, so, you know, it was--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yes, or maybe Sammy Davis, Jr. tap dancing or something like that.  It was like special for television, but not real.
Speaker 1: Did you ever see any blacks on television that you were like proud of in those days when you watched the late '50s [1950s]?
Speaker 2: I guess Sammy Davis, Jr., or some of the Nat King Cole--the musical entertainers were sources of pride 'cause they, they just had tremendous talent.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: 'The Ed Sullivan Show.'
Speaker 1: Yeah, there was a steady stream on that so--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Now, was it--did you go to the movies?
Speaker 2: Occasionally.  There was a movie house up the street from us called the Rhumba Theatre [Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania], R-H-U-M-B-A.  And the Rhumba Theatre cost sixteen cents to get in.  And it was a joy to go there because the two blocks that you would travel to get there was an exciting two blocks.  There was all kinds of stuff happening.
Speaker 1: What was the name of the street then?
Speaker 2: It was Fullerton Street.
Speaker 1: Fullerton, okay.
Speaker 2: And along Fullerton Street, there were a lot of people fancy dressed, or you'd run into kids that you knew.  Georgie Benson used to have a guitar and that little box for coins.
Speaker 1: This is the George Benson, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 136289
Speaker 1: All right.  So you were describing Fullerton Street [Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania], and you were telling me off camera that Fullerton and Wylie [Avenue] was the heartbeat of the black community?
Speaker 2: Fullerton and Wylie was the, was the heartbeat--both the cultural and commercial, there were stores, newsstands, cigar stores, grocery stores, drug store.  The Goode family owned the drug store.  Everybody knew Goode's Drug Store [Goode's Pharmacy].  I thought all drug stores were called Goode's Drug Store.
Speaker 1: Is this with a "e" or just a--
Speaker 2: With a "e".
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And there on the corner was also the, the Rhumba Theatre with--who, after we watched the movies, then we would go find George and make him chase us.  George was a person who cleaned up the theater and was also the security.  He had encephalitis, but at that time, all we knew was that he had a big head, and we called him Waterhead George.  And whenever we called him Waterhead, he would chase us, and we would run and get a good kick out of running from, from Waterhead George.  I don't know what George's last name was.
Speaker 1: Now, did--was he part of the family that ran that theater?  Was it owned by--
Speaker 2: No, it was owned by white people.  George was black.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, was it--is it--was the dynamic of--I've heard people say that the Hill District, at one time, was Jewish at one time.  Was it--I know in the--
Speaker 2: It wasn't Jewish--it was mixed.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: There were a lot of Jews there because the Jews tended to dominate the merchant group that owned stores and bars and places in the Hill District, and some of them lived there.  But it also included a lot of Italians, Syrians, and Lebanese.  Those are the groups that I remember, and a lot of blacks.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So, were that many black businesses, black-owned businesses on Fullerton--
Speaker 2: Sure, sure, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I would say that 30, 40, maybe 50 percent of the businesses were black-owned.  The doctors and dentists had their offices in the community.  The--several of the bars were owned by blacks.  Pat's Place was a newsstand and cigar shop that was black.  Goode's Drug Store was black.  A lot of sandwich shops, they were black.  My mother [Mary Ella Howze] and her sister opened a little sandwich shop next door to the Rhumba Theatre for a time.  And they sold hot sausage sandwiches and fish, fried fish sandwiches, to people going into and coming out of the, the Rhumba Theatre.
Speaker 1: What did they call it?
Speaker 2: It would have been Annie's Sandwich Shop, I believe.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.   So this is, you know, kind of the heart of the community.  Was there a black YMCA there along that--
Speaker 2: There were clubs.  There was the Loendi Club which is a social club--
Speaker 1: How do you spell that?
Speaker 2: L-O-E-N-D-I.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Then there was a Washington Club which I believe was a little more elite than the Loendi Club.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  We were told by--I think Mr. Moseley [ph.] was telling us about the Loendi Club on some level.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And it was like an elite group of--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --black professionals basically?
Speaker 2: Right.  That was all on Fullerton Street.  Of course, the Crawford Grill was right off Fullerton Street on Wylie Avenue down the street from the Crystal Barber Shop.
Story_ID: 136290
Speaker 1: Now, the Crawford Grill--
Speaker 2: --(simultaneously)--and Pool Room. Crawford Grill is the, one of the most noted jazz clubs in the history of jazz in, in the United States.  All of the jazz greats came through and played at the Crawford Grill.  They--the--there was--Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania] was home to two base-, Negro League baseball teams.  Not many cities--most cities didn't even have one Negro League baseball team.  Pittsburgh had two.  And one of them won more Negro League World Championships than any other team.  That was the Homestead Grays, and the second team was the Pittsburgh Crawfords.  Satchel Paige played with the All State Greats for a time and they, they produced most of the stars in the Negro Leagues coming out of Pittsburgh.  And one of the Pittsburgh Crawfords had a Negro League Baseball Stadium, one of the very, very few Negro League Stadiums.  Most Negro League teams played in the white baseball fields when the--when they were playing away in another city.  That's, that's how they, they had a home field [Gus Greenlee Field, then Victory Field].
Speaker 1: Now, was this Crawford Field you're referring to?
Speaker 2: Huh?
Speaker 1: Was this Crawford Field you're referring to or--
Speaker 2: Crawford Grill and the Pittsburgh Crawfords were all associated with Crawford Street--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --which was close to Fullerton Street, which was one block up from Fullerton Street.
Speaker 1: I was asking about the field--that I said was it Crawford Field or was it--
Speaker 2: Oh, the, the baseball field?
Speaker 1: Yes, sir.
Speaker 2: I don't remember the--I don't know the name of the field.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I just know it was the home field of the Pittsburgh Crawfords.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, yeah.  Josh Gibson was a big star--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --of the Homestead Grays, yeah.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And, yeah, so that's--it has a rich history.
Speaker 2: Yes, very rich history.
Speaker 1: Okay, so--
Speaker 2: Probably that was all--I think it was because of the steel industry and the coal mine paid relatively high wages.  And so--and Pittsburgh was always a very affordable town.  So, if you worked in the steel mill, or factory, or coal mine, you had a considerable amount of disposable income to, to hang out in clubs.  And so, you had two Negro League baseball teams, and you had clubs that attracted the best jazz artists all coming through Pittsburgh on their way to or from--between New York [New York City, New York] and Chicago [Illinois].  They would all come through Pittsburgh.  And, and so, there--that rich cultural environment also produced a lot of musicians from Pittsburgh.  So Pittsburgh has a disproportionate number of world-class musicians who came from Pittsburgh because of that rich cultural influence here.
Story_ID: 136291
Speaker 1: Yeah, I think before we broke, you were discussing, you were talking about young George Benson playing guitar on the street with a box to collect--
Speaker 2: Yeah, Georgie got a guitar as a gift for Christmas, and was self-taught, and used it to make money.  And he was always down there, right next to Goode's Drug Store [Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania], playing the guitar, singing and dancing and, and making money.  Everybody loved him when he was a very young kid, seven, eight, nine years old.  And so, he didn't--he was not a late bloomer.  He started very early.
Speaker 1: Now, did they have a name for him, you know, like we had Little Stevie Wonder in Detroit [Michigan], but--
Speaker 2: Little Georgie Benson.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  So, Little is the (laughter) first name of anybody doing that kind of work early?
Speaker 2: Yes, that's right, that's right.
Speaker 1: You know, Little Georgie Benson.
Speaker 2: Yes, in fact, we called Georgie--Georgie a long time into his adulthood.  And it wasn't until--the whole time that he was playing R&B [Rhythm and Blues], his name was Georgie.  It wasn't until he became world class and started playing jazz that they changed his name to George.  But whenever he comes back, he's still Georgie.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, there are a lot of great musicians from Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania].  Ahmad Jamal is one that comes to mind.  Did you ever hear him play in those days?
Speaker 2: No, I was too little--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --during those days.  But I have since become aware of all the great jazz musicians that came from Pittsburgh.
Speaker 1: And he started off as a youth, too.  There are pictures of him in the [Pittsburgh] Courier--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --by Teenie Harris [Charles Harris], as a young, as a twelve-year-old kid playing the piano.
Speaker 2: Yes.  Art Blakey, Billy Strayhorn--there are, there are, there's a long list.  Phyllis Hyman, she used to sing in a group that sang in between the intermissions whenever Ron Penny and August Wilson would read poetry at community meetings.  She's a Pittsburgher.  Lena Horne lived here for a very long time.  Dakota Staton is from here.  There's--I'm sure I'm leaving out some very important jazz artists that are from Pittsburgh.  I recently have floated an idea of televising a couple of panel discussions of the artists who are still alive here in Pittsburgh, and having them talk about their most memorable times coming up in Pittsburgh, who all the artists were from Pittsburgh, and putting that on, on--capturing that on video because they're getting older, they're dying off, their memory is fading.  And it hasn't been captured, especially hasn't been captured on film.
Story_ID: 136292
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So, so all this rich cultural life is going on here [Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania].  Also, now, now where did you start high school?  Did you go to Catholic School High School?
Speaker 2: Yes, I start high school at Central Catholic High School [Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania].  That's when I hooked back up with August [Wilson] and Rob Penny after a time when they--once they demolished the Lower Hill District [Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania], we kind of lost touch with each other.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, what happened?  Was it urban renewal, they called it?  When did they start?
Speaker 2: Yes, one of the urban renewal programs of the late 1950's, early '60s [1960s].  The promise was that they were going to rebuild the Lower Hill District.  And everybody thought they were going to move back into the Lower Hill District, but their real plan was to disperse the residents throughout the city, and to take that land, which was right adjacent to downtown, and create a new cultural district for downtown for the opera, and the symphony, and the ballet, and that kind of activity.  And so, it was also a point at which the Hill District got segregated by race for the first time.  And white families were put on a government subsidized-home ownership track, and moved to the suburbs and to the outer areas of Pittsburgh.  Black families were charted for public housing and, and we are still suffering from that kind of racial segregation to this day.  But the--over eight thousand families, and organizations, and churches were demolished, including Mother Bethel [A.M.E. Church], where Thomas Delany [sic] studied medicine and--
Speaker 1: Martin Delany or--
Speaker 2: Martin Delany--did I say Thomas? Martin Delany went to school rather--
Speaker 1: Okay.  So that's the, that's the church goes all back into the--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --1830s [sic, 1794]?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes, before the end of slavery.  All that was demolished and we moved out of the Lower Hill District into the projects, Red Brick City.
Speaker 1: So, what's the name of the projects that you--
Speaker 2: We moved to Francis Street.  Bedford Dwellings was the name of the public housing community, and Francis Street was the, was one of the main streets in Bedford Dwellings.
Speaker 1: Bedford Dwellings, okay, projects, okay.
Speaker 2: And so, we went to St. Richard's [Junior High School, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania]--
Speaker 1: What, what--
Speaker 2: --Junior, what would be Junior High School.  And then from there, on to Central Catholic High School.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, when you moved to the projects in those days, was that considered a move up for people 'cause many times, the projects were a move-up for some people, but especially when--
Speaker 2: They were certainly a move-up for us.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: The house that we were in--we lived on a corner of Fullerton and Epiphany and the--we lived on the second floor above Davis's Grocery Store, Bill Davis's [ph.] Grocery Store.  It was a very old building.  The windows let the cold air in with such cold breezes that you would, you wouldn't even think there was a window there.  There were holes in the walls.  The refrigerator door was kept closed by a piece of cord.  It was, it was, it was very meager living conditions.  And so, moving into the projects, I thought my father [William Howze] hit the numbers.  We had a brand new apartment.  They had just built this community.  We were the first family to move into this apartment--brand new refrigerator, brand new stove.  I've never even seen a new refrigerator and stove before.  There was adequate lighting.  We didn't have to worry about always--my father would always make us shut off the lights to keep the electric bill down before, but now, the lighting, lights were included.  We had adequate heat, more than ample heat.  We'd never had ample heat before.  The winters were brutal.  And now, we had adequate heat during the winter.  That was a new experience.  And so, it was, it was a, it was a big step up in our minds.  We worried, of course, about what would happen to our friends that we left behind.  We didn't know where everybody was going to land.  We just knew that everybody had to move.  But, eventually, we started to see people who we recognized from the Lower Hill District.  And so, that provided some sense of familiarity and relief, but we had no sense of the destruction it was doing to our sense of community at the time.  We learned it later, but we didn't know it then.
Story_ID: 136293
Speaker 1: So, now, well, so you went, you were going to Central Catholic [High School, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania], and August Wilson and Rob Penny there--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --two fellows you recognized from the old neighborhood.  You knew--
Speaker 2: From grade school.
Speaker 1: What was high school like for you?  Was it mostly a white high school--Central Catholic?
Speaker 2: It was a white high school, very much like the other school experience--Catholic School experience always predominantly white with just a few blacks.  Central Catholic High School was the same, except it was more aggressive, more violent, more fights--first time I've ever been called nigger.  And it was a very unpleasant experience.  That didn't last for very long before I was asked to leave.  My parents were told that I, I'd be better suited in public school.
Speaker 1: What happened, what else had that prompted into?
Speaker 2: A big cafeteria fight.
Speaker 1: What happened?
Speaker 2: Somebody put a--there were a lot of things that led up to it, a lot of individual skirmishes that led up to a big skirmish in the cafeteria in February.  And one of the white boys put a note on the cafeteria table that said, "Negro History Week invited nigger to lunch".  And we knew who did it and so, the cafeteria got turned up.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, when this happens, I mean, the school asked for you to leave, correct--
Speaker 2: Oh, sure.
Speaker 1: --not the--was anything done to the--
Speaker 2: No--
Speaker 1: --antagonist?
Speaker 2: No, no.  Nothing was ever done to that--it was always us.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, how did you feel about that?  Did you feel that it was just as well?
Speaker 2: I was glad to leave, I was glad to leave.  I was especially glad to get to the school where all the neighborhood kids went to.  That was something I had never experienced because all of my life, we were assigned to a school that was different than the school that all the neighborhood kids went to.  And it was Catholic, which all the neighborhood kids were real strange, 'cause it had those nuns with these long black uniforms on, and these priests always dressed in black and talking soft.  And so, it was just--they thought that the whole Catholic thing was like a cult, and we were, we were part of the cult 'cause we were, and we went to their school.  And so, now, finally, I get a chance to go to the school where all my friends and neighbors go to the black school, the public school.  And so, that was--I was glad to go there.
Speaker 1: Uh-hum.
Speaker 2: But that didn't work out either.
Story_ID: 136294
Speaker 1: Now, what was the name of the high school, the neighborhood school?
Speaker 2: Schenley High School [Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania].
Speaker 1: Schenley?
Speaker 2: Uh-hum.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: The--Schenley High School was located in a neighborhood where--close to a black neighborhood called Sugar Top [Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania].  That's where the middle-class blacks lived and that's where their kids went to school.  The projects that I lived in [Bedford Dwellings] were built right next to--it went up to the border of Sugar Top.  And I didn't know that the Sugar Top residents had fought against the projects being built that close to their neighborhood.  And the kids who moved into the projects--when we went to their school, we were looked down on as kind of second class because we were from those hated projects.  And so although we were in a black school, we were never accepted and integrated into the society of the school, 'cause we were not Sugar Top kids.  We were the project kids.
Speaker 1: So, is this the first time in your life you kind of felt like this class, kind of pinch?
Speaker 2: First time, first time.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: The guys, they would accept me in class because I was a good athlete.  And, but after school, they would act like they didn't know me, or they couldn't remember my name.  It was, hey, my man.  And so, that always hurt.  The girls, they were worse.  They looked straight through you and did not see you.  You were invisible to the girls, and not memorable to the guys.  And so, it was a, a very uncomfortable experience there at Schenley High School.  And so, the project guys hung together and gave each other friendship and comfort.  And we said, to hell with the Sugar Top guys.
Speaker 1: Now, how do you spell Schenley and this--
Speaker 2: S-C-H-E-N-L-E-Y.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: The--they gave us a negative attitude about school and going to school.  And we frequently spent more time playing hooky, and hanging out in the pool room than going to school.  That eventually led to deteriorating grades where I finally dropped out of Schenley.  And I decided that I was going to just go to work and get a job and I didn't need no high school diploma and--
Speaker 1: How old were you at this point?
Speaker 2: Sixteen--sixteen.
Speaker 1: Uh-hum.
Speaker 2: Then, at the time, I was also getting into a lot of confrontations with my father [William Howze] who was ill, and irritable and disappointed in me.  And so, when one of my friends told me that a couple of our other friends, who were a little older, were driving to New York [New York City, New York] to move, to live in New York.  He said, "There's nothin' going here in Pittsburgh, man, why don't we go?"  So, I said, "I'm game."
Story_ID: 136295
Speaker 1: All right so, all right.  So, you, you all just get in the car.  Did you tell your mother [Mary Ella Howze] goodbye or what did you--
Speaker 2: I ran away from home.  I, I didn't tell anybody that I was leaving except my sister, Beverly, busted me as I was packing my belongings into this shopping bag.  And I had this paper shopping bag and my basketball.  And she said, "What are you doing?  Oh, you are running away from home.  I'm going to tell!"  And so, I got her not to tell.  In fact, I recruited her into my scheme to help me get out of the apartment, which was difficult, because the last room that led out of the apartment was the living room, which is where my father [William Howze] propped himself up to watch television, after dinner every night.  And that's where he would go to sleep, so I had to wait for him to go into the living room--go to sleep.  You could hear him snoring all throughout the house.  So, that's how I knew what my signal was to get ready to, to sneak past him.  You had to wait until his snore died down to a quiet snore.  That's when he was in his deepest sleep--not the loud snore.  If you try to get by him on the loud snore, you're going to get busted, and then, then killed (laughter), so you had to wait.  And my sister helped me to know when it was safe to escape.  And I snuck past him and went and got into the car with Boojie [ph.], and Melvin [ph.], and Red [ph.].  And we drove this raggedly convertible Buick with a hole in it from Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania] to New York [New York City, New York].  And we were all going to get jobs, and we were all going to learn new hustles, and we were going to make money shooting pool.  We'd become pretty good.  And we were going to the Land of Milk and Honey.  All these guys was coming back to Pittsburgh from New York with new cars and fine clothes.  And they were saying, man, New York is a breeze, New York is like Heaven.  Anybody from Pittsburgh can make it in New York.  And so, we, we knew a lot of new Pittsburghers in New York, and we were going to hook up with them and, and make New York our success story.  So, that's how I snuck out of Pittsburgh.
Story_ID: 136296
Speaker 1: Well, what happened when you got to New York [City, New York]?  Did you find all your friends and become a big success in New York?
Speaker 2: Not quite.  Our contact was Red's [ph.] father.  It was Red's car.  And Red--father lived in Brooklyn [New York], and Red assured us that we could stay with his father until we got on our feet.  Well, when we got to Brooklyn, we went up and Red knocked on the door.  And his father looked and said, "Who, who is all these niggers?"  And Red said, "These are my friends."  And he let us come on in to get something to eat.  Then he told Red, "Well, you're my son.  I got to provide a place for you, but I'm not providing no place for them."  So, Red said--well, he tried to bluff him and said, "Well, if they can't stay, I'm not going to stay."  So, he said, "Okay, all y'all get your asses out of here." (Laughter).  So, we were out, back into the car, living in the car.  So, I called my mother's sisters who stayed on Staten Island [New York].  Now, I'm just as broke as I could be.  I didn't have no (sic) money.  And they said, "Boy, where are you?  Your mother is worried sick."  And I said, "I'm over here in Brooklyn at my friend's house.  We're going to stay with his father."  And they said, "Have you, have you eaten?  Do you have any money?"  I said, "I got a little bit of money.  I'm, I'm not hungry--I, I ate, I'm fine."  They said, "Well, come on over here, over here to Staten Island, and, and say hello to your aunties."  So I said okay.  So, I got Red to drive me from Brooklyn to Staten Island, and they brought me in.  I met my cousin who was my age.  He was in high school.  My mother's two sisters were both nurses.  They owned their home and lived a middle-class existence.  The refrigerator was full.  The cupboards were full of food.  Forrest [ph.] had enough clothes to be able to change clothes every day.  I'd never experienced having those, those kind of clothes.  I wore the same clothes--maybe Tuesday wouldn't be the same as Monday.  But if I changed on Tuesday, then Wednesday, we're going to be back to Monday.  I only had two sets of anything.  But Forrest had--he could change clothes every day for weeks, and never run out of clothes, and always had enough food to eat.  And he was light-skinned, had green eyes, wavy hair, and the girls just absolutely loved him.  And so, my aunt convinced me to go back to school, and they told me that I could live with them.  And they asked me--if, if they could get me back in school if, if I would go.  And I said, if you can get back in after the mess-ups that I have made, then I'll go.  And going to school [Port Richmond High School, Staten Island, New York] with Forrest, who's my cousin, was like me being one of the Sugar Top [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] kids 'cause Forrest was middle class.  And the school accepted him, and the guys accepted me and him, and the girls accepted me, just based on his coattails.  So, high school in Staten Island became a joy.  I really enjoyed high school.  Then, I made the Dean's List, and graduated from high school there on Staten Island because I was able to go to school with my cousin, Forrest.
Story_ID: 136297
Speaker 1: Now this is a whole, as radical a turnaround as I've ever heard.  You know, I mean, just the whole change in environment--completely different.  Were there any, you know, special teachers that you met at [Port Richmond High School, Staten Island, New York]--
Speaker 2: No, I don't remember the teachers.  I just remember the--my, my fellow students.  We just had a very good time.  I discovered pizza, bowling, all that kind of stuff that kids from the projects never did.  I enjoyed learning and I discovered that they thought I was a leader.  And I found myself being proposed to lead things that I never really been asked to lead before in my life.  And they liked my accent.  They, they think people from Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania] have an accent.  I thought they were the ones with the funny accent.  They thought (laughter) that I had an accent and so, they liked to hear me talk.  They called me--they said I had a gift of gab, that I could rap, and I was accepted wholly in, in that environment.  And I was catapulted to position of leader.  And it was in the Youth Council of the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] that I was--had become the Chairman of, primarily for the purpose of getting to the girls who were in the NAACP, and, and being popular because I was the Head of the NAACP.  But that chairmanship of the Staten Island Youth Council of the NAACP is what brought me to Washington, D.C. on a trip that we organized for the Youth Council to travel from Staten Island to Washington, D.C. for the [1963] March on Washington.  That was my first introduction to any real organized civil rights activity other than whenever I would go back to Harlem [New York] where my boys had moved to, the boys that I came up from Pittsburgh with.
Speaker 1: Red [ph.] and--
Speaker 2: Red and Boojie [ph.] and Melvin [ph.], they had moved to Harlem.  And on the weekends, I would leave Staten Island and visit them in Harlem.  And we also loved finding Malcolm X.  Malcolm used to preach around Harlem.  And you never knew where he was going to be, so one of the joys of Saturday morning, after we finished playing basketball and, and getting something to eat, was to go find Malcolm.  And we'd drive around Harlem until we'd see a big old crowd, and we'd know that that's Malcolm.  And then, we'd go to join the crowd and listen to Malcolm speak.  And it was always just a joy 'cause the brother could rap, the brother could rap.  And he was rapping about something that was new to us--this whole idea of black nationalism, and black pride, and the Nation of Islam, and black history, and all this black talk stuff that we had not been introduced to before.  And so, we really enjoyed that.  And that was the first kind of black consciousness education that I had received.  So, when I ran into the NAACP Youth Council in Staten Island, it was a lot of what Malcolm was talking about in Harlem that I was able to repeat that made me sound really hip on Staten Island and, and made me a good candidate for the NAACP Youth Council, and then that trip to Washington, to the March on Washington, and the experience of Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] delivering the 'I Have A Dream' speech.  That turned my life around.
Story_ID: 136298
Speaker 1: Now, now, let me just backtrack and get the dates right now.  The March on Washington is '63 [1963].
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Now, are you, you're still in high school at that point?
Speaker 2: No, no.
Speaker 1: Okay.  You're out of high school.
Speaker 2: I'm out of high school.
Speaker 1: Now, now when did you--you were at, at the high school on Staten Island [Port Richmond High School, Staten Island, New York], the--
Speaker 2: Yes, I came out of there in '61 [1961].
Speaker 1: Sixty-one [1961], okay.  So, what did you do in '62 [1962] and '63 [1963]?  I mean, were you working?  Did you have--
Speaker 2: I had a part-time job in a clothing store on Staten Island, and I went to school.  I went to the McAllister Academy of Mortuary Science [American Academy McAllister Institute of Funeral Service, New York City].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That was God's way of punishing me for lying all of my life.  From the time I was little and people would ask me--what you want to be when you grow up?  I never knew what to tell them.  And then, as I saw a man across the street from where we lived in the projects--his name was Mr. Charles, Mr. Samuels--Samuel Charles [ph.] was his name.  He owned a funeral home.  And he drove a big black shiny car and was always dressed up, and everybody always had a lot of respect for him.  They called him Mr. Charles--how you doing, Mr. Charles?  He had the most respect in the community.  And I said, what is he?  They said he's an undertaker.  So, I would tell people, I want to be an undertaker when they asked what you want to be.  I had no idea what an undertaker did.  I just knew that an undertaker looked like Mr. Charles.  So, I kept telling people, I want to be an undertaker.  And here, they would laugh, here's this little nine-year-old boy talking about he wants to be an undertaker.  That is so funny.  And so, I kept on doing it 'cause it got laughs, it got good responses.  And, eventually when--by the time I got to Staten Island, I was still telling my aunts when they was asking me, what you want to do after high school, I was still saying, I want to be an undertaker.  Well, for my graduation gift, they got me into my first semester of undertaker school (laughter).  I didn't want to be no undertaker (laughter).  But I had to go because they, they had already paid for it, so I went and did well.  The science classes, I did well in.  The business classes, like business contract law and accounting, I did well in.  I did well in biology 'cause I had always had a like for science and anatomy.  And I did well in the school until I got far enough along to do a summer internship at a funeral home in Harlem [New York].  And I got to see the inside of how the business operated.  And I said, I don't like this--this is way too sad.  And the people who owned this funeral home--all they do is take advantage of these people crying and grieving, and they take all their money.  And then, after the people leave, they're laughing and joking about how they cleaned them out, and it turned my stomach.  I said, I don't want to do this, I'm not going to do this.  And so, I was not sure about whether or not I was going to come back and finish the mortuary school when I came back to Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania] for the summer of 1965.
Story_ID: 136299
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, wait, wait, we haven't got you--the last--I left you at sixty--summer of '63 [1963] at the March on Washington [Washington, D.C.].  So, when you came--
Speaker 2: Beyond that, after that--
Speaker 1: Okay.  After that, what happened?
Speaker 2: --I continued working.  I worked in part-time jobs.  I started going to school to the mortuary school and eventually, the, the--I, I came back.  I mean, after the, after the March on Washington, I continued as the Chairman of the Youth Council of the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People].  As a matter of fact, I had gotten up to be, like the Vice President of the State Chapter of the NAACP Youth Council.  So, I stayed in that, in NAACP Youth Council environment.  I continued to work.  I continued to go to school.  And, and then, I came--that takes us up into, like '65 [1965], '63 [1963], '64 [1964], '65 [1965].
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, at that time now, NAACP Youth was pretty active all over the country doing things.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: But on a national scene, the--you got like a movement going on.  Every major urban--if a CORE [Congress on Racial Equality] is doing sit-ins all over the country, you know, SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee] is in Mississippi and, and Alabama.  I mean, Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] is, is engaged, you know.  So Malcolm X is assassinated in '65 [1965]?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: I mean, so where did you, how did you, where did you think you fit in all that?  And did you have a political--were you developing a political position and all that?
Speaker 2: It's hard to recall all of it with, with precision.  But I know that I was becoming increasingly militant, increasingly in love with Malcolm, increasingly, politically active, and involved in leadership activities.  And also continuing to work part-time and go to school part-time and, and trying to figure out who I was becoming as a young man.  I'm, I'm nineteen, twenty years old now.  And so, organizationally, the NAACP is the only thing I, I joined and was a part of.  And that, and that would take me up to '65 [1965].
Story_ID: 136300
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well, tell us--we'll pick this up near '65 [1965].  Now, '65 [1965], what--
Speaker 2: Sixty-five [1965], I'm back in Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania] visiting.  There's this girl that I want to date.  And she says, well, we can go to the movies, but you first got to go with me to hear this speaker from SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee].  It's going to be at Wesley Center Baptist Church--no, [Wesley Center] A.M.E. Zion Church [Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania], and then we can go to the movies afterwards.  So, I figure--well, you know, if all it takes is going to hear some knucklehead speak at a church, and I get to go on this date--oh, I don't care about that.  I'll go listen to anybody speak.  So, I went to the church to meet her.  This guy named--it, it was going to be a speaker.  So, I go to the downstairs vestibule of the church in the basement--and I smoke cigarettes at the time.  And I'm wondering whether or not it's okay to smoke.  Now, I know ordinarily, you don't smoke in church, but we're in, we are in the basement, so maybe they allow smoking in the basement.  And as I was trying to figure that out, this white guy, who's also waiting in the basement, comes up and asks me, do you know if it's okay to smoke?  I said, I was just thinking the same thing, but I'm not sure, so maybe we better go--step outside and smoke.  So, we stepped outside--lit up cigarettes.  He asked me what I was doing there.  I told him I was trying to date this girl.  I was waiting on her to arrive.  And she wanted to--she made me come to listen to some knucklehead give a speech in order to get the date, so that's what brings me here.  You know, what brings you here?  And he was just about to tell me what brought him here when she pulled up.  And so, and around the same time, somebody was coming out to tell us that the program is getting ready to start--you all come on inside.  So, we all went inside and sat down together.  And the emcee gave this long introductory speech about the kids who had been blown up in the church in Birmingham [Alabama], and the civil rights workers [James Earl Chaney, Michael Schwerner, and Andrew Goodman] who were still missing in, in Mississippi, and the other martyrs who were being killed, and what was being done to people in, in Mississippi for just trying to register to vote.  And now, ladies and gentlemen, it is my honor to introduce the representative of the Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee and the Mississippi Freedom Democratic Party, Mr. Don Hamer.  And this guy, who I had talked about coming here--a knucklehead speech--stands up (laughter), and looks at me and smiles.  And I look at him and say, well, (laughter), sorry, man.  But he goes up to the front of the church, and gives one of the most compelling speeches that I had heard.  And here I am--I think I'm pretty hip, you know, I know some Malcolm [X] quotes.  I got my little NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] pedigree.  I think I got my stuff pretty much together, but here's a white boy from Chicago [Illinois] who has to come and tell me, a black man, about my own people's struggle and suffering in Mississippi.  Something's wrong with that.  I did not like that feeling one bit.  And I knew that he shouldn't be telling me about this.   I should have my own experience about this.  And I knew then that all of this stuff had, that had happened before Malcolm, Martin [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.], the NAACP, was all kind of leading up to that moment.  And I knew that I didn't need to go back and finish mortuary school.  I needed to be in Mississippi.  And that's exactly what I committed to do.  And within a couple months, I was on a bus, a Greyhound bus.  Don Hamer, I'm going to meet him in Mississippi.  So he said, I'll be there to pick you up.  And I call him the day that I'm supposed to leave, and there's no answer on the phone.  But it's going to take two and a half days for the Greyhound bus to get there, so I got time for, for--got time to reach him.  So, I'll just get on the bus, start the trip.  I'll call him on one of these many stops that the bus makes on the way to Mississippi.  So, every time the bus stops, I get off, and I call the Freedom Office in Mississippi, the telephone number he'd given me.  And there's no answer.  But the call is put through by the same operator every time I call.  It gets to the point where she recognizes my voice, and I recognize her voice.  This is the same operator.  And she'll say something like, well, he's still not there yet, you know.  So, I know that she knows it's me calling.  We mess around and it's three o' clock in the morning.  We arrive at this bus depot in Mississippi, which is a gas station next to a cafe coffee shop deal, with a little tiny alleyway in between.  I get off the bus.  I get all my belongings.  I'm worried as hell 'cause Don has not answered the phone.  I don't know anybody in Mississippi.  Here I am in the state, and this guy ain't answering the phone.  So, I look for a dime and a phone--I don't see no phone.  I don't, I don't have no change.  I go into the cafe.  I put my things down.  I give the lady a dollar and say, could I have a cup of coffee, please, and, and some change to make a phone call.  And where's your, where's your pay phone?  And I look--I don't hear nothing.  I look up--she's just staring at me.  I say, could I have some coffee and some change for a phone call?  She said, nigger, if you don't get your ass back around to the colored window, how dare you walk through the front door?  If you want some coffee and some change, you better get around to the colored window, and ask for it like you got some sense.  I had never been called a nigger in my adult life by white folks.  And now, I'm indignant.  And that's when I noticed to my right a police officer sitting at the counter sipping coffee.  And I looked up at him, he looks up at me.  He puts his hand on his gun.  So, I'm mad about being called a nigger, and told to go around to the back to the colored window that I ain't going to no colored window.  I grabbed my stuff and all the indignation I could muster up, and I head on back out the door--but where am I going?  I ain't got nowhere to go.  I ain't got no change (laughter).  I'm stuck.
Story_ID: 136301
Speaker 1: So, I'm trying to figure what am I going to do?  And next thing I know, the police officer comes out of the coffee shop.  So, he looks down at my stuff beside the door.  And he says, "This your stuff, nigger?"  So, I said, "That's my stuff."  He said, "Get it from in front of the door."  So, I looked at my stuff, and I looked at the door.  My stuff ain't in front of the door--it's beside the door.  So, I looked at it as if to say, my stuff ain't in front of the door, but I didn't say anything.  I just looked.  He put his hand on his gun again.  So, I got my stuff (laughter).  And just as I turned around to get my stuff, I see on the other side of this gas station, the cafe near the gas station--a telephone, a pay phone.  So, I started off to the pay phone--I think I ran over to the pay phone.  I'm not sure, but I got to the pay phone.  I searched all over my pockets, and finally found a dime, and I called one last time.  And Don [Hamer] picks up the phone.  I said, "Man, I've been calling you for two days.  You told me to call you when I was ready to come, and you didn't answer the phone, so I just got on the bus, and I'm here now."  He said, "I'm sorry, man, I went to a demonstration.  I didn't expect to get arrested, but I got arrested.  And I had to wait until I could make bail and I just got back.  So, I'm here now, and I'll come on out and get you, so where are you?"  I said, "I'm in a little town called Durant, Durant, Mississippi."  He said, "Hmm, Durant?"  I say, "Yeah."  He said, "Where are you in Durant?"  I said, "I'm at the Durant Cafe where the bus dropped me off."  He said, "Oh, my God, get out of there, get out of there.  That's the Ku Klux Klan's headquarters.  Go across the highway and wait for me.  I'm on my way."  So, now I am scared as hell!  I go across the highway--put my bags down.  I'm sitting on my suitcase.  I got this habit of putting my elbow on my thigh, and my hand under my chin, but I'm sitting there like that on my suitcase.  And I'm noticing that my chin keeps sliding off of my hand and I said, damn, what is it?  A chill is in the air.  Then, I discovered I was sweating, so wasn't no chill in the air--it was like 90 degrees.  That was--I was terrified!  So, I'm waiting.  Finally, he said, I'm driving a white pickup truck.  So, I see this white pickup truck approaching.  I figured that's Don.  He blinks the high beams, and I figure--I better tell him to go ahead down the road.  Before he arrived, a group of white boys--the police officer went back into the cafe after he confronted me.  He comes back out.  He gets into the police car which is parked at the gas pump.  He drives around the back of the police station--I mean, of the cafe.  He turns out his lights.  And I can see this car moving without lights between the coffee shop and the gas station.  And when I saw the lights off, I knew something was up.  Shortly after that, the lights in the gas station next door come on in the garage.  And next thing I know, the garage door opens.  And a car drives out with a bunch of white boys in it--a convertible.  A couple of them are sitting up on the back of the convertible.  Others are hanging out over the side.  And they're yahooing, and one was swinging a chain, and another had a baseball bat.  And they came flying across the road and skidded and turned, and asked me if I was one of them moochers.  And I said, I don't know what no moocher is, but whatever it is, I ain't one of them.  They say, you're one of them civil rights workers, ain't you?  I said, no, I ain't no civil rights worker.  They said, well, who you come down there to see?  So, I knew then that the operator had told them that I was on my way.  You got another one on the way.
Story_ID: 136302
Speaker 1: But I had heard Don [Hamer] talk about this man in Lexington, Mississippi, where the Freedom Office was, whose name was Luke Sims [ph.].  And somehow, I just remembered Luke's name.  And I said, I come to see--visit my uncle, Luke Sims.  So they say, we know a Luke Sims--he better be your uncle.  We're going to wait and see.  So, they drove back over to the gas station.  They were drinking beer, and still continuing to whoop and holler, and wait to see who was going to come pick me up.  That's why, when I saw Don starting to approach, I waved him on.  And I figured I was going to just kind of casually get up, like I was moseying down the road to go get into the pickup truck.  But by the time I stood up, and kind of stretched and started to get my gear, Don had gone down the road, had made a "U"-turn, had turned around, and was flying back.  He comes back--I throw my stuff in the back of the pickup truck.  I run around and get inside--he takes off.  They take off right behind us, and they follow us all the way into Lexington from Durant [Mississippi].  But by the time we got close to Lexington, Don turns off onto this dirt road, and Don is flying down this dirt road.  And they are right behind us, but the dirt road is kicking up so much dust that they're getting further and further behind.  They can't keep up.  They can't see in the dust.  And, eventually, they just tail off, and you can't see their headlights no more.  And Don goes on to take me up to Eugene [ph.] Montgomery's house.  Eugene--Montgomery is a family in Lexington, Mississippi who's notorious for civil rights work.  They're the ones who let their kids integrate--be the first to integrate the schools, the elementary school, and high school.  They're the first ones to go down to register to vote.  Bernice Montgomery was the only one who had enough literacy to pass the literacy test.  And she was one of just a handful of blacks who had been registered to vote in Holmes County, even though Holmes County was 70 percent black.  There wasn't more than a dozen black people registered to vote and, but that's the kind of family they were.  They were economically independent because Eugene had inherited this hundred acres from his father.  So, he didn't have to worry about getting fired, and he was as crazy as they were.  When they would shoot at him, he would shoot right back.  And so, all of the civil rights workers, whenever they came in Holmes County, they were welcome at Eugene Montgomery's house.  So, Don took me to Eugene Montgomery's and we got out.  And Don told him what happened.  And I was standing there shivering, and Eugene just could not stop laughing.  He was on the floor laughing.  He made his wife and all the kids come out and look at me, and listened to the story again, and they all fell on the floor laughing.  And that was when he decided that I was going to be different from the rest of the civil rights workers.  They usually came, stayed at his house for like a week or so until they found another family to live with, but they decided that they were going to keep me.  So, they kind of adopted me, and I lived with them for the whole time that I was in Mississippi.  Don had gotten me to agree to spend four months of '65 [1965] in Mississippi.  That four months turned into four years.  And it was in 1968, before I saw the end of my four month tour of duty, when I left Mississippi to go back to Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania].
Story_ID: 136303
Speaker 1: Now, this is a period of time--I think this--well, I haven't read a lot about it, but I think maybe a lot of people don't know what happened after--we all know--.  A lot of people know the dramatic story of the formation of the Mississippi Freedom Democratic Party in '64 [1964], the Freedom Summer, the trip to the [1964] Democratic National Convention [Atlantic City, New Jersey].
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And Fannie Lou Hamer saying she's sick and tired of being sick and tired.  And, you know, the betrayal of, you know, betrayals down there.
Speaker 2: Of the Democratic Party?
Speaker 1: Yeah.  But very few people know what happened afterwards in Mississippi.  Now, these we know about, even I've read about the despair of some of the SNCC workers after the Democratic Party, you know, Convention.  They didn't know what was going to happen next, but you were there for what happened next.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And so, what did happen next?
Speaker 2: Well, that rejection that they received at the Democratic National Committee in Atlantic City is what gave impetus to the need to organize and to strengthen the Mississippi Freedom Democratic Party, and to challenge the Mississippi political system in Mississippi, and not at the National Convention.  It gave impetus to the need to register people to vote, no matter how dangerous it was, how many people had to die, or how many people got threatened.  So, the whole political movement and the importance of it was manifest by what happened in '64 [1964], and the promise that everyone made to themselves that the next time the Democrats try to have another convention in 1968, we're going to be there.  And this time, we're going to be ready, and we're not going to be rejected.  So that's--but it also gave a new impetus to the, the young civil rights workers who had seen so many of their colleagues assassinated, and beaten, and brutalized.  It gave new impetus to their impatience with non-violence, and it gave them a new foundation for developing an ideological confrontation to non-violence.  And eventually, it gave rise to Black Power, and young leadership competing with Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] and [Ralph] Abernathy, and all of the SCLC [Southern Christian Leadership Conference] old-school types.
Speaker 1: Now, the stage for a lot of that confrontation was the March from Selma [Alabama] to Montgomery [Alabama], right?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And, okay, tell--what were you involved in that much?
Speaker 2: No--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --no, I was not physically there.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But a lot of that got set up by young people advancing that confrontation with the older folks saying, this is not a good thing to do.  We should not do this.  And, and the young people, almost daring the police to confront them on the bridge, and, and, of course, the police accommodated as everybody knew they would.  But it, it gave the young people the kind of credentials that they needed to lead, and to be seen as equals, by the old-school leadership.  And, eventually, young people continued to lead themselves.  They didn't need to be led by the old-school leadership anymore, and that leadership of themselves was always a more impatient, and militant, and confrontational kind of leadership--brass [sic], brash, young leaders.
Story_ID: 136304
Speaker 1: Now, now correct me if I'm wrong, but the SCLC [Southern Christian Leadership Conference] leadership, the younger leadership consisted of [HM Reverend] James Bevel and Hosea Williams and, you know, and they were the impetus for that march across the bridge [Bloody Sunday, Selma to Montgomery March]--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --Edmund Pettus Bridge [Selma, Alabama] in '65 [1965] where the--
Speaker 2: Along with some of the SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee], they--it was a kind of like the young people from all the different movements came together under a more militant banner of youth leadership.
Speaker 1: Well, so, you're saying that this was strategic--I guess, to--
Speaker 2: I don't think it was strategic--
Speaker 1: --or--
Speaker 2: --because when you're in the middle of it, you don't know you are being strategic.  You're just responding to the situation as you see it.  And you're responding to your own grieving for the people who you've lost, for your impatience with this go slow, love thy neighbor attitude.  So, you don't know that you're being strategically different.  You're just not accepting that anymore and you're developing your own legs.  That's really what it was.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, the brutalization of the marchers on Edmund Pettus Bridge gave the younger leadership the credential of being able to say, you know, you don't have to tell me what's going to happen.  It already happened to me so I can do--
Speaker 2: Not just the brutalization on the bridge, but all of the brutalization that had happened to all of the civil rights workers, say, from 1961 up until 1965, all culminated in that final confrontation on Edmund Pettus.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And, eventually, a new philosophy of Black Power begins to emerge.  And the young, the new young leadership not only rejects Dr. King's [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] non-violence gradualism approach, it also rejects Dr. King's integration approach, and rejects the concept of integration within the young leadership, and confronts the white civil rights workers to leave the movement, go back home, and fight racism back home.  You don't need to fight racism here in the South 'cause racism exists in the North just as much as it exists here in the South.  And black people have to define themselves.  And this new Black Power is going to lead our own struggle.  And so, there was a huge confrontation between black and white civil rights workers.
Speaker 1: Now, who were the major actors in this confrontation?
Speaker 2: It--I guess Stokely [Carmichael, later Kwame Ture] gets--Stokely's leadership, Stokely's emergence as a new SNCC leader kind of characterizes it more than anything although there was a whole large cadre of young people who sympathized with the young movement, the new movement.  But it gets mostly characterized, I think, and symbolized in Stokely's leadership after Stokely took over from [HM] John Lewis.
Story_ID: 136305
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, there was like a pivotal meeting of SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee] at one point when the white civil rights workers actually were asked to leave or did leave or--
Speaker 2: I don't know that it was a pivotal meeting.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: There were a series of meetings and confrontations.  And they were, they were confronted on many occasions 'cause they did not go easily and willingly.  They had contributed as much, and shared as much blood, and got as many knocks upside their head, and spent as many nights in jail as anybody else.  And so, they were not going to be denied easily.  It took a while.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, the initial idea was that if you brought the whites down, they would protect the blacks by bringing the white media with them to see what's going on 'cause if--I don't--the (unclear) was before '64 [1964], these things are happening in the dark now.  And nobody knows you're getting beat, or killed, or whatever--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --'cause it never makes the national news.
Speaker 2: I think that, that was a large part of the recruitment of whites from the North to the South--the recognition that I don't know that it was that deliberate in its initial recruitment.  I think, initially, people just needed troops--all hands on deck--but then, people noticed that when the white kids are getting beat up, the media is present, and is a different reaction in the country than the reaction that black people had been experiencing since 1955.  And so, more people got recruited as a way, not only of getting more troops, and enabling the raising of more money, but also getting more national attention.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, what role did you play in the Mississippi Freedom Democratic Party in those days?
Speaker 2: I was an organizer who played a kind of a unique role.  I was--although I was black, I was--there were not many black male organizers from the North.  Most of the blacks from the North were women.  And most of the black males in the Movement were Southern black males.  So, I was kind of unique in the Mississippi Delta being a black male from the North.
Speaker 1: Now, was Bob Moses [Robert Parris Moses] still there?
Speaker 2: Bob, by this time, was pretty much marginalized and on his way out, although he still had a lot of influence.  But he wasn't as visibly--I mean, physically present, and visibly present as he had been earlier.  So, my role was--part of it was, I would say, it was bifurcated in, into two different roles.  On the one hand, I was a Yankee Northern agitator, like the white guys.  On the other hand, I was black.  And so, I had this kind of dual existence that allowed me to have a different kind of relationship with the black Mississippians that the whites could not enjoy.  But I could not really be as much a member as the black locals.  I was from up North.  And so, I was a, I was outside organizer who everybody liked except the white folks.  But I was, I was warmly received by the black Mississippians and, and so, the role that I played was, was not as a leader as much as an organizer of local leadership.
Speaker 1: Okay.  When you say you were disliked by the white folks, are you talking about the internal people or the external?
Speaker 2: No, the internal white Mississippians in Holmes County, Mississippi.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, okay.  So, the white people in the [Civil Rights] Movement, you got along with fine?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, okay.
Speaker 2: So, that's the role I played--organizer.
Story_ID: 136306
Speaker 1: Now, was there a training when you arrived?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee] conducted trainings of organizers who were coming in to work with the Mississippi Freedom Democratic Party or other activities.
Speaker 1: Now, did they wait for a group to come in, or did they train you as you, as people just kind of came down?
Speaker 2: They usually and preferred to wait until a group--bring in groups at a time.  But my particular circumstances brought me in alone.  And so, I kind of got baptism by fire.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, it was like, as you go training or--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, to a large extent.
Speaker 1: --rather than, you know.
Speaker 2: I wasn't part of a class.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Day one of training, day two, rather.
Speaker 2: Right.  But, no, it wasn't that organized.  But it was clear that I needed a lot of training based on the way I arrived.  And so, I was always getting a lot of advice about what to do and what not to do; how to not get caught; how to never drive a car that was low on gas; how to never drive a car with bad tires, so that you might get caught on the road at night.  Many of the people who had gotten hurt and killed did so because of bad car experiences--how to never get caught with a white woman upfront sitting in the front seat.  If at all, if it was going to be any integration in a car--first of all, preferably blacks ride together.  Whites ride separately.  But if there's going to be any integration, whites sit in the back.  Blacks sit upfront as a chauffeur.  And if it's a white woman, definitely no white woman should ever be caught upfront with a black man driving under those circumstances.
Speaker 1: Now, we interviewed [HM] Willie McCray a couple of years ago.  He was talking about how the SNCC office in Atlanta [Georgia] would make sure that those cars worked, and the tires, the right tires, and that sort of things.
Speaker 2: They did.
Speaker 1: Uh-hum, okay.
Speaker 2: It could cost you your life.
Speaker 1: This is, yeah, this is a significant part of the struggle--I think people don't really realize--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --how significant tires were.
Speaker 2: Right, absolutely.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Tires, good running engine, you know, don't run out of gas.
Story_ID: 136307
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: There's a story attached to the issue of automobile protocol in the, in those days of the South.  There was a community south of Jackson [Mississippi] called Mt. Beulah.  It was a former--I believe it was a former seminary that had been donated to the [Civil Rights] Movement by a religious organization, and we used it for weekend retreats.  And there was this one time when I had worked late, but it was a Friday evening.  And I had a very tough week, and I really needed to get to Mt. Beulah for this rest and relaxation.  And I was--the sun was about to set, and I was packing up and about to get in the car, and head for Mt. Beulah when this white female civil rights worker came.  She had--this is a person who had a disability, and who walked on these two kind of crutches--you know, the crutch that has the wrap around your wrist and the handles.  She came and she said, oh, am I so glad I caught you because I've got some people visiting me that I was supposed to meet down in Mt. Beulah, and you're the last person leaving.  If you hadn't--if I hadn't caught you, I wouldn't have been able to get down the whole weekend.  So, I said, well, I don't mind driving you down, but, of course, you know, you got to sit in the back.  She said, oh, no, that's too demeaning.  I've never agreed with that.  That, that is just the most demeaning thing that I have ever experienced, and I just cannot do that to you and I can't ask.  Look, it ain't do nothing to me but saving my life.  So, if you want a ride to Mt. Beulah, you got to sit in the back.  She said, I will not do it.  I'd rather sit on the side of the road than, than to demean the, the human race in this manner.  So, I'm thinking, oh, my Lord, what in the world is going on?  So, I tried a little bit longer to convince her to sit in the back.  She was just as adamant about sitting up front.  I then threatened to leave her a couple of times.  It didn't work.  She said, well, then, you'll just have to leave me, and they'll just be disappointed that I didn't come.  They came from Chicago [Illinois] to meet me there, but I refuse to sit in the back.  By that time, it was starting to get dark.  I figured, well, maybe, we can sneak through, so she gets in the front.  And we get on the highway and we're driving down the highway.  I'm nervous as a cat.  Eventually, more and more traffic seems to be building on the highway in the direction that we're travelling, but I figure it's Friday night.  People are just coming out to start their weekend.  But then, the traffic gets so heavy that it starts to slow, so I'm figuring well, maybe there's an accident up ahead.  So, then I see police lights.  And that's when I say, either this is an accident, or my ass is in trouble.  And, sure enough, it was a roadblock which was frequent at that time.  They, on weekends, they did a lot of roadblocks for drunk drivers, and for civil rights workers.  And I had a pistol in my pouch.  I wore a little side pouch, so I grabbed the pistol out of my pouch, and I say, here, put this in your purse.  She's, "Oh, no, I can't, oh, no, I could never touch anything like that.  Oh, my God, what are you doing with a gun?"  We're getting--traffic is behind us, traffic is on the sides of us.  The police lights are on and off.  And, by now, the police is waving all the traffic through.  C'mon, let's keep it moving, keep it moving.  And it's too late for me to do anything.  So, I slide it under my seat.
Story_ID: 136308
Speaker 1: We eventually get to the roadblock.  And he knocks on the window.  I roll the window down and try to hand him my license.  He doesn't take the license.  He just looks in the car and says, "I'll be damned, look what we got here.  Get out the car, nigger."  I said, oh, my God.  So, I get out the car.  And they say, "C'mon on around the back," so I go toward the back of the car.  And so, they start asking me, "What's your name, what are you doing with a white woman in the front of the car?"  I said, "I work for her, but she can't get in through the back with--'cause she's crippled, and she can only ride in the front."  They say, "You're lying, nigger," and one of them hit me.  When she saw one of them hit me, she screams, "Stop that, stop that, don't you hit him!"  Why in the world did she do that?  They went crazy--"Oh, this must be your boyfriend.  Is this your buck, is this your nigger buck?  You're going to protect him, huh?  We're going to give you something to protect him about."  While they're back there roughing me up, one of them starts searching the car.  They look under the front seat and see this pistol, and that was like the beginning of the end.  That was all they needed.  They took me down over the side to this little landing, and they had a little circle.  This is Mississippi Highway Patrol and some county sheriffs.  And they would hit me, like one of them would punch in the mouth, and then grab me, and push me over to the other one who would punch me as I came over into him.  And then, he would grab me and push me into another me, and they had me going me around this circle.  And so, she's up there up on top of the hill by the highway screaming at the top of her voice--let him alone!  And the more she screamed, the more they laughed, and whipped my ass.  They finally got tired of that and put me in the car, and was driving me toward the jail.  And I'm in the back, I'm handcuffed, right, in the back seat.  And one of them is leaning back over the seat into the back asking me questions.  He's asking me the kind of questions that you have to give a yes or a no answer to.  "You from Mississippi?" And I knew why they were asking me yes and no questions.  They wanted to see if I was going to say yes, sir or no, sir.  And they want ask me yes and no question, but I'd give them a full answer.  "Are you from Mississippi?"  I'd say, "I'm from Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania]."  "You, you be down here long?"  "I've been down here a couple of years."  They kept trying to get me to say yes, sir or no, sir.  And they couldn't figure out the question to, to ask me that I would have to say yes or no to, 'cause I would give them a whole answer in a whole sentence, and avoid yes or no until he figured out what I was doing.  And then, he just backhanded me a couple times.  And he said, you're one of them smart ass niggers.  I'm going to show you--give you something to be smart about.
Story_ID: 136309
Speaker 1: We pull up beside this jail, and they come around to open the back door and they say, get out.  So, I've got my hand cuffed behind me.  I started scooting over toward the door to try to get out.  So, I put one foot out, and I lean my head down to start to get out of the car, and he punched me in the face back into the car.  And he said, I thought I told you to get out.  So, I said, I ain't getting out no more (laughter).  So, he grabbed me my feet and dragged me out of the back seat.  They stand me up, and they try to knee me in the testicles.  And the punching didn't work anymore 'cause I couldn't feel it anymore.  So, they were trying to do something that they hadn't done already.  Then, they say, start walking, right?  So, they pull out their pistol and they're walking behind me.  We get up to the side door of the jail, and I start moving over toward the steps of the jail.  And they said, have I told you to go up them steps?  Keep walking.  So, I'm looking on ahead, and there's nothing but woods, so I walked toward the woods.  We get to the edge of the woods and I, I stopped.  He puts the gun in my head and said, I said, walk, nigger.  So, we started walking into the woods.  We get maybe 100, 150 feet into the woods.  And he says stop.  Then he says, are you going to say, yes, sir?  And I was so scared that I couldn't have said yes, sir if I wanted to.  I couldn't, I couldn't speak, and I didn't say nothing.  And he had the gun right here.  And then, I felt the gun ease up.  And I said, this is it--I'm dead.  But I felt this blow and I heard this pow!  And I just fell down to the ground.  And I'm saying to myself, I'm dead, I'm shot in the head.  Is this what death feels like?  I know I'm dead--I felt it, I heard it.  And so, I'm just laying there and I heard him say, get up, nigger, I ain't shoot you--stand up.  And I opened my eyes.  I look around, and I managed to get up, still handcuffed.  He walked me back out of the woods back toward the jail steps.  I get to the steps.  I don't go up this time.  I wait to see what he wants me to do.  And he said, get your ass on up them steps.  So then, I go up the steps.  They opened the door.  They take me in and throw me into this jail cell.  I am so sore.  I sat on that metal slab, and all night asked myself, what are you doing here?  Do you know how close you came to death?  If you get your ass out of this situation, you get your ass out of Mississippi, and don't you never come back.  And that's what I promised myself I was going to do if I get through the night, and I get out of here, you don't have to worry me and my civil rights work.  I'm going to get of here, and I will never come back.  But by the time morning came, I was so angry.  My face had swelled up--I was bleeding.  They came and opened the jail door.  Shortly after, the sun had come up.  And they said, somebody made your bail--you lucky, you lucky nigger.  I walk out.  They hand me all my belongings.  Somebody had gone to the local Freedom Office [Mississippi Freedom Democratic Party] there in Canton, Canton, Mississippi, and they had bailed me out.  They had paid my bail.  And they gave me everything except my pistol, and I didn't even say thank you.  I got my stuff and I walked out the door.  I had the keys to the car.  When I got outside, the woman who I was driving was standing there waiting.  And she was saying something about, I'm so glad to see you.  I walked by her, got in my car, and drove back to the [Mississippi] Delta.  And Mrs. Montgomery fixed me up and took care of me.  But that night, I promised myself for the rest of my life--I'm going to fight you sons of bitches.  I'm going to fight you with everything I have until I die.  That's when I made a life commitment to do this work in Canton, Mississippi.  I never again drove a white woman (laughter) in the front seat of the car in the South.  And I think about her often, and I think about that night often.  It was a brutal, scary, scary night, more scary than the first night when I arrived at the Durant Cafe [Durant, Mississippi].
Story_ID: 136310
Speaker 1: That raises some interesting--I know there were--there's been a lot written about the, the cultural kind of a disconnect between the white civil rights workers that came down there and what they, their expectations and were, and as opposed to the reality what's going on down there, just as--I mean, this is a blatant example, I guess of--
Speaker 2: It was.  And you never know it until it gets tested because I'm sure that both of us received the same training about automobile safety and stuff like that, and how to behave when you're confronted by the police what to say, what not to say.  We all got the same training, but when you're in this situation is when you find out whether or not the training stuck.  And I knew it had to stick for me 'cause it meant my life, but for her, it was some ideological principles that she thought she was upholding, even if she was putting my life in jeopardy.
Speaker 1: I don't--white women have--there's been a lot written about white women and their role in the movement, and then how they, you know, many of them moved off into the Women's Movement as a result of they--just like in abolitionist days, you know, they made that transition.  Do you have any thoughts about that and--
Speaker 2: I'd have to think about it.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, when, so what--now this is in nineteen sixty-what?
Speaker 2: This would have been probably '67 [1967].
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, you'd been down there about two years?
Speaker 2: Couple of years, yeah.
Speaker 1: Couple of years at this point?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And you had never experienced this kind of thing before?
Speaker 2: No, I never put myself in that situation.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, what was your--well, you resolved to work and dedicate your life to the movement, but you'd already, you know, spend the two years.  What was your--what'd you do next?  Did you--
Speaker 2: I spent two more years there.
Speaker 1: Two more years down there?  Okay.  So, you were never in that situation again?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Now, what did the--how did SNCC make a transition?  I mean, what kind of transition was actually made when people started talking about Black Power?  And what were you thinking and what did you--how did you transition?
Speaker 2: It was difficult for me because I was, I was out in the field much of the time, and not in the more populous areas like Jackson [Mississippi], where was large collections of civil rights workers who sat around with ideological debate.  I was in, in the field and so, didn't participate in many of those debates and, and had a lot of difficulty understanding of what was going on, what was being talked about, what was the impetus behind it, what was going to be the results of it, the consequences.  So, I struggled it with a lot.  But most of the conversations occurred at conferences, at training conferences, and training meetings, and large meetings that were held in some of the major cities in the South.  And because I, I identified more with the younger generation, I eventually came to adopt the notion of Black Power, although I was much more sensitive about how we were treating the white civil rights workers who we were kicking out of the movement.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, it seems to me that when I think about that, you had a gun in the car that night that you were stopped--
Speaker 2: Uh-hum.
Speaker 1: You--it seems to me you'd made a commitment to non-violence that maybe is attacking (unclear), but not as a way of life.  Is that a correct assessment?
Speaker 2: By that time, I think we had lost so many people to the [Ku Klux] Klan that many of us decided that although it was against the law, we'd rather have the police catch it with it than the Klan catch us without it.  And if we were confronted by the Klan late at night on some dark, lonely Mississippi road, and we had to defend ourselves, it was going to be self-defense--not non-violence.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, non-violence was a tactical, was more tactical than you know (unclear) (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: It was not only tactical, but was specifically intended for how you behave at a demonstration, at a civil disturbance demonstration.  It had not been accepted as a way of life.
Speaker 1: Now, did you find that the native people in Mississippi, they--did they arm themselves when they went out at night?
Speaker 2: They were armed from the very day I arrived.  They was always armed.  They, they never bought non-violence.
Speaker 1: Okay.  I think that's significant to say.
Story_ID: 136311
Speaker 1: So, '67 [1967], now did you go to the Black Power Conference in '67 [1967], or did you know about that?
Speaker 2: I knew about it.  I didn't attend.  I was busy in the South.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And that was in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania, sic, Newark, New Jersey], I think, or--
Speaker 2: I think it was in Philadelphia--I'm not sure.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, what got you out of the South?  I mean, what happened in--
Speaker 2: The movement shifted.  The, the Black Power battle was beginning to get traction.  Then, a few months later, the architect of peace and non-violence had his head shot off.  That was a death knell for non-violence.  And it was the final rise of Black Power in the South.  And it signaled a shift from a strategy of integration and fighting against segregation in the South to Black Power, and fighting for political and economic power in the major urban centers of the North.  The movement shifted, and I always wanted to be on the front lines, and so I shifted with it.  So, that by 1968, I was in transition out of the South back to Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania] where I would use the community organizing experience, and tools, and techniques that I learned for four years in Mississippi in my own hometown in Pittsburgh.  And so, eventually, I settled in Pittsburgh.
Story_ID: 136312
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, how did your parents [Mary Ella Howze and William Howze] feel all this time when--or your brothers and sisters--how did your family feel about you being in Mississippi all this time?  Did they have any sense of what was going on?
Speaker 2: When I first told them I was going to Mississippi, my family was absolutely terrified because of all the violence that had been precipitated my departure from Mississippi--the girls getting blown up [16th Street Baptist Church Bombing]; the [Michael] Schwerner, [Andrew] Goodman and [James Earl] Chaney being killed [1964]; Medgar Evers shot in the back [1963]; Sammy Lee Jackson [sic, Jimmie Lee Jackson].  I mean, it was a lot of death.  And it scared my family because they knew that I was not going to be received well by white folks in the South, and that my mouth was going to get me in trouble.  My mother was particularly terrified because she's from the South.  She knows these racists and she begged me not to go, but I explained to her this is something I gotta do.  And so, they were, they were very fearful of what would happen to me.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, how many people ever asked this kind of question, but I--this occurred to me.  Did you suffer any permanent damage from that beating?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.  They didn't knock any teeth out or anything or anything or--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.  I was wondering what, you know?
Speaker 2: No broken bones--just swollen.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, when you--was there something--I mean, some point where you just said, I'm going back to Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania] now, or did you plan it?  Did you tell them, I'm going to give you so much time and I'm leaving, or what, what happened?
Speaker 2: I'm not sure how that evolution really occurred.  It, it was slow.  And it was a lot of transition back and forth between Pittsburgh and Mississippi before I finally ended up, finally moving to Pittsburgh with some finality.  It took a long time.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  How did it feel being back in Pittsburgh?  I mean, much has been written about Vietnam [War] vets coming back from Vietnam, and that sort of thing, and post-traumatic stress, and that sort of thing.  I mean, how did you feel coming back to Pittsburgh after being in that, you know, that situation like that for what--was it two or three?
Speaker 2: Four years.
Speaker 1: Four, four years, four years.
Speaker 2: I was received as a kind of a war hero, and an important asset to the work that was being done here in Pittsburgh.  And they welcomed my community organizing experience, and my ability to articulate the issues of the [Civil Rights] Movement, and my ability to organize.  And so, it was a easy reception.  I was, I was easily received into the movement here in Pittsburgh.
Story_ID: 136313
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, what would you describe your ideology at that point?
Speaker 2: Black Power developing toward Black Nationalism.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And how would you define Black Nationalism?
Speaker 2: Initially, a desire on the part of black people to establish the independence of a nation and the respect that nations have among nations.  And I never bought the idea that anybody would concede to a certain number of states in the Southland, but I thought that, that wasn't necessary for nationhood, that a nation could exist even as a scattered nation if they developed enough unity and power to exert, exert that nationhood.  So, I identified with the Black Power Movement with black, black consciousness.  Eventually, the Black Power Conferences that had been held in different cities around the country realized that nothing in between those conferences was getting organized, and that as long as we just kept having these impromptu conferences in a different location every year, our political roles couldn't get realized.  And so, I was really glad when I heard that there was going to be a culmination of all those Black Power Conferences in Atlanta, Georgia in 1980.
Speaker 1: Nineteen--not '80 [1980], but--
Speaker 2: Nineteen-seventy [1970], 1970--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --when the Congress of African People gathered and it gave me an organizational entree for those of us in Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania] who needed a national political affiliation to attach to.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, prior to that time, you were involved in the Black Arts Movement here, the theater movement, and that sort of--
Speaker 2: Yes.  As I was transitioning into Pittsburgh, we formed an organization called the Afro-American Institute.  And the Afro-American Institute had several committees.  Eventually, I became chairman of the Afro-American Institute, and our various committees achieved certain accomplishments within the realm of that committee.  For example, the education committee worked on the establishment of a Black Studies Department at the University of Pittsburgh [Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania] and a black student organization to increase student enrollment and increase black faculty and administrative representation at the University of Pittsburgh.  Many of these achievements that we started then continue to exist today, like the black studies program and like the Black Action Society which is the black students' organization.  They are well institutionalized.
Story_ID: 136314
Speaker 1: Now, the institutionalizing of these studies programs suggest that there must have been some sort of a cultural reawakening or girding up of, you know.  So, did you--you didn't have black studies in school when you were growing up, now did you?  I mean, had you had been reading all along, or trying to develop what a concept black culture was?
Speaker 2: No, the movement was a university.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And the other cities where these struggles were taking place was the course subject that we studied.  And these conferences, the Black Power Conferences, and other conferences is where all this information came together, and people learned what the goals of local organizing should be.  So, it was really something that was modelled for us by other communities around the country.
Speaker 1: Now, which ones and like, what kind of work--I mean, specifically, what works were you reading, and/or what individuals were informing you?
Speaker 2: What I remember most is Amiri Baraka, Stokely Carmichael, [H.] Rap Brown--their readings--Malcolm-X's writings and recordings.  Those were the things that I remember most--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --about that period.  We had a committee that worked on offing the [drug] pusher.  We had a group of thugs in our organization who, when we noticed how much drugs was permeating our community, we decided to confront the pushers who were few enough to be easily identified at the time, and we started beating up pushers and robbing them, and throwing their dope down the sewer, and taking their money, and using it for the movement.  But we ran our mouths too much, and next thing you know, they knew who we were, and they started fighting back.  And we took a couple pretty good ass-kickings before we figured out that that is not going to be the way we get rid of drugs in our community.  And that effort evolved into an attempt to recruit drug addicts, clean them up, politicize them, and bring them into our movement, so that we could understand the underground operation that these pushers operated in because we were not hoodlums, so we didn't really understand that life, and didn't understand how they operated, but we were so above-board and ran our mouths so much that they understood everything about us.  We understood nothing about them.  So, we wanted to recruit some of them into our movement to inform us, so that we would stop taking these defeats that we had taken.  But during the course of that effort to recruit them and politicize them through a drug treatment program, it was a kind of political drug treatment program that we started.  During the course of that, we discovered that confronting street pushers is not going to stop this explosion of drugs in our community.  It's going to have to be a political battle.  And, but the drug program is still a good thing to have, 'cause we saved a lot of people's lives, and it was a source of some employment for a lot of us in the movement working in the drug treatment program.  And so, that program continued, and that continues to this day.  It's called the House of the Crossroads [Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania].  It's still in the same building it started in, in 1969.
Story_ID: 136315
Speaker 1: Now, are you going to school during this period of time?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Another committee that we had was a cultural committee where we learned that the power of poetry and culture was a very effective organizing tool.  And we were heavily influenced by Amiri Baraka [born LeRoi Jones] and the Spirit House Movers [Young Spirit House Movers and Players] in Newark, New Jersey.  And so, we put together a theater called the Black Horizon Theatre [Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania], and it included--it was a kind of reconvening of Rob Penny and August Wilson, and some other poets who called themselves poets in the Centre Avenue [Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania] tradition, urban poets.  And we had the Souls of Ebony who worked with us that I mentioned earlier--
Speaker 1: It was Phyllis Hyman, Phyllis Hyman.
Speaker 2: --with Phyllis Hyman who was the lead singer.  And we made frequent trips to Newark to learn how to put together a theater.  And so, many of the poets became playwrights.  And that's August--I mean, Rob Penny started writing plays first.  And August was still just writing poetry and very shy about letting anybody see his poetry or hear his poetry, and certainly didn't let anybody know that he was interested in playwriting as well.  That was very slow to evolve.  Because I was the political leader in the community with all of these committees and the Afro-American Institute, I became a convenient leading actor in the theater, so most of the plays that we did--read starring Sala Udin.  And so, I was the lead actor in almost all the plays we did for--
Speaker 1: Now, had, had your training or interest in theater prior to this time?
Speaker 2: None.  We used it purely as a means of educating and mobilizing the community.  That was the purpose of it, and it didn't matter to us that we were not good actors.  It only mattered that people came out to see it and that they grew in terms of their own consciousness from having done so, so there was no desire to become professional actors.  And we ran the Black Horizon Theater all the way up until--I think 1974.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, it started in when--'68 [1968]?
Speaker 2: Sixty-nine [1969, sic, 1968].
Speaker 1: Sixty-nine [1969], okay, okay.
Speaker 2: Maybe '68 [1968], '68 [1969] or '69 [1969], somewhere in there.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I would say '68 [1960] to '69 [1960], somewhere in there.  Those were some of the institutions that we initiated that continued to, to this day.
Speaker 1: Now, this, a similar story is acting out in a lot of cities and--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --maybe in the urban areas, the black theater, even in my old hometown [Dayton, Ohio] theater--
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: --and Chicago Afro-Arts Theater [Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 2: It's not surprising because we learned from other communities and adapted it to here, to the local situation here.
Story_ID: 136316
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, these are a lot of different--
Speaker 2: Branches--
Speaker 1: --you know, a lot of activities coming together at the same time.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Now, did you--you went to the Congress of African People in 1970?
Speaker 2: Yes, in Atlanta [Georgia].
Speaker 1: In Atlanta.  And there's been a book published about it.  People that--Congress of African People, its organization--I think was it was formed then, right?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: In 1970.  So, were you a part of--did you become a part of the Congress of African People?
Speaker 2: I became the Chairman of the Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania] branch of the Congress of African People.
Speaker 1: And then known as CAP then, right?
Speaker 2: CAP.
Speaker 1: Pittsburgh CAP, all right.  And, they were--well, tell us a little bit about that, like what did CAP--what was CAP's goal and--
Speaker 2: CAP's initial goal was a Black Power agenda and it was a, an effort to create a national organization, a national kind of coming together of these disparate Black Power groups under a single discipline which, to a large extent, was like trying to herd cats.  These Black Power groups were fiercely independent.  I mean, the people from Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] wasn't going to hear nothing from the people from Chicago [Illinois], or the people from New York [New York City, New York], who were obviously better than everybody.  And, and none of whom wanted to hear anything about anybody from California.  I mean, it was like they were--it was very difficult to bring these people together.  And it took somebody with the intellectual gravitas of Amiri Baraka [born LeRoi Jones] to bring those people together.
Speaker 1: Now, what role or what--how did you perceive the role of [HM] Maulana Karenga in this?  I know CAP was built on kawaida either and that a (unclear) (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: Well, it wasn't initially.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: And the, the entrance of kawaida [Karenga's cultural nationalist philosophy] to CAP was a very welcome initiation because it codified so much of the Black Nationalist Movement into a kind of an ideological whole.  And so, it was very, very handy and very inspirational.  And Maulana Karenga was a very powerful, persuasive, inspirational leader for the young Black Power advocates at that time.  And we were hopeful that two giants like Karenga and Baraka could come together under one umbrella.  And it was okay that we couldn't bring the [Black] Panthers along.  As long as those two got together, we'd eventually get the Panthers if we could ever get them to stop fighting with the US Organization [United Slaves].  So, we welcomed kawaida in Congress of African People, welcomed Malauna Karenga, and continued.  We saw Baraka and Karenga as kind of two co-generals leading this army, but I always considered Baraka my leader more than Karenga.
Speaker 1: Well, Malauna Karenga was incarcerated during the time of Congress of African People, or just about during that time--
Speaker 2: Just before that time.
Speaker 1: --so he wasn't, he wasn't, he was in captivity from 1971 to '76 [1976].
Speaker 2: Right--
Speaker 1: So, he wasn't in the field.
Speaker 2: --but before then, right, before then, his influence was powerful.  And, and Baraka's influence was overwhelming.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  I guess I was trying to make a point that Malauna Karenga couldn't actually be in the field but--
Speaker 2: But the U.S. organization--
Speaker 1: --even though his ideas were not there so--
Speaker 2: --the U.S. organization continued to exist even when he wasn't available.
Speaker 1: Sure, okay, all right.  So, I mean, so it would be hard to really, you know, deal with him in some ways 'cause he wasn't around.
Speaker 2: By that time, he was beginning to have conflict with Baraka anyway and, and his having been away was not all that important anymore--not to the formation of, not to the continuation of the Congress of African People.
Story_ID: 136317
Speaker 1: In--I know in '74 [1974], Imamu [Amear] Baraka [born LeRoi Jones, later Amiri Baraka] makes a shift and really drops kawaida and the cultural nationalist kind of approach.  And there's a--now, by this time, he's head of the--. Did you go to the convention in Gary [Indiana] in '72 [1972]?
Speaker 2: No.  I was incarcerated during that convention.  The, the shift that was made in '74 [1974] was a culmination of a gradual shift that had started in '71 [1971] and '72 [1972] with the Congress of African People becoming more and more involved with African liberation.  And the African liberation movements and the formation of the African Liberation Support Committee and the Sixth Pan-African Congress [Dar es Salaam, Tanzania, 1974] organizing and all of that African-centered ideology led to adoption of an African socialism.  And African socialism gave rise to just international socialism without the African base.  And the socialism yielded to Marxism-Leninism which in 1974, is the departure that you're referring to that Baraka made, so it wasn't a break from nationalism to Marxism.  It was a very gradual transition informed largely by involvement with Africa, African leaders, and African socialism.
Story_ID: 136318
Speaker 1: Tell us about your troubles with the law.
Speaker 2: That goes back to a period when I was still doing a lot of travelling back and forth between Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania] and Mississippi.  And this was in--I guess, April of 1970.  And I had--I was in Mississippi and had purchased a rifle and had it in the trunk of my car, and was driving back to Pittsburgh, headed for Pittsburgh.  And I came out of Mississippi into Tennessee and then, and had just come out of Tennessee, crossed the border into Kentucky, when we were stopped.  And the rifle was found.  It was my car, my rifle.  There were other people in the car, but I got the beef, and went to--I got arrested and charged with interstate transportation of a firearm, and went to trial over a period of many months until I had exhausted all of my appeals, and was sentenced to five years in the federal penitentiary, and was sent to, in 1972, sent to Lewisburg Federal Penitentiary [Lewisburg, Pennsylvania].  I stayed in Lewisburg for nine months.
Speaker 1: Now, where is Lewisburg at?
Speaker 2: Here in Pennsylvania--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: North Central Pennsylvania.  And there was a huge political movement to get people to write letters on my behalf and to get me out, et cetera.  And that's why I only stayed in nine months.  Then, I came on back to Pittsburgh and continued to organize.
Speaker 1: So, you have no doubt that if people had not written letters and protested on some level--
Speaker 2: Oh, there's no question--
Speaker 1: --you'd probably still been--
Speaker 2: --about it in my mind.
Speaker 1: You would have served the whole--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Yeah, okay, all right.
Story_ID: 136319
Speaker 1: So, okay, so you're back by 1970 and--
Speaker 2: I'm back--
Speaker 1: Back in Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania] from, you know--
Speaker 2: I didn't go--I didn't actually start serving the sentence until '72 [1972].
Speaker 1: Oh, okay, '72 [1972], so you're back by '73 [1973], yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah, by late, by late '72 [1972], I'm back.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, okay, all right.  So, well, you're involved with the Congress of African People at this period and the--(unclear) (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: And at this time, the--by the time I got back, I'm still heavily involved in African support.  I did arrange to get permission from my probation officer to attend the sixth PAC [Pan African Congress] in Tanzania in seventy--When was it-seventy--?
Speaker 1: Six [1976, sic, 1974], yeah.
Speaker 2: No, '74 [1974]--it had to be.  Was it '76 [1976]?
Speaker 1: I think so.
Speaker 2: It may have been.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: I was still on probation.  I know that, or parole, but I did attend the sixth PAC.  But all of this time, I would say, I was still head of the Pittsburgh Congress of African People.  I was still an advocate of kawaida and, and was a part of the movement toward African socialism and Marxism but it was, it was an uncomfortable move.  It was an uncomfortable shift for me because I had been rooted so long in Black Nationalism.  But I tried to stay as long as I could.  And by 1977, I think, I resigned.
Story_ID: 136320
Speaker 1: So, okay, so finally, Congress of African People [CAP], you got, you kind of ceased becoming involved around 1977, you said?
Speaker 2: Yes, I think it was '77 [1977] when I--it was around '74 [1974] when people first started to resign.  Up until that point, there were--we didn't have a lot of experience with people resigning because this was a movement that you dedicated your life to, and not something that you resigned from as though you're resigning from a job.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: But the move to Marxism saw people start to leave.  And others stayed and struggled as long as we could, but by '77 [1977], I'd also decided to leave.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And by that time, shortly after that, the whole organization disintegrated.
Speaker 1: So, where did--now, did in Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania] did you have an independent school here or--
Speaker 2: African Free School.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And like, so your cultural program, the drug program, the independent school--
Speaker 2: Political programs, economic development programs, educational agenda--I mean, we--almost every city had the same agenda.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  And so, what happened in '77 [1977] after you--did you continue--did these programs continue or did they--
Speaker 2: What did happen?  The programs began to fade.  I did not try to continue to run them.  The people who I left behind were not adept at running them.  And between '77 [1977] and '80 [1980], the programs gradually declined.  The ones that had not become institutionalized, the ones that were institutionalized continued to exist on their own without the need for any affiliation with the Congress of African People that initiated it.
Speaker 1: Okay.  For instance, the drug program [House of the Crossroads] you were--
Speaker 2: Like the drug program, like the black studies program, like the theater [Black Horizon Theatre, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania].
Speaker 1: Uh-hum.  So, these things are still going on?
Speaker 2: They still exist to this day.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, they-you can see some fruits of what you did in those days?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.
Story_ID: 136321
Speaker 1: Now, were you--now, what did you personally do?  Did you--I mean, what was your personal agenda at that juncture?
Speaker 2: That also--'77 [1977] was also the time that I divorced.  Me and my wife divorced and--
Speaker 1: Now, how did you, how did you meet your wife, and what time period did you get married?
Speaker 2: I got married in--as soon as I got out of the penitentiary in '72 [1972].  I got married as soon as I could.
Speaker 1: Now--
Speaker 2: She had been involved in the movement.  I knew her from the late '70s [1970s], so she was involved in the Congress of African People.  And we got married in '72 [1972] or '73 [1973].  We got married by Amiri Baraka.
Speaker 1: Was it here in Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania]?
Speaker 2: Uh-hum.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, did you have a title in CAP? Were you a mwalimu [Swahili: "instructor"] or a--
Speaker 2: Kasisi ["minister" or "priest"].
Speaker 1: Okay.  And that meant--what did that stand for?
Speaker 2: It's like a lieutenant.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: Then, as I recall, I think I left in '76 [1976] and then got divorced in '77 [1977].
Story_ID: 136322
Speaker 1: All this time, from '69 [1969], I was employed as the executive director of the House of the Crossroads [Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania], the drug treatment program.  Around '75 [1975], I started to learn how to become a trainer.  And I started training other communities in the operation of drug treatment programs as a consultant.  And by 1980, I was a nationally known trainer and had enough people seeking me out to do training that I had to choose between staying at the House of the Crossroads and becoming a full-time consultant and trainer.  And that's eventually the choice that I made, so that by 1982, I resigned from the House of the Crossroads and left Pittsburgh to go to California to start a new training organization.
Speaker 2: So, what was the name of it--
Speaker 1: It was called the Multicultural Training Resource Center, MTRC.  Now, it's also important that after I left, the Revolutionary Communist Party, as it was known then, I wanted to continue to work in Pittsburgh unaffiliated with that organization, but that didn't work.  People still affiliated me with the organization.  Then, I tried to resign from being a leader, and that didn't work because people continued to drag me into political struggles in the community.  Police shoot somebody, demonstration--I'm right out front, that kind of thing.  And, and I discovered around '80 [1980], '81 [1981] that the only way I was going to figure out who I was, independent of what my political affiliations were, was to leave Pittsburgh.  And so, when the opportunity presented itself at the end of '82 [1982], I was very open to it.  I had--the divorce thing had been a settled thing since '77 [1977] and, and I was ready to go and start a new chapter.  I didn't know what my political involvement or affiliation would be in California, but since I had a way of making a living, that's what I did when I got to California.  And I stayed there for ten years.
Speaker 2: Now, you moved to the [San Francisco] Bay Area.  Is that correct?
Speaker 1: I stayed in L.A. [Los Angeles, California] for one year--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --and then moved up to the Bay Area where I stayed for nine years.
Speaker 2: Okay, okay.  And--
Speaker 1: I never really got much involved in politics in California.
Story_ID: 136323
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, 19-, about the time that you left was when the National Black United Front--it was started in '80 [1980], I think it was.  And then National Black Independent Political Party didn't last as long--started in '81 [1981], I think it was.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Now, you were involved in those, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  But you didn't play the kind of role you would have played if you had stayed in Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania]?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: There were other people left behind in Pittsburgh who attempted to continue those activities, but not to much avail.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, as an organizer, does it kind of reflect on like what--maybe about some of the--reflect on the dynamics of organizing when you leave?  And nobody can pick up, you know, can carry it when you're gone?
Speaker 2: It would have bothered me if I were still here, but being three thousand miles across the country, it didn't bother me as much.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: Plus I was very busy with what I was doing trying to remake a new life and start a new chapter.  In some ways, it was starting a whole new identity.
Speaker 1: Now, did you have children here in Pittsburgh when you left?
Speaker 2: Yes, three boys.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Must have been tough to leave them?
Speaker 2: It was very tough--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --very tough.  I brought them back out to California every summer, and tried to continue a kind of a long distance parenting relationship by phone, and by visits, and by letter as much as I could.  I was very determined to continue my parental relationship and responsibility and I did that.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, when you were in the [San Francisco] Bay Area, were you affiliated with some of the activists at San Francisco State [University, San Francisco, California] or Oba T'Shaka or any of the-[HM] Nathan Hare or anybody?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Stayed out of local politics.  I had no foundation in it, had no status in it, no standing in it.  I wasn't trying to create a new political base.  I was really just trying to find myself as I called it, and to establish a way of earning a living.  I was starting to ask myself personal economic questions like, you know, are you going to get health insurance (laughter)?  Are you going to develop a retirement fund?  Are you going to start taking care of yourself physically?  Are you going to start saving some money?  Are you going to buy a house?  Those are the kind of questions I asked myself when I got to California.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Those are different questions than you were asking, say, five years before?
Speaker 2: Much different.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: I was a different person.
Story_ID: 136324
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So, you were there [San Francisco Bay Area, California] for ten years.  Any significant stories from California?
Speaker 2: The--one of the significant tasks of the Multicultural Training Resource Center was to--and this is probably more, the most political activity I did, was to try to educate black people about the oncoming spread of AIDS in the black community.  Black people were, were convinced that AIDS was a disease that white homosexual males were subject to, and not something that threatened black people.  The black people who were dying from AIDS were not publicized, at least in California--the way white gays with AIDS was publicized.  And so, black people didn't think it was their worry and the fact that they were dying seemed tangential.  And people didn't know to what extent black people were dying.  I knew.  And because the black people who were dying, were dying because of their drug affiliation.  And I knew about the, the transfer, and the sharing of needles among drug addicts, and the consequences that it could have.  So, I was much more aware of AIDS as a threat to black people than most people were.  And so, we used the Multicultural [Training] Resource Center to develop materials to educate, not just black people, but we produced AIDS education material in thirteen languages because those were the populations in San Francisco who were most susceptible to AIDS infection.  And we produced the first video in the country that focused on black people and AIDS.  In 1984, we produced a video called "Black People Get AIDS Too."
Speaker 1: That's a landmark, yeah.  Now, did you work with Center for Disease Control [Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC)] or--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  And so, I did a lot of travelling around the country doing training, both in substance abuse, in AIDS, and in multiculturalism.  Today, they call it diversity, but then, it was called multiculturalism.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I became a kind of a national expert in those categories, and continued travelling around the country training.  I, I was out of town three out of every four weeks, then I'd get a week off that I would spend at home before I'd hit the road again.  And I did that until my mother [Mary Ella Howze] became terminally ill in 1992.
Story_ID: 136325
Speaker 1: Now, that seems like, it seem like a lonely life--all that travel.  I mean, being out of town three or four, you know, three weeks out of four a month.  In California, nobody knows you pretty much.  I mean, am I right about that?  I mean, was that a lonely existence?
Speaker 2: It was not.  First of all, training has you up in front of an audience, so your human interaction is frequent.  It's a new audience every time you train, so the interest--it's, it's always interesting.  California is God's country.  I loved living in California.  And I was developing a growing group of friends, social acquaintances in the [San Francisco] Bay Area, especially in Oakland [California] and Berkeley [California].  And although I would go out on the road for three weeks, that one week when I came back was great.  And so, it was not--the part that was difficult was the travelling and the being away from home.  That got old pretty quick, and you just got tired of living out of a suitcase and flying on airplanes all the time.  That was difficult, but it wasn't a lonely existence.  It was just a drag to have to be away from home, and to be living out of a suitcase and out of hotels and airplanes, but I, I loved it.  And I loved California and I love it to this day.
Story_ID: 136326
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well, what brought you back [to Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania]?
Speaker 2: My mother's [Mary Ella Howze] death.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Was that '92 [1992]?
Speaker 2: Ninety-two [1992].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: All of her children picked up from wherever they were and came back to Pittsburgh.  It's to be with her.  We didn't know how much time she had left, but we wanted to be with her for whatever time she had.  And she passed away in August of '92 [1992].
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, had you moved back to Pittsburgh permanently by then?
Speaker 2: I'd moved back permanently.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: When you're training and doing national consulting, it doesn't matter where you live as long as you show up at the training site on time Sunday evening, and get ready for Monday morning's training session.  So, I came back to Pittsburgh and continued doing the same training and consulting schedule that I had in California.  The other thing, one of the guys who was my best friend from '68 [1968] all the way to '92 [1992], was a guy named Jake Milliones.
Speaker 1: How--can you spell his last name?
Speaker 2: M-I-L-L-I-O-N-E-S.  When I met him, he was in school studying psychology.  I believe in '70 [1970], around, around the time, around '77 [1977], '78 [1978], we got him elected to the school board.  That was our political agenda.  And he became the president of the school board during the '80's [1980s] and got elected to the Pittsburgh City Council in 1990.  All the time I was in California, we were like this.  He visited me every year.  We--whenever I came back to Pittsburgh, we were together.  He was my absolute best friend.  And whenever he was running for reelection, I would come back for whatever, whatever I was doing, and help with his reelection, usually managing his campaign.  In--it's January 2nd of '93 [1993], he died of a sudden heart attack.  He got elected in the City Council on 1990.  He dies two years later on January 2, 1993.  We want to hold that seat for a progressive political representative.  And I'm also certain that it couldn't be me.  With my criminal record and my militant record, I certainly couldn't win public election.  So, we were looking for somebody who could.  Nobody showed up and so, I'm pressed into action to run for his seat.  I run for his seat in '93 [1993] and got my behind kicked, mostly because I'm too new back in Pittsburgh having been gone for ten years.
Story_ID: 136327
Speaker 1: So, I lost the election in '93 [1993], and went back to my national training and consulting gig.  Also, opened a African American bookstore with my younger brother, a bookstore called New World Books, and we sold books and [Charles] Teenie Harris' photographs.  And I promised myself I would never run for political office again 'cause losing felt so bad.  And I was content to continue with my national training gig.  And then the guy who beat me died in office.  And the people who helped him beat me came to me and asked me if I was interested in running again.  I said, hell, no.  They say, we need you to run.  I said, the only way I would run is if the people who beat me, convinced me that they're on my side this time.  And they did.  And I ran and won in June of '95 [1995].  And I stayed on [Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania] City Council until January of 2006.
Speaker 2: Now, did that--I mean, I don't know what City Council pays here, but did that subtract from your income having to (unclear) (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: It did--I took a cut in income.  I was making about seventy thousand dollars a year training.  And City Council paid fifty thousand, but I had lived at times on five thousand, so it wasn't all that difficult for me to go from seventy thousand to fifty thousand.  That was more money than I'd ever made in my life anyway.  So, that's what I did.
Speaker 2: Okay.  So, you served on City Council, too--from 1995 to two thousand and--
Speaker 1: Six [2006].
Speaker 2: Six [2006], okay.  Now, and the people we've interviewed in Pittsburgh all have good things to say about  your--
Speaker 1: (Unclear).  You ain't talking to the right people (laughter).
Speaker 2: Well, the ones we're talking so far--they said you did, you know, had to make a point to say that you did more than anybody's ever done.  I mean, so you have your supporters out here.
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: What were the issues that were confronting the community and what did you do?
Speaker 1: The first issue that confronted me was right after--soon as I got elected, I went to the Million Man March [1995].
Story_ID: 136328
Speaker 1: When I got back, shortly after I got elected [to Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania City Council], I attended the Million Man March [1995].  And I was very inspired by the Million Man March and get back to Pittsburgh to discover that the police had killed a young black man in police custody by the name of Jonny Gammage.  And I had had a lot of experience in working against police brutality back from the '70s [1970s] when we operated the Stop Killer Cops Campaign.  So, I immediately went into police brutality opposition.  But this time, I'm working, not just as a person complaining about police brutality with no ability to do anything about it, I'm a city councilman.  And so, I introduced legislation that I thought would permanently alter the way police abused their police power by introducing a piece of legislation to create a Citizen Police Review Board which was immediately rejected by City Council.  So, I had to put it in the form of a referendum to amend the City Charter since council had rejected it.  And we put that referendum out on the street.  And it got overwhelming support from blacks, whites, yellow, old, male, female.  And it passed and we formed the Citizen Police Review Board which continues to exist to this day.  And police brutality has changed.  It has not been eliminated, but it has changed.
Story_ID: 136329
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, so the [Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania] City Police Review Board--I think the legislation passes in 1997.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: The next item that I decided to take up came as a result of my having been elected Chairman of the Finance and Budget Committee on City Council.
Speaker 1: Uh-hum.
Speaker 2: The city is about to go into a major economic development project where it's going to demolish the sports stadium [Three Rivers Stadium] that is home to the [Pittsburgh Pirates] baseball team and the [Pittsburgh Steelers] football team, and to build two separate stadiums--one for baseball [PNC Park] and one for football [Heinz Field].  So, again, rather than just standing on the sidelines demanding jobs and contracts, I'm now on City Council.  I can use my position on City Council to enforce equity and fairness in jobs and contracts.  And so, the legislature again that I introduced was something called Pittsburgh Works.  And, again, it was rejected by City Council, and we had to go back to the streets and get a referendum passed that would require the city to hire a certain percentage of city residents and minorities and women on all construction jobs.
Speaker 1: Now, when was it then?
Speaker 2: This is '98 [1998], '99 [1999].  And that also passed.  The--we also--part of the police work was to force the Justice Department [U.S. Department of Justice] to come to Pittsburgh to conduct an investigation of police abuse.  And they did so and as a result, the City of Pittsburgh Police Department was put under a five-year consent decree, which is a kind of a control, a federal control, of police behavior and police accountability.  And so, the police unions, the fire unions, the building trades unions will not have good things to say about Councilman Sala Udin.
Speaker 1: Now, what year is the consent decree passed or issued?
Speaker 2: I think it was from 1998 until 2003, I believe.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, you're saying now you have your detractors because of--
Speaker 2: Oh, absolutely.  They put up candidates to run against me every year.
Speaker 1: Are you elected annually for--
Speaker 2: Four years--I mean, not every year--every term.
Speaker 1: Every four, every, okay, every term, okay, four-year term?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 136330
Speaker 1: The other piece that we did was to use my position as the Chairman of the Finance and Budget Committee [Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania] to negotiate money to do a disparity study.  As the Supreme Court [of the United States] began to narrow the scope of affirmative action--what was allowable affirmative action activity.  It, it became more and more difficult to get minority contractors, contracts with, with public projects if you have not done a disparity study in advance.  So, a disparity study is very expensive, and it's hard to get cities to agree to spend money on a study that's going to result in minorities getting contracts.  So, we did get five hundred thousand dollars for the side to do a disparity study.  And we did the disparity study.  And the disparity study resulted in a larger number of minority jobs and women jobs in construction, in the building of those sports stadiums [PNC Park and Heinz Field] than in any history of the City of Pittsburgh ever.  At the same time, we also were building housing.  The first new housing to ever to be built in the Hill District [Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania] was built at Crawford Square starting in 1991.  Jake Milliones had started that work and I continued it.  And we built more new housing, over two thousand units of new housing in the Hill District, more than any other neighborhood in the city.  So, by 2004, I had done as much as I thought I could do as a city councilman.
Story_ID: 136331
Speaker 1: And the things that I was interested in doing that remained to be done could only be done if I was the mayor of the city [Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania].  And I had enough name recognition and I thought had built up enough goodwill as a populist kind of a city councilman, looking out for the people that I could explore running for mayor.  And I started a process of exploration, and whenever names were mentioned for who's likely to run in the next election, mine in 2005, my name was always included in that group in the media.  Everybody expected me to run--I expected to run.  While I was being mentioned as a probable mayoral candidate, the enemies that I had accumulated over ten years coagulated, and put their money together and went and found a political enemy of mine that had been a disgruntled employee that I had fired, and financed her political campaign to make sure that if I didn't run for mayor, I couldn't get back in as Councilman.  And I let that go on for too long before I decided not to run for mayor.  I discovered that I just didn't have the support to win and I was not interested in running just to make a point.  By the time I tried to get back to my City Council seat, this person had told most of my political supporters--well, Sala isn't running again for City Council.  He's running for mayor.  And so, that's why I'm running for City Council, and she got a lot of support that way of people who didn't think that they were working against me, who thought I would be moving on to run for mayor.  But I tried to get back because I least, although I didn't want to actually be on Council for another term, I didn't want to turn it over to somebody who I didn't think would continue the progressive politics that this political district had come to expect, beginning with Councilman Jake Milliones.  But I waited too late and I lost the election by two hundred votes.  And it was personally just as well because I had made up in my mind that it was time for me to move on.  I didn't want to move on in that way, but it was okay with me to move on.  And that's when this organization was looking for a new president, and it's a leadership training organization, and they wanted a community leader to run it.  And so, since I had experience in running a non-profit, having run the House of the Crossroads [Pittsburgh] and the Multicultural Training Resource Center [San Francisco, California], and since I had a lot of experience with diversity, and since I had a lot of political experience that could help with the fundraising, and since I was seen as a genuine, legitimate leader, I seemed like a perfect fit for the opening here for the presidency.  And they reached out.  I reached back, and in May of 2006, I started here as the President of the Coro Center for Civic Leadership.
Story_ID: 136332
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, Coro Center [for Civic Leadership] does whole systems thinking, facilitated leadership style, experienced-based learning just--well, these are all different--and I'm familiar with facilitated leadership, you know, but what--
Speaker 2: It's a pretty unique training method.  Coro started in 1942, the year before I was born, so it's been around for a long time as a leadership training organization.  The Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania] branch of Coro started in 1999, so next year, we'll be celebrating our tenth year, our tenth anniversary.  The basis of our teaching method is to immerse people in experiences that force them to discover strengths within them that you cannot discover if you're in your comfort zone.  You're put in an uncomfortable situation where you have to call on resources and creativity that you don't have to call on when you're in a comfort zone, it's a different kind of learning experience.  And it's an experiential result that you don't soon forget.  And so, we place people in those situations where they have to lead and behave like leaders in uncomfortable, unfamiliar, unexpected situations.  So, that's what's meant by all that language.  We teach them a lot about communication, verbal and non-verbal, about how to get information through interviewing techniques, how to organize people around a specific goal to achieve certain goals, and get things done.  All of those are different methods we use over a period of nine or ten months with graduate students and undergraduate students before they go into the workplace, so that when they go into the workplace, they're better prepared to be leaders in those organizations.  And they move faster than the people who came directly out of graduate school and went directly to work.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: 'Cause you don't learn that in college, you don't learn how to lead.  You learn a lot of textbook information, but you don't learn practical experiential opportunity for leadership.
Story_ID: 136333
Speaker 1: Now, what are your future plans?  Do you plan to do this into retirement or do you--
Speaker 2: I have no idea (laughter).
Speaker 1: 'Cause you have so many talents and so many things happening, I was wondering what your--
Speaker 2: I, I don't know.  I am, I'm, I'm happily married.  I got married four years ago.  I also have a ninety-year-old house that we bought, and that I'm almost married to.
Speaker 1: Where is it now?
Speaker 2: It's in Sugar Top (laughter) [Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania].  It's in Schenley Heights.  And I love this job because it, it uses so much of stuff that I'm good at.  And so, things are going quite well.  My wife has elderly parents, and so taking care of them and helping them takes a lot of our time.  But quite frankly, if it was up to my wife and if her parents didn't need us here as much as they do, we'd be in California.
Speaker 1: Now, when did you meet your second wife?
Speaker 2: In 2002 here.  She's from Pittsburgh--she's here.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: She doesn't have the kind of political background that I have.
Speaker 1: Very few people do.
Speaker 2: (Laughter), I guess you're right.
Speaker 1: Yeah, very few people do.  It's hard to find a match for that, you know, it is.
Story_ID: 136334
Speaker 1: If you--when you look back at everything you've done to this point, is this any major thing that you would do differently now if you could?
Speaker 2: The first thing that comes to mind is the fact that I lost my youngest son to homicide, but I had lost him before then to the streets.  As hard as I tried to pull him back from the streets and from certain death, I failed in that and the street won him, they won over, and eventually took his life.  If there's anything that I could do differently that could convince me that I could save his life and prevent him from being murdered, that's what I'd like to do differently.  I don't know what that would be, but if I could know what it is, I would do it.
Story_ID: 136335
Speaker 1: This is another question we always ask.  It's kind of a loaded question for an activist, but what are some of your hopes and concerns for the African American community today?
Speaker 2: I teach a class at the University of Pittsburgh [Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania] on sprawl and the challenges of race and poverty, and it looks at, say, the last fifty years when blacks first began to shuffled off into public housing, and white families were shepherded toward home ownership and wealth building.  Black destiny was concentrated poverty, and declining communities, and drug trafficking, and gun trafficking, and bad schools.  Homicide and early death is inevitable.  But the, the redirecting of resources away from the cities to the suburbs and away from blacks to non-blacks creates a new movement paradigm that is required, and cannot be understood simply in the context of black folks versus white folks.  You have to understand the movement, the moving parts of the economy, and how they are strangling black people, not under the guise of segregation, but under the guise of economics and concentrated poverty.  Our Civil Rights Movement is still stuck in black and white confrontation and are missing the boat in terms of what is strangling our people today.  And, therefore, they don't monitor economic changes and development well.  They monitor race-based development well.  They don't know what to say about the homicide that is ravishing our community that's been done primarily by other young black men because that's not within the black-white mode.  We need a new civil rights leadership paradigm that understands the modern current confrontations or the concentration of poverty that our people are experiencing.  And so, that's my hope that we develop a political movement that is current, and that understands what's happening today, and develop the tools to confront what's going on today, and is not looking at everything as we looked at it fifty years ago.  If the only tool you have is a hammer, then everything is going to look like a nail.
Speaker 1: Now, do you still find some of the cultural nationalist discussion of the--I guess, the late '60s [1960s] or early '70s [1970s]?
Speaker 2: Oh, absolutely.  All you have to do is listen to the radio.  They all, they've all become radio revolutionaries, radio activists, and a large part of the dialogue is a race-based nationalist dialogue, even to the point of the major criticism from the black community against Barack Obama is that he ain't black enough.  I mean, people act as though as he's running for the presidency of the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People], as opposed to the presidency of the United States.
Speaker 1: Well, that's not how I was referring to.  I guess I'm referring to the whole notion of a cultural change in black people, not the old, not the model of what the NAACP would be, but more of a model where Congress of African People was at a certain point.  Do you see any of that as valuable in changing the way we view the--
Speaker 2: I think a portion of it is valuable.  The danger is that, that portion can go too far where you would think that changing the culture and behavior of black people will actually change the concentrated poverty.  There's a certain element of concentrated poverty that could be changed by change in behavior, but until you confront the economic system that's creating concentrated poverty, changing behavior isn't going to take those chains from around their necks.
Story_ID: 136336
Speaker 1: Well, tell us about your other--you have two sons, two living sons.  Tell us a little bit about what they're doing.
Speaker 2: They're twins, Bomani and Salim.  They're thirty-three--thirty-four years old.  Bomani is a program officer for the Heinz Endowments, the largest foundation in the city [Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania] and one of the largest in the country.  And he's married with two children.  And Salim, his twin, is in Houston, Texas, and he works for--he's a corrections officer in one of the penitentiaries down in Texas.
Story_ID: 136337
Speaker 1: Is there anything we have not asked you that we need to ask you before I ask my last question?  Oh, and there is something--now, you're still involved in theater--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --even though you said before that--I mean, you kind of suggested that acting is kind of a throwaway--
Speaker 2: It is, it is.
Speaker 1: --something to do with a cultural end, but you're in, in plays and you're considered (unclear)?
Speaker 2: I did a play earlier this year, and it was a very successful run.  In fact, it was held over and extended for two weeks.  And August Wilson, one of my favorites, is called 'Two Trains Running.'  But that was the first time I'd been on the stage since 1994.  So, if every ten years is, is continuing to be involved in acting, then I guess I'm continuing to be involved, but I don't consider myself an active actor.  I'm not looking for roles.  Whenever I'm asked, I usually say no, and the only reason I said yes this time, was because it had been ten years, and it was August Wilson.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: We also are building the August Wilson Center for African American Culture, which is an organization that I started when we were--when I was on [Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania] City Council, along with another African American City Council woman, Valerie McDonald [Valerie McDonald-Roberts].  And that now is a thirty-seven-million-dollar project that is under construction currently.  It is expected to open next year, next spring, or next fall, and so I spend a lot of time on that board.  I'm also continuing to be on the board of the House of the Crossroads, the drug treatment program that we started way back yonder.
Story_ID: 136338
Speaker 1: Sir, the last question we ask is this.  How would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: As a brother who came up under hard times in the projects with a working class, hard struggling family that loved me and my whole band of siblings, and who did his parents [Mary Ella Howze and William Howze] and his people proud.  That's, that's how I'd like to be remembered.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well, thank you, sir.
Speaker 2: Thank you.
