Story_ID: 409715
Speaker 1: Today our subject is Holly Underwood [HistoryMaker Dr. Hollis Underwood], my name is Jacques Lesure, I'm the interviewer, our videographer is Scott Stearns. Mrs. Underwood would you please state full name with the middle name and please spell it?
Speaker 2: Yes, Hollis Jonetta Crowe Underwood, H-O-L-L-I-S, J-O-N-E-T-T-A, C-R-O-W-E, U-N-D-E-R-W-O-O-D.
Speaker 1: And would you please state your place of birth and your date of birth?
Speaker 2: Chicago, Illinois, 10/29/57 [October 29, 1957].
Speaker 1: And the big question is, what day is it today?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Today is July 14, nine--2007.
Speaker 1: And where are we currently?
Speaker 2: We are in Phoenix, Arizona, in my home.
Speaker 1: And what is your current occupation?
Speaker 2: I am a medical physician, internal medicine and I also am a legal services broker, business consultant.
Story_ID: 409716
Speaker 1: I have a few more questions for you that I just, what we call People magazine type questions, I'll start with the first one.  What is your favorite food?
Speaker 2: Salad.
Speaker 1: And your favorite time of year?
Speaker 2: Fall.
Speaker 1: Your favorite color?
Speaker 2: Chartreuse.
Speaker 1: Your favorite destination spot for a vacation?
Speaker 2: Paris [France].
Speaker 1: And is there a favorite phrase or a saying that you've adopted over the years?
Speaker 2: If you can't be who you need to be, by remaining who you are.
Story_ID: 409717
Speaker 1: We're gonna go through some family history.  I'd like to ask you about your mother.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: What was her name?
Speaker 2: My mother is Jonetta Monica Everette Crowe [Jonetta Everette Crowe], and--
Speaker 1: Where was she born?
Speaker 2: She was actually born in Gary, Indiana.
Speaker 1: And where did she grow up?
Speaker 2: She grew up in Gary.
Speaker 1: What do you know about her background growing up in Gary?
Speaker 2: She was one of the second of five children and she was born prematurely in 1932, and she was two pounds at birth and she's thriving, she's in her, well in her seventies, she's doing extremely well, but it's just amazing how in 1932, a two pounder can do so well.  Her father [John Everette, Sr.] passed away when she was nine, he was burnt in a steel mill accident, both of her parents were from the South, her mother [Marguerite Glapion Everette] was from New Orleans [Louisiana], her father was from Magnolia, Mississippi, and they moved to Indiana at the tender age of seventeen, eighteen, they were young newlyweds and trying to find their way.  And, and she was left, my grandmother was left with her five children after the accident and her, at the ripe age of, in her twenties, so pretty devastating.
Speaker 1: Do you have any influential moments that you can think about, any stories that that your mom has shared with you about her life growing up?
Speaker 2: I do, I do.  I remember, you know, one of the, probably the most touching is that her favorite story was a story called, 'The Little Match, Matchstick Girl' [sic. 'The Little Match Girl,' Hans Christian Andersen], 'The Little Matchbox Girl' and, and it was a story that, you know, she learned to read as a result of, and it would, it touched her so much, you know, whenever she would read it, she would cry, so she's you know, very sensitive and a very caring person.  My mother's occupation, became a nurse, and I think a lot of that was, was, was destiny for her, but a very caring compassionate lady.
Speaker 1: You mentioned a few things of her personality being compassionate and caring, how else would you describe your mother?
Speaker 2: Determined, strong, perseverant.
Story_ID: 409718
Speaker 1: Now your father, what was his name?
Speaker 2: Robert Arthur Crowe, Jr [Robert Crowe, Jr.].
Speaker 1: And where was he born?
Speaker 2: He was also born in Gary, Indiana.
Speaker 1: Did her grow up in Gary, Indiana?
Speaker 2: He did, he did indeed.
Speaker 1: Did he have any special, do, do you know a lot about his life growing up in Gary, and from his perspective?
Speaker 2: I do.  He was, you know, in a, in a town that was a primarily blue collar, but an affluent town, believe or not back in the, back in the '30s [1930s], and '20s [1920s], and he was born in the 1920s, he was an only child, and from two parents [Robert Crowe, Sr. and Flora Crowe] who were from Louisville, Kentucky, originally.  And because he was an only child, and he was the center of their world, they adopted a child for him to have a playmate (laughter), and, and my father was a very accomplished jazz pianist as well as a mathematician.  He actually went to Purdue [Purdue University, West Lafayette, Indiana] at age sixteen on a full math scholarship, just a very celebrated person in, in that small community, died prematurely though, and--
Speaker 1: How would you describe his personality?
Speaker 2: You know, I was nine when he passed away, but I would say, very serious, very focused, I remember being taught a lot of things, politically from him, even at that young age, I remember being taught about music, he had a tremendous jazz collection, and I remember that, at that age and, I remember, you know, he, he had some very excellent associations, strong, accomplished people in, in his life and I remember I was, I must have been about five and there's a very well-known African American actor named William Marshall, he in fact played Othello on Broadway and he, then his commercial fame was in the movie 'Blacula.'  But, I remember coming to the house and picking me up when I was about five and he was this great big guy, I'm sure he must be s- 6'4", if he's still living but, but William Marshall and.  So, I just remember some pivotal things re- relative to that end, and his friends and, and who he was, very serious, very accomplished, very academic.
Story_ID: 409719
Speaker 1: Now, where were you born?  What city were you born in?
Speaker 2: I was actually born in Chicago, Illinois.
Speaker 1: Chicago, Illinois, and can you tell me about your earliest childhood memory?
Speaker 2: Oh gosh, my earliest memory, that's, that's kind of tough but I would say, one of my, one of my early memories was Easter and I probably had not started school and I remember outside of our house and we lived in Gary [Indiana], we were born in Chicago, my siblings and I, but I hadn't even started school at this juncture.  But we were, you know, Easter clothing, our best, Easter best, and I remember taking pictures, I just remember being there with my cousins and we were such a tight knit family unit back then, my mother [Jonetta Everette Crowe] and all her siblings and their children were all very close and--
Story_ID: 409720
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Let's talk about the siblings in the family.  Let's go back a little further.  How far back can you go in your ancestry past your mother [Jonetta Everette Crowe] and father [Robert Crowe, Jr.] or your grandparents?  Can you go back to your great-grandparents and beyond?
Speaker 2: I, I really can't, I can't go back, we've not done the genealogy, I can't get past the, my great-grandmother.
Speaker 1: Okay well--
Speaker 2: Although I did, I, well that's not really true.  I can but I'm not sure how substantiated it is, but my grandmother's mother, who's (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) On which side of the family are we talking about?
Speaker 2: This is my mother's--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --my mother's mother.  So, my mother's mother's, mother--
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: --was Annita Young [Annita Glapion], from New Orleans [Louisiana].  And her father was a slave owner named Major Young [ph.].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That's all I know.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: On that side.
Speaker 1: So you--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --you've been told these stories over the years?
Speaker 2: Over the years.
Speaker 1: Your grandmother, your mother's mother, what can you, what was her name?
Speaker 2: Marguerite Glapion Everette, and then married the second time, Graves [ph.].
Speaker 1: Can you describe her?
Speaker 2: Very much so.  Very strong, very articulate woman, she left New Orleans at roughly age seventeen, eighteen, back then, you--not a lot folks went to college, you'd do a year of a college called Straight College [Dillard University, New Orleans, Louisiana] and I'm not sure quite what that was, I think it was maybe a business school or what have you.  But, but she was a, she was a very strong, she was a very tall woman, my, my grandmother was 5'11", (laughter), but and ha- had to be strong, she was actually one of two children, but her brother was fifteen years older than her, so not really close enough or young enough to be a close sibling, more like another father figure, or a father figure.  And, but she, she just gave us so much philosophy as a family.
Speaker 1: What were some of those, what were some of those things that touched you particularly, her philosophies or influences she had on you?  Is there any one or two things you can share with us right now (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well adding, it's just the way she lived her life by, as I mentioned my, my great-grandfather [sic. Underwood's maternal grandfather, John Everette, Sr.], her husband, passed away, when she was young and left her with five small children and, and I think about it, it's kind of daunting to think that this probably happened when she was in her late twenties.  But, but rather than bemoan her circumstance, she got busy, she did very well, she became a city operator back when this, you had switch operators, who plugged in the phones and the phone lines in and she became a Democratic precinct committee woman, became very much engaged in politics, went to every presidential election--very presidential inaugural, from the time of, gee, I don't even know who, how, how early back, you know, in the '50s [1950s], and traveled the world.  And my grandmother became a diabetic and despite that and lost not one leg but two legs, lost her first toes, which was her first diagnosis of diabetes before I was born, the second occurred after I graduated from medical school [Howard University College of Medicine, Washington, D.C.], just at the time I was graduating and, but despite that she traveled to pretty much every country in the world, been to Russia, China, Europe, you know, had not gone to the continent of Africa, but was very accomplished and, and--
Speaker 1: Were these trips just for her own desire to see certain parts of the world? She would just (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Her own desire to see.  Travel being in education, it's probably one of the philosophies she definitely imbued me with.  But travel is an education.
Story_ID: 409721
Speaker 1: Is there one moment or one story that you can share that, that really touched y- touches you about, about her [Underwood's maternal grandmother, Marguerite Glapion Everette] with you in particular?
Speaker 2: A story--wow, well (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Or, or a time, or influence or anything that's really stands out to you today?
Speaker 2: You know, there're, there're probably so many, I, I, ma--maybe do, the best is for me are the one that kind of summarizes who she was, well several.  One is she was a president of a, of a club and, it was the Court of Calanthe, and I don't even understand all that, but it, I know it had something to do with, of the, the various orders, you know, the orders and what not.  But, but, and I remember going to one of her meetings and at this point she was in a wheelchair, but I was a teenager and, and, I mean, just very, very clear, very concise, very articulate, and I think at that point I saw her differently.  I saw her not as a grandmother who was excellent at making gumbo and peach cobbler and, you know, all that, but I saw her as a, as a, as an astute person that people respected and admired for what she did and as a leader.  I saw her as a leader, I saw her with the kind of influence and, and help spirit that, that, I think all of her kids ultimately developed and--
Speaker 1: Do you feel that that was instrumental in your development?
Speaker 2: Oh, absolutely, absolutely.  I think it was instrumental not just in mine but, but my, my, my aunts and uncles, my mother's [Jonetta Everette Crowe] and a lot of the cousins, absolutely.  If you were in her reach, you were, you were going to be influenced by her philosophy and it was a good philosophy.
Speaker 1: Now you mentioned her husband, your grandfather [John Everette, Sr.], and you said that he died at an early age?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And he died.  Can you tell me about him and what you know about him and his influence on your life?
Speaker 2: You know?  I, I don't, that happened long before I was born, that happened when my mother was a child, I began to think that it might be prophetic because that happened to me with, with my own father [Robert Crowe, Jr.] at the, the same age at age nine.  But, he was from Mississippi originally and just looking for a better life, they moved to Indiana, and, and I really don't, I, we, we know the relatives on that side to some extent, the second degree relatives but not really as well as, as we'd like, but, I, I, I don't, I don't.
Story_ID: 409722
Speaker 1: How about on your father's side?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Your father's mother?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Can you tell me about her?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: What was her name?
Speaker 2: Flora Bird Crowe [Flora Crowe], she was a Bird, and married a Crowe.
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: I think that's pretty (laughter).
Speaker 1: So tell me about Flora Bird Crowe?
Speaker 2: Very, very elegant woman, very much that (unclear) Robert [Robert Crowe, Jr.], my father, was the apple of her eye and that was it.  In fact, I remember stories, Christmas when the family wa- the families would get--gather at my grandmother's home for Christmas, a Christmas Eve dinner, my, my grandmother, I remember this if she, I was young when she passed away, I was probably no older than six or se- or so, when she passed.  And she wouldn't probably getting a little dementia at that point.  But she would just gather up the pro- the, the presents, "Oh these are for Bob's children," (laughter) you know, so, but, but they really, really spent a lot of effort on not just loving their son, but trying to create something that had to be difficult.  When you think about it, in the 1920s, you know an af- African American in America to raise a child who was gifted, who was an accomplished pianist, that's really pretty striking and we're talking about two people who were, laborers, I mean, her husband was a steel mill worker as well and she didn't work outside of the home and I don't know how much education she truly had formally.  But she had a lot of self-education, she appeared to, to be very educated and cultured and I don't if that was illusion or real, but that was, that's pretty much all I know.
Speaker 1: And your father's father?
Speaker 2: His name was Robert Arthur Crowe, Sr. [Robert Crowe, Sr.].
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: And, and we called him Pappy, Big Mama and Pappy, I do remember that, (laughter).
Speaker 1: Big Mama and Pappy?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yes.  And they lived, they lived, and we owned an apartment house and they lived in one of the apartments in Gary [Indiana] and significantly older, because again I was very young when they passed away, but I just remember a very devoted couple, I mean, they had been alive, I mean they had been married for, for at that point I'm sure, forty years (laughter) about (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What can you tell me about Pappy that you recall?  Do you recall anything about that?
Speaker 2: No, there was a lot of dementia at that time, there was just a lot of dementia, so I can't recall very much.
Speaker 1: Okay, you mentioned--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --I wanna go back, you said your father was an accomplished pianist also.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Did, did he play professionally or?
Speaker 2: Not professionally, as in recordings but he actually composed at lot and he played around Gary, and so seeing him--
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: --professional, and that sort, but that's not what paid the bills, he was a teacher--
Speaker 1: Oh.
Speaker 2: He was a math teacher and that's what paid the bills, but, but, but he, yeah, very, very involved in that.
Story_ID: 409723
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So you're born in Chicago [Illinois], in the Gary [Indiana], and you lived in the Gary area?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: When did you move, move from Chicago to Gary?
Speaker 2: Well, we were just simply born there, my mother [Jonetta Everette Crowe] was in nursing, she had done her nursing program at Michael Reese [Michael Reese Hospital and Medical Center, Chicago, Illinois] and was still affiliated with Michael Reese at that time so all of her children were born there.
Speaker 1: So you were born there, but you actually wer- were--
Speaker 2: Lived.
Speaker 1: --were living in Gary--
Speaker 2: Correct--
Speaker 1: --at the time?
Speaker 2: --Her OB/GY [obstetrics and gynecology] would, happened to be here in one of her (unclear) (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And how long, how long did you live in Gary?
Speaker 2: Until I was about ten, we moved to Detroit [Michigan], at that point my father [Robert Crowe, Jr.] had passed away when I was nine, and that following year we moved to Detroit when I was ten or eleven and, and--
Speaker 1: Was it, was it a si- an illness that caused his passing or?
Speaker 2: No, it was accidental death, yeah--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: An accidental death.
Speaker 1: Now, your earliest memory you mentioned the Easter, you said--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --you could recall--
Speaker 2: --Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --the Eastertime, how old would you say were about that time?
Speaker 2: I, I think I probably was about four, three or four, I think maybe three.
Story_ID: 409724
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now, could you list your siblings in order and include yourself--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --in there.
Speaker 2: My oldest brother is Terrence Crowe, I'm in the middle, Holly Underwood [HistoryMaker Dr. Hollis Underwood], and my youngest brother is Richard Crowe.
Speaker 1: Okay.  What was life like growing up in the household for Terrence, Hollis and Richard?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) It was great, it was great, you know, I was, as a girl, young girls tend to be a little bit more actually bossy and direct (laughter) and guys tend to be at that age you know, they, they lay around, they're big blobs so it was it was--
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: --fabulous also.  But you know my older brother and I were very close and we're still close, all of us are close, but you know, we had a lot of philosophical discussions and, and my mother [Jonetta Everette Crowe] got us involved in so much, I mean, she was very much of the same spirit that you expose your children to everything.  So, I grew up playing tennis, my younger brother was a very accomplished tennis player, and so the two of us played a lot of tennis, my older brother was more of a football player and, and but we were close in other respects and so I was in the middle, I always felt like I was a bridge between the two.  They necessarily weren't so close because there was more of any age gap between them, but I was close to both of them, yeah.
Speaker 1: How fold have things sometimes, some things are educational, some are religion, what was the theme of your household, pretty much?
Speaker 2: You know?  I, I think it would be educational with exposure with finding your own way, with having the freedom to find your own way, which is, which is a powerful thing really.  My mother was not, though her mother [Marguerite Glapion Everette], was very strict in, in some regards and many regards my mother was very not, very much not that way, not really a hippie or anything, but, but maybe as much of her as, it's, it's close as you can get being African American, (laughter), at that time without being completely far off to the left but--
Story_ID: 409725
Speaker 1: Do you recall the street you grew up on in Gary [Indiana]?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: What was (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I--
Speaker 1: What street was that?
Speaker 2: Ellsworth, Ellsworth Place.
Speaker 1: And on Ellsworth Place, what was the community and the neighborhood like?
Speaker 2: It was a community in transition, it was, Gary was very white at one time, believe it or not many people don't know that, but I remember our neighbors, white neighbors and you know, very, very middle class, very solid middle class family, families on the street.  And I remember them very well, I remember so many of them so we- so well.
Speaker 1: Who were some of the people of the street that you can recall?
Speaker 2: Oh gosh, well one was a fr- girlfriend, Charlotte Gibson [ph.] and her sister.  Charlotte actually went on to do very excellent things, and became an actress and very accomplished, the Browns, Robert [Robert Brown] and Edna [Edna S. Brown] who were almost a mirror match for my parents [Jonetta Everette Crowe and Robert Crowe, Jr.], he was a, an educator, mathematician and she was a nurse, just like my parents and they had three children, same birth order, older son, middle daughter [Andrea Brown-Charles], and a younger son.  I mean just, almost a, a complete mirror match, they were, my parents were some of my parents' best friends at that time (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What--
Story_ID: 409726
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What are some of the sights, sounds or smells you can recall from that neighborhood and that time growing up [in Gary, Indiana]?
Speaker 2: Oh gosh.  There was a bowling alley on the corner, so, you know, walking by the bowling alley a big brick structure, you know?  It was a bowling alley on the corner, you, kind of, you couldn't go in as a child but you could always peak in, it was always dark, and you would always hear the pins crash.
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: The ball roll and the pins crash.  There was a school that was a high school at the time that was directly up the street, it was directly, you know, the, on the perpendicular street and I remember that very well.  Ultimately it became a junior high, I understand, but it was a high school at the time.  I mean, I remember playing in the street, I remember, I mean this is something that, my kids have no concept about which I'm sad about.  But having children to play with in the street and block parties and you going to Riverview [Riverview Park, Chicago, Illinois], which was a big amusement park in Chicago [Illinois] together as a group, renting a bus, having barbeques in the street and, you know.  And, and at that point the neighborhood had transitioned, it was primarily African American at that point but, but they'll never ever experience to the same degree what we had growing up, communities have changed.
Story_ID: 409727
Speaker 1: What was the racial climate like in Gary [Indiana] at that time, you said it was predominately, predominately white at one time (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) At one time.
Speaker 1: It, and it was in transition--
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: 'Cause, now this is a staunch middle class area you said--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And civil rights, things have changed and they're--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --changing up now.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: We haven't got to the mid-'60s [1960s], yet we're still, we were talking about the time when you were around four or five--
Speaker 2: That's right, that's right.
Speaker 1: What, if you can recall, what was the climate like in Gary?
Speaker 2: Well you know?  I, it, it was interesting and I probably know this more in retrospect than at that time, but I am astonished at the degree of talent that was in Gary, Indiana.  And, and I say that because my parents [Jonetta Everette Crowe and Robert Crowe, Jr.] and their friends, they were all educated, by that I mean advanced degrees, they were professional people, I remember, I remember that, I don't remember the, the down trodden and the, you know, very so--low social economic issues that it, that into drugs and the, and all that.  I don't remember that because that wasn't the Gary that I grew up in, at that point we had moved Michigan and so, I don't remember that, but I--
Speaker 1: How about racism?
Speaker 2: I, I don't remember that because at that point, even though, you know this is at the point where [HistoryMaker] Richard Hatcher became the first African American mayor in the country and, and the transition probably happened real rapidly.  The whites kind of fled Gary at that point, and, and, but, but it, but it took still a few years before the deterioration because it, the steel mills were still operational and, and you know, the school system was still functioning and the--people were doing, you know, what as it appeared to me, as a child to be doing well.  But I, I don't, I mean, it was thriving, it was a thriving solidly middle class community and there was pride there, so I, I, I--
Speaker 1: Do you recall the Hatcher campaign, when he ran?
Speaker 2: I, I do.  I, I remember that my [maternal] grandmother [Marguerite Glapion Everette] who was again this political person and had not only was a precinct committee woman but had worked for the previous mayor, was a man named, Katz, Andrew Katz [sic. A. Martin Katz], I believe or Katz I remember Katz as the mayor.  And I remember she predicted this would be a problem, this might be a, you know, a difficult transition and of course it, it was for a variety of reasons and, and you know some of which maybe personal, some of which may be related to just the climate in the country at that time and the lack of support.  But, but I, I guess years, subsequent to, to his election, steel mills closed, the, the support for that industry changed and dried up and as a result, jobs were lost, and, and I think it really hit the community very hard.  Well you, he had long gone at that point but, but that was not the Gary I remember.  But I, I will say this, and during that one, well my fifth grade year, I have an aunt and an uncle who had moved to the Caribbean in St. Thomas [U.S. Virgin Islands], he became, well she married a man who became the coach for the basketball team in the college of the [U.S.] Virgin Islands and she was a special ed [special education] teacher, this is my mother's sister.  And so, you know, again like all middle class families, they always want their children to have a, an abroad experience.
Story_ID: 409728
Speaker 1: I'm gonna fast forward to that in a moment.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Do you, do you recall your first elementary school?
Speaker 2: I do.
Speaker 1: What was the name of that school?
Speaker 2: Ernie Pyle [Ernie Pyle Elementary School, Gary, Indiana].
Speaker 1: Ernie Pyle.
Speaker 2: Ernie Pyle.
Speaker 1: How long did you stay there?
Speaker 2: I was in Ernie Pyle, well I went there from kindergarten until fourth grade and then the fifth grade I went to school abroad in the Caribbean [at Lutheran Parish School, Charlotte Amalie, U.S. Virgin Islands].
Speaker 1: In the first through the fourth grade, or kindergarten through fourth grade--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --can you recall any of your friends from that time?
Speaker 2: Oh gosh, absolutely.
Speaker 1: Who, who (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Absolutely.
Speaker 1: --who was your friend?
Speaker 2: Well, Andrea Brown [Andrea Brown-Charles]--
Speaker 1: Who was--
Speaker 2: --Derrick Hadeena [ph.], Geno [ph.], oh gosh, I mean so many, I mean I remember them so well, you know a lot of them, and these people I haven't seen in forty something years.
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Some of them, you know, but I remember them very well.  I remember there was a very attractive school, it wasn't an old building it was a relatively new building, Ernie Pyle, of course we had to know who Ernie Pyle was, he was a journalist.
Speaker 1: Ernie Pyle was a journalist?
Speaker 2: Yes he was in the war.  And, of course, I can't remember which war now, but I believe it was World War II [WWII].
Speaker 1: How about teachers that stood out to you at that point?
Speaker 2: I do remember some of the teachers, I was in a, I remember one in particular, one thing that we--I was in, was a honors curriculum, believe it or not, honors, and you know--
Speaker 1: In, in--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --that, an early grade?
Speaker 2: I remember reading 'Profiles in Courage' [John Fitzgerald Kennedy].
Speaker 1: Before the fourth grade?
Speaker 2: Yes, through at Ernie Pyle, with Andrea Brown, and Derrick and Geno and all the kids, Charlotte [Charlotte Gibson (ph.)], Charlotte, gosh and all the kids that were, you know we were all part of the, the same, you know it's the same kids that you go to school with now.  Different than my mom's [Jonetta Everette Crowe] experience, they went from K [kindergarten] to twelve, together, so you know they've got friends that, I mean, that are just, they've been closer than close, as close as siblings.  But that K through four experience was a very, very strong experience for me.
Speaker 1: So what kind of student were you?
Speaker 2: I was an excellent student.  I was, I had a thirst for knowledge, I had a thirst for knowledge then, I have a thirst for knowledge now.  I, I love to read, I love to read.
Speaker 1: Now a lot of times I like to separate the student from the behavior.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: What kind of child were you?
Speaker 2: Perfect in every way (laughter).  Well no not quite, but I really was, I was a pretty, you know, a pretty straight, you know straight and narrow kind of kid.  You know, of course we all--always have influence on and sometimes it's kind of fun to watch some people on the edge and kind of vicariously live through their edge experience without having to go over the edge.  But--
Speaker 1: Some of those friends were kind of edgy people?
Speaker 2: N- no, relatives, cousins, (laughter).
Speaker 1: Oh, (laughter).
Speaker 2: Some of the cousins, you know were able to kind of be a little freer than who I thought free to be.  But, but, know I, I was a actually, I had a, I had a great childhood, I had an absolutely great childhood.  As my mother like to say and I, and I guess I can say it, although it's not really fair, it's not really, it's truth, my kids put it (unclear), they said, you know we didn't know we were poor until we got older.  Well we didn't know we were living in the, you know?  In a, in a, in a, wh- what's the term?  The, an empowerment area, we didn't know that until we got older (laughter).
Story_ID: 409729
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) But now at age nine, around the fifth grade, tell me about this abroad experience that--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --came up, tell me more about that now?
Speaker 2: I, I went, I was actually eight at the time, sev- seven at the time actually, I went to St. Thomas [U.S. Virgin Islands].  My aunt and uncle were there and, you know, I call it now a poor man's study aboard experience.  And St. Thomas, though a U.S. territory, it was like a third world country.  It was a completely different culture.  I mean, you know, oxen driven carts, the topography was, was impressive, more than anything I've ever seen in my life, my very first experience on the plane flying by myself, on my first plane experience to St. Thomas.
Speaker 1: And, and what were you thinking now?  Here, here you're a little girl on a plane?
Speaker 2: Oh man.
Speaker 1: Flying into St. Thomas, did you know what St. Thomas even was actually?
Speaker 2: I probably did some due diligence you know?
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: I mean I had access to the, to the map so I kind of knew where it was and, and you know it's funny because I remember the plane experience.
Speaker 1: Tell us about that?  Go ahead.
Speaker 2: Wow!  You know what?  I remember a little suit that I had on, oh a pinstripe suit, and you know?  With the big thing where mothers and daughters to dress together?
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: My mother [Jonetta Everette Crowe] would always shop at these fabulous re- resale shops in Chicago [Illinois], one, I, I've forgotten the name of it now, but it was a fabulous, I mean, we're talking about clothes that, that the Kennedys might be wearing and then when they got tired of them, they sold it to resale, well of course we got it at you know, pennies on the dollar, but we looked great though, we looked like Kennedys you know?  (Laughter) And, and I had this really, really great pinstripe suit on and, and I sat next to a guy, and of course the stewardesses at the time, you know, they're flight attendants now, but at that time they were all stewardesses, very pretty and they were nice and they were, you know they watched over me and I sat next to a man who started talking to me and you know, I was pretty precocious, you know, so I could carry on a conversation and I remember one gentleman, this man telling me things that I hadn't, I mean, I remember to this day about things, political things, like new world order stuff, and this was in the, this was in the '60s [1960s], and, I mean I remember these conversations.  But getting to St. Thomas, you know, it was just a completely different world, it was very hot, very humid, very different, very sunny, extremely beautiful, never seen so much water in my life, and it was just great (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) How, how long did you stay in St. Thomas?
Speaker 2: I lived there for a year.  I went to, I was there for the fifth grade, went to Lutheran Parish School [Charlotte Amalie, U.S. Virgin Islands].
Speaker 1: So, now how was that experience?  Now this, they have a little different educational system.
Speaker 2: Different, but not really.  Different to some extent, but not really that was my first private school experience, it was a parochial school, and my teacher was a, an incredible lady from Ohio, named Elsie Manrange [ph.], she was a Caucasian lady, who'd come down to the islands, older, probably retired and in fact, from Shaker Heights [Ohio], believe it or not which is what we, ultimately, where we ended up prior to coming to Arizona.  And I just remember, you know just, you know, all the wonderful things that I was taught.
Speaker 1: What did she teach in particular, what, what stood out in you?
Speaker 2: You know?  I think it was just vision, just to a--cast a vision that you can be whoever you wanna be, it was just, it just added to the layers of what I had already been, you know, bestowed on me by my parents and my [maternal] grandmother [Marguerite Glapion Everette] and you know, what not.  And, and to see a lady who would come from Ohio, and she was single at that time, I believe she was a widow, and had moved their just to experience something different.
Story_ID: 409730
Speaker 1: So, you're in St. Thomas [U.S. Virgin Islands]?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: You're in the fifth grade.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: You're at another school, a Lutheran school there [Lutheran Parish School, Charlotte Amalie, U.S. Virgin Islands]?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: What is life like outside of school with, with your--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --aunt and the community?
Speaker 2: Well, it was, it was great, it was great on, on one hand, but you know, of course this was my only childhood experience as well, and I, I was, never had that issue, never, there was no alone time you know when you have siblings.  And I'll never forget my aunt and uncle wanted to go out on their anniversary and it seems like, and I don't remember exactly when this was relative to me being there, they were gonna leave me in the house by myself at night and we had a huge Great Dane, called Radcliff, and he was as big as I was and he was friendly and you know, and oh Radcliff, if there's a problem Radcliff will bark, you know, and we lived up in the mountains and it was dark and the ocean was, maybe you know, it was pretty safe, it was very safe, people didn't lock their doors back then.  But I was so afraid of being alone that I said to them, "I hope you have an accident on the way there," and guess what happened?
Speaker 1: They (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) They had an accident on the way there and I felt so bad, so guilty (laughter) and I thought wow.
Speaker 1: Was anyone hurt badly?
Speaker 2: No nobody was hurt.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: They, they came back, you know and I never even, the thought about that, I mean, I mean, I, and, and I don't know if I said it, but I sure felt 'cause I thought it, and with the fact that it happened, I thought, oh maybe thoughts are a little bit more powerful than I'd realized, you know?  (Laughter) Maybe one has to be a little careful with those thoughts.
Speaker 1: So you stay there for the fifth grade?
Speaker 2: Um-hm, I did.
Speaker 1: And you had the one special teacher, you said that she was very, she was a visionary?
Speaker 2: She was my only teacher, the re--there was this one teacher, you know, and, and back then--
Speaker 1: You call her name again now?
Speaker 2: Elsie Manrange [ph.]--
Speaker 1: Elsie--
Speaker 2: M-A-N-R--, every, we've corresponded for years after that, for years.
Speaker 1: So you stayed there a year because, why did?  Did, did your aunt send you back home or what happened?
Speaker 2: No, no--
Speaker 1: What occurred?
Speaker 2: It was just time, it was just time to go back--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: At that point and you know it was just a, a year, remember there, they didn't have children and they were, you know, relatively newlywed, I mean four or five years or so, so maybe I was an experiment for them too, see if they thought they could handle children (laughter).
Story_ID: 409731
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So you go back home the next year?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And then, and I guess in the summer of s- of '67 [1967], something like--?
Speaker 2: This was summer of, yeah I guess, in '60 [1960], no in '60 [1960], must have been '69 [1969], I believe '68 [1968], or '69 [1969], and actually, I don't, maybe I'm blocking out what the time frame is, but, but my father [Robert Crowe, Jr.] passed away shortly thereafter and I don't remember exactly how close to my return but it was very close to my return.  He passed away, an accidental death, asphyxiation, he was, you know, in jam sessions and choked on food and they couldn't there was no, nobody knew about the Heimlich maneuver, and at forty he passed away and so--
Speaker 1: So you say, he was out just playing?
Speaker 2: Out playing with his, you know, buddies and what not and, and I remember vividly somebody came into my, my house, our house very late one night and all I remember is then my mother [Jonetta Everette Crowe] screaming and crying, I just remember that, you know.  You--it, that is something that you never forget and, you know, and then--
Speaker 1: How did you feel when you heard it?
Speaker 2: Oh, it was devastating, you know?  It was devastating and just, you know, her sorrows so, it was devastating.
Speaker 1: How about your brothers [Terrence Crowe and Richard Crowe]?
Speaker 2: They were s-, you know, numb but sorrowful, but you know, yeah, it was.
Speaker 1: So--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --you all had to go through the process of the mourning, but then what happened?  Did, did you all stay in Gary [Indiana] or?
Speaker 2: We did for another year.  So, it was, it must have been '67 [1967], and then we stayed until, for another year and then we moved to Detroit [Michigan], and then--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Thereafter with my mother's best friend (simultaneous)--
Story_ID: 409732
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So you moved a little further east?
Speaker 2: Yes.  My mother's [Jonetta Everette Crowe] best friend was there and she was a nurse there and really convinced her to get out of Gary [Indiana] and, and we did, we came to Detroit [Michigan] and, you know, opened up yet a whole new, you know, set of experiences.
Speaker 1: Now how was that because you were in the middle, Gary is in the middle of Chicago [Illinois] and Detroit?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: And, Detroit has a little different feel than Chicago does.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: So now here you are, you're about ten years old now?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Nine or ten years old.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Do you remember the school you--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --went to in Detroit?
Speaker 2: I did.  I started in junior high, Coffey Junior High [Wilford L. Coffey Middle School; Wilford L. Coffey K-8 Educational Learning Community, Detroit, Michigan], I started--
Speaker 1: Coffey?
Speaker 2: Coffey, um-hm yes.  And I started in the seventh grade and, you know, a lot of change is happening to the body and you're, guys are noticing you and you know, it was a, it was a different kind of a thing.  But it was a really, it was a, it was incredible, I mean, because you--
Speaker 1: Was your mom working somewhere now?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Did she (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) My mother--
Speaker 1: --get a job in Detroit immediately (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right, Right, and during the year that I was in, away in St. Thomas [U.S. Virgin Islands] by the way, she actually was getting her, her, her bachelor's [degree], she had her nursing degree, she had her RN [registered nurse], but then she got her bachelor's in nursing from Indiana University [Indiana University Northwest, Gary, Indiana] during that year.  And, and then got, she went to Michigan and she just started studying for her master's [degree] in, in nursing.  So--
Speaker 1: She was up the track then?
Speaker 2: She was up--
Speaker 1: At that point.
Speaker 2: --up the track, she was teaching, as well as working as a nurse, she was teaching at Wayne State [Wayne State University, Detroit, Michigan], nursing and, yeah.
Story_ID: 409733
Speaker 1: So, you're in the seventh grade now at Coffey [Wilford L. Coffey Middle School; Wilford L. Coffey K-8 Educational Learning Community, Detroit, Michigan]?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Junior high, and what is that like for you?  Now, you said you were going- through your (simultaneous)-
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I was, I was great and di--
Speaker 1: --adolescent changes--
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, Detroit [Michigan] was co- you know, Gary [Indiana] was still a little small town, it was a small old town, Detroit was sophisticated and, I mean, you know, we're talking about the Detroit tha- that, that just appeared to be that much more affluent and just had so much more to offer, muc- that much larger and I mean I really, it, it was, it was a, it was a good move, it was a good move from my perspective as a small child.
Speaker 1: What was your social life in the neighborhood like?
Speaker 2: Oh it was, it was good--
Speaker 1: What--
Speaker 2: --you know.
Speaker 1: --street did you, were you on in Detroit?
Speaker 2: Inverness [Avenue].
Speaker 1: You lived on--
Speaker 2: --Inverness, yes between 6 Mile [6 Mile Road; McNichols Avenue] and, and wh- and Grove [Street], right off of Grove, you know?  The northwest Detroit, near the University of Detroit [University of Detroit Mercy, Detroit, Michigan] and you know, of course, now these aren't the friends that you grew up with from kindergarten, but you know?  Pretty friendly person, and we kind of made friends, and what not and, and in junior high school, a lot of the kids, you know, were not from, went to that school because I was, I went to a school based on somebody else's address, you know, parents always want to try and find the very best school for their children.  So, sometimes that means, the use of somebody else's address to get you into a district that they think is a better more favorable district.
Speaker 1: That was a trait that happened quite a bit.
Speaker 2: Yes (laughter).
Speaker 1: Now in the seventh grade, was there any one teacher or anything that really happened to you to make a major change or, not a change but to point you in the direction that there would be no return from?
Speaker 2: Yes, and sad to say, I don't remember her name, Winn [ph.], Mrs. Sm- Mrs. Winn, it's funny you know?  I'm so glad you mentioned that, but she, (laughter) because I would not have remembered her name, but she was a science teacher and she was one of the few African American teachers at that school.  So, now here I'm in this, you know, a really, you know, we're in a, we're fish in a bigger pond in Detroit and, and she was my seventh grade science teacher and that turned me on and at that point in my life, at age twelve, (snaps fingers), I decided I wanted to be a doctor.
Speaker 1: You loved science.
Speaker 2: Loved science.
Speaker 1: Wha--
Speaker 2: I thought it was the most fascinating thing I'd ever heard.
Speaker 1: Did you pick, did you consider yourself kind of strange because most students have a tendency to have to be, to kind of reject science a lot of times, like oh this science class, but--
Speaker 2: Unh-uh.
Speaker 1: --but you loved it?
Speaker 2: I loved it, that wasn't strange at all, I was cool, I loved science and math (laughter) I had friends, I've, you know, it's so not at all, I wasn't a nerd, I wasn't somebody who, you know, felt like.  But, but I also was very much an independent thinker as much as one can be at that age and that was it for me, I knew that I wanted to be a doctor.
Speaker 1: So did you come home and tell your pa- tell your mother [Jonetta Everette Crowe], I'm gonna be a doctor?
Speaker 2: Yup, yup.
Speaker 1: And wh- what did she say?
Speaker 2: I think she placated me, I don't think she believed that I was serious, in fact she tells me to this day, "I didn't really know how serious you were until you got into medical school [Howard University College of Medicine, Washington, D.C.]."
Speaker 1: So did you spend your time then like, re- kind of researching, 'cause you seem to be an adamant researcher.  Did you start looking into what a doctor does really and (simultaneous)--?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh I went a step further, I start--
Speaker 1: What did you do?
Speaker 2: --I started working for our family doctor who was an incredible, actually surgeon and, and he became my first mentor in life.
Speaker 1: This was at about the seventh or eighth grade?
Speaker 2: That's right, it was.
Speaker 1: And what was his name?
Speaker 2: Dr. Bill Farmer [William L. Farmer] in Detroit.
Speaker 1: And what did you do for him, just general things for him?
Speaker 2: Oh, I filed, I mean, at, at seventh grade, twelve years old, thirteen years old, not much you can do, but I filed, but I read every report, I remembered the medical terminology, I (laughter) you know, his nurse.  And I did have as they sa- like they say, the hook up because his nurse was one of my mother's, was my mother's best friend, the one who encouraged us to move to Detroit.  And so, so I worked with her, but she even commented to my mother what, you know, that I really seemed to be very seri- very serious and very interested in that, I mean, I worked for him from seventh grade until I graduated from high school.
Speaker 1: So you stayed at Coffey how many years?
Speaker 2: Actually just two, seventh and eighth, and then I was in the first freshman class for Cass Tech [Cass Technical High School, Detroit, Michigan].
Story_ID: 409734
Speaker 1: So you go to Cass Tech [Cass Technical High School, Detroit, Michigan], now for the benefit of our viewers, Cass Tech is considered, was considered one of the elitist schools of Detroit, Michigan?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: So now you go to Cass Tech and what, what happens there for you?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, well the first thing is that, and this was a new concept for us, but, you're right, it was a magnet school, but you had to test to get in but there was, there were some of us who were invited to attend.  And we were invited to attend and become a part of science and arts curriculum, which was an honors curriculum and, and not knowing Detroit, so we're relatively new there, but my mother's [Jonetta Everette Crowe] best friend who was like a second mother to me in many ways, just said, "Oh, absolutely, this is an opportunity you don't want, you know, not take advantage of," and, and that was it.  You know, that was it and I, Cass was--it opened up even broader horizons, now you know we used to call it the pickle factory 'cause it looked like a pickle factory, you know, it was a pretty big old school, we had to all take the city bus to go to school.  But I went to school with some kids that were just incredible people, some of whom are friends to this day, some of whom have done some amazing things in this world, made some tremendous footprints.
Speaker 1: Okay give us a few names of people that that, that we might want to know about.
Speaker 2: Oh wow.  Well one is David Alan Grier, who is a very well-known actor, and he was a Cass Techite, you know, a Cass Techie, and Wanda [Wanda Whitten-Shurney], oh gosh, I'm blocking out her last name, she's a hematologist, her father [HistoryMaker Dr. Charles Whitten] was a, a very, very well-known hematologist in Detroit, did a lot of ground breaking research with sickle cell disease and she was a classmate, actually not only in high school, but also medical school [Howard University College of Medicine, Washington, D.C.], Harriet Covington [Harriet Covington-Smith], also a friend from medical school as well as high school, oh my gosh.  And then, then you had the musicians who are amazing, Geri Allen, one of my classmates who is a very well-known established recording artist, straight ahead jazz pianist, J. Jones [ph.], a very accomplished saxophone player, I mean, so we, you know, we had all of the curriculums, then you had the perfor- the performing arts crowd and you know, and nobody gave any credence to the computer science club, but they're probably all, they've--
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: --probably all became millionaires, up to the '90s [1990s], and we just lost track, I don't know (laughter).
Speaker 1: So--so Cass, they had a very fertile environment for you to grow, would you say (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh amazing.  So, so much, I mean, you know, friends were attorneys and, and you know, the whole, you know the, the legacy, the Patti Coutiver [ph.], a very good friend of mine in high school, an attorney, her fam- her father was an educator, a very well established and well known educator.  The former superintendent of schools [Cornelius L. Golightly], his daughter, Linnie Golightly [Linnie M. Golightly], was a classmate at Cass, so it was incredible and many of my friends wer- are physicians and, and, and attorneys and other careers that are considered leadership type careers as a result of that.
Story_ID: 409735
Speaker 1: So, of course, you, we know, we know you were the star student or a star student at Cass [Cass Technical High School, Detroit, Michigan].
Speaker 2: No, no, no, no, you know--
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: This is, now we're talking about a fish in an even bigger pond now so, we're talking about talent from all over the city, and so, no.  But I did graduate magnum cum laude and I, I did well at Cass and I was actually offered admission to several Ivy League schools, which I turned down, for, for the wrong reasons.  That's probably the biggest regret of my academic career there (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Why, why, did you turn them down?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, I didn't know enough, you know that--
Speaker 1: Who were some of the schools?
Speaker 2: Brown, Brown University [Providence, Rhode Island] in Rhode Island, I was given admission, all I had to do was show up for an interview in Birmingham [Michigan] and I thought there won't be any kids that look like me, I'm not sure I'm comfortable going up to Rhode Island and, of course, I've made friends that I've subsequently cross paths with in, in other venues and, and so that was probably a mistake.  And then Holyoke [Mount Holyoke College, South Hadley, Massachusetts] and, and, and, but the philosophy was Holyoke, you know, Holyoke and Smith [Smith College, Northampton, Massachusetts] both and just that, just the whole female, all female school and some of those traditions which were coming out with a Mrs. degree, that was definitely not my, my cup of tea, I was coming out with something, you know, some, some real juice, you know (laughter)?
Story_ID: 409736
Speaker 1: So do you have any, any other scholarships that you received?
Speaker 2: I, I did actually got a scholarship, and, oh, and it was a school that I chose to go to, for again for probably the wrong reasons, because I was a big tennis player and I was probably secretly admiring John Lucas [John Lucas II] who nobody knew from tennis, they all know him from basketball.  I didn't know anything about basketball back then, but I went to the University of Maryland [College Park, Maryland] and I did receive a, a, a, a small scholarship.  But I went there to move away, get a--you know, to get away from my circle, I wanted to be in the Washington area, oh yeah, and yet, not be in Washington, D.C. I wasn't sure I was ready for that.
Speaker 1: Now when you moved to Maryland, you, you were getting ready to go to, to the University of Maryland, did you, did you, you were still on the doctor track, you still knew--
Speaker 2: Oh.
Speaker 1: --you wanted--
Speaker 2: --oh--
Speaker 1: --to physician--
Speaker 2: --oh absolut--
Speaker 1: --on a medical track.
Speaker 2: Absolutely.
Speaker 1: So we know that you were a pre-med major.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.  I was, I was actually a zoology major.
Speaker 1: Really?
Speaker 2: Um-hm. Zoology major.
Speaker 1: Tell us about that.
Speaker 2: Interesting, you know now, now you're getting to where you really need some mentorship in your life and some leadership and I try to impress upon young folks, not, you know before you can play around, you can, you can, you can fool around and you'll still be okay and land on your feet.  But now, you've gotta get serious, you need a mentor, I didn't know that then.  But I was a zoology major, I, I enjoyed it again, loved it, fascinating, but you know, now it's serious and I spent a lot of library time, I mean, I understood that this was a, a very, very different kind of thing.  In fact, be--before my very first test in undergrad, I broke out in hives, you know, of course, it was all anxiety, I did well on the test and, you know I settled it, but you know, I started to put into practice some, some other principles that I came to, to, to learn over the course of the years.
Speaker 1: Did you have a, have a penchant for animals?  Did you like?
Speaker 2: No, no.  It was just a stepping stone for me, not necessarily, I mean I, I li- I, I don't have a problem with animals but you know, I lo- dogs, we've had all our lives, but, but not, not a, not a particular interest in dogfish shark--
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: --which was (laughter) and white rats, (laughter) which we had.
Speaker 1: So tell me ab- about your time at the University of Maryland on the campus there.  This is a pretty large, actually a decent size school.
Speaker 2: It was large, yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: And what was the ratio of African American to, to, to the majority on the campus?
Speaker 2: It was smaller, you know, I think at that time, there was a lot of interest in trying to encourage some of the local students to come there.  I was probably one of the very few students from out of state, most were from Baltimore [Maryland] and from other communities in Maryland, I would say the ratio was probably somewhere in the order of 15 percent or less, 10 percent African American, wasn't real comfortable, I realize that a lot of these kids were not necessarily there for academics, it, it was not, because of academic competence.  So, you know, I, I kind of realized that maybe in retrospect, it was not really the absolute, at that time, you the best in the world for me to be, I mean, it was my first exposure to, to a lot of things that, that were, yeah.
Speaker 1: So what do you think was, was the climate there, or, or you said they weren't there for academics, do you thi- do you mean the African American students, or do you mean the, just student body in general?
Speaker 2: Oh, I, I think, well you know, some of the African Americans, some were you know, some were, I mean, in every crowd you're gonna have that percentage of folks who are really there for ac- academic purposes, but not really.  It was not the kind of school that let's say a Brown [Brown University, Providence, Rhode Island] would be, where everybody is there because they have a, you know, they have academic pride.
Speaker 1: So you're saying that you think some people are just there because it's the logical next step after high school?
Speaker 2: Logical next step, not real, you know, real interested necessarily and that not, that's kind of a dangerous place to be.
Speaker 1: Would you consider yourself an interested student?
Speaker 2: Pardon me?
Speaker 1: But you were an interested student?
Speaker 2: I was an interested student yeah, yeah, I was an interested student, I was (simultaneous)--
Story_ID: 409737
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So was anybody, any mentors there at the school [University of Maryland, College Park, Maryland]?  Anybody, any teachers, that stood out that really saw where you were going and offered an extra, an extra dose of guidance for you at all?
Speaker 2: Actually there was.  There was a gentleman who was the director of, of the African American student body thing, I'm not sure what his title was, his name was, Dr. Andy Goodrich [Andrew Goodrich] and it's funny I hadn't thought about him in years, thirty years or so.  And he, he did, and he was a very accomplished musician, a trumpet player, but, but he was, held an administrative position and so he was somebody that I could talk with.  Believe it or not, Mary Berry [Mary Frances Berry] was there.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: But I never really leveraged any relationship with her, never developed or cultivated a relationship sadly because she's an extremely dynamic woman that I really, you know, regret that I never got, got a chance to know.
Story_ID: 409738
Speaker 1: So, how would you sum up your, your, your, your four years there at that school [University of Maryland, College Park, Maryland]?
Speaker 2: I would say, it, it, it showed me something about myself because I have a lot of stick-to-it-ness, no matter what, you know?  Sometimes if you land in a good situation, then it's great, if it's not so great, you know, I'm still there, and I try to make it work.  So it, it made me recognize some characteristics in myself that I didn't necessarily know.  But, but, but it was a, I mean, it was still a, from an academic standpoint, I mean, I got what I needed to, to get out.  My goal was always to go to medical school, everything else was, I had to go through that to get there.
Speaker 1: So were you involved in any leadership capacities or any, or any certain groups that you were involved with at the school?
Speaker 2: I was, I pledged a sorority, AKA, Alpha Kappa Alpha [Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority], I was actually on the tennis team, played doubles.  I wasn't a standout star, I wasn't, but I was a doubles player, but a good player and that whole--but I realized that, that it was gonna be very difficult to play tennis, you know, on a competitive level with the school and be pre-med and it just was, there just wasn't enough time for that.  So I definitely did have to let that go, but I did meet John Lucas [John Lucas II], you know, nothing ever developed, but I remember him coming to the court and watching me play once and, you know, rarely there were no African Americans on the team, but him for the guys and me for the girls, and so.
Story_ID: 409739
Speaker 1: So now you, you're at the University of Maryland [College Park, Maryland], it's time to apply to med schools.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Now you know that you had your decision maybe hastily or for the wrong reasons prior to undergrad, are you more cognizant now going into, as far as your medical college?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.  And I think one of the reasons why I wanted to be close to Washington [D.C.], because my goal was go to Howard University medical school [Howard University College of Medicine, Washington, D.C.], which is where my mentor, Dr. Bill Farmer [William L. Farmer] went so.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: So did you apply to many schools?
Speaker 2: I, I only applied to two.
Speaker 1: Which?
Speaker 2: Howard and Meharry [Meharry Medical College, Nashville, Tennessee].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: Howard and Meharry.  Did you get into both?
Speaker 2: I did, I did.
Speaker 1: So you had your choice.
Speaker 2: I did.
Speaker 1: So this is 19--about '79 [1979] or so?
Speaker 2: Seventy-nine, [1979], yeah.
Speaker 1: And you go in to, now you're accepted to Howard?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: Medical school.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Was there a certain degree of pride that you had for this?
Speaker 2: I, there was, and actually I got into Meharry first and, and the stipulation was to go down to Meharry for the summer to their summer program.
Speaker 1: Meharry in Nashville [Tennessee]?
Speaker 2: In Nashville and so I did that.  While I was waiting to hear from Howard, I thought well let me, you know, I better take the, the, the sure thing and I went down to me--to Nashville, total culture shock, I am definitely a Yankee, I understand that.
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Total culture shock.
Speaker 1: Tell me about it.
Speaker 2: Oh my goodness.  I've never seen so many fr- so much fried food in my life, (laughter), and slower culture, slower environment, very racially polarized.  I, I, hadn't been exposed to that much racial polarization prior to, not that and not that I was that, right in that, that cognizant of.
Speaker 1: Was there any one incident that really made you say, where is it?  Where am I?
Speaker 2: Oh, I'm, yes and this was an incident where a Vanderbilt [Vanderbilt University, Nashville, Tennessee] professor came to speak to the incoming, Meharry students who were there for the summer program and, and, and it was just such a very--
Speaker 1: Go ahead.
Speaker 2: What was that?  A neg- negative kind of a statement, a very patronizing statement, something along the order of, you do know what a, a, what a proton is?  You know, you all do know what a proton is?  Or something like that.  And it was like, oh, I just didn't like the way that was said, you know?  It was very patronizing, very condescending and, and I thought, wow, this interesting, this is gonna be interesting.
Speaker 1: Did you kind of interact among the--in the Nashville community?
Speaker 2: I ne- I didn't get well, with the students who were there and actually enjoyed it, I mean, you know, got to know a lot of the students, one of whom actually got into Howard along with me, we'd gotten our acceptance late, you know, but we got it, you know during a time, timely enough fashion to go to Washington.  And we looked at each other and we said, "We're outta here (laughter)."  Became very good friends (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Can you recall her name?
Speaker 2: It's a man, named Terry Thompson [Terry L. Thompson], and he became the director, he head of orthopedics for Howard Hospital [Howard University Hospital, Washington, D.C.] now (laughter).
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: And one of my classmates, yeah.
Speaker 1: So, so you decided to go back?
Speaker 2: Yes sir.
Speaker 1: You, you got your letter, so you're going to Howard now?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: So you go back, you leave good old Nashville and you go back (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah.
Speaker 1: --back up to Howard.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Story_ID: 409740
Speaker 1: Tell me about your first year going in, your first experience, you're going into now you're, now you're, you are there.
Speaker 2: Oh man.
Speaker 1: You, you're in med school [Howard University College of Medicine, Washington, D.C.] now.
Speaker 2: All right.
Speaker 1: What is your mom [Jonetta Everette Crowe] saying at this point?
Speaker 2: Oh well, you know, bursting with pride I think, you know bursting with pride that I had a goal and I accomplished it.
Speaker 1: And how about your brothers?
Speaker 2: I think so, I'm sure, you know, I'm sure my, my older brother [Terrence Crowe] who, at that point was an engineer, he had completed his engineering degree at Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.], in fact, and was in Los Angeles [California] working at Hughes Aircraft [Hughes Aircraft Company].
Speaker 1: Oh.
Speaker 2: So, and my (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So you kind of had a little help as far as Howard was concerned?
Speaker 2: In terms of what?  Financial?
Speaker 1: No, as far as knowing, know, knowing, knowing that, the whole lay of--
Speaker 2: Li- lay--
Speaker 1: --the land?
Speaker 2: Yes, exactly.  Well that was, I think that that was part of my strategy, be kind of close and know a little more about D.C. [Washington, D.C.].  Absolutely, I, I knew D.C., I knew D.C.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And, it was a great experience.  I mean, you know, Howard is a, as many historically black colleges [HBCUs] are, it is a very different environment, it is a toe the line or, you're gonna be towed outta here.  No bl- and no grey, it's black or white, either you cut the muster or you don't.  And I, I had my knife ready--
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: I was ready to cut that muster, (laughter), so, you know, I just, that was a, was a time where I just, everything was all about, about academics.
Speaker 1: Now at that point I guess it had been a few years where, where you had two things happening at, at that point.  You had number one, you were going into med school which is a major accomplishment in itself and you're a black woman doing this.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Now at this point, '79 [1979], things are not all the way where that's just the norm.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: There are a fe- there, there have, there have been major strides, but tell me how, what was it even in the school as far as you being a woman in a, was the class, class predominately male?
Speaker 2: It was, it was.  It was actually--and, and the statistics back then I believe were something like 40 percent.  So we had a lot of women, but, but, but not, you know, not predominately female.
Speaker 1: And how was that interaction?
Speaker 2: Actually good.  I mean, some of these women became close, close friends of mine and still we're very close today and, and so, you know, it was, it was a great pressurized environment, it was pressurized, I mean this is not, this is no joke for me.  This is the kind of you eat, sleep, go to the bathroom and you study and maybe you can eat and study at the same time, but you, I, I spent, I lived in libraries, I lived almost literally in libraries so.  And, and study groups, you know, you can't do necessarily everything alone, so, you know we formed study groups and it was a real, you know, comprehensive study period in my life.
Speaker 1: Now, you're there and, as, as you said it's a black and white situation, it's cut and dry to do the work?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.
Speaker 1: So your social life, how was your social life?
Speaker 2: You know, that was probably the biggest I think, benefit of being at Howard because we studied hard and then right after exams, we partied hard.  In fact, the school even had an organized party, the medical school would have something called doctor stomps which were just, the deejay, we've danced, had a great time, because you have to let off steam.  When you are in that, with that much pressure you have to.  And then we had a student lounge area where we would play bid whist and, you know, after exams and some people, you know, with not the correct philosophy would be playing bid whist all throughout and, of course, that was a problem, so most kids didn't make it through.  But, so you had outlets, we played bid whist, you know, right after exams and then when it came time for the doctors stomp, we danced and, and then you know, then those, that other period, that one month or six week period or what have you, there was a lot of studying, at least for me.  That was the way I---
Story_ID: 409741
Speaker 1: Were there any teachers or any one pr- one or two professors that really made you see the light of day when it came to medicine and your future?
Speaker 2: You know medicine was changing, I didn't recognize how rapidly it was changing even back then, so, as lot of teachers had a lot of impact.  I, I became actually, after my first year, I became an anatomy tutor, a physiology tutor, a biochemistry tutor, genetics tutor, I mean, and, and, and so, I would say, each and every one of those professors gave me something, you know, special, something different because I apparently was able to master what they were telling me and so.  And that was from the basic science portion of medical school, which was a very traditional curriculum.  You did two years basic science and two years in the hospital, but it was my, my advisor, my physician advisor in the hospital that really gave me a lot of information.
Speaker 1: And what was that person's name?
Speaker 2: That's is Dr. John Townsend.  He was the head of the hospital, he was director of internal medicine for Howard Hospital [Howard University Hospital, Washington, D.C.] and for the Howard University medical program [Howard University College of Medicine, Washington, D.C.], in fact, and department medicine and he was my, my mentor sort of speak and it was because of Dr. John Townsend, that I even thought about applying to Mayo Clinic [Rochester, Minnesota].  He encouraged me strongly to apply to Mayo Clinic to be, to be trained by their internal medicine department and, you know, I was okay with stepping outta my comfort zone and did and I met this man, Dr. Paul Underwood [HistoryMaker Dr. Paul Underwood, Jr.], my husband.
Speaker 1: Oh, oh, prior to going there real quick, I know that's a great high point.
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: Did, do you think your experience in med school has been, was different and a lot, a lot, 'cause if there are, I talk to a lot of doctors over the years that have, that have had different experiences--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --in medical college, even some in your own family.  Do you think your experience was different in comparison to those, those (simultaneous)--?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I do.  I do, I do, because I think my receptors were different, my antennas were different, you know, Howard was a goal of mine, again when I'd realized, you know, that I wanted to become a doctor, you know the mechanics of it was to go to Howard medical school because of my association with my mentor, Dr. Bill Farmer [William L. Farmer].  So I was ready for Howard, I was prepared, I was, I was, you know, ready to receive everything it had to offer and, you, you don't, was the experience all positive?  No, but it was largely positive for me it really was.  I was not, I didn't make excuses, I studied, I did what I needed to do, but I, but I know that for many it became very negative and many didn't make it, you know?  A lot of us are called but, not everybody made it through, some to this day are not physicians because of that experience.
Story_ID: 409742
Speaker 1: You're getting near your graduation from Howard University School of Medicine [sic. Howard University College of Medicine, Washington, D.C.].
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: And you're, your mentor John Townsend points you in what direction?
Speaker 2: Oh, he pointed me definitely in the direction of Mayo Clinic [Mayo Clinic School of Medicine, Rochester, Minnesota].
Speaker 1: Mayo had been known for great strides in--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --in research, and in medicine.  How did you feel about going there?
Speaker 2: Well, you know I, I, I guess I trusted his, his judgment, I trusted his opinion, I knew that he had my best interest at heart and I, I was hoping.  I was ready for a change, I mean I, I enjoyed Washington [D.C.], but, but I knew that, you know, this, I, I'd dedicated these few years to, to be the years that I, I groomed myself in medicine and, and mastered that craft.  So, I made a conscious decision about going to interview there, it was helpful that I got there and I, you know, it was a very lily white environment, but I saw a few people of color and, and about four men, not women, I thought this is a switch after coming from Washington where there were eight women to every man.  (Laughter) I thought, maybe this might not be all bad (laughter).
Speaker 1: Was there a, was there a, a big difference between your attitude now, because now, now you're getting ready to go do from, from, from when you actually started this, is it, was there a difference in your attitude or were you still very focused?
Speaker 2: Well, no, no, I was still, very focused but I guess I had--no I ran into some things that I had not really run into much before.  One was sexism, you know, and, and, and at Howard I, there was no racism, that was not much of an issue, obviously being a historically black institution, so I didn't have to deal with racism in medical school and sexism because there were so many accomplished women, that wasn't much of an issue, I mean, it, there wasn't a complete variety but, there was a pr- pretty good numbers.  But in Minnesota, that was the first time I'd dealt with racism and sexism.
Speaker 1: Now did you go straight from Howard, straight there or, or was there a break in the middle?
Speaker 2: I went straight there.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you get there and you, you're now in this rather cold city, cold actually and you're on this, and, and you're doing your residency now?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Tell me about it, you said there was sexism and, and racism, a combination.
Speaker 2: Combination.
Speaker 1: Explain this to me.
Speaker 2: Wow.  You know, I didn't know which was worse frankly, but there were, there were very few women in the training program, relative to, today's numbers.
Speaker 1: How many would you say there were?
Speaker 2: Oh, I would say probably 10 to 20 percent woman which is you know, pretty low.
Speaker 1: And (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And--
Speaker 1: And how large was the whole number of (simultaneous)--?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, int- all of the trainees at Mayo at that time were maybe somewhere on the order of seven or eight hundred or so?  I could be wrong, thinking of the entire male regiment, School of Medicine at point.
Speaker 1: So it could have been about 10 percent?
Speaker 2: Or less, yeah.  It was a pretty--
Speaker 1: That's about seventy women in total?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah it was not, there were not many women at all, there were only two African American women, myself and another woman.
Speaker 1: Do you know her name?
Speaker 2: We called her Stormy [ph.].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Dr. Eva Frazer, yes--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --out of, out of St. Louis [Missouri], yes.
Speaker 1: So you're there and it's time now to get the brass tacks--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --to get down to business.
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: And you're, you run into some slight intangible obstacles, tell us about them.
Speaker 2: Yes, yes, well, you know the first probably was that the, the structure of the residency program is different than any other place in the country, whereas, in typically you have your, your interns which is what I was functionally within residence and then the chief resident, then an attending.  But at Mayo, you've got your interns, who were on parity with your residents and you re- related directly to an attending.  And that attending was called a consultant and most programs wore white coats, where at Mayo, you wore suits and, and of course, you know, your first day out of medical school as a resident, you don't really know much.  You realize, gee I don't really know, a lot of medicine, but I, you know, having the kind of work ethic I've always had, I studied and I studied, and I studied some more and I studied your patients too, I studied yours too.  Because, you know what, if it's to be gotten, I'm gonna get it, that was my philosophy.
Story_ID: 409743
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Do you recall your first assignment?
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.  I was in community internal medicine, oh my goodness, ha, ha, with a gentleman who sadly, y- what I've come to realize is that some people's mediocrity prevents them from seeing the greatness in other people and they make it a conscious effort to put the squash on other people because of their own internal insecurity, and I saw a lot of that, I saw a lot of that, people hiding behind the shields of the Mayo Clinic [Mayo Clinic School of Medicine, Rochester, Minnesota] and with their own mediocrity.  And I saw some things that really exposed what that whole experience was, was all about but, but I, I remember being nervous, a, a new intern, first rotation out of medical school [Howard University College of Medicine, Washington, D.C.] and a patient came in, he was very, very, very critically ill, we worked on him, you know, along with the, you know, the E- you know he came in through the ER [emergency room], I worked on him, did, you know, some things; read, worked, read, worked, you know, you had to really kind of move fast, got him kind of stabilized but you know, the, the attendings, consultants would always say, you know, call us, keep us posted, let us know what's going on.  So maybe I called them at four o'clock and when I said, "I just wanted to let you know about the person came in and this is what happened and, you know, he's, he's doing better now."  He said, "Well if he's still alive, call me in the morning," bam!  Or, "We'll deal with it in the morning," and he hung up the phone on me, and I thought, okay so that, that, that was the first baptism by fire, and I realized, okay, so now I understand.
Speaker 1: So, so, so what did you do at that point when he did that to you?
Speaker 2: Oh, I--
Speaker 1: Were angered, or, or do you say, or what did you do?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) 'Cause you--
Speaker 2: --it angers you.
Speaker 1: --had a patient.
Speaker 2: But it makes you strong.  Let me tell you something, and, and this is what the old folks say, if it doesn't kill you, it'll make you strong.  It made you strong.  Every little hurt, every little slight, every little obstacle, every little pin that was pushed in my side intentionally, and mes- mostly intentionally, it just made me stronger.  I'm, I, I'm, I made sure that there wasn't anything in medicine that I had not seen or knew about and I've, I've made that my philosophy.  And I read, I read the PDR ['Physicians' Desk Reference'] and never forgetting once, I went to see somebody at his office, one of the consultants and I had the PDR and I was reading about something, he said, "What are you doing?  Reading the PDR?"  You know, he was kind of snickering, kind of in a very snide, and I said, you know, and I just laughed and said oh no.  Yeah, I was reading the PDR, as a matter of fact, I was gonna read every aspect of that drug, at least what we knew about so I would be that much better informed so.
Story_ID: 409744
Speaker 1: So that's the kind of person that, the person that, that you've been over the years with medicine (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, absol--
Speaker 1: Conscientious--
Speaker 2: Conscientious.
Speaker 1: --about it.  Now, now you're there and you're, you're at the Mayo [Mayo Clinic School of Medicine, Rochester, Minnesota], the Mayo facility and people are, you, are you riding through the ranks as someone that, that's, that's just not mediocre, are they starting to see you now and (simultaneous)--?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, oh, this is after, after the, after the second year, absolutely, absolutely.  After the second year, oh yes indeed.  You know, here, I mean, you know, the, again that first experience that whole baptism by fire, folks who say yes, you're doing well, and then would write something different, folks who would say, you're right on track.  One guy who I'll never forget came, I, I was on his rotation, same community internal, it's my first rotation, first, you know, first few months and, as a doctor.  And he, at the end of our rotation he would take us out as a group, the two guys who were, second or third year guys and I was the, you know, the new person but we were all essentially, we all relate directly to them.  And he took his out, like he would take us to dinner, well he took us out on his boat and the guys had girlfriends with them and I was, you know, relatively new and didn't know anybody in town and, and it's, since I didn't have a date, or a husband, he had this old woman consultant, never married, looked like she was the matron saint of medicine and I thought this is not going to be life, (laughter).  This is not, that, that was also, that was pivotal for me, I thought now you know, this is not, not gonna be my life where I've gotten, you know (laughter).  I'm just an old gray haired doctor--
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: --of medicine looking like a matron, and I decided that was not gonna be my life.
Speaker 1: So, you got out and got social at that point?
Speaker 2: I was social before, I was social before but, you know, it was just at that particular, you know, point was how I guess they saw women in medicine.  Well, you know, you're destined to be old, alone and unattractive, well I don't believe that.
Speaker 1: So you're--
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: --here at the, at the school, and you're doing your residency, are things getting better as the years go on as far (simultaneous)--?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh yeah, absolutely.  I mean, you know, aft- I, in fact, at the end of the ye- at the end of the day, at the end of this program, and in fact I even did a fellowship year, which was great.  I did a fellowship year and people really came, I think respect who I was, I was invited to be on staff in Scottsdale [Arizona] right after residency, I actually, we had gone to the Caribbean because I had a public health commitment.  But that same guy who hung up the phone, my first week or as a doctor, came in and, I mean, at that point, I, I had heard the number of patients who told me how poorly he had treated their--their par- their, their loved ones and how he misdiagnosed them and didn't diagnose them and he was very, very cavalier and it was his own mediocrity that was clearly part of the problem and he actually said, "You know what?  You've become a fabulous doctor."  He actually, in his own way, was able to apologize.
Story_ID: 409745
Speaker 1: You're at this, at the school [Mayo Clinic School of Medicine, Rochester, Minnesota] and you're on campus, I mean, you're at the hospital, you're working, you're doing your thing and you have your own individual struggles, you're kind of by yourself, who do you run into all of a sudden?
Speaker 2: Well, actually what was funny, because you know, I had a big brother that was assigned to me who was an African American guy who was in the class, I believe one or two years ahead of me and we're still real good friends today, to this day.  He's in Detroit [Michigan] married, and he's an internal medicine doctor.
Speaker 1: What's his name?
Speaker 2: Terry Gordon [Terry R. Gordon].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Dr. Terry Gordon, yes.  And so, we, he was my big brother so I could always kind of, you know, talk him, but everybody is busy, I mean, you know, you're busy, this is not, this is not a social time and, and in Rochester, Minnesota, if you wanted to party, there was nowhere to party anyway  (laughter).
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: You'd have to drive to the Twin Cities [Minneapolis-St. Paul, Minnesota], but, but my first--I started in July, as m- as the new interns do, the house staff well, but this guy, Paul Underwood [HistoryMaker Dr. Paul Underwood, Jr.] was a senior medical student and he started classes in September, like they do.  So, come September, this guy shows up, you know, on the community internal medicine rotation and I was, you know all the while people had asked me, "Have you met Paul Underwood?  Have you met Paul Underwood?"  Well at the time, Johnny Carson had a little skit called, who the hell is Rula Lenska (laughter).
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: And, I'm, who the hell is Paul Underwood?  And I met him and he was a student and, you know, he was, I was on the community medicine A service, he was on the B service, and we'd get together for conferences, usually at lunch or whatever at noontime or whatever.  And at this time, you know, there was some other residents there of color, African American men, you know, a couple of years ahead of me, one of this is a very good friend, I, and we, you know, did, done a little bit, nothing really but, I knew who he was and his girlfriend I guess at the time was having a going away party, she was an IBMer [employee, International Business Machines Corporation] and Paul Underwood asked me if I wanted a ride to the party.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: I mean it was a, listen this is a big event, this is like the social season in Rochester, Minnesota a black person was having something social.  And, and, and I said, then he said he asked if me if I wanted a ride, I said sure, I'll take a ride, he didn't ask me for a date, he asked me for a ride.  So, I made sure that I was looking really, quite nice and, and he came to my apartment, I remember his eyes got big when he saw me--
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: --you know, I wasn't in my suit, you know?  And, but he asked me if I wanted a ride, so we took the--I took the ride, when I got to the party, I thanked him for the ride and I proceeded to dance with my friends.  The next day he called me and asked for a date, see language is specifically clear--
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: --and he had to be clear (laughter).
Speaker 1: (Laughter) So you went on that first date?
Speaker 2: Yes we did.
Speaker 1: And you all are both busy now?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: So, so dating time is very, it, it's a priority.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: It, it's very special.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: So, and you have to make quick decisions in the, in the dating process when you're in med school.  Go ahead and te- tell me more.
Speaker 2: Oh wow, I probably should have listened to his tape (laughter).
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: Corroborate or refute it.
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: But, I, that next day, if I recall correctly, he asked me on a date to go to the Minnesota State Fair [St. Paul, Minnesota] and that was in the Twin Cities, and, and it was great because I hadn't been to, to St. Paul [Minnesota] or to Minneapolis [Minnesota] at that point.  So we drove up there in his old clunker, with a great sound system (laughter) and, and, and he bought me these feather earrings that I had for years, I, I don't know where they are now, but he bought me this little gift and that next day, Sunday, he said, you know, he invited me over to eat dinner with his mother [Jacqueline Martin Underwood] and his sister [Carla Underwood] who lived in Minnesota.  And I met them and I was there and they threw some darts at me and it was okay, I was dodging darts and, and--but he was such a great guy, he was such a nice guy and, you know, and that was, that's what it came, became very clear to me, what a nice guy.  And he's very shy, he was very, very bright and you know, we, you know, at that point we started studying together, he became one of my study partners and we, you know?  We'd talk over cases and--
Speaker 1: So one thing led to another, and for some reason at some point, did, did you find yourself saying yes to a marriage proposal?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I did.  And let's see how did that happen, well I'll tell you, actually what happened is, for winter break, you know, I was able to get a week off for winter break and I was gonna go to St. Thomas [U.S. Virgin Islands] which is where my mother [Jonetta Everette Crowe] was living at the time and I invited him to come to St. Thomas, and we had a great time, we had, you know, just, you know, St. Thomas is fabulous, it's a beautiful, beautiful island and so that wa- that we- that went great.  And then his birthday that following March, we drove to the Twin Cities we were parked by one of the lakes, you know, Minnesota, the land of ten thousand lakes and he said, you, he had gotten matched, that's the process where you know where you're gonna go, 'cause you don't know until the end where you're gonna match to.  And he was matched to Henry Ford [Henry Ford Hospital] in Detroit [Michigan] and he said, "I'd like for you to come."  I said, "I'll come and visit you."  He said, "No, I really want you to come and here's something to make you think."  And it was a ring and of course, you know.
Speaker 1: And the rest was history.
Speaker 2: Ah, the rest was history (laughter).
Speaker 1: So, okay.  So now you're, you're, you're engaged and almost in your what is, what year of residency?
Speaker 2: First.
Speaker 1: First year of residency.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Oh, first year.
Speaker 2: First year, yeah.
Story_ID: 409746
Speaker 1: Now there's a new spin, you're engaged, you're going through, you're happy, are things still the same way around the ho -around the hospital [Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota]?
Speaker 2: Yes, you know, for the most part.  I mean he [Underwood's husband, HistoryMaker Dr. Paul Underwood, Jr.] was a student at that point so, you know, he, he had other rotations, I think he had done a rotation in New York and some other rotations away from Minnesota.  But, but no, I mean this was still, you know, my opportunity to really just learn and learn and you know, I was on call every third night and, and that I was still putting in a lot of hospital time, putting in a lot of library time still, just learning and, and studying.
Speaker 1: Now you also received a fellowship of, while you were there right?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Or after, and--
Speaker 2: I became, yes.
Speaker 1: Tell us about that a moment.
Speaker 2: That was actually my, after my third year, after my third year [at Mayo Clinic School of Medicine, Rochester, Minnesota], it, the typical internal medicine residency program is a three year program and, and that of course, and many people they springboard into a sub special like cardiology and nephrology or, or hematology or what have you.  But I loved general internal medicine, I mean I loved every aspect of medicine but I did one and it was theoretically through the emergency room, but, but what was so powerful for me is that I had an opportunity to spend a month with the urologist and I spent a time with the orth- with sports medicine folks and, and just gave me I think a much more solid foundation in medicine.  I mean, I think the urologist he was, now amazed that I can feel prostate cancer, (unclear) you'll be normal, but I can feel because I st- I, I, I spent that time feeling what the urologist felt and--
Speaker 1: So you feel that, that your time of going around has made you a, that time, that time of studying everything has made you a better overall physician?
Speaker 2: Oh, no question.  Just that concentrated extra year where I was able to concentrate in areas where most internal medicine docs won't ever get an opportunity to do--
Story_ID: 409747
Speaker 1: Your fiance is in one place and you're in another, how's that working out?
Speaker 2: Well, well that, that was, he, he was gonna match to Detroit [Michigan], so I knew he was gonna be in Detroit and I told him, honestly?  And, it was so hard, I said, been there, done that--
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: --I'm not really interested in going back to Detroit and, and I said well maybe you might wanna come back up here.  So he actually did, he spent his first year internship at Henry Ford Hospital [Detroit, Michigan] and then he came back up to Mayo [Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota] to finish the second and third year.
Speaker 1: So, so he made his way back--
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: --to a place that, that he got away from kind of fast too (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah. Yeah.
Speaker 1: So now, so you all are both back together?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: And now what happens?  It's about 1987, now.
Speaker 2: Eighty--oh well gosh, in 1987, after I completed that year, the, the senior clinical fellow year which also gave him an opportunity to finish and catch up with me so that he had finished his residency at that point, then I had a public health commitment to fulfill.  I, when I went to medical school and Howard [Howard University College of Medicine, Washington, D.C.] was one of the most affordable medical schools in the country, but I still ha- being a, you know, product of a single mom, essentially at this point, I had a two year obligation to serve in a, in a medically underserved area.  But my mother [Jonetta Everette Crowe] was director of nursing for St. Thomas [U.S. Virgin Islands] and St. John [U.S. Virgin Islands] in, in the Caribbean at this point, and I was able to do a, my public health commitment in St. Croix [U.S. Virgin Islands], so.
Speaker 1: Now, now was that really on the list?
Speaker 2: It really was--
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: --on the list, it truly honestly was a, a sight on the list--
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: --and it was in small print but it was on the list (laughter).
Speaker 1: So now you're gonna get a chance to go be near your mother?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And take your new husband with you.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Tell us about that.
Speaker 2: Oh, it was, it was, it was great, we lived in St. Croix and it was enough water to separate mother and daughter, you know, you've gotta have some water between you.  (Laughter) But, but yet it was close and St. Croix was a very different island in many ways, in fact, ne- it's not even part of the same geographic island chain as St. Thomas and St. John.  But it was, it was incredible, Paul [HistoryMaker Dr. Paul Underwood, Jr.] became the head of the emergency room and the ICU [intensive care unit], and I worked at the Frederiksted Health Clinic [Frederiksted Health Care Inc., Frederiksted, U.S. Virgin Islands] which was a, a publically, public health facility on the west side of the island (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) How was that because now you're seeing--
Speaker 2: Oh it was awesome--
Speaker 1: --the under, you're seeing--
Speaker 2: --awesome.  And you know what, it was, it was incredible and, and people were grateful for, for care and you know they were happy to, to see you and, and oh my gosh, you know, it, it, it was interesting but I thought demographically, whoever put this hospital, this little, this little health clinic on the hill and most people, you know, some people didn't have transportation, so they'd have to walk up the hill, so I guess if you could make up it up there you weren't that sick or you, you didn't have heart trouble, but, but it was great.  And I really got a chance to see some things that I didn't see at Mayo, and I got to formulate some, some opinions about things that I didn't know.  I saw very few acute heart attacks during that time, in fact, very few and I realized, well this diet of fish and folks were walking, you know, they might be overweight, and I didn't see wh- the only acute heart attack I saw was in a, in a, in a tourist, a white guy who had a cocaine heart attack and that was in, in the three years that I spent there.  I have a two year commitment and I stayed on an extra year, you know, I, I, I just, it was, it was great.  Saw it, saw cancer, not, not a huge amount because there weren't a lot of smokers, so you didn't see a lot of lung cancer, but, but just was able to put together some environmental lifestyle things that (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And draw--
Speaker 2: --that happens.
Speaker 1: --some hypothesis--
Speaker 2: And draw some--
Speaker 1: --about that?
Speaker 2: --hypothesis, exactly.
Story_ID: 409748
Speaker 1: And you're there and your mom's [Jonetta Everette Crowe] there, you're in the islands and, and but now something happens?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: In a couple of years.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: While you're there.  What happens?
Speaker 2: Well, actually the first thing that happened is, I, I, I had a, my first son, and that was my son Paul [Paul Underwood, III] who came prematurely.  We were living in St. Croix [U.S. Virgin Islands] and, and I was due roughly in November and he was born six weeks early but my, my, my membranes were, were leaking and I knew he was coming so, you know, again my whole philosophy, I had thoughts of things, and the information that I had back when I was fifteen, sixteen, kicked in like you've talked to your child, even when they're in utero, you know.  And I just, you know, I had been doing this all along but, but I told him, I said, you're gonna be coming soon and I need you to breathe because they don't have pediatric ventilators on this island, you're gonna have to do that.  And, and just two days I just stayed in bed, I knew what was going on, read my books on OB [obstetrics], that gave me some perspective and I just, you know, laid quietly and then on Monday saw the old traditional OB, and he, you know, propped me, examined me, sent me to the hospital and shortly thereafter my water's broke, what would, had not leaked out completely and there he was.  But he was born, his Apgar scores were nine and ten which is what any, any parent could hope for, for their term baby so, I was very pleased, but he was three pounds, fifteen ounces, at birth.  Second thing that happened is that we had our second child about twenty-one months later and, and--
Speaker 1: And now, now let's go there for, for--up until this point, you've been on a track of doing what you wanna do and making it happen because you had a, a goal.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Now these two sons are here, now you are now something that you weren't before, you are now a mother.
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: Tell me about that experience of being doctor, mother?
Speaker 2: Yeah, you know, that's the one thing I wish somebody had given me--see the, you know, a male mentor can't give you that perspective and I realize that now, they can't tell you how to do that, 'cause they, they aren't that.  And, that's something that I really regret I didn't have that information because now I'm thinking, you what?  I'd like to be as much mother, you know, and I can't put, you know, a hundred hours of medicine every, every week and not spend any time with my children and so, philosophies started changing, had some great help from my mother was always incredible at, at helping, though she was working, had wonderful, wonderful women who came into our lives to help.  Pat [ph.], our first nanny with Paul was incredible and just, you know, could do anything, she was just awesome, but not me, you know, and, and Ian [Ian Underwood], when Ian came, you know I, it really made things a little different.  And, but what happened shortly after his birth literally two, two months after his birth was we experienced a category five hurricane.
Speaker 1: Hurricane Hugo.
Speaker 2: Hurricane Hugo, yes.
Speaker 1: Now as we say that there's al- now the water is, is, is rising literally now.
Speaker 2: Literally.
Speaker 1: You have three babies, three children.
Speaker 2: Two.
Speaker 1: Two children (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Two--
Speaker 1: --at this point.
Speaker 2: --two yeah.  Um-hm.
Speaker 1: And your husband is involved in a very extensive work that he's doing, he's director and you're very busy also?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Now what happens?
Speaker 2: There was no electricity on the island after Hurricane Hugo, it was like a, it was like a holocaust, like a bomb had gone off literally and the clinic [Frederiksted Health Clinic; Frederiksted Health Care Inc., Frederiksted, U.S. Virgin Islands] was shut down and, and, but the ER [emergency room] and the hospital had to be up and running when the feds came, they established the medical tents and, but I made that decision, I had to go, I went to St. Thomas [U.S. Virgin Islands] with my mother with these two babies, Paul [HistoryMaker Dr. Paul Underwood, Jr.] stayed behind in St. Croix and worked and, and when things settled down, we sti- we didn't have any electrical power for six months at our home.
Speaker 1: Now after, now you were definitely the first thing is to, is to, is to protect, that's a motherly instinct--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --to protect your children and get away from the, whatever's going on.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: But did you have a feeling as a physician that possibly you should be there helping?
Speaker 2: I did, I did and, and you know, and I, I didn't stay away long and then I came back and once things kind of dried up, you know, which wasn't that long, I probably didn't stay away more than a week or so, a week to ten days.  And I, and I got back and started doing some work of, on a very part time basis because we only had part time you know, availability, really, it was noth- no full time, they had the feds in with medical tents and, you know.
Story_ID: 409749
Speaker 1: At this point, you, we, you, we're looking at medicine and how (unclear) and sometimes during this age, this time period, when we could have went to a med school, medical school the thought about the money was an issue--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --as to why you should be a doctor, why you should even be a professional.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Are you looking at this point in your life now, saying and looking at the work you were doing, would you say that your career was not based, or your choices were at all not based upon making money as a doctor?
Speaker 2: Oh god, not at all.  I mean at twelve that was not even a concern, I probably even didn't understand that the value of a dollar at that point.  And I've always said that medicine, you know, is something that I would do and, and you know, I, I'd give away the service so, you know, the, the economics of medicine did not (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Did you see others in your class with, with a little different opinion--
Speaker 2: Oh, absolutely--
Speaker 1: --about it?
Speaker 2: That, and I think anybody who really had a true desire for the economic power of medicine didn't do primary care medicine, wouldn't do internal medicine 'cause that is not where there, there's the financial wherewithal, that's, those are the sub specialist, but no, money was never even the quest for me in medicine.
Speaker 1: 'Cause now you're in the [U.S.] Virgin Islands with, with a hurricane [Hurricane Hugo] and people are needing help and you and your husband [HistoryMaker Dr. Paul Underwood, Jr.] are helping, there's nothing really glamorous about that--
Speaker 2: Unh-uh.
Speaker 1: --at that point?
Speaker 2: No, nothing glamorous, nothing at all but, but no so money was never an issue, you know, we were paid, we were, we were employees--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Government employees, me from the feds and him local and so we just did what we needed to do, we, we worked, we gave, still gave 200 percent.
Speaker 1: So how long did you stay there after the hurricane?
Speaker 2: We stayed, we stayed on actually an extra year, my commitment was a two year commitment but we left in, one, we, we took an extra year, actually and stayed on.
Story_ID: 409750
Speaker 1: Okay (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Which was--
Speaker 1: --and, and then where did you go?
Speaker 2: We went to Ohio, went to the Cleveland area, Paul [HistoryMaker Dr. Paul Underwood, Jr.] matched to the Cleveland Clinic [Cleveland, Ohio] for a cardiology fellowship and we moved to Cleveland.
Speaker 1: And what did you do at that time in Cleveland?  What, what were you doing while your husband was doing his fellowship?
Speaker 2: I actually was working.  I was supporting us--
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: --because he was a broke fellow.  (Laughter) And at least you know, as a, as an internist I was, I was very employable and I worked actually for Kaiser Permanente [Ohio Permanente Medical Group, Inc., Cleveland, Ohio], and Kaiser Permanente developed a relationship with Cleveland Clinic.  So, it was, it was great and it gave me a lot of, again more perspective, more information, I developed leadership, I became a, a physician manager, a lead physician for my facility and, and--
Speaker 1: Now, now you were working--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --and he's working?  Well he's, he's studying--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --and, and, and you're working, did you have help with the kids at this point?
Speaker 2: Oh definitely, definitely, absolutely, wonderful and, and had a third baby [Neal Underwood] (laughter), and that happened during that, that black out time in--
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: --in the islands [U.S. Virgin Islands] (laughter).
Speaker 1: So you actually have three kids now?
Speaker 2: Three kids now and, no we had great help you know, we had live in help, wonderful wom- wonderful woman from Nicaragua, who, who took care of my third son so well and just was awesome and just a lot of really great women came into our lives to help and we needed the help and, and yeah.
Speaker 1: So, so how long were you in Cleveland?
Speaker 2: There for, I was there for three years, so he did his two year fellowship and then he did an interventional year, if I'm, yup, I believe that's correct, is that right?  No, I think that was wrong, three year fellowship and a four, and the fourth year was his interventional year so we were there for four years, is that right Paul?  In Cleveland?
Speaker 1: Somewhere around that way.
Speaker 2: Now I think so, yeah.
Speaker 1: Now, in nineteen, so, so we're in, we're in like '89 [1989], going into '90 [1990] now?
Speaker 2: What?  Ninety [1990], moved to Cleveland right (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And, and you worked for par- in (unclear) you worked--
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: --and, and now how long did you stay there at that, in Cleveland you worked there how many years now?
Speaker 2: I worked for four years.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, until we moved here to, to Arizona.
Speaker 1: Now, in '92 [1992], you worked at the, in St. Louis, Missouri?
Speaker 2: No, no, no, no, no.  No, I was in '92 [1992], this is when lipids were just becoming--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --interesting to physicians and looking at lipids as a real risk factor for cardiovascular disease, and I became a lipids specialist.  I was invited to attend a, a course and I became a, a lipids specialist.
Speaker 1: Okay so you went to St. Louis just to study for a moment?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: In, in that here.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: Now, what, what have you done with that work?  What's been known to with, with that work on lipids lately?
Speaker 2: Oh my gosh, I mean, we've come so far, I mean we've come so far, we know so much and even now it's evolving so it hasn't been current for a, you know, I mean, it's, you know, it's, we are just still developing where people need to be with their lipids in order to maintain their cardiovascular health and, and I, you know, I look at the, what we talked about then and it's almost, it's so antiquated, it's not even, not even relevant so.
Story_ID: 409751
Speaker 1: So you do that in '93 [1993]?  Now you start getting on some boards and doing some things--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --and I did some research here, you've been at the Templum House, Cleveland Women's Incorporation [Cleveland Women, Inc., Cleveland, Ohio]--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Explain that--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --that organization.
Speaker 2: It was a domestic violence, a facility for women who were victims of domestic violence and, you know that was kind of interesting, that was, you know, the beginning, the real beginning of the community where, you know,  where community activism kind of coming back up to the, to the surface, bubbling back up and so.
Speaker 1: Was that an issue that, that because of, because of being in medicine, and seeing things that, that was kind of a pet issue for you?  Had you seen much domestic violence or injuries--
Speaker 2: Oh.
Speaker 1: --or the thing, or, or the results of it?
Speaker 2: I had seen, yes, absolutely had seen, witnessed it with, with friends and, you know, all kinds of places, I mean, it would just didn't, there weren't any area where that didn't touch, a lot of people who I knew in my life.
Speaker 1: Well now we have Holly Underwood [HistoryMaker Hollis Underwood] moving into her social and activist career--
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: --along with her medicine--
