Story_ID: 352256
Speaker 1: Okay so I'm Shawn Wilson with The HistoryMakers this is Neculai Burghelea the videographer.  So I will have you state your full name including the middle name, and spelling it out for us.
Speaker 2: All right it's Ione Teresa Dugger Vargus [HistoryMaker Ione Teresa Vargus], V-A-R-G-U-S.
Speaker 1: Ione?
Speaker 2: Ione. Ione is I-O-N-E.
Speaker 1: And the middle name, just spell it out for me.
Speaker 2: D-U-G-G-E-R.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Dugger.
Speaker 1: So your date of birth?
Speaker 2: I was born July 19th, 1930.
Speaker 1: Your place of birth?
Speaker 2: Medford, Massachusetts, I was born in Medford, Massachusetts.
Speaker 1: Today's date?
Speaker 2: Today's date is December 19th, 1970- 19- (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Two thousand and six [2006].
Speaker 2: Two thousand and six [2006].
Speaker 1: The location of this interview?
Speaker 2: The location of this interview is at Shannondell of Valley Forge [Audubon, Pennsylvania] a continuous care retirement community.
Speaker 1: And your occupation?
Speaker 2: I am retired, however (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Before retirement, before retirement?
Speaker 2: Before retirement I was the vice provost for undergraduate education at Temple [Temple University, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] and before that I was the dean at Temple University.  Now I am, however, the chair of the Family Reunion Institute at Temple University, which I do as a volunteer.
Speaker 1: I know it takes up a lot of your time.
Speaker 2: About thirty hours a week.
Speaker 1: That's a lot.
Story_ID: 352257
Speaker 1: So I'm gonna start ask- by asking you five basic questions.  The answers will appear on our website and they're very short answers, favorite food?
Speaker 2: Favorite food is fried clams.
Speaker 1: Favorite color?
Speaker 2: My favorite color is blue.
Speaker 1: Favorite time of year?
Speaker 2: Favorite time of the year is fall.
Speaker 1: And your favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: My favorite vacation destination is Myrtle Beach, South Carolina.
Speaker 1: And your favorite phrase or saying, favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: My favorite phrase is keep the faith.
Speaker 1: [HistoryMaker] Tavis Smiley doesn't he, doesn't he has something similar to that?
Speaker 2: Oh yes he probably, he probably does it's what my uncle used to always say (laughter).
Speaker 1: Keep the faith (laughter).
Story_ID: 352258
Speaker 1: So you were born in Medford, Massachusetts?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: We're gonna talk about your family tree for a while.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: So we will start with your mother's side of the family, work our way backwards from her and then we will talk about your father's side and work our way backwards, and then forwards again.  So your mother's full name?
Speaker 2: My mother's full name was Madeline Kountze, Madeline Mabray Kountze [Madeline Kountze Dugger-Kelley] (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And can you spell that for me, Kountze?
Speaker 2: Yes, that's her, well that was her maiden name Kountze.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: K-O-U-N-T-Z-E, and then she married and, Ed, Edward Dugger [Edward Dugger, Sr.], Dugger so.
Speaker 1: And her place of birth?
Speaker 2: Her place of birth was Boston, Massachusetts in 1893.
Speaker 1: Her, the date of birth, do you know the month and day?
Speaker 2: Yes it was July, July 28th nine (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Eight, 1890--
Speaker 2: Eighteen ninety-three [1893].
Speaker 1: So what can you tell me about your mother's childhood, stories she may have relate to you about her growing up in Boston at the turn of the century?
Speaker 2: Well she didn't talk that much about her childhood, I do know that once she got to be in high school, she was the only, she was a track star, she was an athlete.  And so that now she's in the Medford hall of fame, she was the first person inducted into the Medford hall of fame because of the letters that she received as a young athlete in, in the school.
Speaker 1: So I read she was the first African American to receive a letter.
Speaker 2: Yes (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) In track, I mean she was a long jump--
Speaker 2: She was the first woman, yeah.
Speaker 1: The first woman?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yes.
Speaker 1: So what was the sport, what was her sport?
Speaker 2: Golly I don't remember all of her sports, I know she was in track, she was, she, I don't remember exactly all of her sports.
Speaker 1: Well what else can you tell me about your mother, what did she do for a living?
Speaker 2: Well my mom was, she went to, she went to college which of course in her day was considered unusual, and she went to a school called Sargent School for Physical Education [Boston University College of Health and Rehabilitation Sciences: Sargent College, Boston, Massachusetts].  What she used to tell me about it was that she, because she again, she was the only black woman, and it was a very segregated school, this was in Boston.  They didn't wanna take her, the owner, Mr. Sargent [Dudley Allen Sargent] really didn't want; want to take her, but the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] which had (laughter) not in existence very long.  But she threatened them with the NAACP, so they took her, but then he didn't want, the owner didn't want her to study with the other young women.  Apparently a lot of them came from the South at that time, so but she did make some friends with some of the young Jewish women.  But she said what she did was to, to get back at them, she just beat them all of the various you know athletic (laughter) competition.  So then she married my father in 1917, he was in World War I [WWI], and they, they got married and then they rai- began raising a family.
Speaker 1: Raising a family.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Story_ID: 352259
Speaker 1: Before we talk about your father [Edward Dugger, Sr.] and his side of the family, your, let's talk about your mother's [Madeline Kountze Dugger-Kelley] parents, your grandparents (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah well they--
Speaker 1: Did you ever have any opportunity of meeting them?
Speaker 2: Yes, oh yes, I was very fortunate, I had met my unc- my grandfather was Hillard Kountze, and my grandmother was Madeline, Madeline Mabray [Madeline Mabray Kountze].  And then of course then she became Kountze, yes.
Speaker 1: And what did they do for a living your?
Speaker 2: Well my grandfather, I wasn't quite sure what he did, he seemed to be a jack of all trades, but one of the things that I know he did is he worked for Brandeis [Louis Brandeis], later became a justice.  And so he worked for Justice Brandeis, well he was not a justice then, he was a judge, and he, I think he did a variety of things in just in his properties and so forth.  For some, in some way he was related, my, my grandfather was related to real estate because he collected the rents for people.  And one of the people that he collected rents from was the Curley family which later became the mayor of Boston [Massachusetts], you know Curley [James Michael Curley].  And the story that he, that we've been told, in fact I know it's true because it was told while he was alive basically.  Was that they were very poor so he would not always make them pay the rent, and, and so you know he let them skate and so forth.  And, and so eventually when they became, when mayor became Curley, they became big politicians you know.  Then they remembered, they used to remember my grandfather, and he was able to you know ply some get something back from that usually in a political sense you know.  But that was, that was one of the things, and he just, he was just a--
Speaker 1: Jack of all trades.
Speaker 2: Jack of all trades.
Speaker 1: Your grandmother (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And my grandmother--
Speaker 1: Was she a domestic?
Speaker 2: Yes, she was, well then had ten children and so she stayed home, she wasn't much of housekeeper; oh I can tell you that.  She (laughter) really didn't and she, but she was, she was a lady of the house, she knew German, she could speak German.   She loved the opera, you know this is interesting because I think, because she was born year after slavery.  You know after the Emancipation Proclamation, so she was born close to slavery, but she was well-written you know and she had a beautiful handwriting.  Which in, in a sense was not unusual, if you, if you look back and see some of the handwriting of the people of that time, it's beautiful you know.  So, and so hers was too, and so she, she raised the children, but she was real, a real lady, I remember her taking me to the opera and opening you know events.
Speaker 1: Who taught her German is there German heritage (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I don't know--
Speaker 1: In the back, in the family's tree?
Speaker 2: I, I really don't know how she learned German, I don't know.
Speaker 1: Well she had to have learned it during her childhood.
Speaker 2: Yeah she must've of learned it some, sometime, she didn't go to, I think she went to high school, but I don't think she went to, I know that she went to college.  And of course even in those days again going way back that time going to high school was considered you know I mean for a lot of people dropped out you know and all.  But she, she got through high school.
Speaker 1: And she had ten children.
Speaker 2: And she had ten children.
Speaker 1: So she start, they started young, early.
Speaker 2: Yeah I don't rem- I don't know the date of their marriage, I'm sure it's in our Bible, our Bible somewhere or my uncle had.  My uncle probably captured that.
Speaker 1: Can you list the names of your uncles and aunts that the ten children they had?
Speaker 2: Of the ten children sure, there was--
Speaker 1: And the order in which they or--if you can.
Speaker 2: (Laughter) I'm not sure if I got (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay.
Speaker 2: Right order.  There's Barbara [Barbara Kountze Press] was the oldest, Hillard [Hillard Kountze], Portia [Portia Kountze Bosfield], Madeline actually Madeline I believe was the second, I think my mother was the second child.  There was Elmer [Elmer Kountze], Mabray [Mabray "Doc" Kountze], and Con- Consuelo [Consuelo Kountze Ramos] and Vivien [Vivien Kountze Russell].
Story_ID: 352260
Speaker 1: Did any of the other siblings go off to college like your mother [Madeline Kountze Dugger-Kelley]?
Speaker 2: No they didn't go to college.
Speaker 1: So your mother would've been the first in the family to receive (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) She would've been the first.
Speaker 1: The college, to have received a college--
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: --college degree?
Speaker 2: Right, well she actually didn't finish, I don't think she finished I think she married my father [Edward Dugger, Sr.] so she didn't finish getting her degree.  She went back to school in 1931 after I was born, after her six children, I was her sixth child, and she went back to school and got a law degree.  From Portia law school [Portia School of Law; New England School of Law, Boston, Massachusetts], so she finished that I know 'cause I got those graduation pictures, but I'm not sure about whether she ever finished Sargent School [Sargent School for Physical Education; Boston University College  of Health and Rehabilitation Sciences: Sargent College, Boston, Massachusetts] or not.
Speaker 1: Did she practice law?
Speaker 2: She didn't practice law for a couple of reasons; one is that my father was getting very, very sick at that time.  And so she was having to go out to work and also, and she was a black woman and (laughter) and she just you know she didn't really get through all of that.  She later, after in the late, in the '40s [1940s] mid-'40s [1940s] she did work in adjudication and she did, she used some of her legal, she, she used all of her legal sense a lot.  Because she was the, the director of service clubs for soldiers and, of black soldiers 'cause you know again all of that, they were all segregated during World War II [WWII].  And she really fought very hard, so that the places would open to black soldiers.  Boston [Massachusetts] was also segregated as you know and so she fought a lot on in that area, in fact the newspaper articles about her, she think was one when she was ninety-one.  And then there was another one when she was ninety-six and the one when she was ninety-six years old said, "Still fighting," you know so (laughter) she, she, she did, she did use that information that she had.  You know the legal training anyway.
Speaker 1: Now she worked, you said as a director of services for the [U.S.] Army?
Speaker 2: Service clubs, yeah.
Speaker 1: Service club.
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: So what exactly was a service club?
Speaker 2: Well a service club in, during World War II was where the men came to relax and enjoy (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) It's like an officers' club?
Speaker 2: Yeah, but it was not, it was not strictly for officers, the one she had was for all the men, and so they were on the base, on the Army base.  Hers, she worked first at Fort Devens and in Ayer, Massachusetts and then later she worked at Fort Myles Standish [Camp Myles Standish, Taunton, Massachusetts].  But both of those jobs were, both of those jobs were, so she had, she, she provided the entertainment and the activities for all of the black soldiers on, on those you know in those places.
Speaker 1: And what types of enter- entertainment?
Speaker 2: Well she used to bring all of the big wheels there the, Joe Louis, the singers all of the people who were black entertainment period at that time.  You know the musicians, the jazz musicians, she would bring them there, she would also plan the dances for them, and then she would just plan all kinds of activities.  The games, whatever (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now would there have been white women in that doing that same thing for white soldiers?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: So that, it was separate?
Speaker 2: Separate.
Speaker 1: And they had, she was holding the same post that a white woman would hold?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: For--?
Speaker 2: Right for, and then for white soldiers, but she became sort of a mother, I mean most of the, the soldiers always kind of, well first they would fall in love with her.  Then they'd meet my mother's daughters and they'd fall in love with my, my sisters, and (laughter) and but she became sort of a mother to, to many of them.
Story_ID: 352261
Speaker 1: So in '52 [1952] do you remember when she [Vargus' mother, Madeline Kountze Dugger-Kelley] was awarded Mother of the Year [Massachusetts Mother of the Year]?
Speaker 2: Oh yes, uh-huh, that was when I graduated from high sch- college [Tufts College; Tufts University, Medford, Massachusetts].
Speaker 1: And how did that come about, how did she (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well my sister, Barbara [Barbara Dugger Anderson] nominated her they, they I guess you nominated people to become Mothers of the Year.  She was nominated and actually that point my sister lived out of state, but she nominated my mother and the committee chose her, um-hm.
Speaker 1: Now why is her portrait today hanging in Medford City Hall [Medford, Massachusetts]?
Speaker 2: Well because she was very active until she died, she died in 1995, but she was very active until she died.  And I guess because she was just such a you know just such a, an icon for people in the city.  I mean she worked in a lot of volunteer kinds of things; she became the head of the aging--chair or the aging board committee [ph.], I mean as time went on and all of that.  She always studied, she always, she loved education so she was also taking classes, and she loved art also.  And so she was always going to the museums and studying art.
Speaker 1: Were there artist that, you can think of that she liked?
Speaker 2: I can't recall, she, she seemed to like the classic, classic white artists, although when she, there were also some black artists who, she was friendly with also.
Speaker 1: In Boston [Massachusetts]?
Speaker 2: Mainly in Washington, D.C.
Speaker 1: So there was a time when she lived in Washington D.C.?
Speaker 2: No she didn't live in (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) She didn't, okay.
Speaker 2: But she, she knew a lot of people, I guess, it seemed to me when I was growing up that the black community was, was very small. It wasn't of course.  But it was seemed to be very small, seemed like everybody came to our house.  But there were people who, anybody who was anybody, many of them because of my father's [Edward Dugger, Sr.] occupation, we got to know all of those people.  And, and I guess it was probably a very small middle-class maybe; we got to know a lot of people from around the country.  Now I wasn't into that, I didn't (laughter) you know by time I begin to become more conscious of things, my father had died, when mother was struggling.  And so I didn't get into quote, the society you know which was fine.
Speaker 1: Had your moth- did your, was your other a member of any of the clubs, like Links [The Links, Incorporated] or?
Speaker 2: Well, the Links weren't there until (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) When did they
Speaker 2: Late.
Speaker 1: When did they, when were they formed?
Speaker 2: I don't know (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) In the '40s [1940s]?
Speaker 2: But they (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah, she, they weren't around but when she was coming along, she had some very yes, she had the sorority of course the Alpha Kappa Alpha [Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority] which she dearly loved.  And then, then a lot of local clubs like the Daffodil Club, the Lend-A-Hand Club those kinds of things and in our neighborhood.  And of course she was always president of one of them or the other and of course very active in the church.  She was a superintendent of Sunday school.
Story_ID: 352262
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now what were those two local clubs again?
Speaker 2: It's Lend-A-Hand Club, Lend-A-Hand and the Daffodils [Daffodil Club].
Speaker 1: And they're both black clubs?
Speaker 2: They were both local community clubs of lack, of black women.
Speaker 1: Now tell me a little about each of those clubs.
Speaker 2: Well they, what they both did really was kind of similar actually, they both helped people in the community who needed help.  So you know--(simultaneous)
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) To go to college or to--
Speaker 2: They did baskets, food.
Speaker 1: Food, okay.
Speaker 2: Food yeah, going to helping, go, go to school.  We didn't have a lot of people in the community going to college so they, but they would help them with, whatever kinds of needs that they had in spite of the fact (laughter) that we all were poor.  They were, they helped out you know especially let's say a family had a fire and so forth.  Because we didn't have, in those days, they didn't have the government services that people have now.  Or even the lodge things like the Red Cross [American Red Cross] or anything like that so--
Speaker 1: So the Daffodils and--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And Lend-A, what was the (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Lend-A-Hand.
Speaker 1: Lend, Lend-A-Hand.
Speaker 2: Lend-A-Hand.
Speaker 1: Lend-A-Hand.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And Daffodils.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Were the two social organizations that provided some benefits to (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That's right.
Speaker 1: Black people in the community.
Speaker 2: In the community.  Now mama [Madeline Kountze Dugger-Kelley] though belonged to the, there was a colored women's association [National Association of Colored Women's Clubs] that was a national group.  It was, may even still exist, I don't know, but I know it existed until a few years ago.  But it was sort of like a coalition of colored women's groups, and she belonged like to the Boston [Massachusetts] chapter.  When we, although we lived in Medford [Massachusetts], you did a lot, we did lot of the, lot of what went on, went on in Boston.  All of the communities outside of Boston had small black communities, including ours, but then you did most of your things in Boston.  So she belong to that, then she was very strong Republican and you know she was one of Lincoln's [President Abraham Lincoln] Republicans (laughter) you know black people were Republicans in those days.  Because of Lincoln, and so that's what she was, so she belong to the various political, couple of political clubs.  Plus there were some very interesting black clubs in Boston that never really got a lot of notice and so forth, and the reason I know about them of course is because when she died I found a lot of her papers.  And I filmed the, I filmed a lot of references to various clubs that you wouldn't have thought you, that people you didn't you know, people didn't know about.  I guess them came and went, and maybe they were even originated because of needs, so you find a club, and I don't remember the name of it.  But a club that was specifically to serve black soldiers for instance during World War II [WWII] that came out of colored women's club.  And of course in those days they called them colored, so but various colored women's clubs for various things, and so she belonged to those kinds of things.  Yeah she was very active (laughter).
Story_ID: 352263
Speaker 1: And your father, your father's name and his date of birth?
Speaker 2: Well my father was Edward Dugger [Edward Dugger, Sr.] and he was born in eight, I'm not sure exactly but I think he was born.  Now she [Vargus' mother, Madeline Kountze Dugger-Kelley] was born in 1897, I think he was born in nine, 1893, that's it, yeah, uh-huh.  And he was must've been born I guess in we think in Danville, Virginia.
Speaker 1: So he's a southern, your dad was born down south.
Speaker 2: Yes, as far as we know, he was born down south.  Both of the families came from Virginia, my grandmother's family came from Petersburg, Virginia, and my father's family came from Danville, Virginia.  So anyway he was born, and as far as we know down south, we don't know how he (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Ended up--
Speaker 2: His family got up north, we do know that when they did come, they went to what is now a like a, a close to Cape Cod, which is Duxbury [Massachusetts] now.  Then they moved to Natick, Mass [Natick, Massachusetts], but there's a whole, a whole thing missing there, we don't really quite know then how he got to Boston [Massachusetts].  We know that his mother [Mary Dugger] lived in Natick in 1911, simply because I have a postcard from her other son, from a son in Danville inviting to her in Natick.  And that was in 1911, but he, he somehow he came to Boston, I don't know who he lived with or what, but he, he was a track star also at Boston English [English High School, Boston, Massachusetts] which was a very fine high school at the time.  So (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Who's some of the other students at Boston English at time that he went to school?
Speaker 2: I really don't remember.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I think, I'm not sure whether, I get a little confused between his time in high school and the time of, when he was the commanding officer of the National Guard.  As I said, he served in World War I [WWI] in France in World War I war and you know black men had to serve under the French Army.  The United States didn't let them, sent them over but didn't let them serve under the United States flag.  So black soldiers fought under the French Army (laughter) in World War I, and so that's what he, he did yeah.
Speaker 1: And he came back I'm sure wanting to fight the racism he saw here (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh what--Oh well yes in fact he did, he became a police officer first, and it was so racist, he dropped that, he just didn't do that at all.
Speaker 1: He was one of the first black police officers then in the Boston area?
Speaker 2: Probably I don't know they haven't said much about that, but he may have been, but he just found it so racist and so he just had to get out of that.  And then he went to work for the post office, and when the, the 372nd [372nd Infantry Regiment], which was the commanding officer of for, I'm not sure.  But he was the, he was the commanding officer, I know he came up through the ranks, he went, he was lieutenant in World, in World War I.  He went to the black training school, officers training school [Fort Des Moines Provisional Army Officer Training School] that they had in Des Moines [Iowa] for black officers.  And I forget how many they trained, and but it wasn't an awful lot, and, and so when he came back I, I don't remember if he was still a lieutenant, what's the next one?  Ma, major, major yeah, I know he became a major yeah.
Speaker 1: And then a captain?
Speaker 2: A captain.
Speaker 1: And then a captain, okay.
Speaker 2: No, he was lieutenant, captain (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And major.
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Lieutenant, captain and major.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And then he became lieutenant colonel before he died.
Story_ID: 352264
Speaker 1: So what do you, what year did he [Vargus' father, Edward Dugger, Sr.] and your mother [Madeline Kountze Dugger-Kelley] marry?
Speaker 2: Nineteen seventeen [1917], 1917.
Speaker 1: So then they were, you were born in 1930?
Speaker 2: Thirty [1930] right.
Speaker 1: And did, do, did your father go off to war again, did he have to serve (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No--
Speaker 1: Have to serve in World War II [WWII] or the?
Speaker 2: No the serving, he died before World War II.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: 'Cause we didn't go into World War II until '41 [1941].
Speaker 1: Forty-one [1941] and he died when?
Speaker 2: And he died in 1939.
Speaker 1: So he died when you were a little girl?
Speaker 2: Yes, and he had been very sick, however, prior to, prior to his death.
Speaker 1: Now how many children, how many siblings do you have?
Speaker 2: So I have five, I had five, there were six of us. Six children.
Speaker 1: And, give me the order.
Speaker 2: Okay, there was Edward [Edward Dugger, Jr.]. Eddie--
Speaker 1: And gi- And Eddie was born in?
Speaker 2: Nineteen nineteen [1919] I believe yeah, Barbara [Barbara Dugger Anderson], Barbara I think was born in 1922, Madeleine [Madeleine Dugger Andrews] in 1923, Portia [Portia Dugger Byard] in 1924, Cortland [Cortland Dugger] in 1926 and then I was born in 1930.
Speaker 1: So you're the baby?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Yeah, I'm the baby (laughter) and it's only actually the three of us living now.  My brother Eddie died in, he was, he was a big track star as a matter of fact.  And probably unfortunately the Olympics, he, he was win, winning all the hurdle races and had holding all records when they were not having the Olympics.  And so he missed two Olympics as a matter of fact because of the war, World War II.  But Eddie, so Eddie was my big brother and yeah, he was in college when my father died, and my mother decided though that she would not accept.  And they were just beginning to start welfare whatever they called it at that time.  And she would not accept it, even though she had the six children, because he would've had to come out of college.  And so she, so you know this was when she just struggled but all of my brothers and sisters went to college also.  She just believed so strongly in education.
Speaker 1: What are some of the other things that your father may have told you about his life or, or things you, your mother may have told you about your father's?
Speaker 2: Well you know I don't really know much about my father other than that he was a track star, and I have pictures--
Speaker 1: Of him being a track star? Running (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Of him (laughter) running.
Story_ID: 361056
Speaker 1: Continuing on roll two, your earliest memories of your childhood, you said you couldn't think of anything really.  But I will--the earliest memories of your childhood?
Speaker 2: Well, I, I don't remember a lot of things about my childhood generally, I remember a couple of things.  I do remember that my father [Edward Dugger, Sr.] used to, I do remember sitting in the room with my father, we had a sunroom.  And we had a living room, a dining room, a kitchen and a sunroom.
Speaker 1: Well I'm just gonna stop for one moment.  Okay continuing sorry about that go ahead.
Speaker 2: And I (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Just start from the top again.
Speaker 2: I remember some things, but not, not a general kind of thing, but I remember for instance with my father sitting in the sunroom.  And his asking, and my asking him for a penny and his giving me (laughter) quite a grilling, what was I gonna do with the penny?  And said because pennies then well you know, money real money you know (laughter).  It's not like today when we're saying we won't even manufacture them anymore.  So the penny and I, and I do recall that you know, but I don't have a lot of memories about that with my father--
Story_ID: 361057
Speaker 1: But with my family we, you know, lived in a pretty, I mean it was, it was at first the community was very mixed.  It had Italians and Irish and Jewish people, et cetera, and then after World War, well after the war [World War II, WWII] for instance, it became all black.  I mean white people could move out, we were all poor you know we were all poor when they were, when we all lived together.  We were very and very friendly people, all of us were very friendly people, so that was the kind of a community I grew up in.  The, the families of course were very in, and we had black church you know the all-black church.  And as in all communities close by, all of the local communities Winchester [Massachusetts], Woburn [Massachusetts], Malden [Massachusetts], all of those communities around Boston [Massachusetts], as I said all of them had small black populations.  And people later used to think, oh you live in the suburb you must thing you're something, we all had, we were all, they were all there.  So (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Did the, go ahead, so?
Speaker 1: So, so well and then you knew people, you knew people in all of these, these, quotes, of other suburbs, all black people knew each other (laughter) yeah.
Speaker 2: And let's talk about that for a moment, did, I mean you said all black people knew each other.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: Was that really the case, I mean you knew the other black families even that were in different parts of the city than you were?
Speaker 1: That are in different parts of that were in different suburbs.
Speaker 2: Different suburbs, yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah, wherever we lived, we lived together, whatever town it was in, all the black people lived in the same place, you know together.
Speaker 2: What were the benefits of that do you think?
Speaker 1: Well the, it wasn't, it was because you had to; I mean it wasn't because you chose to as much at, at least initially.  It was because you were relegated to a particular part of the city so that for instance, in Medford [Massachusetts] where I was initially people moved to Medford, they were allowed, to, to live in Medford.  Because, but they were swamped, it was a swamp land, so that's where the black people lived (laughter) in the swamp.  However, eventually and I, I can't tell you the process, but eventually 'cause that became the very favorite part of town.  There were no swamps by time I came along, they were, it was a lovely river, lakes (laughter) and a desirable part.  Of where in which case we had to defend other people moving in you know, wanting to put up condominiums and all of that kind of thing.  And so you know we got, I had to have an association I think we called it, I forget what we call, what we called it, but it was some kind of an association.  That defended the area (laughter) and it was true in the other small communities, black communities also.  But true, you did, you get to know that all of the, it was so, but it wasn't a whole lot of people you know.  It was so you got to know all of the different people in the, the local communities.
Speaker 2: Now and Medford was there a black district as far as business district, was there like (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) No, we didn't have, didn't really have businesses, in, another reason that, that black people lived in all these communities is 'cause mostly they served white people.  In other words, many, many of the women most of the women were domestics, and so they you know they served the white community.  So they tended to live really near the rich, white communities and, and worked for them.
Speaker 2: Where do you remember shopping as a kid, what stores do you remember your mother taking you into (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Well. Well we did have a business district, it just wasn't black, that's all, it wasn't black-owned.  They had the five and ten for instance, Woolworths [F.W. Woolworth Company] you know that was one of the places I can remember.  Hoods [sic. Hood], which is a milk, milk place, they, that was right there where they, they processed the milk, et cetera.  And you know so there were, little, little, shops.
Speaker 2: What do you consider sort of longstanding institutions in the black community of that time, were they the churches?  Were they the doctors, I mean who were the institutions, the community leaders (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Well mainly, yeah, the mainly the church, yeah, there weren't in my community there weren't doctors, lawyers or anything like that.  They, if, they maybe lived in Boston, funeral directors of course were big, that was a big business among, among blacks.  Catering was good also, among black, black professionals, if you worked in the post office, of course that was considered you know a good job, a good job (laughter).  And then later, if you worked for the federal government or the state that was considered a good job you know.  Like I'll never forget that the day after I, when I got my doctorate, my mother [Madeline Kountze Dugger-Kelley] said to me, "Now did you put in an application for the federal government?"  Because of course, you know she (laughter) that was what, you know had been the, the jobs for black people basically.  I mean if you were gonna make a decent salary, that's where you went.
Story_ID: 361058
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) How would you describe your childhood?
Speaker 2: It was really nice, a very pleasant, a very good childhood, but what was particularly important was that my father [Edward Dugger, Sr.] died and then my mother [Madeline Kountze Dugger-Kelley] went away to live.  And she had this job in the [U.S. military service] service that was a service; she had to live where she worked.  So there was no parent in the house, and what I you know, and that's why I think I'm in the work I'm in now.  So the community pretty much took care me, they made sure that you know I got in the house on time.  They made sure that I studied they made sure that I did my piano lessons, they really watched out for me, and while I, my siblings were home, but my sisters would go off to college in the morning.  They left around five A.M., they didn't get home until seven at night, and because they had to take the train to get to college.  And then they worked after school, so while I did have some of the siblings in the house while my mother was away.  For the most part, I was, a, alone, I was alone child basically, pretty much alone and, and it's just that all the neighbors watched out for me.  And as I say, and I, I still say that they were harder on me than they were their own children you know (laughter) but that's what I remember.  And it was wonderful.
Speaker 1: How often would see your mother?
Speaker 2: My mother came home maybe once a month, then when she did come home, being the, being the kind of person she was, she ran around to see all the sick.  You know and the people who needed things and all of that, so I ran around with her, 'cause that's the only way I could get to see her.  You know (laughter) but she was still very active, when she came home she was very active still in the community, so I just stood by her.
Story_ID: 361059
Speaker 1: How did you view her, what would, what did you think about her (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh I loved my mother [Madeline Kountze Dugger-Kelley], oh I just thought there was no one like her, just no one like her, and when I, I wrote something which I still have.  Which I wrote about her and how wonderful she was and caring and loving and so forth, yes she was just very special.
Speaker 1: Did you, having her as an influence, did you grow up thinking you wanted to be like her, that you wanted to do a job similar to the one that she was doing?
Speaker 2: I don't know if I thought about that consciously.
Speaker 1: What did you wanna do when you were a kid, what did you think your job would be?
Speaker 2: Well I, I'm not sure if I knew what I would be--
Speaker 1: But did you dream about things you may wanna become?
Speaker 2: I don't recall that.
Speaker 1: Like you know a fireman, oh I'm gonna be a policeman, oh I'm gonna be a doc- (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I don't recall, I don't recall thinking that I wanted to be anything particularly, I knew of course that I was gonna go to college.  Because it was no choice, mother was gonna have all of us go to college, and she was particularly keen on having women go, because of course through her own experience with my father [Edward Dugger, Sr.], having lost him when he was in his early forties.  She knew that black women needed to have a, be able to have, take care of themselves, and so she was very strong on us going to college.  So that much I knew (laughter) but what I was gonna go to college for, I really didn't know.  I began singing when I was about I don't, maybe thirteen or so. I had been taking piano lessons, the piano teacher came in from Boston [Massachusetts] and taught piano lessons in my community from my house.  So we worked, you know I took piano lessons.
Speaker 1: What was her name?
Speaker 2: Her name was Bobbitt [Anna Bobbitt Gardner], her last name was Bobbitt, oh she was really wonderful, she, she finally started the Negro Pops [sic. Colored American Nights] at Symphony Hall in Boston.  And her, was her first name, I kind of forgotten her first name as much as I knew it.  But anyway (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) But she'll be easy enough to look up
Speaker 2: Her last name was Bobbitt.
Speaker 1: Bobbitt yeah.
Speaker 2: Bobbitt, Bobbitt, um-hm, she only died a few years ago, she lived a very long age.  And but she used to come out to Medford and we would you know people; kids would come take the piano lessons, including me.  And, and so I begin to sing while I was playing the piano (laughter) and that led me, and then she, she just suggested I take singing lessons and so forth.  I don't know if I took the singing lessons or not, I finally did but anyway she, and so I you know I began to sing.  I can't recall if that's what felt like I really wanted to do, but I did sing, I sang you know concert music.
Story_ID: 361060
Speaker 1: You talked about the community taking care of you when you were a child (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes. Yes.
Speaker 1: What teachers took care of you when you were in school, and I'm talking about elementary school, who were your big influences as far as teachers?  And your, where did you go to elementary school?
Speaker 2: Well I went to an elementary school very close to home Hervey, the Hervey School [Medford, Massachusetts], all of us had gone to the Hervey School.
Speaker 1: Who is Hervey, who is it named after?
Speaker 2: I don't know who it was named after probably, you know some white man.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But I think he, but we all went to that school, and of course my, my being the last child, there was a lot of expectations.  Because my sisters and everybody had, not my brother [Edward Dugger, Jr.] but everybody had done really quite well.  So (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Except your brother?
Speaker 2: Except my brother (laughter) and as it turned out, he hadn't done so well partially because he had an eye problem which had not been picked up.  He's, he's an interesting story, but anyway he, so anyway there was all this expectation, therefore, that I would do well.  And by the teachers I think we all had the same first grade teacher.
Speaker 1: Who was?
Speaker 2: Miss Harris [ph.], I think her name was Harris, I'm not sure, but anyway and then we had the same teachers, I mean, so they all knew the family.  Then of course when my father [Edward Dugger, Sr.] died, they, they felt particularly caring for me, they were all white, they were all white.  We didn't have any black teachers, oh no we didn't have any black teachers in the community until about 1970 when some of us took over the high school building demanding a black teacher you know (laughter).
Speaker 1: Well we'll get to that because that's a story in itself (simultaneous)
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right. Yeah, right. Yeah.
Speaker 1: But--
Speaker 2: But--
Speaker 1: --before we even leave, go, go ahead, but.
Speaker 2: Yeah so but, so we didn't have, these were all white schools.
Speaker 1: So they were all white and did (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) But now here's the thing that I look on then about that, is that they had expectations what, you know nowadays one of the, what I see as one of the problems is that they, there were no expectations.  I mean somehow it was some psychology that said these poor children can't read, learn, whatever.  We didn't have that; they expected you to do, be able to do well regardless of the fact that you didn't have any money.
Story_ID: 361061
Speaker 1: Well what was black history like for you during that did all of the teachers were white--
Speaker 2: Oh all the teachers were white.
Speaker 1: Who was it that gave you a (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh you got your--
Speaker 1: --sense of being black?
Speaker 2: You get your black history from the church and from the community, and my and my family happened to be very strong in that whole area.  Particularly an uncle [Mabray "Doc" Kountze] that I had who had been studying black history for years and wrote books about it, and the whole thing.
Speaker 1: And that uncle's name (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So we had a lot of under, we had a lot of that, and then there was always on Sundays when people came to visit, there was a lot of discussion about whoever you know the, the leaders were at that time.  Marcus Garvey, Du Bois [W.E.B Du Bois], Booker T [Booker T. Washington] so there was always this discussion about that kind of thing.  And then there was always discussion about the discrimination and race, we didn't use the word racism so much then.
Speaker 1: But it's discrimination.
Speaker 2: But we use the word discrimination, prejudice.
Speaker 1: Prejudice that was the word, yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, um-hm right, right.  So that was in a conversation so I heard a lot, got a lot of it, but you know.
Speaker 1: So you got black history in a sense of being black from the community and from home?
Speaker 2: From home, that's right (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay but before we go on though--
Speaker 2: And the black newspapers.
Speaker 1: And the black news and Boston [Massachusetts] had which newspaper?
Speaker 2: It had The Boston Guardian with Monroe Trotter [William Monroe Trotter] who was the publisher and the Boston Chronicle, um-hm.
Speaker 1: And your family received one or the other or both of them (unclear) (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) They, well we received both of them and my uncle wrote for both of them.
Story_ID: 361062
Speaker 1: What was your uncle's name?
Speaker 2: His name was Mabray Kountze [Mabray "Doc" Kountze], yeah.
Speaker 1: And I wanna get a little of his story and then I wanna get your, a little of, of your brother's [Edward Dugger, Jr.] story.  Because you said they're both interesting stories--
Speaker 2: Well (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) within themselves.  So you can give them in a nutshell your brother's story.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Well it, it's that he in, as I said he had problems in school, he didn't seem to be as bright as the rest of us.  Because, but as we later learned it was 'cause he had a problem with his eyes, and he probably didn't see real well.  And then when he went to, when he was in high school of course they told him that you know he had to be, if he, he was gonna go to college but of course he had to study sociology because you know he didn't have the brains to do anything more interesting.  Well anyway here he is now, he's no eighty, eighty years-old and he's still doing his patents, scientific patents and growing his crystals (laughter) and so forth.  He became a biochemist and so one of the big companies stole his patent and he, and he sued them.  They had seven lawyers and he had one and, but anyway we didn't, never it got settled, we don't know you know who won or didn't win 'cause he, he never you're supposed to never tell.  And he never has told, (laughter) so I don't know what the term, I do know, however, that he; he had put up his house and everything in this, in this suit, in this lawsuit.  And he didn't lose his house so I presume it's okay, it was okay.  But I (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And what year what, did that take place?
Speaker 2: That took place in around, I would say around 1985 yeah, yes I'd say about that um-hm.
Story_ID: 361063
Speaker 1: So he was also the uncle that's, that knew black history (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That's the brother [Edward Dugger, Jr.].
Speaker 1: That's the brother?
Speaker 2: That's the brother.
Speaker 1: Okay your brother became the, the che--
Speaker 2: The scientist.
Speaker 1: --the scientist?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, my uncle [Mabray "Doc" Kountze] is the one who did the family tree, who did the genealogy I guess he was studying that in around the 1930s.  And he worked for the black newspaper, he wrote for the black newspapers.
Speaker 1: Both of them right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, um-hm and there he became very enamored of William, of Trotter, his name was Trotter [William Monroe Trotter] who had the, The Boston Guardian who's a very militant man.  One that, history somehow rather hasn't picked up as much as some but he was very militant, very radical.  And my uncle wrote for that paper, he mostly wrote sports for that paper and things like that.  On the local news everybody you know com, community sent in their information, and he might write that.  But Monroe Trotter was a really, very as I said radical man and fought very hard regarding black issues, and so that what his paper was.  But, he was a Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] graduate, decided to do this black publication, and that's what he did.  And so but anyway my uncle, and then from that my uncle also did then, then our gene- our history, and he went back, he was able to go back to the Revolutionary War finding, of my, my grand, my grandmother's [Madeline Mabray Kountze] family.  And, and then so he traced all of that and then he wrote it up, and then he wrote it up and called it 'One Man's Family.'  And then what he did is he went around the community and, again he was way ahead of his time, so he, he managed to get from many of the people who had either been slaves or born right after slavery just like my grandmother had.  Their stories and their history, and he put it all into a book called 'One Man's Heri-'--'This is Your Heritage' [Mabray "Doc" Kountze], yeah.  And that was in the '70s [1970s] before black books became very popular, actually he wrote it, finished it in the early '60s [1960s] then he gave it to a printer, who had it on his printing press for over ten years.  So it didn't (laughter) get published until the '70s [1970s] I believe and when we were all, but it was, it was you know, it's so, so he, so, but the important part of that was, was that it's the history of many of the families in the community then at the time and everything that they did.  And I think it's gonna be, it's a wonderful thing for grandchildren, for the grandchildren, who (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Right.
Speaker 2: --looking up their heritage, but he was very black, everything black.  And he had a wonderful way of writing in that white people, he, he wrote about white people particularly in, in later in his life.  He would write about white people what they did, if there was something related to be, being black.  And he made, he made them part of the black history, in other words, he wrote, and I didn't realize this until after he died, and I was reading a lot, he wrote a lot of articles.  I got them I, anyway, he, he had a way of writing so that when he wrote about white people they became a part of black history.  Instead (laughter) of black becoming a part of white history, it was very interesting style.  And he just did it, I mean it wasn't like he you know formulated it that way particularly, he, it just became that.  And so Mabray Kountze, I, I put all his papers in at BU [Boston University, Boston, Massachusetts] special collection.
Story_ID: 361064
Speaker 1: So when you graduated from elementary school [Hervey School, Medford, Massachusetts].
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Where did you go to junior high school?
Speaker 2: I went to I did go to the junior high school, I for, Hobbs Junior High, Hobbs Junior High School [Medford, Massachusetts], um-hm.
Speaker 1: Were there any teachers there that was, that influenced you? Were they still all white?
Speaker 2: They were all white, they were all white, we had, we had good teachers generally speaking throughout, throughout all of my education, public education.
Speaker 1: Well let me ask you this then, during junior high school, you're a teenager relatively.
Speaker 2: Um-hm, right.
Speaker 1: Did you, what opportunities did you think were available to you, did you think oh, I'll become a teacher like these women?  I'll study law like my mother?
Speaker 2: You know I (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What were your thoughts?
Speaker 2: I don't recall, I, the only thing I remember was that I, I thought, I thought the United States was going the way of Rome [Roman Empire], ah I mentioned that in class (laughter) in seventh grade.  And the teacher, of course I mean she, she I mean I think she kicked me out of the room.  How could I say anything so awful, but it was you know I loved ancient history and I thought (laughter) it would, I thought this country was in really serious trouble.  And so I happened to mention it in class and so forth and this was, but of course this was during World War II [WWII] I think it was during World War II.  And I think the, the war may had been sep- actually I think we had some, what do they call people who were Nazis but were there was a word for it.  They were sympathetic with the Nazi, and I think I was friend with one of those girls but not knowing (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Sympathizers.
Speaker 2: But not knowing that that was the case, and one day they just simply disappeared, simply disappeared the whole family.  And they lived right across from the junior high school, and she had been my you know she'd been one of the friends and so forth, Eva [ph.].  I remember her name was Eva and, but I don't recall that knowing what I want, what I wanted to be.
Story_ID: 361065
Speaker 1: Were you aware of sort of the seeds of the Civil Rights Movement being planted in, in the, in the, during that time of your life when you're in elementary school [Hervey School, Medford, Massachusetts].  Or people talking about it in church the things that were going to sort of erupt, what, what was the talk at church?
Speaker 2: Well no 'cause it was still it was still that the discussion was still that what really made, mainly on the discrimination that existed and, and that kind of thing.  And of course we faced a lot of it in my own family, my fath- my brother [Edward Dugger, Jr.] graduated from Tufts University [Tufts College; Tufts University, Medford, Massachusetts] with a--college, it was Tufts College then--with an engineering degree and could not get a, could, and in spite of, his fame as the world's hurdler et cetera and the president of Tufts saying that my brother had put Tufts on the map, he couldn't get a job locally.  So and none of the corporations hired him and he was considered a wonderfully young man, he always described as modest and gentlemanly and all of these things you know.  So then he went to work for the government they went to work in, he went to work this would've been like 1941.  He went to work for the government, he got hired you know through one of these (laughter) exams and so forth.  And to Wright Air Force base [Wright Field; Wright-Patterson Air Force Base] in Dayton, Ohio and they didn't know what to do with him, when they found out he was black.  So they had him emptying, you know emptying trash cans and things like for the first six months.  And then the war [World War II, WWII] came and then that changed everything you know, and then they finally used his, he was an engineer, he had studied engineering.  And then they finally began to use his engineering you know, but we had so much of it in my own family.  My sisters who had gone through this Medford [Massachusetts] public schools and gone to college, gone to teacher's college and couldn't get a job in Medford as a teacher.  Because the superintendent of schools said I will never hire a, a colored teacher, and so that was also in the '40s [1940s].  So, so one sister went to, to Palmer's [Palmer Memorial Institute] which was a private girls school in the South in Sedalia, North Carolina, and so Palmer Institute and she went there.  And interestingly enough and of course this was before Rosa Parks, she always sat at the front of the bus.  She wasn't supposed to, but she always did, and they just said you know, they said, he said the bu- she said the bus driver just thinks she was an uppity nigger.  And so they didn't, they never threw her off the bus but (laughter) but she was sitting in the front of the bus, and all of that.  And but they couldn't get jobs locally, my sisters; my other sisters could not get jobs right in our own hometown.  And then they, they finally were able to get into the Boston [Massachusetts] system of teachers.  And so they did, they did get jobs, but it, it you know it was, we just, just they so, so you know right up front.  Because you see in those days people could say to you, we're not hiring you because you're black, and there was no law to say.  I mean it was fine as far as the law went (laughter) legally went, they could say that okay.
Speaker 1: When did you become aware that that was happening, how old were you when you became aware that?
Speaker 2: Oh I was getting to be a teenager, and, and when those things were happening, yeah.
Speaker 1: And who, what were, was there specific incident for you to where as you realized that people were prejudiced or would discriminate against you, because you were black?
Speaker 2: Well that was, I think that was just always there, we always just knew that, as I said, because either the problems of my mother [Madeline Kountze Dugger-Kelley] had had, mother had a difficult time also finding work.  And you know after my father [Edward Dugger, Sr.] died, she had a very difficult time, and she written letters to a lot of people.  There, you know they all just tell her now you know either woman either because she was a woman or because she was black or whatever.  So it was just so endem- it was just so much a part of our lives that I, I just, I, I always knew it.
Story_ID: 352275
Speaker 1: Okay continuing on roll three and we were going to talk about your high school years.
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.
Speaker 1: And before we do, we'll talk about the fact that all of your sisters became educators or teachers.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And Madeleine [Madeleine Dugger Andrews], we will talk about I guess a little later on how (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay.
Speaker 1: --she got on the community board (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes.
Speaker 1: --and a school's named after her.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: So your high school years. Any teachers are any--who's involved in helping you get to college, once you become a senior in high school.  You know that you gonna go off to college.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Who becomes involved in help getting you there?
Speaker 2: Well you know counselors in those days didn't have the same role that they play; you didn't have counselors helping you to get into the school.  As we're talking now what, the late, we're talking the '40s [1940s] yeah, we're talking the '40s [1940s].  So you know count, you didn't have, you just, you just went, you decide, now I went to Jackson [Jackson College for Women; Tufts University, Medford, Massachusetts] however, or Tufts [Tufts College; Tufts University, Medford, Massachusetts] because there's really no difference.  The names, there were two names but you took all your classes together, it wasn't like Radcliffe [Radcliffe College, Cambridge, Massachusetts] and Harv- and Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts].  But in any case the, I went to Tufts I guess I can't remember what other places I might have applied.  All through high school, see I was the only, I was the only black person in the college curriculum, all the other black kids were usually in as a vocational or business I think, yeah.  So I was always again in my own classes by myself as the one of the black, black person, and the teachers were fine.  They were really good you know, I didn't really feel any, in, in spite of all the racism and stuff that was around, and discrimination.  I didn't particularly feel you know against, I didn't feel negative against, against me, any negativity against me particularly.  And as usual, I had support of people and by that time, my mother [Madeline Kountze Dugger-Kelley] was back home, she came back home in the mid-'40s [1940s] from the, well when the war [World War II, WWII] was over basically.  So she was, she was there and I used to cook for her, she did the, she went to work and I did the cooking and stuff when she got home.  So it was kind of uneventful that's all I can recall (laughter) and, and you know classes I didn't like science classes, some I didn't particularly care for.  But other than that, it was just uneventful; I had a lot of friends (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Were you on--
Speaker 2: I was the secretary of the class you know when graduation came, I remember, I remember doing a very long poem that I had made up about the class.  Yeah, I was an officer for two or three years in, in high school, I remember that.  I was in athletics, I was run- I was also in track and in probably some other sport, but I can't (laughter) even remember now.  Yeah, I was very popular kind of student in high school, as I then later got to be also in college.  Now Tufts did not at the time, Tufts took Medford [Massachusetts] students, it didn't, it was trying to become a much more national.  So it took some but not all and we were very surprised when it didn't take really our valedictorian who was Jewish.  But in those days there were quotas for Jewish students in the various colleges also you know so and Tufts was, I went there, I guess 'cause it was close to home.  At that time, most blacks in Boston [Massachusetts] and around who were going to college went to black colleges [HBCUs]; that was what you did.  If you, especially if you were in society you know, you went to a black college, we couldn't afford it.  I could walk to Tufts (laughter) and if I didn't walk it was only five cents you know to get on the bus.  I didn't have all of those expenses of living; I lived at home, and so while it was probably somewhat more expensive in tuition than the black colleges, all the other things that went with it made it much easier for me to be at home, and so that's, that's where I went.
Story_ID: 352276
Speaker 1: And you majored in?
Speaker 2: Sociology, I majored in sociology.
Speaker 1: And why did you choose sociology?
Speaker 2: Oh I don't know, it's probably the only thing, well you know and again in those times and this lasted for a while, even through my time.  If you were a black woman you either were in education or some kind of helping profession, mainly social work or something like that.  Although I didn't know anything about social work at the time, but nevertheless, you, so most of the women went into those kind of, kind of place that's the curriculum, you didn't you know you didn't have them in, quotes, the hard sciences and engineering, things you see them in today.  So that's probably why I went into sociology you know, I, but of course it also the, the information was interesting.  I liked what, what you learned in that too, and I don't think I wanted to be a teacher, I don't think I wanted to be, so education was not one of the things that I really wanted to, to do.  In spite of what my sisters did.
Speaker 1: All four of them, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, all three of them.
Speaker 1: All three of them.
Speaker 2: All three of them, um-hm, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So, so that's how I got to Tufts [Tufts College; Tufts University, Medford, Massachusetts] and then of course my brother's [Edward Dugger, Jr.] name was very well-known, and actually my brother, my other brother Cortland [Cortland Dugger] had gone there too, before I did.  When he came out of the [U.S. military] service, he went to Tufts [Tufts College; Tufts University, Medford, Massachusetts], so there were three of us who had gone there.  And then I had a sister who got a master's [degree] there, Barbara [Barbara Dugger Anderson], she got her master's [degree] at Tufts so it became like a home school for us.  And we were well-known--
Speaker 1: Because of your brother's athletic abilities?
Speaker 2: Yeah, um-hm, and the, but it was still a, it was a school that had been founded by Universalists but by time, but the, the religious aspect of it, except but they still had at the time a theological school when I was there, Universalist theological school [Crane Theological School, Medford, Massachusetts].  But it was not, there was no, no feeling of set you know religion or anything like that particularly.  It was, def- definitely you know school open for all.
Story_ID: 352277
Speaker 1: And what year did you graduate Tufts [Tufts College; Tufts University, Medford, Massachusetts]?
Speaker 2: I graduated from Tufts in 1952, graduated from high school in '48 [1948], graduated from Tufts in '52 [1952].
Speaker 1: And in after you graduated Tufts what were your plans, what did you do?
Speaker 2: Well I, I knew that, I felt like I should go on and get a master's [degree] in something, and I didn't really know what I wanted.  But Harriette Wharton who is the, who was the mother of a, of a person [HistoryMaker Clifton R. Wharton, Jr.] who eventually became the president of Michigan [Michigan State University, East Lansing, Michigan], president of TIAA-CREF [Teachers Insurance and Annuity Association of America - College Retirement Equities Fund] and all was a social worker.  And she was very close to the family and so she thought that that's what I should go into was social work, so I said okay.  Had no idea what it was, I asked her you know well what were the best schools in the country, so she told me Chicago [University of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois] and Columbia [Columbia University, New York, New York], and so I applied those places.
Speaker 1: To both?
Speaker 2: Yeah, Columbia didn't take me because you were supposed to have ten years' experience before these schools took you.  All of these schools of social work took you; I didn't know that, Chicago decided to do an experiment, so it took four of us who were just out of college into their program.  And they liked that as a matter of fact, we were so you know, they, they didn't have re- reteach us, relearn us you know, they, we could just absorb everything they taught us.  And at the time, Chicago was considered a very, like a Communist school.  And also and it was a time when what's his name, Joe McCarthy [Joseph McCarthy] was very strong you know, so (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Did you, go ahead.
Speaker 2: No, so it was, it was really quite a, an experience for me, now we had always taken boarders from Tufts, black men.  Because Tufts didn't allow black men to, or black people to stay on the campus, none of the colleges did.  So they lived in you know people's homes if they came there, and so we had, and had been a, one of the persons from Chicago [Illinois] who had lived at my house.  And he had said that all of Medford [Massachusetts] and all of Boston [Massachusetts] could get into one apartment house in up, I mean black community.  Could get into one apartment house in Chicago, well he was absolutely right (laughter) when I went to Chicago, it was a culture shock.  I had never seen so many black people in my life, and it was really just a very, just a very different experience, it was really a culture shock.  I'd never seen, I mean it's just you know something I had never experienced all those people and then all those black people.  And all those places (laughter) and all that.
Speaker 1: But you experienced a lot of people because Boston is a city also.
Speaker 2: But it's just a small city.
Speaker 1: It's a small city.
Speaker 2: Small city compared to Chicago, and small black population compared to Chicago.
Speaker 1: So it was a culture shock then?
Speaker 2: It really was, yeah.
Speaker 1: Now did you know Cliff, Clifton Wharton?
Speaker 2: Clifton, my family knew him very well (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah.
Speaker 2: In fact he was there also at the same time I was there, only he was working on his Ph.D., and so we did get to see each other some at the time.
Speaker 1: Now did you know his father [Clifton R. Wharton, Sr.], was a diplomat were you (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes.
Speaker 1: --aware of his father's status and?
Speaker 2: Yes, well see his mother and father were friends of my mother [Madeline Kountze Dugger-Kelley] and father [Edward Dugger, Sr.] so we, so we knew them yeah, quite well.
Speaker 1: And he went to Boston Latin [Boston Latin School, Boston, Massachusetts] (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It was his--
Speaker 1: --I think.
Speaker 2: Yes, yes which of course was in competition with Boston Eng (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) With Boston English [English High School, Boston, Massachusetts].
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Yeah (laughter).
Speaker 2: But his, his mother Harriette yeah was the one who told me I should go on to be a social worker.
Speaker 1: Now you--so his mother encouraged you, so she became an influence?
Speaker 2: Yes, she did (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) One of your influences?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah. All right.
Speaker 2: She did.
Story_ID: 352278
Speaker 1: So you get into Chicago [Illinois] it's a culture shock for you, what else, is there anything else about that experience that enlightened you?
Speaker 2: Well I lived in International House [University of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois] which was a wonderful place for all kinds of international you know people were international (laughter) lived there.  And that was a good experience for me, but I went to Chicago with twenty-five dollars to last me for two years.  And so (laughter) so I would--I got hungry real fast.
Speaker 1: And you had to work?
Speaker 2: And I had to work, I did work we used to stand around the piano and, and sing, and there was a Hungarian guy who was a great pianist.  And one time he said, "Come on let's sing," I said, "Look I haven't eaten for three days, I'm too weak."  So he said, "Well you come with me." So I went with him, he was a pianist at some local club and I sang and he, he played and so we you know.  So I began to sing jazz, only this of course jazz not the classical music.
Speaker 1: Now before you were trained, you were trained when classical music did you, were you aware of Marian Anderson?
Speaker 2: Oh of course.
Speaker 1: And her career?
Speaker 2: Oh my goodness yes.
Speaker 1: Was she an influence on you, did you wanna sing like her?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, sure, oh yes, in fact people in the town used to call me the, the next Marian Anderson in Boston [Massachusetts], that's what they would call me.  'Cause they thought that you know I had such a beautiful voice and but yes, oh yes.  Marian Anderson and well there was a man too, it was such a great--
Speaker 1: Hayes?
Speaker 2: Hayes, Roland Hayes.
Speaker 1: Roland Hayes.
Speaker 2: Yes, yes, yes.  Yes they were, they were idols right, um-hm.
Speaker 1: Now did you play piano well enough to follow--
Speaker 2: Well, well enough to (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Classical?
Speaker 2: Yeah well enough to--
Speaker 1: Musicians?
Speaker 2: --accompany myself and you know, yeah play, yes and I would play for concerts and teas and things like that yeah.
Speaker 1: Now during, I mean because you that, her concert then on in Washington [D.C.], the big one.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Must've been a big highlight (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh yes.
Speaker 1: In your life too.
Speaker 2: Oh yes, it was.
Speaker 1: Did you listen to it on the radio, did you?
Speaker 2: Yes I'm sure we listened to it on the radio and, and follow you know what was going, what was going on, yes.  And of course you know she was from Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], so of course once I moved to Philadelphia many years later, it was like you know being right there with her.  But yes so Marian Anderson was just such an idol.  And then there was a Dorothy Maynard [sic. Dorothy Maynor], was that her last name?  She was an alto and she was a wonderful, wonderful singer too.  Yeah, there were several.
Story_ID: 352279
Speaker 1: So you get into Chicago [University of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And then you graduate Chicago, nineteen--?
Speaker 2: Fifty-four [1954].
Speaker 1: So that was, you come out the same year the ruling comes out, Thurgood Marshall or the ruling comes down Brown vs Board of Ed [Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka, 1954]?
Speaker 2: Oh yes.
Speaker 1: Exciting time for you?
Speaker 2: Oh yes, yes, right we listened carefully about, about that whole thing.
Speaker 1: What were your concerns about that case?
Speaker 2: Well at the time, I'm not sure I had any, any real concerns; I think it was just mainly the fact that this had happened Brown versus some.  And the Board of Education, and the fact that it you know it, at I mean it was just you know almost incredible to think that this finally had had happened.  You know that, but I think later of course as we looked, but you know just on hind sighted some of what has happened, now in our own community in Medford [Massachusetts] I finally moved back to Medford in 1960.  And I had two children [Suzanne Vargus Holloman and William Vargus] by that time, in the '60s [1960s], we began to insist, by this time, the, the community had gotten fairly the, the junior high school that I had, I mean the elementary school [Hervey School, Medford, Massachusetts] (laughter) that I had gone to was all black as far as the children went, and, and we begin to say that you know these things that they needed to be some kind of racial balance actually.  In fact that really came from the state and that there needed to be some racial balance, and so that, that happened in our community.  We, they you know racially balanced some of the schools, but there weren't black teachers, and it--only the black children had to get bused.  So that led us into a whole thing in which we eventually had to take over the high school, of course by this time we were in the '60s [1960s] now.  We had to take over the high school to demand that they actually balance or, or make it also so that not just the black, not just the black children were standing out in the cold waiting for the bus.  And they eventually made a cousin of mine a teacher and then they made her the principal, a principal of, of a, of the school.
Speaker 1: And what was that cousin's name?
Speaker 2: Her name was Shirley Kountze (laughter) if you go to Medford, you gonna find Kountzes all over the place.
Story_ID: 352280
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now who else was involved, you said we, who else was involved in helping that change to come about?
Speaker 2: Well actually we had a, an association, a civic association I'm trying to remember the name, I think we called it the West Medford Civic Association [ph.], right.  And so it was really a community type thing, at that time we still met as a community, we had a community center, West Medford Community Center [Medford, Massachusetts] which was right there at Tucker [ph.] playground.  And we met and there constantly around various things hoping to, helping to keep the community you know alive and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Had the community started, had the community started to, start to decline?
Speaker 2: I don't, at that point, I don't think it had started to decline, but--
Speaker 1: But keep it alive in what sense?
Speaker 2: It alive in a sense of making sure that the city served us well, for instance any little thing we didn't like up, we went to community, up to this you know (laughter) city hall (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) City hall (laughter).
Speaker 2: Right, and my uncle, not this, not the Mabray [Mabray "Doc" Kountze] uncle that's the journalist, but my other uncle (laughter) Uncle Al [Elmer Kountze] was sort of like the person who would go to city hall and you know demand that we have this and that.
Speaker 1: He was the liaison between (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah.
Speaker 1: You guys and the--
Speaker 2: Yes, yes, he was a prison guard by his occupation, but his somehow or other the you know all the powers that be listened to him.  And so the, so that's how we you know, but that's, that's what we did, we made.  And then when new people moved in for instance, we would sort of teach them you know how to take care of your property.  And you know how you do all of those kinds of things, and you don't throw garbage out the, all of those things proper etiquette, proper etiquette for living in the community.  But really it was a good thing you know people learned if they were coming from places that they didn't know how to do those things.
Speaker 1: You, they you talking (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) How to put the trash out--
Speaker 1: Yeah you taught them to--
Speaker 2: You know little simple things (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) respect their property too. Okay
Speaker 2: Um-hm, right, right.
Story_ID: 352281
Speaker 1: So you, when you moved backed Boston [Massachusetts] (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Boston, right.
Speaker 1: Or to Medford [Massachusetts], you were working as a, where did you get your first job as a social worker?
Speaker 2: Well my first job as social workers were in, in Chicago [Illinois], I worked as a, I worked at, as a for the family service, United, it was called the United Services [ph.] I believe it was, something like that.  And it was a family agency, you worked with people and again this was really before the government took, you know, took over.  And so we were doing things that now the government takes care of.
Speaker 1: For example?
Speaker 2: Well social, people didn't have much in way of social security, we helped aged people, we helped teenagers who were in trouble you know pregnant, we, I had a lot of those as my cases.  We talked with families about their problems, and we gave money to families, I remember giving one of my clients was the parents of a well-known famous musician.  He was unfortunately into something else, and so he didn't help them, we gave them money, then I worked also in Chicago with a family with a, with a children's agency.  Where we placed children in foster homes and adoption, and that was a private agency, and so I would place the children and, and study the fo- homes for adoption, and, and that kind of thing.
Speaker 1: Did you find that rewarding or?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Or stressful or what were the challenges?
Speaker 2: Well I guess it was rewarding, yeah it was, it was a job, it was, I, I enjoyed it very much as a matter of fact, yeah.
Story_ID: 352282
Speaker 1: Then you said you by the time you moved back to Boston [Massachusetts] you'd already married, you were already married.
Speaker 2: Yes I had two children [Suzanne Vargus Holloman and William Vargus]. Yeah I had two children (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) You had two children, what year did you meet your husband [Bill Vargus], who was he, how did you meet him?
Speaker 2: Well I met my husband at Tufts College [Tufts University, Medford, Massachusetts] in, it would've been about, I said I graduated in '52 [1952] so I must've met him in 1950.  He was a student there and he, I don't know, I don't, I can't recall how we began dating whatever.  I have a feeling he ran after me, maybe (laughter) I'll get to know him (laughter) and I do remember that the dean of women said, "You cannot date this man."  He, we were gonna go to the junior prom and he said, she said, "No you are not going to the junior prom with him, 'cause he's white."  And so I went, and that and that was the worst thing you could've said to me (laughter).  And so we went and, and we dated, he was in, he was in one of those fraternities, he was a fraternity, fraternity man.  Which was an all-white fraternity, but the brothers they all, they all took me in and whatever.  And because on campus, I again was very popular, I was singing, I was the soloist for the Choral Society [Dedham Choral Society] which was the society that you had to audition to get into.  I was an officer, I played field hockey, bowling you know, took those kinds of teams and things like that, I was into everything.  I was the head of the off-campus club, and a lot of the, the kids who lived off campus used to congregate at my house, 'cause I was only five minutes away.  So I--
Speaker 1: And these were mainly white kids then (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) These were all--
Speaker 1: --because there weren't that many black kids--
Speaker 2: They were practically all white.
Speaker 1: --and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Practically all white kids, so there were no other black woman on the campus at the time, seem like they took one black woman in every four years at Tufts.  And there were a few black men most of them were athletes, and of course these were the days before you even got those athletic scholarships.  So, so they were there because they you know they made the grade so to speak, but they were also athletes.  And so and we were friendly but there weren't any in my class, I don't think, and they all commuted, they all commuted, yeah.  So that was, that was situation but (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Well they have to commute because they couldn't live on campus, right?
Speaker 2: They couldn't live on campus.
Speaker 1: But they could play sports for the university, but they couldn't live on the campus at the university (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) They could play sports. They, right, right, right um-hm.
Story_ID: 352283
Speaker 1: So you, your husband what's his, what was his name?
Speaker 2: Bill Vargus.
Speaker 1: Bill Vargus.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So you obviously you hit it off with him, and you marry him.
Speaker 2: And I married him, but I didn't marry him until I was in my second year of graduate school at in, at the University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 1: So you married him in '53 [1953]?
Speaker 2: In '54 [1954] (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Fifty-four [1954].
Speaker 2: Nineteen fifty-four [1954].
Speaker 1: Fifty-four [1954], okay.
Speaker 2: Right in March of 1954.
Speaker 1: Okay well let's just talk about this briefly.  It's 1954 I mean people do it all the time it's no--but I want your, you so your introspective on it.  You were dating someone of a different race (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right.
Speaker 1: A white man.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And you know and the country's fighting to desegregate schools.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: What did, what is it the two of you talk about, do you talk about it with each other, do you?
Speaker 2: Yeah I think we talked about it, about, with each other.
Speaker 1: I mean how did you deal with the fact that you were like--
Speaker 2: Well--
Speaker 1: --different--
Speaker 2: Well-
Speaker 1: Like you're black and he's white, how--
Speaker 2: He's, right.  I really don't know now that, that combination of course is not unusual in my family, my uncles, I had uncles and so forth on my father's [Edward Dugger, Sr.] side mainly who had married white women.  And some cousins and all of that so it was not an unusual thing in a way, but of course as I--but when we started, when we started dating, however, I was still in Medford [Massachusetts], and, and black people were and I guess still are very, very you know we're very accepting, a very accepting group.  So you know he was accepted fine, my family was not upset about it or anything like that.  And so then when I went to Chicago [Illinois], he, he used to come visit me practically every weekend that he could get off.  He was in the [U.S. military] service in New Jersey and he would take his old (laughter) buggy and drive to Chicago to see me.  And in Chicago, I guess again I don't recall too much I knew that we can't go through Indiana, 'cause it's illegal to be, to be interracially married in Indiana.  So you know if we're going east it was (laughter) had to find our way around not go through Indiana, which of course was right next to Chicago.  Otherwise we could be picked up, put in jail whatever.  So but we, we did have to be careful once we got out of the more protected environments of the university.
Speaker 1: Did you ever travel through the South with him?
Speaker 2: Oh no, no, unh-uh, no in fact I never even went south until I was working on my doctorate, so yeah.
Speaker 1: So you knew where you could and couldn't go?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Sort of?
Speaker 2: Exactly.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: You knew, I knew that and I and of course we did run into a lot of problems racially particularly once we got back to Boston [Massachusetts].  Well in Chicago, the reason we left Chicago was 'cause we couldn't find housing, the housing was either black or white.  And they might be right next to each other especially in Hyde Park [Chicago, Illinois] where we lived, but you still couldn't, which was supposed to be the very liberal area.  But you still couldn't live in a white building you know, we could live in a black-owned building, but we couldn't live in a black and white-owned building.  And we got, we got out of, we got put out of a black-owned building and I would call and I, and I didn't realize that you couldn't go into other buildings.  And I'd call and say you know I see you have an apartment available the person would say yes, show up, no you can't, we just, you know you can't, no, we don't take black people.  'Cause again it was still in the time when they could say that, we don't take black people.  So you know, so we had a very short time to get out of Chicago and I, that's how we got back to Boston.  And I (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Did you have the two children [Suzanne Vargus Holloman and William Vargus] by this time?
Speaker 2: Yeah, um-hm.
Speaker 1: And the two children (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) The children were--
Speaker 1: --mixed, there were, they were, a combination of the two of you?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: So.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: How did they fall along the lines of where they could or couldn't live, I mean I guess they, they were (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Well you just knew that if you had children of a mixed couple that the children were black, yeah, you just knew that that was in and that's how I raised them. (Laughter) 'cause their identity, even today,  even though they're close to their father, their identity is black and they know that they're African Americans.  We didn't even call them biracial then you know, nowadays they call themselves biracial, but we didn't do that (laughter).  They were, they were black, that's it, African American whatever.
Story_ID: 361066
Speaker 1: Okay the housing situation, you say you have a few--very small amount of time before you have, you gotta get out of Chicago [Illinois].
Speaker 2: Get, gotta get out of Chicago, have to get out of Chicago, and so I did and I and I had to leave before well before he [Vargus' husband, Bill Vargus] left.  Because of his, his job, he, by this time he had, he, after we got married, he went and also went to the universe- I graduated and he went, started the two year master's [degree] program at the University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois] as a social worker.  So he also studied social work, so then, but so he was working for the Salvation Army in their family services department, when we had to leave.  And he, he had to give a much longer notice, so he stayed behind for a couple of months.  I went back to Boston [Massachusetts] and begin looking for a job for him (laughter) and I went to believe it or not the Urban League [Urban League of Eastern Massachusetts].  And so they couldn't find a job for him, but they called me and asked me if I would take a particular job that was a demonstration job, a new job.  And would be working for the City of Boston as a social worker which they had never had, and there was only one other city in the country that had a social worker in its housing.  Which was, happened to be Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] and so, so I did and it was a very interesting job, I learned so much. Began to really, as a matter of fact, begin to develop new ways of working with poor people.  And there was a team of us, I was the case worker there was a group worker and a, what they call an administrator; those were two black, two white men and then myself.  And we had an apartment right in the housing project and worked with these families about five hundred of them.  Well anyway it was, it was a, such a wonderful experience, I had learned so much, I threw away the book.  As far as what I had learned at the University of Chicago in terms of social work, and been, really we began working in a whole different way.  The feds began coming to visit us, eventually they learned about it and they becam- came and come visit us.  And we kind of started laying a lot of groundwork for what later became the antipoverty programs.  And so that was a, a wonderful experience.
Story_ID: 361067
Speaker 1: How had you been taught to work versus the way you were deciding to work?
Speaker 2: Well the some of the understandings first of all about poor people I found were really quite wrong, some of the theoretical stuff I had heard at the (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Give me just an example.
Speaker 2: Well--
Speaker 1: Of one.
Speaker 2: I don't know if I can remember it anymore
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Because it's been so long ago but mainly because it's become such a part of me now.  But I remember, all I can remember is that I, that there were things that I had learned at the University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois].  And this is supposed to be the best school in the country, mind you, besides Columbia [Columbia University, New York, New York].  That I found were not true, and you really got to working with poor people, and you really got to know them well.  In a, that's I mean, I mean they, they also taught you the skills of how to, how to talk to people and all of that kind of thing.  Which was at the University of Chicago and that was that that kind of thing was okay; I kept those kinds of skills.  But in terms of on the some of the theoretical stuff, the understanding things I just, no, this is not true.  Whatever they've told me about poor people is not true (laughter) and so that was what, what I was working with.  Plus they had also told me some things about black people, that I really found, that I knew, well I knew that was wrong to begin with.  'Cause there was, I remember being taught that black men were henpecked and I you know, so they were henpecked, but how?  Well they cook, they take care of the children, they do housework, they do all those things.  These men, these men are henpecked, so this is what the men in my community did, they did all those things (laughter).  Even my father [Edward Dugger, Sr.] while he was alive, he cooked, he took care of us you know all the men did, and they were real, can you imagine, I just couldn't believe that they were teaching me that.  But that's just what they taught me.  And so, and guess what, I later learned that they, they got that from a black sociologist of the time who was, who was well-known, Franklin Frazier [E. Franklin Frazier].  Who wrote several volumes about black people, but anyway that's where they got (laughter) it from.  And they were just passing it on, but anyway, so all of these things that they, that they had taught me, I found that it just wasn't so, once you got in.  So I begin to develop a whole different way of working with, with low-income people, and, and it just, just and, and looking at the strengths of people.  And looking at their good things and I got, you know where I got that from my mother [Madeline Kountze Dugger-Kelley], my mother had always raised me with there are good people.  There's good in everybody she always taught me that, and it wasn't a religious thing with her it was just something she believed.  So when I was trying to find the way to work with the people in the housing project, I remembered what she told me.  And that's how I went about working with people, and finding them I mean they were, there were prostitutes, there were all kinds of people that lived in the housing project.  And but that's what I looked for first was what was their strength, and once I've could work with their strengths and help them to see their strengths, then I could work with them around their problems.  And they had some very serious problems you know, there were and many of the families had several agencies running in.  And social workers running in to work with them and so forth and so I developed what they now call case management.  But that was like thirty-year, they calling it now thirty years after (laughter) I'd be, we had already been doing it.  All those kinds of things and so that's why the as, as it began to show that we were doing this kind of work, and this is when the feds began to come in somehow they heard about it.
Story_ID: 361068
Speaker 1: Was it this time that King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] was in Boston [Massachusetts], I mean at what point was King studying in Boston (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) King was studying in Boston in the '50s [1950s].
Speaker 1: In the '50s [1950s].
Speaker 2: In the '50s [1950s].
Speaker 1: So this is before you left the first?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yes, yes (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So--
Speaker 2: He was there when I was in school.
Speaker 1: Okay so (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) When I was at Tufts [Tufts College; Tufts University, Medford, Massachusetts] yeah.
Speaker 1: Did you know him, did you?
Speaker 2: I, I got to, well yes I did as a matter of fact, not real well, but I did get to know him, 'cause he came to, there were so few of us black students in Boston that we would get together.  Very, you know every so often, and both the black men and the black women, 'cause as I said, most of the black people went to black colleges [HBCUs] (laughter).  And so we would get together and he would come, he would come at you know to these gatherings, he and.  I didn't get to know his wife as well of course I guess we weren't looking at other women as much you know.  But he, he would come and he was working on his doctorate at the time, and so we all looked up to him, 'cause he was working on his doctorate.  You know we thought that was just tremendous, were har- very few (laughter) few people were, black people worked on their doctorate you know.  So that's how we got to know him and of course, he wasn't showing any of what we saw later in, in terms of his you know courageous--so he was just a person that we knew and liked because he was working on his doctorate, and then he married Coretta [Coretta Scott King] and broke so many women's hearts.  You know 'cause they, they would love to have a minister as a, as a husband, and so that was, that was how we knew him.  But that was in the '50s [1950s] yeah.
Story_ID: 361069
Speaker 1: So then just going to move back to where we were.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: You--case management--you developed what is now called case management.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And that was a new way of working with (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, that was one--
Speaker 1: --with people.
Speaker 2: --of the ways of working and that was bringing all of the agents I, in other words, I, but I called myself the anchor person in other words.  Now they call it case management, but it was the anchor person, I, I coordinated all these agencies that were running in to these houses and all, um-hm.
Speaker 1: Now you, you moved away from social work in the late '60s [1960s] and you be, started to teach, is that how it came about?  How did you go from doing the social work into academia?
Speaker 2: Well I, I decided I really wanted to go, I really wanted to go for my doctorate, and of course I was working and all of that.  So I begin working, actually three jobs, as a matter of fact, one of the persons who encouraged me to go was Andy Billingsley [Andrew Billingsley] he was at Brandeis [Brandeis University, Waltham, Massachusetts].  And I met him, he came to my agency and whatever and we talked, and I said, "You know I really wanna get my doctorate."  I said, "I just don't understand why people are so poor in this country," what, what is poverty and so forth and so on.  And he encouraged me, he said, "Yeah you, yeah you should really go," and he encouraged me to go to Brandeis because of course that's where he was the Heller School [Florence G. Heller Graduate School for Advanced Studies in Social Welfare; Heller School for Social Policy and Management, Waltham, Massachusetts], which was really very prestigious, well-known school.  And of course as you know from my past, I only go for the best so (laughter) so I, I worked three jobs and I was fortunate enough to have family around.  So that the children [Suzanne Vargus Holloman and William Vargus] could be watched and so forth, and, and until I could afford to go.  And I went, I started Brandeis in 1967, and, but I still, but so but that, that point it was still considered a school of social work.  Now its management and policy and a whole lot of, but it was still in sort of the social work field, most of the people who went at time were social workers.  So, so I went into, and so I, I really hadn't given up social work, I just was going to get my doctorate in that in social policies, social administration was what my doctorate was in, but it was, but with a strong social work base.
Story_ID: 361070
Speaker 1: And you start, did you become an assistant professor at Brandeis [Brandeis University, Waltham, Massachusetts]?
Speaker 2: Yes, now that (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) In the late '60s [1960s]?
Speaker 2: But that was in black studies department, my first teaching was in the black studies department, the students had demanded.  See I was, I was there at the time that the black students across the univ- country were making demands on, on administrations at white colleges.  Well actually even some of the black colleges [HBCUs], and I did my dissertation on black students in white colleges.  And it was about the demands that they were making and it was about the response by the administration.  So, and then I used two, two schools as case studies to watch as the black students, one at Brandeis and one at Tufts [Tufts University, Medford, Massachusetts].  To see how the students behaved et cetera and how the administrations behaved, and so that's how I got into that whole thing.  And when the students at Brandeis took over a building for eleven days, they were very tired and they didn't, couldn't come out.  So I did a lot of their negotiations for them, and when the, and then when we got the, their demand for having a black studies department it was approved.  Then they wanted me to teach, the students wanted me to teach in it, so I did.
Story_ID: 361071
Speaker 1: Okay we're gonna go back and just talk about the eleven days siege.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: What role did you play?
Speaker 2: Well the (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Well first go, go we're--talk, set it up for me.
Speaker 2: Okay. Okay.
Speaker 1: The students were angry about this, this happened, I came in and did this.
Speaker 2: Okay.  The, across the country, stu- black, black students were making demands on at white colleges, mainly their demands dealt with that of housing.  They wanted black housing (laughter) they wanted black faculty and they wanted more in the curriculum.  Those were the basic three demands and if it started at one college and went all the way across.  And they had a kind of a, a communication, so I made myself the secretary of communication, I was, that was my dissertation was to be with black students at white campuses.  And I remember saying to my, my committee person--chair, well I'm gonna have to change my topic there's nothing going on here at Brandeis [Brandeis University, Waltham, Massachusetts].  And then the next day the students took over the building Ford, it was called Ford Hall.  They didn't tell me, now they knew that I was doing this study, and they were very smart, they did not tell me, you know.  In fact it was just a small group who actually planned it and executed it, they didn't tell all, everybody.  Well whatever it was a dozen, a dozen other black ch- students (laughter), they didn't tell everybody which was good.  Because the FBI [Federal Bureau of Investigation] came in later pretending to be somebody else just asking questions, insurance companies or whatever.  Fortunately I couldn't tell them anything, 'cause I didn't know who did it you know.  But anyway, once it happened, they were locked into the building, I mean they themselves stayed in the building.  They didn't wanna come out and so they needed somebody though because the, the negotiations broke down, that was, that was why they took the building over.  They had been, they had been making their demands nicely et cetera and then feeling completely ignored, they finally took over this building.  Which was a sensitive building because it had the, I guess whatever the electronic technol- 'cause I mean we didn't have computers or anything like that.
Speaker 1: How could they take, how could they like not how could they hold the building for eleven days and the police not come in and just grab these half a dozen kids and cart them off, I mean?
Speaker 2: Well they did.
Speaker 1: They did.
Speaker 2: Well of course one of the things that did happen at Brandeis was that then the community, black community supported them.  The black community brought food for them, cooked food brought it in also served, and then white kids served as security.  So that nothing would happened to them, there were white kids on there who did that kind of thing.  And so that's how they were able to handle it.
Speaker 1: And how did you get involved?
Speaker 2: Well I was a part of the group, I mean I was doing my, I was doing my study; I was doing my dissertation on black students on white campuses.  And I got involved because when I saw that they, however, weren't able to do the negotiations, continue their negotiations while they were in the building.  'Cause they were gonna stay in the building, that's when I got involved and began to talk with the administration, but on their behalf.  I would talk with the students, I didn't, I didn't do any negotiations on my own, I would talk with them while they were in the building.  I could go in the building see, I would talk with them while they were in the building saying I think we should do this.  And then they would say yes or no or whatever.
Speaker 1: Who were the students?
Speaker 2: Who were they?
Speaker 1: Yeah can you remember some of their names some of the people you worked with?
Speaker 2: No, I do know it was Bailey [Randal C. Bailey] he's in, he's in Georgia now. I, you know I don't remember their names, I guess.  And but interestingly enough they were, most of them were southern they came from the South, and, but they all you know the, they really worked together.  And I can't just off the hand, offhand remember their names, and I surely didn't remember the names when the B- FBI asked me (laughter).
Story_ID: 361072
Speaker 1: Okay so you do this negotiation--
Speaker 2: And yeah (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) and, and out of the negotiations comes?
Speaker 2: Comes the black studies department, in, yeah.  And, and so that's, and that was first led, the first director of it was Ron Walters [HistoryMaker Ronald Walters], I don't know if you know Ron he's at, now with the University of Maryland [College Park, Maryland].  But he also had been at Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.], and he was the first director of it, and but he was too democratic as a matter of fact.  'Cause you know the students you know make decisions and so forth and so on, and they pushed him right out after a while.  An Ethiopian who used all of his autocratic stuff came and got those students to move against Ron after a couple of years.  But anyway, but that's how I got to teach, that was my first reaching position, meanwhile, I was still working on my doctorate at Brandeis [Brandeis University, Waltham, Massachusetts].  But when I taught it, when I taught in the black studies, I taught the black family, black community and black music.  And the music was very popular, I had like seventy-five students of course they're mostly white students.
Speaker 1: Well what books did you use?
Speaker 2: For any of the classes?
Speaker 1: Yeah for teaching those classes (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, well for the black fam--
Speaker 1: --because there were no textbooks.
Speaker 2: No, there weren't, there weren't textbooks on black family much at all, so I had wall because I used books like from, from DuBois [W.E.B. Du Bois] or from Langston Hughes.  You know things that had things about our experience in this country.  And there was one book, however, which I still, which was written in 1908 by Du Bois called 'The Negro Family' [sic. 'The Negro American Family,' W.E.B. Du Bois]. And it compared black families from the South with black families to the North to Africa, it, fabulous book.  And he did a study you know and he actually interviewed all these thousands of people, which we don't do anymore, now we take samples you know.  But he actually interviewed thousands of people, and he had this whole study going on in Atlanta [Georgia].  But anyway this book was written in 1908 and I still love it, still use it, but it was about the only book there was.  Billingsley's [Andrew Billingsley] book came out after I was teaching this class so, but in any case it was, so I used a those kinds of, those kinds of books and things like that.  So you extrapolated from them, which I found to be much, almost more fun than reading a book about the, you know, yeah.  So, but the black, black music, I read, we, again well, I, I you know we taught it from what I knew, I mean I knew I had already studied a lot about black music.
Speaker 1: Classical music though, did you teach it from (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh no.
Speaker 1: Oh no?
Speaker 2: Oh no.
Speaker 1: Jazz?
Speaker 2: Yeah (laughter) I taught black music from slavery to, to through jazz, showed the slave music, the spirituals all of that.  I, I had, had a little group, a little group of kids that I used to take around and we did the whole thing.  This is before I, well, while I before I was in school, before I had gone to my graduate, you know Ph.D. work.  And I took them we called ourselves the Soul Cousins and we went from church to church to church and various places, showing this music.  And they demonstrated the music, so I had already done a lot of the research for that, and, and now I was teaching it.  And I, I taught it in a way that the students loved, we had a field, field work once a month which meant we went to a, a jazz club.  And I negotiated with the owners that the kids only came in for a dollar, the students you know.  So it was very, it was really, a, a fun class, but actually somebody else had been teaching black jazz there, prior to my going.  I don't, I never did meet the professor.
Story_ID: 361073
Speaker 1: Well it's the 1970s did you have a natural look or did you straighten your hair, or did you wear a natural (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I wore a natural, I wore a natural um-hm, late '60s [1960s] early '70s [1970s].  I wore a natural until ooh I don't know for years (laughter).
Speaker 1: So and, in the early '70s [1970s] you find yourself back in Chicago [Illinois], so how do you get from?
Speaker 2: The early '70s [1970s], no, I wasn't in Chicago I was in Urbana [Illinois], Illinois from '71 [1971] to '74 [1974].  When I graduated, I, I was told and I think this is true that I was one of thirteen black women in the country with a Ph.D. in social work.  And so I really could write my own ticket, University of Illinois [University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign, Champaign-Urbana, Illinois], I had a cousin working there as an assistant dean.  And he asked me to come to lead a dem- a program there in it was called the School-Community-Pupils Program.  It was a national program and he wanted me to lead the one at the University of Illinois, and I agreed to do that.
Speaker 1: What was that program?
Speaker 2: It was, it was, that's what it was called, the school (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I mean but what yeah, but it
Speaker 2: Oh--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: The idea was to teach social workers, see social workers tend to be were being taught and even I was taught that which is what I threw away.  This clinic very clinical kind of way of working with people like a junior psychiatrist.  So they had, so, so social workers in the sch- were actually working in the schools in Illinois.  That was one of the more progressive states in terms of having social workers in the schools.  And so, but we wanted to teach them really about how to make change to get away from this very clinical approach to working with a system's approach.  And so that's what I was hired to, to do, and that's what I had learned well at Brandeis [Brandeis University, Waltham, Massachusetts] is really systems change.  And, and of course had been experiencing that prior to going to Brandeis, so that's what I did, and we had a feeling that the community, the parents, the students were all one system.  And so you worked the system, and, and brought these groups in a, you know all of this together.  And helped them to see that they were a system, and that they all had to you know, none of this blaming the parents only.  Or blaming the school only you know kind of thing, and it was very, it was considered very radical, oh yeah people thought it was you know terrible.
Speaker 1: It sounds like that was the start or you can tell me of PTA [Parent Teacher Association] is sort of.
Speaker 2: No the PTAs existed before that.
Speaker 1: So PTA existed?
Speaker 2: PTAs existed before that.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yes, um-hm.
Speaker 1: So but that was sort of the same sort of program where you bring the parents and the teachers and, and this time the kids (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well but they were different.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: The parents and teachers thing is mostly the teachers telling the parents about their kids (laughter)
Speaker 1: And what's different about this community (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well this was where you act, where the parents became the change agents, they were the ones who might suggest to, to the schools instead, this is how you handle this.  This is what you do, we work, we do work together, but at the same time, we had these issues.  Now one of the things that we did work for instance some of the children in special education were shunted aside.  They weren't given the right kind of, they weren't given the kinds of resources and so forth that they should have.  And we organized parents to protest and to you know get those kinds of things for their kids.
Story_ID: 361074
Speaker 1: Now was it about the same time in the '70s [1970s] when you were at the University of Illinois [University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign, Champaign-Urbana, Illinois] that your sister was fighting back in Boston [Massachusetts] to--at some point there, there no you know when the uproar about okay we need more black teachers (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Teachers, yeah.
Speaker 1: And we need.
Speaker 2: That was prior to my going to Illinois, yes they were, my, my sister had become a school committee person in the early '60s [1960s], like 1963 something like that, I think it was.  And that had, had come about as a result of the community, some people in our community in Medford [Massachusetts] feeling it was about time we had a black school committee person.  And so we just, we asked, first they asked my sister Portia [Portia Dugger Byard] and she said no, so then asked my sister Madeleine [Madeleine Dugger Andrews] (laughter) and she said okay.  And they wanted a Dugger in other words they wanted someone with that name.  Because the name was well-known in Medford and they figured if they got a Dugger then that, people would from the other parts of the city would know the name and would vote.  So--for her--so she did and at the time she took on her issue was community colleges, they didn't have them at that point in time.  And so she was saying that she felt this, and that she saw them they thought, she thought that was a good resource for people who lost their jobs actually at that time.  And so she was pushing that as her case, as her issue, and it must've worked, because the first time that she ran, and you only get six.  And I think there were like twelve people running or whatever, she was the sixth person.  After she, after that she always came in first, but, but that was how she got in and we worked, my, I, I wasn't the chair of her committee we had another person do that.  But I was working very hard in her campaign.
Speaker 1: To get her elected?
Speaker 2: Yeah to get her elected, and she went ar- you know across the city and all of that, yeah.
Story_ID: 361075
Speaker 1: Now we should also talk about the fact that a park was named after your father [Edward Dugger, Sr.].
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Your, you said Dugger was a--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And it reminded me that your, there is Dugger Park [Medford, Massachusetts].
Speaker 2: Yes there is.  It's Dugger Park.
Speaker 1: Now--
Speaker 2: Which is actually a playground (laughter).
Speaker 1: A playground, okay.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Now is that in Medford [Massachusetts] itself?
Speaker 2: That's in Medford, it's in Medford it runs along the river [Mystic River] it's a playground with a basketball court and tennis courts, which mostly white people use now.  But because it's right across from what used to be a very exclusive white town.  So white people would come over and use the facility you know, but anyway and it's got a tot lot and it's got you know it's a very nice, actually there's a nice stone there that explains my father.  It has my father's name on it and talks about what he did.
Speaker 1: And what does it say that he did?
Speaker 2: Well I've kind of forgotten what it says, I know what it says that he was the, the lieutenant colonel and that he was the commanding officer of the 372nd Infantry [372nd Infantry Regiment].  Of course that was, he died in 1939 and that's when the, when it was, the, the playground, the park was named after him in 1939 after his death, so.
Story_ID: 352296
Speaker 1: So let me just wind up that little section a little bit though, as I mentioned, if you say Kountze or Dugger in West Medford [Medford, Massachusetts], you really have gotta long, we gotten an awful lot of memorials and so forth.  And the thing about it is that, this is not something that usually started by the family, or even the black fa- black people.  There's an art festival named after my uncle Mabray [Mabray "Doc" Kountze] this will be its eighth year, it's called the Doc Kountze Festival [Mabray "Doc" Kountze Film and Art Festival], it's an art festival.  We didn't have anything to do with that you know getting it started, of course putting that; my mother's [Madeline Kountze Dugger-Kelley] picture in the city hall her portrait.  Hangs you know in the city hall in the mayor's conference room, we didn't have anything to do with that.  The mayor (laughter) does, my sister's, the school named after my sister [Madeleine Dugger Andrews], we didn't have anything to do with that you know.  I mean that was just something that the mayor and the city, council or whatever all agreed upon.  To name this brand new school after her, we have a memorial stones to my uncle, my Uncle Al, Elmer Kountze.  And then of course my father [Edward Dugger, Sr.] the playground [Dugger Park, Medford, Massachusetts] named after my father, and so it's interesting to me, because I'm not there, my, I, I have nephews that live there.  But it's not, it's not as if, it's been something that the family has promote as much you know (laughter) others (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) As people bestowing these aw--
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: You know, rightfully so.
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 2: Giving credit
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 2: Where it's due.  So that's gotta make (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And Tufts [Tufts University, Medford, Massachusetts] has--
Speaker 2: You feel good.
Speaker 1: --Tufts has a wonderful stone named after my brother [Edward Dugger, Jr.], right near the track team, you know track stuff, so it's, it's yeah.
Story_ID: 352297
Speaker 1: So 1978 how do you get to Temple University [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania]?
Speaker 2: Nineteen seventy-eight [1978] okay I was, went to Temple in 1974 as the associate dean, I had done this special project over at the University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign [Champaign-Urbana, Illinois]. Urbana is okay.  But it's you know, it's (laughter)--
Speaker 1: Now are the kids [Suzanne Vargus Holloman and William Vargus] traveling around with you all this time (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, oh yes. Yes they went everywhere.
Speaker 1: Okay and your husband [Bill Vargus] are you still married at this time?
Speaker 2: I was not married, I was not married; I was single.  And so they were looking for an, an associate dean and somebody you know interviewed me and asked me to apply, and that kind of a thing.  And I did and Urbana-Champaign it's just a nice quiet little town you know (laughter)  So and it was great for my kids, it was great for my kids, but they were going off to college now so I didn't need to, I didn't need to stay for them.  So they, I, I accepted the job as the associate dean, the person who was the dean was a Jewish man.  Had started the school [Temple University School of Social Administration; Temple University School of Social Work, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], was a very young school at the time, it was only when I went; it was only four or five years old.  So he was a Jewish man and he had kind of decided that after he worked with me for a while that he would like for me to replace him.  So he taught me, he really mentored me and--
Speaker 1: What's his name?
Speaker 2: His name is Simon Slavin and actually he's still al, he's still alive I think he lives in Connecticut or New York someplace.  But anyway he, he mentored me so well basically you can call it mentoring, I did all of the work, and he played the violin (laughter) basically. But anyway and, and so this was good.  And so when they then did a search for he, he retired, he retired, and they did a search and in 1978 they named me the acting first, acting dean which made me the first woman dean and African American dean of an academic college at Temple.  In, at that point Temple was about ninety-three years old, and so (laughter) I was the first of both of those, became a full dean in July of that same year.
Speaker 1: And how did, I mean you're an adult by this time (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) In 1978, yeah.
Speaker 1: You gotta yeah, you're, you gotta be aware of being a trailblazer and being the first and how did that feel?
Speaker 2: It was common, I mean you know all my other jobs had been pretty much the first, and, and as I said in my family generally speaking we had been the first whatever job it was.  So that, that was just something that I just took in stride and used to the thing that a friend of mine, a white faculty member who was very good, very friendly used to get after me.  'Cause she would, "How could you be with all those men?" That what was the thing she, she was a real feminist you know.  And (laughter) she couldn't understand how I could handle thirteen other deans men, all men you know.  And I said, "Well one thing is I don't try to act like I'm a man you know, I am a woman and I bring certain kinds of attributes as a woman to this to this job."  Had a very good experience as a dean the faculty was extremely cooperative.
Speaker 1: What were the challenges?
Speaker 2: Well the major challenge was always a budget problem, because the university was always had, having a budget problem at those times.  And so that was, that was really the major, major problem, we started, I started a number of, of programs.  Not only my own Family Reunion Institute but a multicultural institute, we did an off-campus, started an off-campus master's degree program in Harrisburg [Pennsylvania].  One in somewhere in the north, north, northern part of the state, near New York (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Who was the president of Temple at that time?
Speaker 2: At that time when I was appointed his name was Wachman, Marvin Wachman, and Marvin is now somewhere in his nineties but still, I don't think he still plays tennis but he is still alive.  He was a President of Lincoln [Lincoln University, Lincoln University, Pennsylvania] before he became president of Temple.
Speaker 1: Were there any other black faculty members at Temple and the time?
Speaker 2: Yes, there were and there, they were in my school.
Speaker 1: Who were they?
Speaker 2: Well one was Bill Paradee [ph.] who has, is now deceased, Thad Mathis [Thaddeus Mathis] was a black faculty member who is still there (laughter) he got there I don't know, he got, the school started in 1969.  I think he came as the first one, he's still there as a faculty member a very, very much into politics, political analysis and black social work etcetera.  And there was a Gloria Gaddis [ph.] who is now deceased, Audrey Pittman who is now deceased, no she's not deceased, she has Alzheimer's.  There were, yeah Marcella [ph.], there were several at the school, the first dean did a good job in getting a black faculty there, Gene Moore [ph.].  None of them had doctorates but I came with a doctorate of course and several of them have gone and gotten doctorates since then.
Story_ID: 352298
Speaker 1: What led to the publishing of the book?
Speaker 2: Which book?
Speaker 1: 'The Revival of Ideology: Afro American Society' [sic. 'The Revival of Ideology: the Afro-American society movement,' Ione D. Vargus]?
Speaker 2: Oh that's, that was my dissertation.
Speaker 1: So the, so the, that--
Speaker 2: That's basically my dissertation about the black students, yeah, yeah (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Simultaneous) And so--
Speaker 2: --on white campuses.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And in and it does talk about the ideology that was going on at the time in the, in among black, you know in the country.
Speaker 1: And that I, ideology being we need more black faculty members?
Speaker 2: Well no (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) We need--
Speaker 2: The Pan Africanism I mean Pan African, nationalism all of the different ideologies that were swirling around the students.  As they went about their demands et cetera.
Story_ID: 352299
Speaker 1: How did you see yourself at that time?
Speaker 2: How did I see myself?
Speaker 1: Yeah what did you see yourself as your role being dean [of Temple University School of Social Administration; Temple University School of Social Work, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania]?
Speaker 2: As a, oh as a dean (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah.
Speaker 2: --when I was a dean? I don't remember except to say that you know just do the best I could.  I've always believed that you should make a difference when you're in a, you know in a particular.  So when you have the opportunity and if you're in a particular role and if you're black, you're supposed to make a difference.
Speaker 1: Well how did you identify with, with the different ideologies you know?
Speaker 2: Well now that, that was a, now the different ideologies by time I got to be a dean, they weren't swirling around anymore.  Those ideologies were during the '60s [1960s] and early '70s [1970s], when the black students and black community generally I mean you know we started the black power, the black power convention [National Black Political Convention].  The black social workers, a lot of black organizations came into being during the late '60s [1960s] early '70s [1970s].  So that's when those ideologies were kind of swirling around a lot, and I guess I consider myself a nationalist, yeah.
Speaker 1: So you like the Black Panthers [Black Panther Party], you?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah I like the (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Sort of?
Speaker 2: Yeah I thought the Black Panthers were, I understood what the Black Panthers were trying to do and what they were about.  Nationalism, however, being that you really very strong on, you're not against other groups, but you're very strong on promoting your own culture, and promoting your own people, you know.
Speaker 1: And how do you feel about it today?
Speaker 2: I feel the same way, we just don't use the labels anymore that we were using then you know.  But, but I'm sure there are contradictions you know I mean you look, well where am I living in a white place, right?  And (laughter)--
Speaker 1: Well and you had married a white man [Bill Vargus] (laughter).
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah well he claims, of course that's why the, the marriage broke up is 'cause I was so much into black things.  But I don't think that was major, the major reason although it was a piece of it because, I couldn't accompany him.  See he, he's a big sportsman you know he likes tennis and golf and all those places, couldn't go with him to those places.
Speaker 1: Why could you not go?
Speaker 2: They were segregated in Boston [Massachusetts], I'm talking, see in, we're talking '60s [1960s] now, they were segregated.  So if he would, you couldn't even play at those places if you were black, so you know.  And that, and again that's true across, that was true in the cities across.  You know same thing here in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], people tell me about the--that time when the, you know all those things were segregated.  Those kinds of facilities were segregated.
Story_ID: 352300
Speaker 1: So now we're moving into the '80s [1980s] you know (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right, Okay.
Speaker 1: You know in the 1980s and you--talk to me about becoming I guess more involved in trying to understand the black family, black family reunions--
Speaker 2: Oh yes (simultaneous)
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) You did the radio documentary?
Speaker 2: Um-hm, well, I, I kind of think it goes back to my childhood, when I think about what I'm into now, and especially the fact that I've been doing this as volunteer now for twelve years.  The, it's, it's again my way of doing some social work but in a different way (laughter) as I've been doing for many years.  And I began to see this movement going on about family reunion; well we had a family reunion.  My family had a reunion after many years.
Speaker 1: And what year was that you had the (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That was 1980, we had it in Maine at a lodge that was owned by black, by black men, and had been owned by black men for many years.
Speaker 1: What was the name of the lodge?
Speaker 2: It was--all of a sudden now, I can't remember it all, and I can only tell you it was on some lake whose name I can't absolutely not mention.  Because it was, it was an Indian [Native American] name which I'd never, but it was way up in Maine, and it'll probably come to me.  But it was, it was in fact a lodge that Du Bois [W.E.B. Du Bois] had even gone to, and a black of, a group of black men owned that lodge, so we went up there and had our reunion for a week.  And it was so wonderful; I wondered if other families did this, we thought we were doing something very special.  Well when I came back, I learned that other families also had family reunions, black families.  And so I decided I really wanted to take a look at it, because I had seen some real benefits of it at my own family reunion.  So took me a while to be able to find the time 'cause I was a dean to do the research, and but I did.  I did the summer of '86 [1986] I decided I was gonna do the research and, and that's what I did, I went to lots of family reunions.  Again and found lots of benefits, I, I'd ask families well what, what do you, why do you have, go to family reunions?  Oh I love my family, great, because I think there's more going on, so that's what I did, I went to lots of reunions every weekend and just observed.  And I would go and I'm thinking I'm just gonna go with one family, there might be four or five at the hotel you know.  (Laughter) Where the ho- where they were being held, and so I, I'd crashed them all you know and go and interview people.  And found that there were lots of benefits and a, and a great deal of potential through the family reunions.  So it's way of working with the extended family and of course as the families now are, have you know scattered so. We're not all living in the same neighborhood as when I lived.  Or even when my children [Suzanne Vargus Holloman and William Vargus] were living you know, families are scattered from one end of the coast to the other.  So they have to, they have to plan to get together, and that's what the reunion is, basically.  And so, so I thought that this would be a good way to begin to, to bring the extended family together in a different way.  They can't live in the same neighborhoods but there are other things, and then when we do get together, there are certain things that maybe if we do will help, will help.  None of this is coming from my intellect, my, this coming from watching these families, seeing what they do and then making them conscious of it.  As well as others conscious of, 'cause these are all strengths, these are strengths.  You know I'm back to my strength thing (laughter) that we can use to help rebuild the, rebuild the family.  And, and the extended families are exceptionally important to African Americans because that's how we survived, that and the church.  Is really how we survive after, after slavery, the fact that there were other families, extended families.  We helped each other psychologically, financially you know put each other up in our house, you know all those kinds of things.  And so now, so, so that's, that's the basis of my work, I still see it as working with families and helping.  And, and so what we do is you know because it's only me, I'm, I'm the institute, Family Reunion Institute [Temple University, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania].  And I (laughter) and as I say, I don't even get paid, we can't do a lot more I had you know I had other ideas, but--
Speaker 1: What were the other ideas?
Speaker 2: Well I, I wanted to do something which we've never really been able to do except for the very first year that I did it.  Which was to reconnect also we using the reunion, however, families, foster children, substance recovery people and so forth.  To reconnect with their families at the family reunion, because that's a, a good non-threatening place to do those kinds of, kind of things.  The families, most of the families are so large, they can absorb like this and that kind of thing, it's one of the things we just never, I just never was able to do.  And I, and I still have lots of plans for the Family Reunion Institute (laughter) if we ever get you know some money and some staff.
Story_ID: 352301
Speaker 1: But let's talk about the conferences you organized in 1988 was that the first one?
Speaker 2: That was the first one that was the first one, yes.
Speaker 1: And where was it, where did it take place?
Speaker 2: Well that was held in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] and I was really served as the consultant to that one I didn't it was not my idea it was the idea of the director of the African American Museum [African American Museum in Philadelphia, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], [HistoryMaker] Rowena Stewart, and she went on, on the radio saying that's what she wanted to do.  She was doing the whole thing. University of the, city was having the whole thing called, We the People, and all of the black cultural organizations then were putting on programs.  And so she, she thought that she would like to do a conference and, and to recognize the black people who had been in Philadelphia for over two hundred years and so forth.  So that's what we did and I, I just served as a consultant and they had money.  In 1990 when we formed the Family Reunion Institute [Temple University, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] is when I really, however, took it under my wing, because the money had gone and they didn't have (laughter) anybody to organize the, a conference and so forth and so.
Story_ID: 352302
Speaker 1: Well let's go back a little and talk about the history of family reunions.  I think I read something and you can help me with this.  Where's there is a, you know after all the slaves were freed, this guy says okay you know maybe they all came back together once a year, the family.  And then he decided that okay every year we should try to get together.
Speaker 2: That was the Still family. That was a particular family (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Oh that was a particular family, okay.
Speaker 2: That's the Still family and that's the family, the African American family that's been having it the longest, as far as we know in this country.  And it was, it was right after slavery and that's what he said, we should get back, we should do that.  And of course the Still family as you know, is the Underground Railroad,
Speaker 1: William Still family.  Where he was in the Underground Railroad and you know they called him the father, that and so but it's that family and they get together every year, yeah.
Speaker 2: What's the largest family reunion (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) The largest family reunion that I know of is the Hairston Family Reunion; they have as many as five thousand people at their family reunion.  And they, there's a book written about them called something about black and white ['The Hairstons: An American Family in Black and White' Henry Wiencek].  But they were also CBS did, did a story on them and, but they're very large, but they, but they're so large that they have to break down and have their individual family reunions, yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah its (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah.
Speaker 2: --tough to get what, you said five thousand people?
Speaker 1: Right (laughter).
Speaker 2: Tough to get five thousand people at, in one location (laughter).
Speaker 1: In one location--
Speaker 2: One hotel one get you know (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah.
Speaker 2: --one set of functions.
Speaker 1: Yeah and how do people even really get to know each other?
Speaker 2: Right, that's a huge crowd.
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Now they don't have that many every year, but they've, they've had that many and that have you know they have large ones.  And then they just have smaller ones.
Story_ID: 352303
Speaker 1: So when did you establish the Family Institute School [sic. Family Reunion Institute, Temple University, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania]?
Speaker 2: Well I established the institute in 1990 when I actually took over the conferences from then on and I was as I said a consultant, mainly.  Because I'm the one who had the contact with families so in 1988 and in 1989 when we did it through the museum [African American Museum in Philadelphia, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania].  And then we took it over in 1990 and, and established it as the Family Reunion Institute, and it had been more of a cultural type conference, prior to my taking it on.  And then I moved it into more family, much more family orientated, looking at how we can strengthen the families through their own activities.  And so, so that's, that's the focus that we have.
Story_ID: 352304
Speaker 1: You were the dean [of Temple University School of Social Administration; Temple University School of Social Work, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] from?
Speaker 2: Okay I was the dean, I was the associate dean from 1974 to 1978, I was the dean from '78 [1978] to 1990 and, and in 1991 I became the acting vice provost.  That was a very quick change.  The president at the time something had happened, we had just had a strike I believe at Temple [Temple University, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania].  And something happened; anyway it was a very quick turn of events where he, the president, President Peter Liacouras asked me to be the vice provost.
Speaker 1: And, in that role your responsibilities?
Speaker 2: Well in that role it, it was called vice provost for undergraduate education, but in that role I did whatever I wanted.  And so what I did because the person who became the acting provost had been the vice provost.  And she kind of took her, her duties with her, so she became the provost (laughter) and continued what she had been doing.  So it left me free to do a lot of things, but she, well she was, she was very good, but she, so she took those things.  And so I then or new, newer things, one of them that we worked on though was to insist that all, we were insisting that all students who came to Temple had to have a course in racism.  And the faculty were you know kind of resistant to that and, and one of the things they said was, well we won't know how to teach it.  So I of course said to myself, how did you learn to teach anything else, but anyway, we said well we'll teach you how to teach it.  So that was one of the things that I did.
Speaker 1: Well how did you teach them how to teach it, teach me, yeah talk to me the way you talk to them about.  Okay here's how we gonna teach this course.
Speaker 2: I don't know (laughter).
Speaker 1: No, no but you okay its racism how do you teach (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It's racism--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah, well first you have to teach them about racism (laughter) what racism is and what it isn't and, and how you handle the, the kids in the class.  What kinds of issue are gonna come up as a result of this, and then we, you know, but of course these faculty were from all different disciplines.  So it isn't as if you're you know teaching a general course on racism, you're teaching it in a specific subject.  And I don't know like, I remember I had them do a great deal of reading; we had a great deal of discussion about things.  And don't, I, I don't remember, but I, I, and I know I took a summer and this the faculty came and we, we had, and it was very good.  And other universities were beginning the same thing, and so we were meeting and you know sharing and that kind of thing.  But I've always had a real interest in a multiculturalism and as, as well, and so that's diversity, that's different from racism.  But I've always had a real interest in the multi-cultural aspects of things.  And when I worked in Boston [Massachusetts] before I ever went to school for my doctorate, one of the programs that I worked in, see I worked in about three or four before I went to.  Well I told you I had three jobs at one time, and one of them was working with a variety of ethnic groups, and this part of Boston which was south end had forty-eight different ethnic groups.  A small area, forty-eight none of them talked to each other, and so I, part of what I did was to bring these groups together through their girls.  And 'cause I worked, I was working with the girls, so, girls so I brought the girls together and their parents together and so forth and so on.  And we would have eventually before I got through with that job we had great multicultural you know days, fairs, affairs where people brought all their food and all that kind of thing.  And so I've had a real interest in that, and that was, so, so then, I was teaching the racism and then I was also, we were fostering a lot of multicultural activity on the campus.
Story_ID: 352305
Speaker 1: So I would imagine teaching racism then you were probably mainly dealing with black and white?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And today would it be the same or is racism more inclusive now whereas Arab people are being targeted for whatever reasons the same we were (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right.
Speaker 1: You know, I'm just asking.
Speaker 2: Exactly. Exactly. Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Has it expanded beyond just black and white today (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh yeah definitely and in fact at the school though I was teaching a multiethnic course, showing those kinds of things that happened to various groups.  And, and, even, and even historically because I happened to show, for instance, to my class that about the Irish and what had happened to them.  They weren't able to get jobs and this happened at one time, but the students were so mad with me for even suggesting that some other group had had a problem you know (laughter).  Well I came from Boston [Massachusetts] I knew that was the case but it was at the same time when all this desegregation problems in Boston were going on.  And which the Irish that were acting up, so they didn't want me to say anything in sympathetic you know.  But it is some, it, yes, it is, these, these issues you see the same you know, and, and but you see, I think though that, that these other groups have learned a lot from us, as African Americans.  I mean what we've gone through, I mean they can take a shorter cut to do their protesting and, and you know all of that.  Because they just, because we been through it, we've kind of shown (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) It's been documented, yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: And we've kind of shown--led the way.
Story_ID: 352306
Speaker 1: So what year did you retire from Temple [Temple University, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania]?
Speaker 2: I retired from Temple in 1995 after I left the provost office, I well I be was the vice provost and then I became something called a presidential fellow.  Which was a special kind of a thing that the president had, president on the campus and, and he, and in that you were able to do whatever you wanted if you (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And what did you wanna do then, by then?
Speaker 2: By then I don't know whether I was working on the conference I'm, I'm not even sure what I was doing.  But when I retired, that was what my title was presidential fellow, and I went over, I, I then decided to actually do the, do the to administer the Family Reunion Institute [Temple University, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania].
Story_ID: 352307
Speaker 1: Well, when you look back over your career, and we're, we gonna start to wrap it up.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: When you look back over your career, what stands out most for you of the things you've been able to do, what would be the crowning effort (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well I think--well I think one of the things that does stand out is that indeed I probably had started a lot of things.  You don't, you know I think I'd been a pioneer in a, in a number of ways in terms of the services that I have started.  And, and you don't start out saying well I wanna be a pioneer you know start out at all with even thinking about what you're doing.  You do wanna see some; some changes and you want to see some difference, so you, so you take that road and that leads to maybe doing things differently.  Starting things that hadn't been started, done before and all of that, but I think that's probably my, you know what I've, what I've done.
Story_ID: 352250
Speaker 1: Another question is you talked about sort of the things that you were, were proud of, what stands out for you.  But if you were to speak about something you've implemented that you're proud of, what would that be?
Speaker 2: Well of course I'm proud of the Family Reunion Institute [Temple University, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] and its conferences, I, the reason that I think the conferences are so good is because for several reasons.  One is because it's for the families themselves, it's not a professional conference that you know that we all go to see our friends.  People come to get (laughter) knowledge and, and it truly is building on the strengths of the families as I, you know I like that.  And I get a lot of testimony from, from the persons, and they just, they, they're just having a reunion.  They're not thinking about, but now I see, I can see over time they really are thinking about what goes into a reunion now.  What is gonna make the family stronger, what is gonna make them bond more, all those things, and many of those ideas they get from the conference.  And the fact is that it's not just--because we share an awful lot of information as people.  Especially as black people, and we emulate a lot, so you see another family doing something and you say well that's a good idea.  And they take it and they take it and you know so it, it really gets around, it may not, we may not have hundreds people at the conference.  But what they do, it, what we do just gets around, so, so I'm really quite proud, pleased really I should say of that, that that has really done something.  And I think it's very interesting that most, no one else seems to have recognized this, this thing, this family reunion concept, as something to be used in working with and in bringing our families together.  So I have a couple of proposals, but I probably will never get to them, who knows (laughter) about that, yeah, I still write proposals and stuff you know, yeah.
Story_ID: 352251
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So what is it you would like to be remembered for?
Speaker 2: Well I'm probably just like every other parent, just want to be remembered as a, a parent with good kid, you know, I'm very blessed with my children.
Speaker 1: What are your children doing (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well my son [William Vargus] is a, son is a sports anchor and he, for a local FOX station, and he's very good.
Speaker 1: Where is he? In Boston [Massachusetts]?
Speaker 2: Here.
Speaker 1: Here.
Speaker 2: In Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], all my kids follow me.
Speaker 1: Okay so we can turn it on (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) They come everywhere.
Speaker 1: --and watch him tonight.
Speaker 2: He probably won't be on tonight.
Speaker 1: Oh he's a weekend anchor?
Speaker 2: Yeah, he's a weekend anchor, usually starting Thursday, Friday, Saturday and Sunday, but he is very good.  And that's been since he's been about three years old.  I mean he learned the English language really young, and has been interested in sports forever.  So he doesn't play anything but he you know he's been--
Speaker 1: He's a good commentator.
Speaker 2: Yeah, good commentator, so that's good, and he's married to a weather woman, she's on in the mornings from five to nine a.m.  She's on the same station, FOX, local FOX, Sue Serio is her name.  Then my daughter [Suzanne Vargus Holloman] is a dean of a, of continuing education in workforce development at the Montgomery Community College [Montgomery County Community College, Blue Bell, Pennsylvania].  And so she's, and she's just a, just a wonderful daughter, so I've just been very blessed.
Speaker 1: And she has two children.
Speaker 2: She has two children.
Speaker 1: Adopted.
Speaker 2: Two that she adopted.
Speaker 1: Through the foster care system or?
Speaker 2: She picked them up right from the hospital, yes through an adoption agency, she got them.  They called her and said there's a baby, would you take it, and so she said okay.  And of course she got to meet the mother's--it's called open admissions, open, open adoption, and that's how she.  So we've had them since they were in the hospital, since they were born.  And wonderful, wonder girls, yeah.
Speaker 1: Well how is it to be a grandparent?
Speaker 2: I, I enjoy it very much, I really do, I'm like my mother [Madeline Kountze Dugger-Kelley] though, I don't have a lot of time for babysitting you know (laughter).  But, but I do get to be with them because they don't live too, my daughter doesn't live too far from here, which is great.  And it's just nice to be with family, yeah.
Story_ID: 352252
Speaker 1: Well it has been a pleasure talking to you.
Speaker 2: Thank you.
Speaker 1: We didn't talk about any of your awards, and I have a whole list of them here, I won't read them off.  But are there any that you've received that have really meant something to you?  I mean I know they all mean something, but--
Speaker 2: Yes, they all do mean something to me, yeah; they all do.
Speaker 1: Something that's really special?
Speaker 2: Well I think the two, the two that I more or less, well, I do show some of them in my apartment.  But the two that I can remember that were very special of course was when I was, I was a, a trustee at Tufts University [Medford, Massachusetts].  And I, when I went there I was working as a domestic and had been working, and I worked as a domestic for you know for several of the professors.  Because I needed some money, so, so when I became a trustee, guess who I sat next to, one of the professors I used to work for, right?  Which I loved. but they, that's, that was good they gave me a, some kind of service award as an alumnus.  And the, the other was the Foundation, The Philadelphia Foundation [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] who gave me some, some beautiful scrolls when I re- when I stopped being the chair of their board.  But I was like the first black chair of a foundation also in the country when I was the chair of The Philadelphia Foundation.  And I still serve in, in a kind of an advisory capacity.
Story_ID: 352253
Speaker 1: So what are your hopes for the African American families, what are your hopes for, I was gonna say African American family reunions.  But really just (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Really it's for the families, yes it is the families, well I, I would hope that we could continue.  I think I, I think we don't get enough credit for what we do, I mean we read more about the negative aspects of our families and the problems.  And I and I would like to see us show more, I think if we could act as, we are models, there are many families that are just wonderful models.  And I love to see those families you know get more recognition, they're just everyday families, but they're wonderful.  And I would just hope that we could continue to progress basically and yeah.
Speaker 1: So do, are you, are you mentoring anyone at the moment in?
Speaker 2: For my job?  Well there are several people, young people who would be willing to take on my job, but they need a salary.  And I don't get paid (laughter) so that's why I have to get some proposals out there so we can get some money to pay somebody you know to take my, my place.
Story_ID: 352254
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Well it has been a pleasure.
Speaker 2: Thank you.
Speaker 1: And a great pleasure, you sitting, why did you agree to give us your story?
Speaker 2: Oh just 'cause I was asked I guess.
Speaker 1: Why you feel history is important?
Speaker 2: Oh wow, you couldn't have an uncle [Mabray "Doc" Kountze] like I have and a mother [Madeline Kountze Dugger-Kelley]; she also was very much involved with history.  And you couldn't have one without having that (laughter) sense of what is important really.  And of course I've put both of their papers in various places one (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Well can you tell me where?
Speaker 2: Yes my uncle is at the Boston University [Boston, Massachusetts], it used to be called the special collection, they now have it named after someone.  But it is his papers are there along with Monroe Trotter's [William Monroe Trotter] papers, the man who did the Boston Guardian.  My mother's papers are at the Bethune House [Mary McLeod Bethune Council House National Historic Site] in Washington D.C., they took twenty-four boxes, papers from my garage.  I brought them to Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] then they took them, I don't believe, however, they're catalogued how- and that was in 1995.  So the little challenge there, but anyway they're there and at least they're in archive, archival boxes someday, somebody will get around to this very interesting information that she has.
Story_ID: 352255
Speaker 1: This is a picture of my mother, I believe this was taken in about 1960s, in the 19- during the 1960s.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  And her name?
Speaker 1: Her name is Madeline Dugger-Kelley [Madeline Kountze Dugger-Kelley].  This is a picture of my wedding of, on my wedding day with my husband.  We were married in March 27, 1954.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  What's his name?
Speaker 1: His name is William Vargus [Bill Vargus], and at the time I was Ione Dugger [HistoryMaker Ione Teresa Vargus].
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: Now this is a picture of me Ione Var- Ione Dugger when I was about eleven years old, I'm standing outside of the Fort Devens' service club in Massachusetts.
Speaker 2: This is a picture of me, Ione Dugger Vargus when I became the dean of the School of Social Administration at Temple [Temple University School of Social Administration; Temple University School of Social Work, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] in 1978.
Speaker 1: This is a picture of my son and his wife when they got married December 31 in, and so there's Sue [Sue Serio], myself, Ione, Sue's mother Nancy Serio [Nancy O'Donnell Serio] and my son Bill Vargus [William Vargus].
Speaker 2: Picture of my giving an award to the first award from the Multicultural Institute [Temple University Multicultural Research and Training Institute, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] and which is what I formed, and they named the award after me.  They call it the Ione Dugger Vargus Award [sic. Ione Vargus Multicultural award], and we are giving, I'm giving it to Shalom Staub.
Speaker 1: The persons in the photograph are Cheri Black who was the director of the Multicultural Institute, myself, Ione Vargus, Anita Pernell-Arnold who was the chair of the board at the time.  Shalom Staub who was very active in multi, multicultural affairs, and Curtis Leonard who replaced me as the acting dean at the time I was the provost at the university, vice provost at the university.  That would've been like 1992.
Speaker 2: In this picture we see the elders of the Kountze family and their children.  Seated is my Uncle Mabray [Mabray "Doc" Kountze] he was a bachelor so he didn't have any children, Uncle Mabray Kountze.  Then next to him is Elmer Kountze, next to him is the, is Vivien Fisher Russell [Vivien Kountze Russell] and then next to her is my mother, Madeline Dugger.  She, so those four, the elders lived quite a while as a matter of fact and then three of them died rather almost together in the 1995.  But behind them is Wallace Kountze who is--and Elmer Kountze those two the children of Elmer Kountze who is seated second in the second place.  Next to them is my Aunt Vivien's daughters, Ann Dura [Ann Fisher-Durrah] and Viv, Vivien and they're Vivien Russell's chil- girls.  Next to that is my, myself Ione, Ione Dugger Vargus, my sister Portia Byard [Portia Dugger Byard] and my brother Cortland Dugger.  And we're all behind my mother Madeline; we are the three surviving children of the six children.  This picture would have been I, I believe sometime in the mid eight- 1980s.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  And where exactly?
Speaker 2: It that, it was taken in Medford, Massachusetts at my cousin, cousin Wallace's house.  This is a picture of my second husband, William Adams and myself, Ione Vargus.  And we were married in 1978 and I believe that this picture is one that was taken right, soon after we were married in 1978.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  We have two more left.  Hold on one second.
Speaker 2: This is a picture of my brother Cortland when he was about seven years old, this is, and a picture of my father [Edward Dugger, Sr.] who was the commanding officer of the 372nd Infantry [372nd Infantry Regiment].  And a, next to him is my older brother [Edward Dugger, Jr.] who would've been about fifteen, fifteen perhaps.  They were, this picture was taken in the 1930s, probably 1933 or--'3 [1933] 1933 or 1934.  And was at the Cape, in Cape Cod [Massachusetts] where they went for the summer, for their summer training.  This is a picture of Bill Cosby who was a trustee at Temple University [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] and myself, Ione Vargus, at a graduation in the 1990s.  Bill must've been saying something quite funny, 'cause as you can see I have a very broad smile.  But he was a wonderful person for Temple, a wonderful trustee giving it a lot of, giving it a lot of publicity.
