Story_ID: 658462
Speaker 1: I'm [HistoryMaker] Harriette Cole the interviewer today for The HistoryMakers. Our videographer is Scott Stearns.  Today is December 15, 2016, we are at Skadden, Arps [Skadden, Arps, Slate, Meagher and Flom LLP] at 4 Times Square in New York City [New York, New York] and I would like for you to say and spell your name, please, tell us your date of birth and what you do?
Speaker 2: Okay.  My name is [HistoryMaker] Angela Vallot, it's spelled V-A-L-L-O-T the T is silent so I tell people it's like, hello, Vallot.  I was born on November 8th, 1956.  I guess no more lying about my age (laughter), and I just had a big birthday so I've outed myself.
Speaker 1: Happy birthday.
Speaker 2: Thank you.
Speaker 1: And, what do you do?
Speaker 2: I am a diversity and inclusion consultant.  I have my own consulting firm right across the street, VallotKarp [VallotKarp Consulting LLC, New York, New York], so it's my last name and my business partner's [Mitchell Karp] last name and we do management consulting with a focus on inclusion and diversity.
Story_ID: 658463
Speaker 1: So, we'll start with what we call People magazine type questions.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: What's your favorite food?
Speaker 2: Oh, gosh, that's hard.  Well, I eat very healthy foods so I love fish and pasta, but when I'm not being so healthy a lot of my favorite foods are from my roots in Louisiana so I love gumbo and I love other Louisiana foods like boudin, things that are really bad for you.
Speaker 1: What's that?
Speaker 2: Boudin, boudin is--it's like a sausage but it's, it's something that it's French so it has rice and pork and spices and seasonings, and it's wonderful.  I mean, not too healthy for you but really, really good.
Speaker 1: What about your favorite color?
Speaker 2: Well, I love black for clothing but in terms of other colors, red, I'd probably say red and my business cards are blue and our logo's blue.  I'd say red, red, and blue.
Speaker 1: Your favorite time of year?
Speaker 2: Probably spring because I love flowers and I love it when flowers are blooming, and I'm a warm weather person.  So, I don't like winter so I would say spring and early summer.
Speaker 1: Vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Oh, gosh, that's hard.  I love travel, it's one of my favorite things to do in the world.  If I had to pick one or two cities that I love, I love Paris [France].  What's not to love about Paris?  My daughter [Anne Vallot-Basker] lives there now, I just spent Thanksgiving with her and reminds you of how much--how great Paris is.  But, I also love Barcelona [Spain].
Speaker 1: And, do you have a favorite saying or phrase?
Speaker 2: I don't.  I'll have to think about that one.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 658464
Speaker 1: We'll talk about your family now and let's start with your mother, your mother, and her side of the family.  What is your mother's name, when was she born, where is she from?  Tell me about her please.
Speaker 2: My mother was Irene Porche, P-O-R-C-H-E [Irene Porche Vallot], and she was born and raised in Lafayette, Louisiana which is a town half hour away from where I was born and raised.
Speaker 1: And, when was she born?
Speaker 2: She was born in 1930, May 3rd, 1930.
Speaker 1: And, what--tell me about her?  She, she grew up there, how many siblings, what?
Speaker 2: My mother had one sister, she had--and she had three brothers.  I think she was the third, and tragically she died when she was very young.  She died when she was thirty-six.  She died two weeks after giving birth to my youngest sister [Colette Vallot], so there's seven children in my family.  And, she died of something today you would never die of, but, basically, she died of a blood clot that went to her heart because she had, had a cesarean and a hysterectomy for the seventh child.  And, she came home after the hospital and--I remember this very distinctly because she was feeling some shortness of breath and my grandmother [Aline Bruno Porche], her mother, was there helping us.  And--
Speaker 1: How old were you?
Speaker 2: I was ten.  And, she, she called the doctor and the doctor said, you know, like, "Just get in bed, you're probably tired, it's probably no big deal."  I--it may even, you know, may be imagining things that's the family story.  You may--, "It may be just your imagination."  And I remember one night my father [Peter Vallot, Jr.] took her to the hospital at about ten o'clock at night because she was having a hard time breathing.  And the next morning she died, because this blood clot, you know, I think it's called thrombosis or something went to her heart and heart attack.
Speaker 1: Wow.
Speaker 2: Yeah, that was, that was, that was pretty deep.
Speaker 1: And at ten when you were very aware of what was going on.
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, I remember.  I remember exactly what I was doing the day it happened.  I was--I'm number three in my family so there were two older girls [Ava Vallot and Michelle Vallot] and then--but a lot of younger kids too.  My grandmother was there and I think she was cooking, and I was actually ironing and had the ironing board set up and doing my little chores.  And the phone rang and my grandmother picked up the phone, and she dropped it and she fell to the floor.  And I knew, I knew what had happened.  And, yeah, that was a start of a very difficult time.
Speaker 1: Because seven children, so did your grandmother stay living with you?
Speaker 2: She did.  Well, my grandmother, her mother, lived in the next town over, so, I mean, I come from a really big family on both sides.  So, my dad had like five siblings, my mother had five siblings and, you know, there were a ton of first cousins on each side.  I think I, I'm one of twenty-five first cousins on both sides.
Speaker 1: Wow.
Speaker 2: So, everyone really just kind of moved in and embraced us.  And, and my grandmother was wonderful, I mean, she, she lived with us for a while.  And my father's family helped because everybody lived on the same road, 'cause I grew up in a rural part of Louisiana so we had all of this extended family who, who just sort of took us on, you know, for, for--until my father remarried [to Kathleen Kern Vallot].
Speaker 1: An infant and, as well as, six young kids that's a, that's a lot.
Speaker 2: It was a lot, it was, you know, I mean, at a certain point, I mean, I remembered everything.  I remember the funeral, you know, then, then there's this sort of blank space that happened for a long time where I just kind of don't remember a lot.  But, I remember all the, you know, the arrangements leading up to her funeral.  And, I was talking to my siblings last night trying to remember exactly the chronology of how this happened, but, because we're from such a big family, my father knew that the church that we belonged to--it was a small black Catholic church in our town in Abbeville [Louisiana] called Our Lady of Lourdes [Our Lady of Lourdes Roman Catholic Church]--was not going to be big enough to hold all of the family.  I mean, because this was pretty shocking news that someone just died suddenly at thirty-six and left these seven children.  So, my dad had to get permission from the archdiocese [Roman Catholic Diocese of Lafayette, Louisiana] to hold her funeral in the white Catholic church in town called Mary Magdalen [St. Mary Magdalen Church, Abbeville, Louisiana].  And I remember there were these negotiations over like a two day period where he was talking to the monsignor at the--I think he was he head of the archdiocese to get permission, because everything was so segregated.
Speaker 1: Right, because she died in '66 [1966], right?
Speaker 2: Yeah. Yeah, so we, we--he finally got permission and it was the first time there was, you know, because, you know, blacks and whites just went to separate churches and separate facilities.  I don't remember the funeral service at all, but it was a big deal that we had it in the church and apparently, it was packed because it was, you know, it was a small cathedral in our town.
Story_ID: 658465
Speaker 1: What do you remember about your mother [Irene Porche Vallot] when she was living?
Speaker 2: Well, my mother was beautiful, she was absolutely gorgeous.  And I have these beautiful pictures and all seven of us, you know, share all of the pictures we can get our hands on.  But, she was very strikingly beautiful, she was a fabulous, fabulous cook, she had great taste.  And food is such a big part of the Louisiana culture but her mother [Aline Bruno Porche] was a fabulous cook.  I mean like really, really, serious, serious cooks.  And, I just remembered that we always had fantastic food and, you know, for back in that time--she, she dressed beautifully.  She didn't work.  The stories that her grandfather would--her father [Bill Porche] wouldn't let her go to college, very sadly, because he thought that, you know, women were supposed to be wives and, and housemakers.  So, he didn't let her go to college and, in fact, interestingly I was just in New Orleans [Louisiana] with [HistoryMaker] Norman Francis.  Norman Francis was the president of Xavier [Xavier University of Louisiana, New Orleans, Louisiana] for I think forty-eight years, Norman grew up with my mother.  And they went to St. Paul's high school [St. Paul Catholic School; Holy Family Catholic School] in Lafayette, Louisiana from kindergarten through high school.  And, he has all of these wonderful stories about my mother and how smart she was, and they were on the school newspaper together.  And, he told me this just last month when I was with him, he said, "You know, it was such a mistake that her father never let her go to college because your mother was so smart."  But then she married young and she and my dad [Peter Vallot, Jr.], you know, started a family pretty early and they built a house together and decorated this house, which was, you know, it was, it was, it was beautiful.  So, I don't know where she got this taste from, but she was a very elegant woman with, with, with, with a great sense of style and, obviously, she had ambition but, you know, because she wasn't able to, to go to college I think she, she found other outlets for, for her ambition.
Story_ID: 658466
Speaker 1: What did her parents do?
Speaker 2: Well, her parents were, were not educated.  Her mother was, was a homemaker so she stayed at home and raised the kids.  And her father was a mason, a bricklayer.  And, he, in fact, helped my dad [Peter Vallot, Jr.] to build our house, you know, it's a rambler, you know, brick house but back in those days it wasn't unusual you found an architect or--you know, my dad was very handy at things like this so they designed a house and my grandfather and my uncle, who was my mother's brother, they were, they were all bricklayers or masons.  They literally helped build this house on, on the weekends, and that's how our house got built.  And I remember as a kid, you know, helping my grandfather to sort of--he would, you know, sort of lay bricks and, and he used to drink too, so, yeah.  And, interestingly, as we got older we would find, you know, if you moved around a wall or like, you know, these planters, you know.  Back in the day, they'd--everybody had these planters and you had these plants, you know, like in your living room.  And, you'd start looking there and he'd have a bottle of like Cutty Sark buried somewhere in the brick, you know.  But, you know, I don't know how long it took but maybe like three years, but that's how our house get built, got built.
Speaker 1: And, what were your grandparents' names?
Speaker 2: Aline was my grandmother's name, Aline, her maiden name was Bruno [Aline Bruno Porche].  And, actually, I wanna do some more research--she came from New Orleans [Louisiana] and my father [sic. grandfather] was Bill Porche.
Speaker 1: How far back can you trace your mother's family?
Speaker 2: Pretty far back.  I have pieces of it but apparently, it dates back to the 1700s where there was a Jean-Francois LePorche [ph.].  So, they think what happened is that the Le got dropped when he came from Brittany, France and the name got changed to Porche.  But, I think that he--his arrival in Southern Louisiana dates back to the 1700s that's the earliest tracing on the Porche side of the family.
Speaker 1: And so, you know that this person, LePorche, was in the family line?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Who, who in the family was black?
Speaker 2: Yeah, that's an interesting story.  So, that's where we don't have it all together but we have the same thing on the Vallot's side of the family.
Speaker 1: Right, right, right.
Speaker 2: So--and I think this is a very big part of, you know, black family history and especially Creole family history.  There is always in Creole families there was the mistress of some white guy, right.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: So, I'm French on both sides but, apparently, at some point one of these French guys had a Creole mistress and that's how we came to be.  You know, I'm not a hundred percent clear on--and I think on the Porche side, I think they were always free people of color.  I, I'm not aware of slavery on that side.  I am told that on the Vallot side that there was some slavery in the family from on the Taylor side, and that would have been my paternal grandmother's [Melda Taylor Vallot] side.  But, again, I don't have the pieces all together.
Speaker 1: That's interesting, that, that it could have been free, I mean, New Orleans has a very interesting history, Louisiana.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Of, of mixing of cultures.
Speaker 2: Yeah, very much so and my family didn't grow up in New Orleans, I mean, my grandmother did on my mother's side but they settled in, in southwest Louisiana.  So, apparently, there was a whole area called Pointe Coupee [Pointe Coupee Parish, Louisiana] and that's where a lot of Creoles settled.  So, I think the Porche family was from Pointe Coupee and then moved to the Lafayette [Louisiana] area.  But there was a whole distinct sort of community of Creoles and, you know, they kept to themselves because there was a time when, you know, you had slaves and then you had Creoles and then you had, you know, whites.  Well, Creoles always were afforded certain privileges that, you know, slaves and other people who were descendants of slaves weren't accorded kind of not too different from what we see and what we saw, you know, apartheid in South Africa with, you know, the Coloureds and, and then blacks.  But, it's my understanding that the Creole community and my mother's family being part of that and on my dad's side too--and they were such big families they sort of were really insular and kind of stayed within the family.
Story_ID: 658467
Speaker 1: So, as your family--as your mother [Irene Porche Vallot] was growing up in, in--and with her siblings, that community--the community that she would have identified with would be Creole, correct?
Speaker 2: Yes, yeah.
Speaker 1: And so, as it--what do you call yourself?
Speaker 2: Well, I call myself African American, but, you know, I say to people--and because I do a lot of, you know, sort of training more than speaking, I often have to say to people that I am African American.  You know, I'm obviously of mixed heritage but, you know, I very proudly identify as African American.  So, it's interesting that, you know, once I left Louisiana people were always uncertain about, "Well, what are you? Because you look like you could be anything."  But in Louisiana because so many people look like me, when I go home, people always know that, you know, you are Creole or mulatto.
Speaker 1: Well, and, and Creole--well, certainly mulatto is something that people were called more in a disparaging way than Creole.  Creole was not in any way pejorative, but it didn't end up being like something that's on the census.  You know, it's as a category even though in Louisiana it certainly is, right?
Speaker 2: I think so, I think and again, this is the part that I'm now really intrigued to, to wanna go back and do some of this research myself.  I think that, yes, somehow in the census people were either labeled as Creole or--
Speaker 1: Was it ever on the census?  I'm not sure about that.
Speaker 2: You know, I don't know for sure, I don't know for sure.
Speaker 1: But, in Louisiana, you know, back I guess what if we look in the 1800s and maybe early 1900s the, you know, the octoroon balls and the quadroon balls and all, the differentiations that people would subscribe to, it was uniquely played out there.
Speaker 2: Absolutely.
Speaker 1: Did, did your family talk about participating in any of those things?
Speaker 2: Well, again, most of my, my, my family were kind of country people, so we didn't--we weren't sophisticated, you know, sort like city New Orleans [Louisiana] people.  We had relatives in New Orleans and when we'd go to visit, you know, we, we'd recognized that they--like they were much more sophisticated than we were.  We were country people.  So, so we didn't have that, the, the balls and, you know, the cotillion balls and all those kinds of things.  But, race and color was just such a big part of my life and my family's life, because people were very, very conscious of these gradations of skin color and hair texture, and nose and lips.  It was just, you know, it was just very talked about and people kind of, you know, you stayed with your own.
Speaker 1: And, so what was discrimination like within that context?
Speaker 2: So, yeah, so that, that's a really interesting question because on one hand, you know, I grew up during Jim Crow, so.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: You know, we had separate facilities and, you know, for the first six years of school I went to--we went to the colored Catholic school, Our Lady of Lourdes [Our Lady of Lourdes School, Abbeville, Louisiana], which was associated with our church [Our Lady of Lourdes Roman Catholic Church, Abbeville, Louisiana].  And then we integrated the, the white Catholic school [Mount Carmel School, Abbeville, Louisiana], which was, you know, which was a big deal then.  And, race was just a big part of my life for as long as I can remember.  When we went to the doctor's office, we went in through the back door.  There was a colored entrance and, you know, I have very, very vivid memories of this as a kid.  There was a waiting room in the back of the building and there was a, a black and white photograph of a black--a young black girl with two pigtails and she had a tear, and that was, that was all there was.  And, it was sort of a dark room with like just a couple of chairs and that was the colored entrance which we used to go into.  And you would wait your turn to be called into, you know, to see the doctor.  And, if you wanted a soda, you could walk down the hall into this very large white area.  It had a television, it had a Coke machine, it had a water fountain and it was, you know, air conditioned.  So, you'd walk down the hall and, you know.  But, it was just--the contrast was so stark.  And, at some point when, you know, when we made the transition and we helped to integrate things, and my dad [Peter Vallot, Jr.] said, okay, this is ridiculous, we're gonna, you know, go into the front door.  My sisters remember that they used to call us back quickly to put us in a room to wait for the doctor.  So, even when we started coming into the front, you know, people would kind of look around and it was kind of like, hm, what are they doing here?  But, then they'd quickly, "Oh, hi, come on in," but they'd get you out of the waiting room and waiting in, in the back for the doctor.
Story_ID: 658468
Speaker 1: Among your siblings and, and your family members, what are the gradations of color within your family?
Speaker 2: Interesting, not, not much gradation, so everybody looks like me.  There's seven of us and, in fact, one of the pictures that I brought is of my siblings and we're all exactly the same skin color.  So, no--and my parents looked--in fact, well, my dad [Peter Vallot, Jr.] was more fair skinned than--a little lighter skinned than I am.  But my mother [Irene Porche Vallot] and father were great examples, and I have their wedding picture.  And you can see in their wedding picture all of the relatives who were in it, they're all these Creole.  They all looked exactly the same.
Speaker 1: And, I'm asking because you probably look like some of the white people when it's--probably--in some instances there are white people who are, are darker.
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, absolutely, yeah.  Everybody's all mixed up down there and there was always whispering about, you know--and, of course, I grew up knowing about the powerful drop, that if you had one drop of black blood, so look, I had relatives who passed for white and--
Speaker 1: That's what I'm asking.
Speaker 2: You know, at the time, passe blanc.  And they were always, you know, the adults were always whispering about people who passed.  But, you know, this was also during the great migration west, so people who could and who had the wherewithal to move west, did.  And, once they got out to the West Coast, you know, they lived a different life and there was just a different level of acceptance and there wasn't as much scrutiny about what are you.  And, in fact, my mother's sister and her family moved to California and I remember we took a car trip in 1965, and we went to visit them.  We drove across the country with six children, this was before my mother had the last child [Colette Vallot].  And I remember there was all this--well, we--first of all we had to drive through the South and we didn't stop at hotels because we didn't know if we would be allowed to stay in hotels, so, you know--and, we didn't have a lot of money so my dad would just pull over and we'd sleep in the car.  Six kids and we'd stop and get, you know, lunchmeat and make sandwiches and things like that.  Once we got out of the South then it was different and you knew it was okay, but there was all this talk about once you got to California, don't bring up race that, you know, my aunt and her husband were not considered black.  And people thought they were Mediterranean or, you know, 'cause she looked just like my mother and she kind of--and her husband had green eyes and, you know, people thought--didn't think they were black.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: But you can't blame 'em, I mean, who wanted to stay 'cause it was, you know, it was pretty, it was pretty tough, tough going growing up there.
Story_ID: 658469
Speaker 1: Your father did--did in, in your household, did you talk about race?
Speaker 2: All the time, all the time.  So, my dad was, was, was different, he was, he was, he was sort of a Renaissance man.  So, my father grew up on a sugarcane farm. So--
Speaker 1: And, what's his name?
Speaker 2: My father was Peter Vallot, Jr.  His father was Peter Vallot, Sr. and he grew up in Abbeville, Louisiana which is about a half hour from Lafayette [Louisiana] where my mother [Irene Porche Vallot] grew up.  And his father and grandfather, and great-grandfather were sugarcane farmers.  And, my dad kind of took a little bit of a different path, he worked on the farm as a young man and he would work on weekends, but he, he's one of--let's see he had three brothers and two sisters, so six of them.  But his parents were not educated, I think his father may have gotten through six grade and, you know, they were French.  And, I can remember there was always a lot of French being spoken.  The old people all spoke French especially when they didn't want the kids to know what they were talking about.
Speaker 1: Did you understand it?
Speaker 2: No, not as a young kid.  I mean, I studied it in school at some point but they spoke kind of a patois French so it was, it was a little bit different.  But my dad decided to kind of take a different course and he was one of the only one of his siblings to, to go to college and get, you know, get a college degree.  So, he went to Southern University [Southern University and Agricultural and Mechanical College], Baton Rouge [Louisiana], black university [HBCU].  And then he got his master's [degree] at the university of Lafayette, Louisiana, USL or University of Southern Louisiana [sic. University of Southwestern Louisiana; University of Louisiana at Lafayette, Lafayette, Louisiana].  He got a master's in education, so he taught school.  He taught biology and science at the black public school in Abbeville, Herod High [James A. Herod High School].  And then he, he also ran--what do you call it, community action programs.  So, this was during, you know, sort of the Lyndon Johnson [President Lyndon Baines Johnson] Great Society programs, so he ran Head Start and other community action programs.  I think all of which were under OEO [Office of Economic Opportunity] programs, and he also was associated with this black priest who had come from New York [New York] and was stationed down in, in Louisiana named Father Albert J. McKnight.  And, I just Googled him and found out that he just died in April at eighty-eight, but he was considered a real revolutionary radical priest to be a black Catholic priest.  And his whole thing was economic empowerment and, you know, he was part of the, the black movement and he started something called the Southern Consumers Coop.  And, you know, it was, it was cooperative which then became part of a whole larger southern cooperative.  But it was all about black empowerment and helping black people to achieve, you know, economic empowerment and you could borrow money through this, you know, cooperative.  So, my dad worked with Father McKnight for several years, you know, on these various programs and was one of the founding members of this Southern Consumers Cooperative (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Wow.
Story_ID: 658470
Speaker 1: And how far back can you trace your father's family?
Speaker 2: So, back to the 1800s.  So, we have the genealogy on, on that side.  There were three guys who came from Burgundy, France, so my mother's [Irene Porche Vallot] people came from Brittany, France and, and the Vallots came from Burgundy, France.  And, the way the story goes these three brothers come down, they settle in southwest Louisiana and, apparently, one of them took on a mistress and that's where our side of the family came in.  So, there was always a white Vallot family in Abbeville [Louisiana] and then there was the colored Vallot family.  And we always knew we were related but it was kind of like that unspoken rule that you just didn't talk about it.  And, in the '70s [1970s] the white Vallot family gave--'cause I don't know, my dad [Peter Vallot, Jr.] was also involved in, you know, business circles and, you know, at some point it became more acceptable to talk about these things.  And the white Vallot gave my dad the family genealogy and said, "Here's where I think your family came in and it's all documented."  So, this guy Nicholas Alfrade [ph.] took on a Creole mistress and her name was Sylvanie Charpio [ph.] I think, C-H-A-R-P-I-O, and they had five children and that's how my family came into being.
Speaker 1: Wow.
Speaker 2: And, apparently, when he died, he left them sugarcane, he left them land and that apparently, I understand, was pretty typical in those days of Creole families because I heard the same thing on the Porche side that, you know, it wasn't like he disowned this, you know, colored family that you had that, you know, you, you left the inherited land and that's how we got into the sugarcane business.  And my grandfather [Peter Vallot, Sr.] was actually a very, very big sugarcane farmer.  So, you know, you asked earlier about race, so, you know, I kind of lived in a bubble.  So, we lived in this bubble of our own separate world because people--none of my family didn't have--they didn't particularly work for people. They all had their own businesses.  So, my grandfather owned his own sugarcane farm and hundreds and hundreds of acres.  He had people working for him, all the brothers were in the business.  They all owned their own land and they would all build their own houses and we lived down this one road.  So, that was the bubble.  So, on the one hand I had this sort of idyllic childhood that we were surrounded by family and we all owned our own houses, and people farmed and, you know, you slaughtered a calf and you had food for the year, and you grew vegetables, and it was pretty hunky dory.  I mean, in the larger world when we went to school that's when you experienced segregation.  And then you got it from both sides because we also experienced racism from the black community, because we weren't particularly embraced by the black community and not embraced by the white community.  So, we were always kind of separate and apart.
Story_ID: 658471
Speaker 1: Let's talk a bit about the race sensitivity, because as a Creole African American and as a child when you are in school talk a bit about what the black dy- black Creole dynamic was.
Speaker 2: Yeah, that, that--it was interesting.  So, when we--the first school I went to was the black Catholic school, Our Lady of Lourdes [Our Lady of Lourdes School, Abbeville, Louisiana], and I was very keenly aware that there were these tensions between sort of the black kids who live in town and we lived in the outskirts of town in an area called Grosse Isle, which is a French name.  And all my relatives lived down this one road.  But as far as the black community in town was concerned we were considered like the (air quotes) rich, the rich, you know, Creoles.  I don't think we were rich but, you know, we, we were, we were economically sort of independent.  I remember at school getting beat up a lot.  And there was this one girl in particular who--I guess she didn't like me very much because she'd beat me up after school every day.  So, every day at three o'clock I would meet her and I, I let her beat me up.  And she'd pull my hair and she'd scratch me--
Speaker 1: What age were you?
Speaker 2: I was like in third grade.  And on the school bus, we rode the school bus to school and the school bus would pick us up on Grosse Isle Road.  All the cousins and we'd kind of stick together and then as we'd go down we'd start picking up other kids.  And there were--always be fights on the bus and there were always these tensions between sort of the Grosse Isle kids, my cousins and, and the black kids from town.  But, you know, this girl would just beat me up.  I didn't know why but I just figured if I just got it over with quickly it would, you know, just go away and if--I didn't wanna, I didn't wanna anger her so I'd show up on time to get to get my little but whipped every day, right.  So, my oldest sister [Ava Vallot] who was fierce and, you know, for six girls and I had this one brother [Glen Vallot] who was in between but he was younger than I was, but my sister was the oldest one and she was a warrior.  She found out one day that this girl was beating me up and she said to me, "Are you crazy?  You're letting somebody beat up on you?"  So, one day she met me at three o'clock with the girl and she beat her butt.  And that was the end of that.  And she said to me, "Don't you ever let anybody hit on you again," you know.  "If you do, I'll beat you up," but she was always like the mother pushing us out there.  And she have to fight to get us on the bus, and people would throw spit balls at us, you know.  I mean, some of that was just typical kids' stuff but some of it was the racial tension.  And, you know, it was also during, you know, the Civil Rights Movement.  And I remember we used to go to these retreats on weekend led by this Father A.J. McKnight [Albert J. McKnight] and, you know, it was an awkward time because if I said, we, talking, but we black people they would look at me and say, "We, what do you mean?  You're not one of us."  And, if I said, "They," they'd say, "Oh, what do you mean, you're too good to be one of us?"  So, it was like, okay, you know, like, you're damned if you do, damned if you don't.  So, it was just--it was a very difficult time, you know.  Everybody was trying to find their way.  I remember it was in the days of black power and Afros and--my sister who has slightly curlier hair than I do, she'd set her hair and she was able to get this big Afro going, you know.  And I tried and had this long sort of stringy hair, but, you know, I couldn't make my hair do that.
Story_ID: 658472
Speaker 1: I want you to think back earlier to when you were a child.  What is your earliest childhood memory?
Speaker 2: I had wonderful early childhood memories.  It was--there was always food and in Louisiana food is such a big part of our culture.  And, you know, my mother [Irene Porche Vallot] was a fabulous cook, her mother [Aline Bruno Porche] was a fabulous cook.  We would, you know--lots of cousins around, you know, twenty-five first cousins on each side.  And, you know, when we would come together we were always, you know, good times and a lot of laughter and fun.  And, I, I remember my grandparents [Melda Taylor Vallot and Peter Vallot, Sr.] on my father's side, you know, they were farmers, so, you know, a few times a year they'd slaughter a hog or, you know, a calf or something.  And there'd be all this, you know, cooking and they, they made boudin, cracklin and all this stuff so it was kind of fun as a kid, you know.  You're just watching all of this, you know, stuff being made.  And then they would can stuff for the year, so they would, you know, put away all this food.  And, you know, they grew vegetables so they would can corn.  And, on my mother's side, you know, there would be this season of making crawfish etouffee so for like three days in a row you'd peel the crawfish and they made all these wonderful bisques and etouffees and things that they'd freeze for the year.  So, a lot of--a lot around food and cooking.  When were very young, that's when my dad [Peter Vallot, Jr.] was still sort of finishing our house and I remember helping him--we all helped to--I mean, he literally wired, put in Celotex, we put in insulation, tile on the floor.  'Cause we moved into the house but it was a big enough house that, you know, you could finish off certain areas so I remember helping him do that.  We always--we worked hard.  I mean, we, we had chores so we definitely had to work, cut grass and clean windows.
Speaker 1: Did you do any farming?
Speaker 2: I didn't do farming per se, no, I mean, I went out and I got to ride in the tractor or something but, you know, we lived in the--you know, it was a very safe area and everybody knew everyone [in Abbeville, Louisiana].  So, on weekends and during the summers we would just take off my sister and I, we'd, we'd leave for the day.  We'd make little peanut butter sandwiches and we would go through all these back roads and sugarcane fields.  And we'd visit this aunt and go and get sweet potato pie here or blackberry tarts here, and your mother always knew where you were because the aunts would call and say, "Oh, the kids stopped by--," and then the cousins, you know, we would just hang out.  And we just--we had this sort of on the one hand very, very ideal life.  In the country, it was, you know, you could, you could just roam around.  It was safe, nobody every worried about--and you came home by dark (laughter).
Speaker 1: And with twenty-five first cousins on each side, do you know everyone well?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.  My first cousins?  Yeah.  I mean we would--I mean for holidays and special events so like when it was somebody's birthday you just had a birthday cake and all the cousins came.  You know, and there were almost twenty people there for your birthday party just because there were so many of us.  And we were all sort of the same age, because they all had kids at sort of the same time.  And, you know, my, my grandparents were--especially on my dad's side everyone congregated there.  They were, they were definitely the sort of lynchpins of our family so their home was always a gathering place.
Story_ID: 658473
Speaker 1: You describe the street--the road that you grew up on. All of the family was on that road [in Abbeville, Louisiana].  What are the sights, sounds and smells that you remember as a child?
Speaker 2: Hm, well, one of the smells was the smell of like molasses because, you know, sugarcane.  So, in the fall when they would harvest the cane they would cut it and then they'd burn the flags.  They would really set the cane on the fire to burn the flags so there was this wonderful, wonderful smell in the fall, it smelled like molasses.
Speaker 1: When you say burned the flags, what does that mean?
Speaker 2: The sugarcane flags, so, because what they would take to the mill to refine to turn into sugar and syrup was just the stalks.  But, somehow, they would burn the flags so the cane and--I don't remember exactly how they did it, they set it on fire but it was a wonderful, wonderful smell.  I mean, it probably wasn't so great for the environment, and I don't know if they still do that today but it was just this, this great smell.  So, I always loved fall because it was a time of harvest and, and then there was a sugarcane mill in town that they would take the, the, the cane too.  And, even in town you could smell this lovely smell from the sugarcane mill.  So, that was one of the things I remember.  Sounds, I don't know if I particularly remember sounds because it was rural area.  So, you know, we rode our bikes a lot and we, you know, we roamed, we roamed because there was a lot of space and land.
Story_ID: 658474
Speaker 1: You said you went to Our Lady of Lourdes School [Abbeville, Louisiana]. Where did you go after that because that was elementary school, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, well, then we switched.  So, we, we, we switched to the white Catholic school, Mount Carmel [Mount Carmel School], which was also in Abbeville [Louisiana].  And, we were the first--I think we were one of two black families to integrate that school, so that was a really big change.
Speaker 1: So, at what time?
Speaker 2: This would have been--I think I was in fifth grade so that would have been like in 1967 that we integrated the, the white Catholic school.  And (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So that's at the very beginning of the integration of schools?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, and it was a whole 'nother experience, you know.  And, trying to be accepted and find your place there amongst these white kids and for them this was all new too, because they had never been in school with (air quotes) colored people.  So, you know, I remembered hearing comments from, you know, some of the kids and the girls that I became friends with, you know, and they would say things like, "You're not really colored. You're much more like us."  Or people would--they would say, "You're the prettiest colored girl I've ever seen," you know.  And, you're eleven years old and you're trying to figure out like, what do I do with that, you know, like, it's sounds just like a compliment but you knew it wasn't really a compliment.  But, they were, you know, they were trying to find their own way and they were trying to deal with this whole issue of, of integration (background noise).  And, in some ways, to be honest (background noise) some of the white kids (background noise) embraced us more warmly than the (background noise) black kids did.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Hold on.
Speaker 2: (TAPE INTERRUPTION)
Speaker 1: You were saying that the, the white kids were more welcoming in some instances than the black kids in that school.
Speaker 2: Yeah, to some extent, I mean, I don't remember like hearing the N word or anything once we integrated that school, and we made a lot of friends. I mean, where it started getting a little bit tricky was when it was dating time.  And that's when things got a little funky.  But, you know, otherwise there were, there were kids who, who embraced us and whom we got along fine with.  I remember lots of issues and drama around prom, so we went into the high school of the same Catholic school.  So, the high school was called Vermilion Catholic [Vermilion Catholic High School, Abbeville, Louisiana] but it was all part of the same,--and I was there for two years. My oldest sister [Ava Vallot] was there for four years.  And, one of the guys she was dating was white and there was huge issue of when it was time for prom, and it was like the talk of the town that she was, you know, that there was this interracial, you know, date for the prom.
Speaker 1: Did they go?
Speaker 2: They did go.  But, you know, again, drama, drama, drama.  But he was a lovely guy and we were very comfortable with the idea of sort of multiracial relationships, so.
Story_ID: 658475
Speaker 1: We haven't talked yet about the fact that my father [Peter Vallot, Jr.] remarried after my mother [Irene Porche Vallot] died and he married a white woman [Kathleen Kern Vallot] which was pretty scandalous in 1967.  And he married pretty quickly after my mother died.
Speaker 2: He had seven children.
Speaker 1: He had seven children.  I thought it was two years but actually in talking to my older sister it was--it turned out it was the following year that he married, 1967.  So, there was still anti-miscegenation laws on the books--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --so that's another whole story and then I'll come back to the, the school [Vermilion Catholic High School, Abbeville, Louisiana] and the prom story.
Speaker 2: Please, tell me, yes?
Speaker 1: So, they eloped.  They went away and got married and came home and surprised us and this was a huge surprise.  So, they went to Indianapolis where there was a black priest, priest who was from Abbeville [Louisiana] and his name was Father Lebouve [ph.] and he was at a parish in Indianapolis, Indiana.  They went away and got married, his parents [Melda Taylor Vallot and Peter Vallot, Sr.] knew that they were marrying, her parents knew too, but they surprised us.  So, here we are, you know, and they walk in one night and go, "Surprise!  We're married."  And it was like--
Speaker 2: Did you know her?
Speaker 1: Yes, we knew her because she was, you know, she was coming around the house a lot and I knew they were sort of dating but, you know, you know, I'm ten and eleven by this time.  But I didn't think like dating serious enough to be married, but I knew that there was something going on.  But it was, it was really big.  Her parents disowned her, so I never met her parents.  They died and I never her--met them.  I met two of her sisters, I never met her brother because her brother (background noise) could never embrace the fact (background noise)--
Speaker 2: So, her parents--so, let's, let's back up for a second.  The anti-miscegenation laws meant what?
Speaker 1: That it was--interracial marriage, it was illegal, you could not marry across race.  Now, as you may know that [U.S.] Supreme Court case about which there is a movie today, Loving v. Virginia, the Supreme Court outlawed anti-miscegenation laws.  So, that was in 1967, but I think that was just before my father and stepmother married.  So, they went to Indianapolis where this priest married them and I don't think--
Speaker 2: Even though it was illegal?
Speaker 1: Well, it was illegal in certain states.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: You see it was illegal in Virginia where the Lovings [Mildred Jeter Loving and Richard Loving] got married and they were arrested and, and that case then eventually made its way to the Supreme Court.  But there were states where it was not, but it clearly was against the law in the State of Louisiana.  So, it was a big deal.  And my dad's family, while they ultimately embraced her, there was a lot of tension there.  They thought he had married too soon after my mother died and they weren't so in love with this idea of him marrying a white woman, because it was, it was really big news.  I mean, we got hate mail from the Ku Klux Klan [KKK], I mean, so, you know.  Again, this is a small town and word spread pretty quickly that, that there was this interracial marriage.  So, it was, it was a hard time.  It was hard for my mother inheriting these seven children, including an infant [Colette Vallot].  Well, she was--I guess she was one by the time they married, my youngest sister was one.  And--
Speaker 2: Did they have children?
Speaker 1: No.  And, they stayed married eleven years but, so, over that period of time, I mean, you know, I got very comfortable with this notion of, you know, a white mother.  And, and so, in the backdrop, you know, the Civil Rights Movement is happening and black power, and say it loud, you're black you're--I'm proud.  And, you know, you remember James Brown's song ['Say It Loud, I'm Black and I'm Proud'] and all of that's going on.  And this was the time of, you know, white people were all bad, hate white people and, you know, I'd jump and say, well, no, all white people are not bad.  I mean, my--you know, people knew I had a white stepmother so that caused a lot of, you know, people teased us and we were the subjects of a lot of, you know, ugly stuff because we had a white stepmother.
Story_ID: 658476
Speaker 1: And I just wanna clarify another point because you--it was in '66 [1966] was it when you went to the--when you integrated the school?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I think it was in '67 [1967], 'cause my mother [Irene Porche Vallot] died in '66 [1966] and I think it was right after my father [Peter Vallot, Jr.] remarried [to Kathleen Kern Vallot] that I think they decided, all right, time to start integrating everything and, you know, we're gonna take the kids out of the black Catholic school [Our Lady of Lourdes School, Abbeville, Louisiana] and put them in this white Catholic school [Mount Carmel School, Abbeville, Louisiana].
Speaker 1: So, it was their decision to move you into the school--
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: --because Brown vs. Board of Education had occurred in '54 [Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka, 1954].
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: In Louisiana where you were, was it around the time that your family integrated the schools that this was occurring there or had it begun?
Speaker 2: Well, this was, this was post-Brown for sure--
Speaker 1: Of course.
Speaker 2: --but these were, you know, there was still a lot of de facto segregation in Louisiana.
Speaker 1: Right, that's why I'm asking.
Speaker 2: So, even after the Civil Rights Act [Civil Rights Act of 1964] was passed, you know, we still had everything was just the way it had always been.  So, yeah, there was a lot of stuff that was still in place so--but, this was a Catholic school so it wasn't a public school.  So, legally, it was integrated but there weren't black kids at that school.  You know, part of it was a matter of economics I'm sure that, you know, you had to be able to afford to pay the tuition and part of it was that it just wasn't done, it was still status quo.
Speaker 1: Right, because it takes a while from the time that the (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Exactly.
Speaker 1: --law happens to when it--
Speaker 2: Exactly.
Speaker 1: -- actually happens.
Story_ID: 658477
Speaker 1: So, speaking of race, here's another very vivid memory I have.  So, there was a movie theater in town so, you know, all in the little town square there was the, the, the Mary Magdalen church [St. Mary Magdalen Church, Abbeville, Louisiana] where my mother's [Irene Porche Vallot] funeral service was held, there was the doctor's office right around the corner, and there was Frank's movie theatre [Frank's Theatre, Abbeville, Louisiana].  Well, we never went to the movies, I mean, we were seven kids and, you know, you just didn't.  And, everything was segregated.  So, one of the ways that we sort of lived in this bubble or avoided coming face to face with some of this is that, you know, my parents just didn't expose us to it and 'cause we, you know, we had our own family and our own things.  So, on the one hand idyllic childhood, on the other hand, you know, once you got into town you could see and experience the segregation.  So, one day my parents took us to see 'Lilies of the Field' at Frank's movie theatre, 'cause otherwise we wouldn't just go to the movies for entertainment we had our own ways of entertainment at home.  But, my dad [Peter Vallot, Jr.] walked up to buy tickets and the guy sold him tickets to the balcony.  My dad said, "Oh, no, we will not sit in the balcony.  We're gonna sit downstairs."  And I remember this caused quite a stir and it was ugly, and I thought they called the police and I asked my brother [Glen Vallot] this the other day and he said, "No, they didn't call the police but it was, you know, there was a shouting match."  And, ultimately, we ended up sitting downstairs in the balcony but, you know, I mean, in the--you know, on the first floor.  But that was still, you know--so, this would have been in like '67 [1967].  Again, after the Civil Rights Act [Civil Rights Act of 1964] was passed but everything was still status quo segregated.  But, my father refused and insisted, "Nope, my children will not sit in the balcony. We are sitting downstairs."  And, all I remember is that I wanted to go home, like, I don't wanna see 'Lilies of the Field.'  I don't care if it is Sidney Poitier, I just wanna go home and get out of here.  But, that was very much the case and my father was always, you know, he was very much, you know, a civil rights leader in our town, you know.  And, then we'll talk about his entrepreneurial career but he was always a guy who pushed boundaries and refused to accept status quo.
Story_ID: 658478
Speaker 1: And, yet stayed in the town?
Speaker 2: He did, he did.  You know, my dad [Peter Vallot, Jr.] was very much rooted to the community and his family.  In fact, there's a story that when he, he went to Houston to live with his aunt and uncle to go to school--he was the oldest in his family and I think his parents [Melda Taylor Vallot and Peter Vallot, Sr.], who were uneducated, knew that he had real potential and they wanted him to be educated and the schools there were not good.  So, they sent him to Houston, Texas to live with my grandfather's sister and her husband.  And, I think he was there for a couple of years but he was homesick and he ended up coming back to, to Abbeville [Louisiana].  So, he was this interesting guy in that he was rooted to the land and would farm with his brothers on the weekends, but then he went off and did all of these very different things that were--and, and he often got a lot of, you know, his, his siblings kind of ribbed him, his brothers, you know.  And they teased him that he was, you know, sort of the uppity, educated one who went off and did something different.  But, after he taught school and then he, he had this time when he did these government programs, Head Start, and worked with A.J. McKnight [Albert J. McKnight] then my father went into the oil business.  He started his own company in I think '69 [1969] or '70 [1970] initially with another black guy and, they ultimately parted ways.  And, my father's company was called Am Vak [Am Vak Corporation], and he was a contractor who provided services to the oil field.  So, they would build these heliports, these heliports, yeah, that helicopters would land on out in the Gulf of Mexico to work on these rigs.  They did road construction, bridges, highways, and he also provided the crews, you know, 'cause in these rigs in the Gulf of Mexico people would work seven days on seven days off.  So, you would have men and at that time, and I think they're still mostly all men.  But, my dad had the crews and he contracted out his crews to go and work on these rigs.  And he was--I mean, this was pretty radical for a black man to have his own company in the stodgy old oil field.  And, he used to come home and tell stories at night about lunch.  He'd have lunch with these oil field executives and he'd take them out, and this sort of in the days of the steak lunch, three martinis, and he'd say the first thing they would do is they would tell nigger jokes.  We were horrified and we were like, "What did you do, daddy?"  And, he said, "Well, I laughed."  And, we were like, "That's horrible.  How could you do that?  How could you laugh?"  He said, "No, it's okay."  He said, "They'll find out eventually."  They didn't know he was black.  So, he said, "They'll find out eventually and, you know, they're gonna owe me and they're, they're gonna have to do business with me."  And that was also at the time of 8(a) programs [8(a) Business Development Program] and set aside.  So, my father, you know, realized that that was a way for him to, to, to get some of that business through, through 8(a) contracting.
Speaker 1: In order to do that he had to reveal his--
Speaker 2: Well, eventually but in the beginning, he didn't and they didn't know.  And that was--they just didn't know he was black, so, so, he, he ultimately, I mean, he stayed in the business for about fifteen years and he had a very successful company.  I think at one time he had maybe like two hundred people working for him and my sister, and my brother [Glen Vallot], and a lot of the family worked in the business.  I was already away at college [Mills College, Oakland, California], but that was quite an interesting time.
Speaker 1: Do you know what prompted him to choose oil, I mean, it's--
Speaker 2: Well, because it was a big business and where we grew up was kind of the heart of the oil patch.  It--in the '80s [1980s], it moved to Houston but when I was growing up the whole area was surrounded by oil field services.  So, he saw an opportunity.  I mean, he was always sort of a visionary, he was always very entrepreneurial and he saw that there was an opportunity.  And, again, I think it was at the same time as, you know, the beginning of these 8(a) set aside programs so he saw an opportunity and he took it.
Story_ID: 658479
Speaker 1: Let's go back to your education.  Where did you go to high school?  You went to two high schools.
Speaker 2: So, I went to two high schools.  So, originally, so I spent two years at Vermilion Catholic [Vermilion Catholic High School, Abbeville, Louisiana], which was the high school of the, of the Catholic--white Catholic school that we integrated, and we were there for two years.  My parents then moved us to the public high school [Abbeville High School, Abbeville, Louisiana], it was for my last two years and I guess it was for my older sister's [Ava Vallot]--guess she would have moved in her--I went in tenth grade maybe she went in eleventh and twelfth.  Because it was--the, the demographics were different, there were more black kids.  Because every year the big issue was who do you socialize with, who do you go to the prom with and, you know, we were--there were still only a handful of, you know, black kids at the Catholic school.  So, we integrated--
Speaker 1: So, for social reason your parents moved you?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.  They, they, just decided, you know, we needed a different, you know, we needed a different environment and then maybe that would be better socially.  Well, it wasn't really (laughter), it wasn't really.  There were issues.  I mean, there was a lot of racial tension in that school.  So, in fact--
Speaker 1: It was, it was the public school, so was it mixed or was it mainly black (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It was the public school, it was mixed, it was mixed.  So, it about--it was proportionate to the African American representation in our town which was about 20 percent.  But, that school was fraught with problems so--I'll never forget there was this huge, long hallway and every morning you'd have to walk into this hallway.  All the black kids sat on that side and all the white kids sat in this side, so you'd have to walk down this hallway in the morning and, you know, kids are catty and mean and vicious.  We'd get all this heckling and, you know, people had names for us.  It wasn't pleasant, you know, and we probably got more heckling from the black kids than we did from the white kids, but there was a lot of racial tension.
Story_ID: 658480
Speaker 1: We had a big race riot at my school in 1972, and it made national news because there were buildings burning all over town.  And, I'll never forget it was on Walter, Walter Cronkite national news, "Abbeville, Louisiana race riots. Town is, you know, in flames."  And, it was so bad that for a couple of nights we didn't even sleep at our home, we went to my [maternal] grandmother's house in Lafayette [Louisiana], because I remember A.J. McKnight [Albert J. McKnight] was in the center of all of this.  And there were press conferences, and my dad [Peter Vallot, Jr.] was associated with McKnight.  But, there was some sense that there was some danger because of my father's involvement in the negotiations.  Because, after the riots, we boycotted school for like a month, we stayed out of school.  Because my dad was negotiating with the school board to get, to get representation for black students, because part of what caused this race riot is, you know, the football team, the basketball team, naturally most of the athletes were black, right.  They were all the great players.  Well, every year when it came time for school elections, homecoming court, all white.  So, what sparked the riots was homecoming court got announced and there were already these tensions adding up, adding up, adding up.  All white court announced and the, the school went crazy, you know, they broke glass, all the, you know, the trophy cases.  It was really bad.  I remembered being terrified and they tried to get--they got us into the gym but the boys were fighting and they had chains and knives, and the principal got his gun.  And so, we stayed out of school for a month.  Ultimately, my dad did negotiate this 20 percent deal that there had to be 20 percent representation of African Americans on everything.  Homecoming court, cheerleaders, you know, there was a black president of the student body and there was a white president of the student body.  And, that was, that was my last two years of that school, so, you know, race was very, very, a very big part of it.
Speaker 2: Even as your father's [Peter Vallot, Jr.] at the forefront negotiating this, your description of your experience is kind of in the middle.  I mean, you were chastised more by the black students than the white students.  So where do you feel that you fit in or did you?
Speaker 1: Well, you know, that's kind of the story of my life always sort of trying to find my place and I think it's part of the reason I do the work that I do today it's because I've had a lifetime of feeling like an outsider.  Not feeling fully embraced by the black community and not feeling fully embraced by the white community.  I mean, I sort of understood it because they are both byproducts of racism and segregation.  And, just going back to the, the race riot it was sort of ironic because I remember the day that--I think we went back to school [Abbeville High School, Abbeville, Louisiana] at some point.  We were boycotting.  I think we went back into the schools but there was something that happened and it didn't go well, and we had to be taken out of school very quickly.  Well, my dad drove the bus that the black kids were on to get us out of the school.  I don't think it was the day of the riots because I remember my stepmother [Kathleen Kern Vallot] coming to get us, but my dad had a chauffeur's license because he grew up on a sugarcane farm and used to drive farm vehicles so he was the only one who could drive the bus.  Somehow, it was an emergency and we had to--the bus had to be made to get, get these kids out of school 'cause another riot was getting ready to start.  And, my dad was driving the bus and the black kids on the bus were singing that horrible--that song that was so popular, "They smile in your face and all the time they want to take your place, the backstabbers" ['Back Stabbers']. And, my sisters and I are sitting there thinking how, how could you--my father negotiated this whole thing and he's driving the bus to get us to safety.  And you guys are thinking that he's a backstabber?  So, it was--yeah, it was just a--it was a really, really difficult time.  I mean they, you know, on the one hand you couldn't blame them for being suspicious but, yeah, it was--that's just the way it was.
Story_ID: 658481
Speaker 1: I want to, to go to college now (laughter).  So, you're, you, you graduate from the public high school [Abbeville High School, Abbeville, Louisiana]. There's seven of you so is it, is it a given that you're gonna go to college?
Speaker 2: Well, my parents always said we were going to college.  It was not a given for the area, so--but was pretty typical in the area that I came from is, you know, you, you graduate from high school.  If you went to college, you went to the local university, USL, University of Southwestern Louisiana [University of Louisiana at Lafayette, Lafayette, Louisiana], you got a plot of land and you built or bought a house somewhere near your parents.  So, my oldest sister [Ava Vallot], when she graduated from high school, she, she went to France for a year on this CODOFIL program [Council for the Development of French in Louisiana].  That was a French program, you know, in partnership with, you know, because of Louisiana's French history.  And, she spent a year in France which was considered like really radical and revolutionary, like people just didn't send their kids out of the country.  And, my sister was this beautiful French speaker.  I mean, she was like really fluent and she studied French in high school, and she was--she scored like the highest ever on this exam to become part of the CODOFIL program.  She came home and she didn't finish college.  She ended up marrying and at a, at a fairly early age, and went into my father's business.  And my father [Peter Vallot, Jr.] also had a travel agency [Odyssey Travels, Inc. (ph.)], and he had a little restaurant, and he was, he was busy guy, got a lot of business.  So, that was my oldest sister.  My second sister [Michelle Vallot] went away to college in Southern California, she was at Pomona [Pomona College, Claremont, California] and I went to Mills [Mills College].  Mills was in Oakland [California], and I can't remember if she started a year before me or at the same time.  She might have delayed a year and then she went.  But, you know, when it was time for college, you know, it was not like today where, you know, you go visit all these schools.  I remember driving to New Orleans [Louisiana] to see a reel to reel video about Mills, so my stepmother [Kathleen Kern Vallot] knew about Mills and suggested that I apply there, you know.
Speaker 1: It's a, it was an all-girl school, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.  And I saw this reel to reel video, I applied, I got a scholarship.  I also applied to Yale [Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut] and I had visited Yale because I was in New York [New York] visiting the McKnight family--
Speaker 1: Um-hm, the priest (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) the priest A.J. McKnight [Albert J. McKnight], his brother, and his wife they were also an interracial couple.  They lived in Long Island [New York] and, while I was in New York, they took me to see Yale.  I didn't like Yale very much.  What did I know, I'm this little country kid and I didn't like, you know, the, the community.  It looked--it was very different, then I got into Yale but I didn't get any money.  Mills gave me money and my parents said, "That's where you were going."  And that was that.  And they put me on a plane and I flew to California and, you know.
Speaker 1: Was that your first flight?
Speaker 2: No, I had gone to New York--
Speaker 1: Oh, so that was a flight, um-hm.
Speaker 2: --so when I went to New York to visit the McKnight family that was my first plane flight.  And, to go to Mills it was, you know, it was a little bit scary, and the college people from the college picked me up.  And, I remember I made that long distance--you remember in the day of person to person calls.  You get the operator on the phone so our--'cause it was too expensive to call, but, you know, you'd call and ask for yourself and your parents would say, "Sorry, she's not home."  And the operator would say, "Do you wanna leave a message," and I said, "No thank you, I'll call back later."  And that was the clue that everything was fine, you landed and that was it (laughter).  You know, you didn't do a lot of talking--
Speaker 1: I forgot about that, yep.
Speaker 2: --and you just figured it out.  So, Mills was a, was a really great experience for me.
Speaker 1: It's an all-girls school, it's couple of thousand miles away, right?
Speaker 2: (Nods head) Yep.
Speaker 1: How were you acclimated when you first arrived?
Speaker 2: Well, interestingly, I, I had sort of two groups of friends.  So, there was this group of black women from East Oakland [Oakland, California], the sisters, and, and they embraced me.  I mean, I got a lot of flak from them too but, you know, some of them were, were seniors or upperclassmen and they sort of took me underwing and I remember they did the whole sort of surveying me up and down and, you know, I wasn't this enough, and wasn't that enough.  And, you know, so they were gonna teach me how to dance and be soulful, but they really did embrace me and they sort of helped me get settled.  And then I had, you know, there were women from all over the world.  So, I kind of always moved in and out of these two different groups, so I had my black women from East Oakland and then I had this white girl from Southern California that I was very, very close to.  We were best friends and there was a woman from Ethiopia that I became very close to, so.
Story_ID: 658482
Speaker 1: What did you study?
Speaker 2: I studied government because I, I wanted to go to law school, so that was kind of my (air quotes) pre-law major.  So, it was straight sort of political science, government.
Speaker 1: How did you know that you wanted to be a lawyer?  What, what--when did that awareness come?
Speaker 2: That's interesting.  I mean, I wish I had like a really great story of some inspirational person and when, you know, again, because my father [Peter Vallot, Jr.] always drove into us, "You're going to college."  Education was always very, very important to my father and to my stepmother [Kathleen Kern Vallot], you know, he just--so, I knew I was going to college.  I was going to be something and my dad always said, "You all can be whatever you wanna be."  And, even though there is this segregation in our country, you know, you--the world steps aside for a young person that knows where they wanna go and what they wanna do.  So, I always had in my head that I could be somebody.  There was a time that I wanted to be an actress because I was in, you know, little school plays.  And my other big passion was sewing, so at a very young age I learned to sew.  It was a great pastime and it was the only way I could get clothes.  And my stepmother was a fabulous, fabulous seamstress so she taught me to sew and I made every stitch of clothing from the time I was in high school all the way through law school [Georgetown University Law Center, Washington, D.C.].  So, I wanted to be a fashion designer.  So, when I would try that out on people and they'd say, "What do you wanna be?" Or, "What do you wanna study?"  And, I'd say, "I wanna be a fashion designer."  My father looked at me and said, "No way.  You're not gonna be a fashion designer, you'll starve, you'll never be able to take care of yourself.  Think of something else."  So, the other thing I knew how to do really well was talk, because I had won all these little public speaking contests when I was in elementary school.  I was a part of the 4-H club, you know, which is considered this world thing.  I didn't raise cows or pigs but I was always in sewing and public speaking.  So, at a very young age I started competing in these public speaking contests and I always won, and, you know.  So, I knew I knew how to talk so I got in my head the notion that I'll be a lawyer.  And, when I'd say to people, "I wanna be a lawyer," people would go, "That is so great."  And, everybody was always so impressed that my father thought that it was a fabulous idea.  So, I sort of just stuck with the story.  So, when I went to college [Mills College, Oakland, California], I was looking for a pre-law major and I was gonna go straight to law school.  And I did.
Story_ID: 658483
Speaker 1: Did you have internships while you were at college [Mills College, Oakland, California]?
Speaker 2: I did, I did.  So, my--the second summer--so I finished college in three years because--which was--now looking back on it was a crazy idea.  My stepmother [Kathleen Kern Vallot] was against it and said, "You're in college, you're only gonna be in college once. Take your time, enjoy it."  I wish that I had.  My father [Peter Vallot, Jr.] said, "Go, go, go," 'cause he was always this ambitious push, push, push.  And, he said, "If you can do it in three years--," and I overloaded credits and--so, the second summer I went to Washington and I did an internship for my then congressman in California, Pete Stark.  And, I did a--you know, I worked in his--I interned in his office on Capitol Hill [Washington, D.C.].  And I just thought that was the most wonderful, exciting, fabulous opportunity.  So, I had never been to Washington or maybe I went once for an interview.  And, my mother had a friend in Washington and I lived with her because otherwise we wouldn't have been able to afford to, you know, put me in an apartment or find housing.  But, this lovely woman let me live with her for the summer and I worked in his office.  So, I used to give tours of the Capitol [U.S. Capitol, Washington, D.C.] to constituents and I wrote constituent letters and I got a lot of BLT [bacon, lettuce, tomato] sandwiches for the congressmen.  But, I learned Capitol Hill and I, I knew my way around all of those buildings and around the Capitol.  So, I decided that that was where I wanted to live, I wanted to be in Washington.  Because I wanted to be right in the, in the middle of all the action, and I had this love affair with politics.
Speaker 1: And what, what were his causes at the time?  What was he championing?
Speaker 2: Well, Pete was considered a very liberal congressman.  As a matter of fact, you know, the joke was that he wanted to be a member of the Black Caucus [Congressional Black Caucus] (laughter) and they wouldn't let him, but that's how liberal he was.  I mean, that he kind of thought he was a brother, you know, and--oh, gosh, I wish I remembered the causes but they were all sort of civil rights, very liberal causes.  And he was a, he was a really good guy.
Speaker 1: And, you, you describe Washington, D.C. was where you wanted to be. What about the city was attracting you, what about your experiences?
Speaker 2: Well, I just loved the fact that this was the seat of power for the country, that this was where laws were being made and, you know, there were a number of, you know, black congressman by this time.  There was a such thing as a black caucus, you know, I loved, you know, just observing and be in the galleries while they were, you know, debating legislation.  And I just found it so exciting (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What, what year was that?
Speaker 2: This would have been in '76 [1976].
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: Summer of '76 [1976].
Story_ID: 658484
Speaker 1: And, by this time my dad [Peter Vallot, Jr.] was pretty well established in his business and--
Speaker 2: In the oil business [Am Vak Corporation, Abbeville, Louisiana]?
Speaker 1: Yeah, and he was coming to Washington [D.C.] to lobby, you know, our congress people and I, I knew our, our senator and our, you know, our congress people.  And, my dad would come up and, you know, we would go and meet people and then I was able to sort of take him to different offices.  And, I remember that Andy Young [HistoryMaker Andrew Young] was in the House [U.S. House of Representatives] then and was just lovely, and I had, you know, met his staff.  So, when my dad would come up, you know, I would take him around to, you know, all of these offices and he got to meet with Andy Young and, you know.  We were trying to figure out how to get him more business and how to change laws so, you know, people like my dad could, you know, could get access to more business.
Speaker 2: Which is interesting because he was a very small business in this huge oil industry.  What was lobbying like for him?  You know, as a small, small business in, in the pool of what could have been like sharks?
Speaker 1: Yeah, that's a good question.  Yeah, I don't know if I remember particularly, but I guess part of what you had to do was come up and see your congress people, so John Breaux was our--first our congressman and then our senator.  So, I know my dad would come up and see him.  And, I don't know what he would have been asking John for but, you know, I mean, it was all these guys all knew each other and John represented the oil industry.  So, I think part of what my dad was trying to do was maybe influence this whole minority contracting piece.  And he was on the board of one of the organizations that, you know, worked on minority contracting.  So, it was minority supplier diversity, (makes sound), you know, but this was the early days of black businesses coming together and then lobbying, you know, the federal government to, to try to get more set aside and this was on the start of before supplier diversity programs were really in effect.  This was sort of the precursor to getting companies to commit to doing business with black people.
Speaker 2: Your father was fearless, he was always fighting for, for civil rights, huh?
Speaker 1: He really was, I mean, and he was just somebody who always pushed boundaries.  And, he didn't take no for an answer.  And, again, this was all so different from, you know--'cause he grew up as this sort of country kid and, you know, I don't know where all of this ambition came from but he had the idea.  And, I think if my dad had been born in a different place, I think he would have been an elected official.  He would have been congressman or a senator, because he just always had this really big vision so, you know, he fought not only for his own business but then set up these programs or helped set up these programs that, you know, then ultimately led to supplier diversity programs (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Um-hm.
Story_ID: 658485
Speaker 1: When you graduate, you graduate a year early, three years.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Do you immediately go to law school?
Speaker 2: I did.  I did immediately go to Georgetown [Georgetown University Law Center, Washington, D.C.], so when I was ready to graduate, I had this notion that I was gonna take off a year and I was gonna start a business.  And, I was gonna start this spa, hair salon business.  Now, I, I don't know where I got this crazy idea and where I thought I was gonna get money but, you know, this is when you're young and sky is the limit.  And I thought, you know, I, I wanna take off a year and I had this entrepreneurial bug, I didn't really know it.  But, you know, it was kind of in my genes coming from my dad [Peter Vallot, Jr.].  And, I remember announcing to my dad that I was gonna take off a year and I wasn't gonna go to law school.  And, I got this like five page, handwritten, impassioned letter from my dad, which I wish I had kept.  And I remembered by the end of this letter like literally just sobbing and, you know, it was the whole letter about, "You've come too far," and I was the first one to graduate from college.  And, you know, my dad always had a lot of confidence in me and my siblings teased me and say I was always the favorite one.  My dad made everybody think they were his favorite kid out of the seven.  But, I knew that he had put a lot of stock in me and, you know, he kind of just wrote a letter that just recounted our whole family history, and segregation, and, you know, the fact--he said, "You're on the verge of doing something great but don't stop.  If you don't go to law school, there's a good chance that you'll never go.  You have this opportunity, you have to go."  So, I remember thinking, okay, okay, I'm going, I'm going, you know, please, just no more letters like this.  So, I went straight to Georgetown and--
Speaker 1: What year was that?
Speaker 2: I started in '77 [1977], graduated in '80 [1980].
Speaker 1: And, Georgetown because it was in D.C.?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  So, I was so crazy, I mean, this, again, stupidity and, you know, I, I didn't come from a family that, "So, oh, you, you, you got to pick like six schools."  I applied to one law school, Georgetown.  And, people said, "Why only one?  I mean, aren't you putting all your eggs in one basket?"  And, I said, "I only wanna be in Washington, D.C., and I only wanna go to Georgetown."  And I got in (laughter).
Speaker 1: Had you been a good student at Mills [Mills College, Oakland, California]?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I was a good student.  And I was a good student in high school.  I mean, I was always in, you know, advanced classes in my high school and it was good enough for me.  It wasn't 4.0 [grade point average] or anything but it was north of 3.5 probably a 3.8 student.
Speaker 1: What--tell me about being at Georgetown and now you're in D.C., you're at this elite law school.  Law school can be tough, what was your experience there?
Speaker 2: Law school was hard, but it was also a great experience.  So, Georgetown was known for having a very large black student population.  And the dean of admissions is a wonderful man called David Wilmot [David W. Wilmot]. David is still around.  And, David is another one of those, you know, people to whom we all owe such a debt of gratitude.  But, David decided he was gonna admit a whole lot of black people to Georgetown and he did.  And, we had one of the largest classes of African Americans, so it was great.  So, I was surrounded by other people like me who had come from all over the country but, you know, all young ambitious people, and David made us believe we could do anything.  And, we looked up to him and, and it was a great, it was a great time.  I mean, it was hard, it was a lot of, lot of work but it was a great time.
Speaker 1: Did you get a scholarship?
Speaker 2: No.  Well--did I? No, I took out student loans.  So, my father, my father paid for part of it and I took out student loans.  Yeah, and I remember paying those student loans back for years and years and years.  And, I'll never forget the day I paid my last student loan, by that time I had one daughter, my youngest daughter [Katherine Vallot-Basker].  And, I remember writing that last check and it was like, "Yes, hallelujah, hallelujah."  But, no, my parents by that time--and in college I always would do the same thing so I got part scholarship, they put in part money, and I had a job, I had a job in Oakland [California].  I worked at a clothing store so I had to earn part of the money.  And, then that internship that I did for Pete Stark on the Hill [Capitol Hill, Washington, D.C.] I had to take part of that money and that went towards my, my tuition.
Story_ID: 658486
Speaker 1: And who were some of the other students at, notable students at Georgetown [Georgetown University Law Center, Washington, D.C.] when you were there?
Speaker 2: Hm, okay.  Notable students.  Wow wee, wow wee.  Well, there were so many of us, I mean, oh, gosh.  I don't know if I wanna start naming names but, you know, people all went on to do great things.  Judy Berg [ph.] was one of my good friends.  And, you know, she worked for the mayor of Chicago [Illinois] for a while and then started an--was in the airport consulting business.  Nikki Zollar I think who was the elections commissioner in Chicago was in my class.  I'm not thinking of other names but, but it was a great class who all went on to do different things.  And lots of them were entrepreneurial things.
Story_ID: 658487
Speaker 1: And at this point where there, there're many more African Americans at this school than in previous experiences and you're older, what is your--what's the racial dynamic for you now at Georgetown [Georgetown University Law Center, Washington, D.C.]?
Speaker 2: Oh, it was good.  I mean, there were so many--we had such a critical mass of black people and we had, you know, BLSA, Black Association of Law Students [sic. Black Law Students Association; National Black Law Students Association].  Yeah, that, that, that it was totally different.  I mean, and then we were in D.C. [Washington, D.C.] which was, you know, black city, so, you know, my life changed in so many positive ways once I got to Washington.  It was just--I had the sense, I mean, I was out of the South.  It was just different.  It was totally--I mean it was a different time in history but it was also a different dynamic.  So, I remembered from my siblings who were still in Louisiana, you know, my whole things was, you know, "We're in D.C. we can do anything, we have black empowerment, we got a black mayor here," you know, it was just--it was the sense that
Speaker 1: [HistoryMaker] Marion Barry was in then?
Speaker 2: Well, when I first went to Washington, Walter Washington was, was still the mayor.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: He was the first mayor under home rule.  And, then Barry got elected, you know, once I was there.
Speaker 1: Right.  And, well, interesting that you describe Washington, D.C. as not south.
Speaker 2: It had a southern feeling but, you know, over time I, I, I came to see Washington as--I mean a very transient city but a lot of vestiges of the South.  But, for me, coming out of the Deep South, I mean, Washington was just so much more sophisticated, you know.  One, you had, you know, Capitol Hill [Washington, D.C.] the lawmakers but you did have this large black demographic.  So, it was just a very different feeling for me.  Now, at the same time, it took me a while to see this but Washington was also a very segregated city, there were definitely two communities of people.  But, you could have this thriving life in this very successful thriving black community.  So, you know, one of the people that I became friends with was Bill Fitzgerald [William B. Fitzgerald] and his wife Tina Fitzgerald [Faustina Eaton Fitzgerald].  He, he started a black bank, Independence Federal Savings [Independence Savings and Loan Association; Independence Federal Savings Bank], which went public at some point and I bought stock in it and, you know, that's where I got my mortgage when I bought a house.  And, you know, there was just this sense that there were successful black lawyers and, you know, other people like that, and role models and people you could look up to.  So, notwithstanding the segregation it was just, it was a great city.  And, it was also the beginning of sort of bridging those gaps--
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: --and bringing the white and black community together to talk about these issues.
Story_ID: 658488
Speaker 1: Did you have internships during your law school experience [at Georgetown University Law Center, Washington, D.C.]?
Speaker 2: The--what did I do?  I didn't--oh, yeah, I did.  So, my first summer I interned for DuPont [E. I. du Pont de Nemours and Company] and I worked in the government relations office, and it was run at the time by Stacey Mobley [Stacey J. Mobley], who's African American, and Stacey later became the general counsel of DuPont.  And that was a great, great summer for me, because what I was doing in the government relations office was monitoring legislation on the Hill.  So, my job was going up to Capitol Hill [Washington, D.C.] every day, sitting in hearings and that was the whole reason I had come to Washington [D.C.].  That is exactly what I wanted to do.  And, Stacey was such a great role model and sort of mentor for me that summer.  And then I spent a couple of weeks in Wilmington, Delaware at the DuPont headquarters.  So, that was the first summer, the second summer I went to Paris [France] on a student program.  It was a law school program and I was there for the summer studying international and comparative law.  And it was really just a boondoggle, it was a chance to go to Paris and that was the first time I'd ever been outside of--first time I'd ever been to Europe.  So, I applied for this program because I didn't get to do it in college [Mills College, Oakland, California], you know, to do the year abroad and because I had this sort of, you know, very abbreviated three year college career.  So, I was determined that I wanted to be in Europe and after all, two of my sisters had been to Europe.  My oldest sister [Ava Vallot] and then my second sister [Michelle Vallot] also lived in, in France for a couple of years and I was the only one who hadn't.  So, I went for the summer and actually my law school classmate, Judy Berg [ph.], also had applied for that same program.  We ended up sharing a small apartment in Paris and we had a great time.  It was a fabulous, fabulous summer.
Speaker 1: And were you aware of your French heritage?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Did you, did you try to find family at all while you were there?
Speaker 2: No, I didn't, I didn't, because we were in Paris, we traveled to the South of France, you know, and when you're young you're not all that interested in ancestry and genealogy.  I mean, today, I really want to know and understand that history, but, no.  We, we went to classes for the most part (laughter), but we just--we saw Paris.  You know, we had Eurail passes, we'd hop on the train and go down to Cannes [France] or Nice [France].  We went to, to Italy with some friends that we met in the program.  It was just a great summer of, you know, exploring Paris, learning to speak French, going to little cafes and--
Speaker 1: How were you treated?
Speaker 2: Great.  I didn't, you know, I, I, I had no issues.  I've never, ever had any issues traveling.  Interestingly, kind of going back to race and appearance, when I go outside of the U.S. and I tell people I'm black, I mean, it's a concept that is different for Europeans.  They're like, "But you're not, you're not black."  I'm like, "It's just a term," you know.  It's, it's--so, people didn't see me as (air quotes) black and I've spoke a little French and I always tried so, you know, the French are tough of course.  But, wherever I go I always try to speak the language and I try to understand something about the culture so--and, you know, we were young and naive and were just having a good time.  But, I, I, I don't remember having any issues.
Speaker 1: I would have imagined that you would be most immediately seen as American, right, which at that time--what, what year is it that you were going there?
Speaker 2: This was 1978.  Yeah, '78 [1978] or '9 [1979].  Yeah.  And I don't remember anti-American sentiments, so--
Speaker 1: Nothing?
Speaker 2: --nothing.  We, we just had a grand time, I don't remember any, any issues around nationality, around race.  We were just students hanging out.
Story_ID: 658489
Speaker 1: As you're completing law school [Georgetown University Law Center, Washington, D.C.], are you thinking about what type of law you'll practice, because law is everything (laughter)?
Speaker 2: You know, interestingly, I never intended to practice law.  I always thought it was going to be a good education and a good background to have.  What I really wanted to do was I wanted to work on Capitol Hill [Washington, D.C.] in some capacity, I wanted to be a quote unquote (air quotes) lobbyist, you know, my understanding of what a lobbyist was.  So, after my summer in--summer internship at DuPont [E. I. du Pont de Nemours and Company] I had the idea that, oh, I wanna do what Stacey Mobley [Stacey J. Mobley] is doing.  You follow legislation that, you know, impacts your company, you get to know a elected representatives, you go and meet with them, you take people out to lunch (laughter), dinners, you go to industry functions.  So, when I graduated I started--I mean, I was studying for the bar but then I started interviewing for positions, and people kept, kept asking me for like, my rolodex.  "What, what's your rolodex?"  And, I was like, "Well, what do you mean rolodex?"  Well, to be a lobbyist you're supposed to know people, you're supposed to have a network.
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: And I was like, well, you know, I know people in Pete Stark's office, I know people in like the Louisiana delegation 'cause I knew all of them, but I didn't have like--I didn't have lobbying experience.  So, that door shut pretty quickly.  So, it occurred to me that I should start looking for a job in a law firm, and it was kind of difficult at first because I didn't do a summer internship most of my colleagues were all doing summer internships in law firms while I decided to go to Paris [France] and have a good time.  And, you know, and the DuPont thing did count but it wasn't a law firm.  So, when I did start interviewing I had a hard time finding a job in a law firm.  And, I must admit I didn't have like great, great grades either (laughter), you know, I, I had a good time in law school.  I partied and, you know, I did okay but I wasn't top of my class, so most of the firms were not interested in me.
Story_ID: 658490
Speaker 1: But, I did finally find my way into a small real estate law firm and I didn't particularly have an interest in real estate but it was a good business to be in.  And it was a good business to be in, in Washington [D.C.] because I started representing commercial developers.  And, if you think about it, commercial developers have to get all of these different approvals and permits, and they have to go to communities and negotiate with communities to get their approval to build these buildings.  And it turned out to be a perfect, perfect business for me and sort of brought together all the things that I loved and wanted to do albeit not on Capitol Hill [Washington, D.C.], but it had some crossover because we still have to get approvals in some parts of the city from the Architect of the Capitol.  So, I ended up being a real estate lawyer for like ten years.
Speaker 2: And, when did you start there?
Speaker 1: I started there about a year after I graduated from law school [Georgetown University Law Center, Washington, D.C.], so I think it was '81 [1981], '82 [1982].
Speaker 2: And what was the firm?
Speaker 1: It was called Linowes and Blocher [Linowes and Blocher LLP], a firm owned by a guy named Robert Linowes [R. Robert Linowes] who was, you know, one of the pillars of Washington, you know, community.
Speaker 2: How do you spell it?
Speaker 1: L-I-N-O-W-E-S. Good.
Speaker 2: So, I was there for about four years and then I went to, to Jones Day, which was a much bigger and a national firm, whereas Linowes and Blocher was a, a small local firm with offices in Maryland and D.C.  And, it was an interesting transition because the person who had become my informal mentor was a senior white partner named Kirk White, J. Kirkwood White, and he had come out of the city government and he was a partner, a senior partner at Linowes and Blocher.  Well, he was such a big name in real estate somehow I just ended up doing a lot of work for him and I was sort of his go to person.  And, at some point, you know, he pulled me aside and said, "Hey, look, I have this opportunity to go to this big firm and I get to take one associate with me and I'd like you to come with me."  And that was, you know, it was scary and an enticing opportunity at the same time.  And, I had no idea, you know, that he had that much confidence in me.  So, we went together to Jones Day, which was like, you know, really big time coming from this small firm and starting this--it was really a land use real estate practice that became part of the larger transactional real estate practice at Jones Day.
Speaker 1: And, was that in D.C. as well?
Speaker 2: It was in D.C. and actually it was in the exact same building, so, you know, this was back in the early '80s [1980s] so this was before everything was, you know, on computer and on files.  So, once we made the decision to go, and I had to go and do all my interviews and we had accepted we knew we had to get all of our files copied.  Of course, you know, Kirk wasn't gonna do that. Angela [HistoryMaker Angela Vallot] did all of that.  So, I would be at my law firm every night until two, three in the morning, you know, when no one else was there 'cause I had to do all this very--surreptitiously copying every file until we had these boxes.  And, because they were in the same building I was able to go up the staircase and take all of our boxes.  So, night after night, after night, after night, and then the day we announced we were leaving it was really bad as we expected it would be.  The guy who was the head of the firm came and took our keys and I remembered he said to me, "How ungrateful after everything I've done for you."  You know, basically, get out.  So--but we were prepared to leave because we had copied all of the files (laughter).  And then off we went and, yeah, and we had, we had a, a pretty good practice.
Speaker 1: But you were in the same building so what would happen when you would see those people (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, it's a little--
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: I don't think like my colleagues begrudged me and then ultimately, we went back and got another associate from that firm, a white male who joined us.  And, you know, it was a little funky at first but, you know, they got over it.
Story_ID: 658491
Speaker 1: You worked in real estate law for ten years and then, and then you changed the type of law.
Speaker 2: Well, in, in 1989, the real estate market sort of just came undone.  And most of my commercial developer clients were either in workout or bankruptcy so I had to reinvent myself.  And, by this time, I had--so I ultimately left Jones Day and I ultimately separated from the partner who--with whom I had gone over.  I was, I was really leading the practice and, and doing all the work, and at some point, I took three other associates and we decided there was another firm that was, you know, trying to get us to, to join their firm so I left.  And, about the same time Kirk [J. Kirkwood White] left Jones Day and sort of semi-retired.  But--and Jones Day wanted us to stay on but I took these two white guys with me and I was then the head of the practice group and I went to Arent Fox [Arent Fox LLP], which was a Washington [D.C.] based firm, and we did real estate there for a couple of years but when the market tanked we, we started--we all had to do something else.  So, Bob [ph.] actually went off and joined an architectural firm and the other guy left.  And then I stayed on and I joined the government relations practice.  And I worked under John Culver, who was a former senator from Iowa and headed Arent Fox's governmental relations practice.  So, then I sort of developed a lobbying practice, which was what--
Speaker 1: You wanted to do from the beginning.
Speaker 2: --I always wanted to do, so it came full circle.  So--and I always had to bring in my own clients so, you know, that was again where the whole entrepreneurial thing, you know, and I don't know, I sort of learned it from my dad [Peter Vallot, Jr.] and I knew how to go out and hustle and market.  And I, and I always brought in my own clients and I had my own book of business (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Did you have to do that also at Jones Day to bring in your own clients?
Speaker 2: I did.  Well, at first Kirk did and then, you know, as he became less active and as I became more active and real headed kind of de facto headed the practice group I had a really good record and people knew me.  And, and developers came to me and they knew if they wanted to get their stuff approved and I also had--I had ties in the black community.  So--and it was an interesting time to be in that business.  You know, the black community was always looking for jobs and we had to negotiate packages, what was in it for them.  But they knew me and they trusted me, and they wanted to see me succeed.  So, I was always able to find the win-win.  I was able to get my clients what they needed, but they had to then give something up and give something back to community.  And I was able to get the community's support.  And, some of these projects were very, very contentious, and that in and of itself was part of the fascination for me because I loved this negotiation of trying to bring these two communities together.  'Cause that's where you did see a lot of racial tension that, you know, black people felt like why are these developers coming into our community and building these big fancy buildings?  And, we don't have jobs and, you know, what are we gonna get out of this deal?
Speaker 1: And, so were you negotiating opportunities for them to have work?
Speaker 2: Well, yes.  You know, we would have agreements and this was all then documented and it was in the record that there would be, you know, jobs.  They could use the facilities for meetings.  If there were buildings that had swimming pools in it, they'd have access to that.  So, yeah, I mean, I, I--the jobs thing wasn't as big because, you know they, there was generally a contractor who'd go out and hire people to build the building but there was always a clause in there that, that they, that there would be certain preferences for people from the community.
Story_ID: 658492
Speaker 1: So I'd like for you to, to talk about the dynamic between the big law firm with the big real estate company and the community and, and what those dynamics could sometimes look like, what, what you may have participated in?
Speaker 2: Yeah, so, you know, the agencies that we had to go before to get these approvals were predominantly black, but they were mixed so it was the redevelopment land agency [District of Columbia Redevelopment Land Agency], the zoning commission [District of Columbia Zoning Commission], the board of zoning approval [sic. District of Columbia Board of Zoning Adjustment] and, you know, again, there was people under white developers and unfortunately at the time, they were all white developers.  There was one black developer who had, who had just started and had come into the business while I was still practicing.  And actually we represented him, his name was Conrad Motts [ph.].  But, I was representing a white developer who was competing for a piece of city owned land that the city wanted to have redeveloped.  And, there were four or five different developers all competing to get this.  And you have to come in with your proposals, your architects, you know, the whole works of what you were gonna do.  And, we were appearing before the redevelopment land agency, and it was a very, very contested, very heated case and it really got into some very ugly politics.  And it was in the black community, so we had another--our law firm competitor was representing another developer.  That's right, it was down to two developers my guy and then another guy who was represented by a competitor firm.  But, it had gotten very, very ugly because it was an article that appeared in a Washington [D.C.] magazine and a Jewish developer was being interviewed and he was, he was a real estate developer and he made a very foolish statement.  And the statement was they were talking to him about his attitudes or about developing these buildings and going into the black community.  And he had this horrible, horrible quote that he said, "You can't put whipped cream on shit."  This was published in a magazine. That was the quote.
Speaker 1: Who said this?
Speaker 2: A developer.  He was a Jewish developer, I won't name names.  He was the developer that was trying to--that was competing against my developer guy.  So, my guy was Jewish, this guy was Jewish.  It so happened that he was being interviewed for this Washington magazine and unfortunately, he made this unfortunate quote.  So, I got ahold of that article and my--the, the black community that I was dealing with, you know, was in support of my guy.  So, the night before the hearing I made copies of this article 'cause it was hot off the press.  It had just come and I thought, oh, well, yeah, this is gonna seal my deal right here.  I mean, how could you make a statement like that?  So, the, the person who was head of the ANC, the advisory neighborhood council [sic. Advisory Neighborhood Commission], you know, they were sort of elected officials, black guy, he was also a, a, a minister, and he was my guy.  He would help me with all my projects, so I told him about this article.  So, they didn't have like copy machines and all that stuff so he said, "Angela [HistoryMaker Angela Vallot], copy it for me.  Make copies and here's what I want you to say--," type up a flyer 'cause, again, he didn't have like a typewriter and all that stuff so I typed this up.  It's late at night, I'm in my law firm [Jones Day] late and it's a flyer that says something like, we can't let this kind of stuff come into our community.  And, you know, the quote was highlighted.  "You can't put whipped cream on shit," referring to the black community.  So, I walk into the hearing, he'd met me outside the building and I had the box and he passed out the flyers in the hearing.  Oh, my god, this caused such chaos, and it became clear that I had made the copies.  Well, they had to suspend the hearing because people were going crazy in the hearing once they saw what he said.  So, you know, they, they--he guy's tapping the gavel.  "Order!  Order!  Calm down," you know, and the other side is looking at me and they're glaring.  So, things were suspended for a while and the other side ended up talking to my client about, you know, look at what's happening.  They're pitting us, these two Jewish developers, against each other.  And, they called the head of my law firm and he was furious that I had made copies and I said, I didn't write the story, I didn't make the statement.  All I did was make copies because this guy didn't have a computer, I mean, a Xerox machine.  He asked me to make copies.  But, it, it, it, it caused a lot of tension.  And the head of the real estate practice said to me, you should never, ever do something like this, I mean, that's like crossing the line.  I'm like, "Look, I'm advocating for my client.  This was a horrible statement, I didn't make the statement."  But it got into this very ugly thing of sort of the Jewish community against the black community and it was just ugly.  It was really ugly (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Even though he said it.
Speaker 2: You can't put whipped cream on shit.
Speaker 1: He was not--
Story_ID: 658493
Speaker 1: So, he didn't receive criticism for his statement?
Speaker 2: Oh, he received criticism.  In the end, my guy won.  And part of it is that he torpedoed the deal because of this, you know, horrible racist statement that he made.  But in the meantime, the subtext was, you know, my developer client wanted to win but he thought maybe I had crossed the line and had done something inappropriate by Xeroxing copies of the article for the black community.  And, so, it was worthy of almost of a, of a book of that dynamic 'cause it was very stressful.  And my firm wasn't very happy with me, and they wanted to know did you type up the flyer that went with it.  I said, "I did type it but I--he dictated to me exactly what he wanted to say in that flyer."  In the end my, my client won and he was very pleased to have won but he, he, he felt badly about all the tensions.  I remember the night before the decision was being made I called him and again I won't mention any names, and I said to him, "Listen, I know you haven't been happy with this whole process," and I said, "but, I don't want you to have any regrets about this.  I wanna give you a way out. You may not have thought of this."  I said, "Here's what we could do tomorrow.  I propose that we go into the hearing, we approach the bench, and you withdraw.  Because I know you're not happy about this and that, you know, your friend who made this horrible statement, you know, felt like he was being ganged up on by the black community and that I did something inappropriate."  I said, "So, you have a choice here. If you feel so badly about the way this was handled, we could simply withdraw your application and you'll get it or they can decide to hold another competition."  He said, "Oh, no, no, no, no.  I don't, you know, I don't feel that badly about it. Let's go forward."  But, I needed to do that so that when we did win he didn't then look back and blame me for what had happened.  And we won, and then there was a huge celebration--and, but, I mean, that was, that was an example of, you know, right in the thick of racial politics.
Speaker 1: That, that firm at Jones Day, there've been many prominent attorneys who come out of there, including Antonin Scalia, right, didn't he practice there?
Speaker 2: Well, he, he wouldn't have been there when I was there but--
Speaker 1: Of course, right.
Speaker 2: --I didn't know that was Scalia's firm.
Speaker 1: Yeah, and, and another completely unrelated--Megyn Kelly, the FOX News' Megyn Kelly.
Speaker 2: I didn't know Megyn Kelly came out of Jones Day.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Isn't that something?
Speaker 2: Interesting though, I'd be curious to know if they were in the Washington [D.C.] office or in the--
Speaker 1: I don't know.
Speaker 2: 'Cause there was an Ohio firm.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: So, I did have to go to Cleveland [Ohio], you know, several times over the years for, you know, meetings there and stuff.  But, no, I didn't know either one of them came out of Jones Day (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) (Laughter) Yeah they, they--
Story_ID: 658494
Speaker 1: When you leave that company [Jones Day], you go to Arent Fox [Arent Fox LLP], is that where, where you go?
Speaker 2: (Nods head).
Speaker 1: And is that still in D.C. [Washington, D.C.]?
Speaker 2: It's in D.C.  So, I was there in D.C.--let's see, I was there at Fox altogether from '89 [1989] to '97 [1997].
Speaker 1: And is that where you would lobby?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: So, at this point, you do have a big rolodex? (Laughter) Or growing?
Speaker 2: Yeah, well, a growing, a growing rolodex.  So, I started representing--I mean, basically, anybody who would hire me to represent them on the Hill [Capitol Hill, Washington, D.C.], so I did work for Marc Morial [HistoryMaker Marc H. Morial] who was my friend and, you know, fellow Louisianian.  So, Mark went to Georgetown [Georgetown University Law Center, Washington, D.C.] as well.  He was a year behind me but when got elected mayor he hired me to do all of his, you know, federal work.  So, Marc was a client, I did some work for Chrysler [Chrysler Corporation; FCA US LLC], I did work for a lot of foreign governments.  So, in order to locate and embassy or a chancery in Washington you had to go through the foreign missions office [U.S. Department of State, Office of Foreign Missions], but you also--so that was on the federal side.  But you also had to get, you know, local government approvals and generally they were subject to hearings.  So, that was sort of left over from my real estate days 'cause I knew how to, you know, I knew the system and how to get those approvals done.  So, I ended up representing a number of foreign governments who needed to get approvals to be in Washington or to change the location of an embassy.  So, it was just sort of a fun time.  I had a nice diverse practice and then at the same time I was sort of on the fringes of local politics and I got involved in Clinton one [President William Jefferson "Bill" Clinton] a little bit in terms of the campaign.  And then ultimately working on the transition team.
Story_ID: 658495
Speaker 1: At what point do you get married?
Speaker 2: Well, I was, I was marred twice.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So, I, I married for the first time in 1982 right after I graduated from law school [Georgetown University Law Center, Washington, D.C.].  That marriage ended in divorce so, yeah, I was married for about eight years and I--and then I married my, my now husband in '95 [1995].
Speaker 1: So, you were still--were you still at--
Speaker 2: At Arent Fox [Arent Fox LLP, Washington, D.C.]?
Speaker 1: At Arent Fox then?
Speaker 2: When I met Jim?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: So, my, my husband is Jim Basker [James G. Basker] and I was--yes, I was still, I was still at Arent Fox.  I was still practicing law when I met Jim, and this was--I met Jim in '92 [1992] so this was right after the election.  Clinton [President William Jefferson "Bill" Clinton] won.  And I was doing some work for, for Ron Brown at the--initially, I was just working on the, the, the Clinton campaign and then I did transition once Ron got appointed to be secretary of commerce.
Speaker 1: So, working on the Clinton campaign, wh- when did you enter that process?  How, how did you get involved?
Speaker 2: So, one of my mentors and friends at Jones Day, and he was a big name that came out of Jones Day, was a man by the name of Vic Raiser [C. Victor Raiser II], Vic Raiser.  And he was one of the early Clinton people, and he got me involved 'cause he was doing fundraising.  And so, I got involved a little bit in fundraising and just, you know, sort of hanging out with him going to various campaign meetings.  And, I was also on the Women's Campaign Fund at the time and actually with his wife Molly Raiser [Mary Millonzi Raiser], who later became chief of protocol for, for Clinton when he was first elected.
Story_ID: 658496
Speaker 1: So when the Women's Campaign Fund was that a, an extra job or what were you doing with them?
Speaker 2: That was just a board, a board position (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay, on the board. And, can you say what they do?
Speaker 2: The Women's Campaign Fund was, was a bipartisan organization that, you know, supported women, I mean, elected officials.  So, it was getting--helping to get women elected and also I think had to be pro-choice, pro-choice.
Speaker 1: And raising money?
Speaker 2: And raising money, yeah.  So, that was--so I did that for a little while and I was also on the board of the District of Columbia retirement fund [District of Columbia Retirement Board].  That was a pension fund for firefighters, police, and teachers.  And that was an appointed position and that was a paid position.  My firm allowed me to, to take the board position but I had to give the money back to the firm 'cause you couldn't earn outside income.  So, while I was at Arent Fox [Arent Fox LLP, Washington, D.C.]--so, I had, I had an interesting arrangement with the firm so I wasn't a partner but I was of counsel.  And, I was still having to bring in business and, you know, do my work, work but at the same time the firm sort of allowed me to have this independence.  So, they let me do the commerce department [U.S. Department of Commerce] transition team work and they allowed me to serve on the board of the District of Columbia retirement fund.
Speaker 1: And, did you not wanna be a partner?
Speaker 2: I did wanna be a partner, you know, partnerships are hard and it's all about, you know, having--bringing in business, which I did, and I was able to keep three associates busy.  But, apparently, I never had enough business over a sustained period of time, supposedly, to, to become partner.  By the time I left, the year I left I think I had a book of business over a million dollars.  So, at some point, I sort of worked out an arrangement with the firm--well actually they brought me in as of counsel.  So, when I left Jones Day that was my deal with them.  I wanted to go in as a partner but, you know, I didn't have enough of a book of business at that time.  And they wanted to do a looksee, so that was my deal, yeah.  'Cause I needed to have the credibility and the title.  So, they brought me in as counsel.  And then overtime, you know, this is where I was able to sort of negotiate that I wanted to do different things.  I didn't just want to practice and, you know, the whole assumption was that the more networked you were in the community that would enhance your ability to bring in business.  And it did of course, because that's how people would come to you to, to represent them on the Hill [Capitol Hill, Washington, D.C.].  So, I was going to a lot of different--I was involved--I had a finger in a lot of different things and that was one of the exciting things about being in Washington [D.C.].  So, I was doing a lot of embassy, you know, sort of on the embassy circuit.  And then I was doing sort of the political stuff with the Clinton [President William Jefferson "Bill" Clinton] campaign and then with the commerce department, and I had this retirement board thing (laughter).
Speaker 1: So, you were very busy?
Speaker 2: I was busy but it was, it was a nice mix of things.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Story_ID: 658497
Speaker 1: The Clinton [President William Jefferson "Bill" Clinton] campaign and then, then he wins and you're on the transition team.  I'm very curious about how that works, you know, we're, we're learning now in 2016 a lot about Trump [President Donald John Trump] and the transition team.  But, back then (laughter) to my recollection we didn't--the public didn't talk about it as much but it's still going on.  And, it's fast and there're all kinds of roles that have to be filled.  Can you describe what, what it was like to be a part of that team?
Speaker 2: Well, yeah.  I remember there were just lots and lots of binders around (laughter).  You know, binders became famous I think with Mitt Romney.  But, lots of people wanted positions.  They either wanted jobs at commerce [U.S. Department of Commerce] or wanted access to Ron [Ron Brown], so, I would go there during the day and then I'd go back to my firm [Arent Fox LLP, Washington, D.C.] at night.  But, you know, there were meetings during the day and there was a lot of, you know, trying to figure out who was--who were the right candidates for the positions in commerce.  And then there were the positions that required, you know, the U.S. Senate confirmation and then there were just other positions.  So, we were working at lots of different levels to find people to fill these various positions and then helping to vet people for the hearing process.  And also, communicating with the White House to make sure that--because there were a lot of people that were also being sent over by the White House.  So, I mean, you know how that whole thing works, like, "You got to take care of these people." "Well, why are we interviewing this person?  This person doesn't seem to have--." "Because that's what the White House wants."  So--
Speaker 1: Meaning the, the administration that was leaving?
Speaker 2: No, meaning the Clintons.
Speaker 1: Oh, meaning the Clintons, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.  'Cause there were all these, all these jockeying for positions and people who had to be taken care of and, you know, slotting people into different places.  So, it was an interesting time to, to be there.  And it was sort of fun to have this, you know, up close and personal view of how this stuff was working.  And, then at the same, you know, then we were actually at the commerce department.  So, part of my job was being sort of this White House liaison and talking to the White House and making sure we were taking care of their people and they were okay with the people, you know, Ron was suggesting.  And, then I was also overseeing the office of minority development [Minority Business Development Agency], it had a name and I'm blanking on what that name was.  But, I was the acting director of that office and it was sort of trying to keep the, the existing contracts with, you know, minority contractors, developers, suppliers or--I forget exactly what--so, I was serving in these two different roles but it was, it was a fascinating time for me and I, I met a lot of people there.  And, I debated staying at the commerce department, and Ron wanted me to stay.  I thought it was a good time for me to go back to my law firm, because I'm thinking, you know, now I've got access to you and, you know, [HistoryMaker] Alexis Herman was at labor [U.S. Department of Labor], and Bill Richardson my friend was at--oh, where did Bill go?  He was head of one of the departments [U.S. Department of Energy].  Anyway, I had a lot of contacts in the government for the first time so I decided to go back to my firm.
Speaker 1: And, and how long were you on the transition team?
Speaker 2: I think it was about nine months, 'cause I know at some point my firm started kind of looking at me cross eyed, like, okay.
Speaker 1: And, and it crossed after he was in office?
Speaker 2: Yes, because it took a while--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --it, it took a while to get all of the appointments in place.  And there was still a lot of work to be done.  But, I think after about nine months my firm said, "Okay, like, you need to bill some more hours," (laughter), "and you said you were gonna do this on a temporary basis."  And, you know, I was trying to do the work at night, but I was really spending all of my time at commerce.
Story_ID: 658498
Speaker 1: And so you went back?
Speaker 2: I went back, yeah.  Yeah, and, you know, a lot of the friends that I had made and who stayed, including my, my good friend Kathryn Hoffman, who was on the plane with Ron [Ron Brown], and, you know, I remember always saying to her, "I'm so jealous, you know, you're traveling all over the world."  And, you know, here I am in my office [at Arent Fox LLP, Washington, D.C.], billing hours until the, you know, the wee hours of the morning.  And I talked to her just before she went on that last trip, and that was that.
Speaker 1: What year was that?
Speaker 2: Well, they just had the twentieth anniversary, so, that would have been '96 [1996]?
Speaker 1: Six [1996], yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I think it was '96 [1996].  Yeah, 'cause this was just the twentieth, the twentieth anniversary of the, of the plane crash.
Speaker 1: And there, there remained questions about why that plane went down.
Speaker 2: I know there were all those conspiracy theories. I actually never really, I never really believed any of those.  I think it was bad weather.
Story_ID: 658499
Speaker 1: When did you leave that law firm [Arent Fox LLP, Washington, D.C.]?
Speaker 2: I left my firm in '97 [1997] to go to work for Texaco [Texaco, Inc.].
Speaker 1: So Texaco.  This is oil, right. (Laughter) So, your daddy's business.
Speaker 2: Yes, I made full circle back to the oil business.
Speaker 1: How did that come about?
Speaker 2: Well, that was a very interesting story.  So, I don't know if you know the story of what happened with the lawsuit and Texaco.  So, in 1996 there was this big, you know, press thing about the black jellybean story.  What had happened was that African Americans in the company brought a racial discrimination lawsuit alleging discrimination on the basis of pay, promotions, et cetera.  They filed a class action, the class had not yet been certified.  One day in a meeting two executives were talking about the lawsuit and were talking very foolishly about destroying evidence in connection with the lawsuit.  There was a third person in the meeting and the conversation sort of deteriorated, they started talking about African Americans being like black jellybeans stuck at the bottom of the jellybean jar and that's why they didn't get promoted.  Ha, ha, ha.  And they also used the N word.  What they didn't know was that the third person in the meeting had a pocket mic recorder [microphone recorder] on and had tape recorded the whole conversation.  At the end of that meeting that employee went to plaintiffs' counsel who was Cyrus Mehri.  Cyrus Mehri went to The New York Times.  The New York Times published the entire transcript of that conversation on the front page of the newspaper.  So--and, that made world news because at the time Texaco was the third largest corporation in the world.  And, I remembered following this story very closely, I was still at my law firm.  And, my dad [Peter Vallot, Jr.] followed it closely too, because he was by this time retired from the oil business.  But, you know, he would call me all the time and he'd say, "You know, those SOBs, you know, I told you--," because he was always talking about how racist the oil companies were and how tough it was to do business with them.  So, you know, we were like talking every day, several times a day because this was, you know, at the time 'Nightline.'  It was the leading story on 'Nightline,' front page news all over.  And Texaco's stock price plummeted, like, hugely and like, they lost a billion dollars when (unclear) and market cap in a twenty-four hour period.  So, the CEO, who was Peter Bijur, decided we're gonna settle this thing because there's just too much bloodletting and, you know, it's costing too much in terms of--
Speaker 1: They lost a billion dollars in twenty-four hours?
Speaker 2: Market capitalization in one day.  And the stock price was literally going down the tube.  So, Bijur, to his credit and he had only just become the CEO so can you imagine here now the CEO, you've been at this company thirty something years, you've been waiting for your chance, you got your chance, and these tapes come out.  And, you're, you're like--Texaco's a household name.  So, he settles the lawsuit for $176 million.  Okay, great, wonderful.
Story_ID: 658500
Speaker 1: What does that have to do with me?  I was on the District of Columbia Retirement Board still at the time.  So, Bijur [Peter Bijur] got invited to speak to the Council of Institutional Investors, it's the big umbrella industry organization to which all the pension funds belong--CalPERS [California Public Employees' Retirement System], CalSTRS [California State Teachers' Retirement System], NYSTRS [New York State Teachers' Retirement System], all of those--the big money.  And they own, you know, millions and millions of dollars of Texaco [Texaco, Inc.] stock.  So, he gets invited to come and be the keynote speaker and he's trying to calm his, you know, shareholders down to say--and literally he said, I'm the guy, I'm in charge, things are gonna change.  By this time he had already settled the lawsuit and he was trying to convince people that he was gonna make radical change at Texaco.  I was there and the woman who ran the Council of Institutional Investors by this time had sort of become a friend, and she invited me to a small dinner party that night for the CEO of Texaco and the CEO of--all the oil CEOs were there.  And it was, you know, like maybe twelve people.  And I sat next to him and I thought, okay, this is my big chance, I'm gonna get Texaco as a client, right?  'Cause I was always hustling, right.  Everybody met, you know, it was like, you know, "I can help you."  So, I said to him, you know, like, "Wow, I'm not surprised by any of this."  I told him my, my dad's [Peter Vallot, Jr.] story of being in the oil industry and, you know, the nigger jokes at lunch and, we had a great conversation.  I ended up flying back to New York [New York] with him that night on their company plane because by this time I had moved to New York.  I had gotten married and my firm [Arent Fox LLP] transferred me to the New York office 'cause my husband [Vallot's second husband, James G. Basker] and I were commuting.  So, we had agreed after the plane ride back, and he had some of his other staff people on the plane, that we would stay in touch and, you know, I'd come to see him about the possibility of doing some work for Texaco.  So, he set up a meeting, I went in and met all of the top leadership of the company, and at a certain point he said to me, you know, "You have a really interesting background.  Instead of representing us, you know, would you ever consider coming to work for us?"  And, I said, "No, I, I wouldn't, I don't think I would."  I said, "You know, Texaco's got a really bad reputation.  Most of my friends have torn up their credit cards, like, you, you need serious help.  But, I, I will represent you on the outside but I--no, I wouldn't wanna go to work for you."  So, that was sort of the beginning of a conversation that, you know, took place over the next few months.  Ultimately, I went to work for Texaco.  And, Peter wanted me to head diversity and, you know, at first I said, "No, no way.  Why?  I'm the black woman, you're gonna hire me to run diversity because I'm a black woman," you know.  I, I don't know anything about diversity.  I had been my firm's co-chair of diversity and I said, you know, "Obviously, it's something I'm passionate about but I'm not an expert.  Why don't you hire somebody who's an expert in the field?"  And he said to me, "You know everything you need to know and you'll learn the rest. I want you to do this job."  I remember being sort of startled by that and, and I, I took the job.  So, I, I started and built the Office of Diversity and Inclusion and I had a team of I think four people.  And we worked very closely with this court appointed taskforce, which at the time was headed by Deval Patrick [HistoryMaker Deval L. Patrick] and then later Deval was hired to become the general counsel of Texaco.
Speaker 2: So, was there a diversity department before you arrived?
Speaker 1: There was HR [human resources] and there was somebody--there was not an HR--a diversity department but there was a guy there who was focused on diversity.  So, you know, to some extent Texaco felt very burned by what happened, because after--I think after the suit was filed I think they had started to really focus on--all right, we need to do something about this 'cause we do have this lawsuit pending.  So, I think they felt very burned by this whole thing 'cause they felt like they were doing things.  But they hadn't made it the priority that it became, obviously, after the settlement of the lawsuit.  And it was, you know, it was unfortunate that these two idiotic people, you know, had that conversation and, you know, the fact that it was recorded.
Story_ID: 658501
Speaker 1: Was the lawsuit already--
Speaker 2: Pending.
Speaker 1: --pending?  Yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  And it just hadn't been certified as a class yet, so they were waiting for class action certification.
Speaker 1: What does it take to get certified as a class?
Speaker 2: I don't know, you know, I'm not a litigator but I think a judge has to determine and there were--whether there were enough people who had signed on.  So, a number of African Americans had signed on to the suit and the suit was being led by a woman named Bari-Ellen Roberts.  And, she later wrote a book ['Roberts vs. Texaco: A True Story of Race and Corporate America'] about the whole Texaco [Texaco, Inc.] saga.  But, you know, because of the tapes it never had to be certified because immediately Bijur [Peter Bijur] said, "That's it, you know, I gotta stop the bloodletting and I'm gonna settle this."  And he settled it for a really big amount of money.  And some of that money was designated for, you know, the taskforce and for diversity.  And, of course, many of the, the, the plaintiffs also got to divide a pot of money.
Speaker 1: So, it was $176 million, right?
Speaker 2: Which was the largest ever settlement of a racial discrimination lawsuit.
Speaker 1: Part of which went to the people.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: But, what you're describing is that another part went in- internally to ensure that these things wouldn't happen again.
Speaker 2: I think that's right.  I, I know part of it was. And I think that Texaco volunteered to have the taskforce. I don't think the court required it but I think part of it was to pay the fees of the people on the taskforce.  Because the taskforce was in place for three years, they continued to monitor our demographics on a regular basis.  And also, you know, the taskforce had already begun to put an action plan in place.  So, when I got there I was hired six months after the settlement of the suit.  There had already been some work that had been done, so I don't want, I--
Speaker 1: What?
Speaker 2: --to lead you to believe that I created it all or that we started from scratch because the taskforce had already done some great work under the leadership of Deval Patrick [HistoryMaker Deval L. Patrick].
Story_ID: 658502
Speaker 1: When--you were describing how things came together in terms of the diversity work at Texaco [Texaco, Inc.] and you said six months before you came, Deval Patrick [HistoryMaker Deval L. Patrick] is leading this team.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And then you arrive.  How are you--are you working together with his team?  How are the dynamics?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I would have to present to the taskforce and initially the head of HR [human resources] and the people in HR who were working on diversity were working with the taskforce when I came in.  I didn't immediately work with the taskforce because I was sort of in a stakeholder role, because I was sort of in a roaming role working with government relations, working with lots of different groups.  And I was also sitting in on meetings in the CEO's office so, you know, at the time I think I was in part terrified and sort of didn't really realize the gravity of what I was doing.  But, as part of my acclimation process the CEO [Peter Bijur] said to me, "I'm going to allow you to sit in on executive committee meetings."  Now, there were only five white men in these executive committee meetings in a little conference room outside of his office at seven a.m. every Monday morning.  So, I would get up at like five and drive from the city [New York, New York] and make it to, to Westchester [Westchester County] to Harrison [New York] where our offices were so I could be there by a quarter of seven to be in his office.  And there was a roundtable, I didn't get to sit at the table but I got to sit along the wall and listen to all this, you know, confidential information about what was happening in the entire company.  And there was another woman who was allowed to sit in and she was head of communications, so we were the two observers but every Monday morning at seven a.m.  So, I did that for nine months and after nine months he said to me, "Okay, I think you, I think you should have--you got it.  By now you should have the gist."  And then by that time I was really fully enmeshed in, in leading diversity.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: (TAPE INTERRUPTION)
Speaker 1: After you had these meetings in--and you're told you're ready, now what do you do?
Speaker 2: So I--
Speaker 1: To change, to change a culture is a very difficult thing to do.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  And, and, listen, again, I don't wanna lead anybody to believe I did that alone.  I mean, the CEO really did lead this effort and he would say to people, you know, "This company's gotten fat, dumb, and happy and we're gonna change."  And, he started holding people accountable to, you know, certain diversity goals and numbers.  We set up, you know, an amount, we set up a supplier diversity program and significantly increased the spend with minority suppliers.  So, it was--yes, it was the beginning of culture change and Texaco was a very polarized company.  When I got there after a while I thought, dear me, what have I gotten myself into?  You know, because people were so traumatized by the lawsuit.  You know, you had people who thought, we're a great company, how did this ever happen here?  There were, you know--that the tension was really, really thick.  And then you had some African Americans who were part of the suit who got money and there was resentment towards them that they had been part of the class action and had received money from the settlement.  It, it was just a very, very tough time.  I mean, the good news is that over time we made a lot of really, really great change.  So, Texaco went from being considered this corporate pariah, and really, they were considered the most racist company in America, I mean, especially by people of color, to after these years of hard work and, you know, setting goals, and having this taskforce in place and--I did a lot of public speaking for Texaco around the country really with, you know, special interest groups persuading them that Texaco had really changed--
Story_ID: 658503
Speaker 1: After what period of time, because you go in with a bit of trepidation about (laughter) what's this, you know, what's this going to do to your reputation in a sense but then your--when you--when do you become the public face?  How much have you done before you get out there and start talking?
Speaker 2: Yeah, pretty simultaneously.  I remember I used to be the person that would go to all these conferences, because part of what I did was, when I started running the office of diversity [Office of Diversity and Inclusion], I needed to have a budget, I put together a strategy and a plan.  Here's where we need to increase our visibility, here are the groups we need to have partnerships and relationships with, you know.  We need to be at their conferences, we need to buy tables at their dinners, we need to be involved in their, you know--so, I had this whole plan.  So then, you know, it was time to start showing up.  So, I would show up at the conferences and speak at this--and in the beginning I have to tell you it was a little tense.  In the beginning when I would show up to speak at these events, you know, as soon as people said Texaco [Texaco, Inc.], you'd hear the boos in the audience, you know.  I remember the time when I wanted to always make sure I was near a door and that, you know, if I needed to pivot and get out really fast I could.  Because in the beginning, I mean, people hated Texaco.  I mean, because there was so much press about the black jellybean story and, you know, you try to convince people that this wasn't the whole company.  This was just, you know, a few people in the company.  Of course, there were grounds for bringing the lawsuit in the first place, but over time and part of it, you know, did also have to do with the relationships that I had in certain communities that over time we were able to persuade people and we supported their organizations, we provided money.  And over time, Texaco did become seen as this company that had made remarkable change.  But in the beginning, it was definitely a prove it, like, "Yeah, that's what you're saying but prove it."  And then we also had, you know, obviously, every organization in the world was like, "Okay, you all are in trouble.  You need us to endorse you, send money."  So, I'd be like, "Sure.  What time should the truck be there with the cash? We'll just show up with a whole bunch of cash and how, how much are we talking," (laughter)?  You know.  And we weren't literally doing that but everyone saw an opportunity to, you know, "You all need us, you're in trouble.  We need you to support this, this, this and this, and here's how much it's gonna cost."  So, I had a pretty big budget.  And we supported a lot of organizations that we hadn't previously supported.  So, suddenly Texaco had a real presence in lots of these communities and, over time, we were able to persuade people that we meant business.
Speaker 1: How long did you work there?
Speaker 2: I was there until 2001 when we got acquired by Chevron [Chevron Corporation].  And I would of stayed but for the merger.  So, this was when there were all these oil industry consolidations and Texaco had resisted, resisted the, you know, the merger.  "The urge to merge," as our CEO [Peter Bijur] used to say.  And, we were--Chevron and Texaco were like the last two on the dance floor.  So, Chevron ended up acquiring us and the whole operation moved to San Ramon, California.  So, I did a lot of shuttling back and forth working on the transition team for the merger, and I didn't wanna move to San Ramon.  I couldn't have, it, it--you know, my husband [Vallot's second husband, James G. Basker] was a tenured professor at Barnard [Barnard College, New York, New York] and I had two young children [Anne Vallot-Basker and Katherine Vallot-Basker].  So, I, I took the package and I went to Colgate Palmolive [Colgate Palmolive Company] instead.
Story_ID: 658504
Speaker 1: I'd like you to talk a bit about being in such a demanding role and having young children and, you know, a husband [Vallot's second husband, James G. Basker] and young children.  And, and, you know, a lot of lawyers in particular, women talk about the challenge sometimes that doing their job and having a family.  You were in a different role--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --but nonetheless a very large role.  How did you balance all of that?
Speaker 2: It was tough going.  My first daughter was born when I was still practicing law at Arent Fox [Arent Fox LLP], and in some ways that was easier because, you know, as a lawyer when you have your own practice, I mean, you know, you don't really have to punch a clock.  You know, you come and go as you need.  I mean, often there are late nights, but Anne [Anne Vallot-Basker] was born in Washington [D.C.] and I was able to sort of, you know, negotiate my schedule.  I did take a three month maternity leave but I worked, I worked.  I remember the week after she was born I had a pitch meeting and I was trying to get the business from a city; I won't name the city.  I didn't end up getting it but I remembered I was--I had, had a cesarean, an emergency cesarean and I was breastfeeding, and this mayor was late, like two hours late starting the meeting.  And I remembered I really like had to leave, and I kept saying, "When is he coming?  When is he coming," (laughter)?  And I wasn't, I wasn't in the greatest shape.  I should have never taken that meeting, but I did.  But, you know, I mean, I considered it my own business so it wasn't like I had to punch a clock.  This was what I needed to do to keep my clients.  Then when I went to Texaco [Texaco, Inc.], my second daughter was born at Texaco and I also took a leave.  I just--I slowed down a--well, no, actually that's not true.  I travelled a lot all through my pregnancy with Katherine [Katherine Vallot-Basker] to the point where my gynecologist said to me, "Now, look, I'm not responsible.  I told you to stop flying and--," you know, I was small so you couldn't really tell that I was pregnant, so nobody would stop me from getting on a plane.  But, I traveled right up until the ninth month.  And I was flying all over the country showing up at these different conferences.  I was meeting with--we had five different business operating units around the country.  So, and I ran the diversity councils for all of them so I was showing up there--so, you know, I wanted to get as much done 'cause we were doing such great things.  So, it was, it was a juggling act but I had a lot of help.  I had 'round the clock nannies, weekday, weekend.  So, we were able, between my husband's schedule and my schedule and with a lot of, lot of help, we were able to, to do it.  But, you know, I won't say it was easy, it was, it was difficult.  And when I went to Colgate [Colgate Palmolive Company] same thing, then I started traveling internationally and that was really hard 'cause my kids were really young.
Story_ID: 658505
Speaker 1: Before we go to Colgate [Colgate Palmolive Company] I have one other question regarding Texaco [Texaco, Inc.].  Was your work at all international in terms of the diversity part?
Speaker 2: (Shakes head) It wasn't.  There was some travel outside of the U.S.  I mean, the CEO [Peter Bijur] and sometimes members of his executive team were going to Azerbaijan and places like that, but our work was really--was domestic.
Speaker 1: And even the, the hires who your--where your focus was, was on Americans, American employees?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah.  Colgate was a totally different story, it was much more of a global company but Texaco was--although it was doing business outside the U.S., Texaco was really a U.S. company and for the most--
Speaker 1: With U.S. employees?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: When do you go to Colgate?
Speaker 2: I went to Colgate in 2001.
Speaker 1: In the same role, chief diversity officer?
Speaker 2: It was interesting.  I, I went in as head of--and I came up with this title myself because by that time I had sort of decided I don't know if I wanna continue to do diversity work, you know.  It was really hard work, I mean, at Texaco we had the burning platform and we sort of had the--we had to do something, you know.  But, diversity work is really, really hard work, so I had kind of decided, you know what, maybe I wanna break and wanna do something different.  So, I met the CEO of Texaco [sic.] in Los Angeles [California] at a conference just before 9/11 [September 11, 2001], it's the day before 9/11.  And, he told me at that time he had a search open for, for a chief diversity officer and said, "What do you wanna do?"  And, I said, "I don't know. I'm looking at some other opportunities."  And I was looking at some communication positions on Wall Street.  After 9/11, I contacted him and he said, "Why don't you come and talk to me?" So I did.  And he said, "This would be a great position for you to take."  I had an offer from a firm on Wall Street to do communications and I said, "I'm probably gonna do this job.  I doubt that you could move quickly enough to--," and he said, "Give me a week."  And in a week, he came back to me and I had the interview.  I came in quickly for interviews and interviewed all of his top people and he offered me a job.  Well, after 9/11, I kind of thought, you know what?  I don't wanna be on Wall Street because at that time Wall Street was like a ghost town, remember?  It was really, really bad down there and this company was right next to the towers [World Trade Center, New York, New York].  And I thought, you know what, too depressing.  And part of my job was going to be traveling.  Well, that was when everyone was completely spooked and companies at all offices suspended travel.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: So, I decided okay, well, you know what?  Well, let me talk to you.  So, he made me an offer and the offer was--because I didn't wanna exclusively do diversity 'cause I felt like I didn't wanna get tagged with that, you know, and I wanted to still keep my options open.  They made me head of business continuity planning and diversity, but we called it global workplace initiatives.  So, I was vice president of global workplace initiatives.  So, the first year at Colgate, I really spent most of my time coming up with a business continuity plan, 'cause that was when every business knew post-9/11 you had to have a plan in place if another 9/11 happened.  Where were your people going?  How were you gonna operate your businesses?  And that was one of the hardest jobs I ever did (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So, this is like emergency planning?  What does that mean, business cont- ?
Speaker 2: Well, business continuity.  How you keep your business going.  And today, I mean, every organization--I serve on the board of a mutual fund [Sentinel Group Funds, Inc.] and at every one of our quarterly meetings, we review or at least check that box that our business continuity plan's in place, that we've done, you know, simulations to make sure that we can keep the business up and running if New York [New York] were to go down or if an office were to go down.  So, it meant having to coordinate with people all over the company globally to come up with this plan.  And we had a book, we had the book (laughter) that took forever, and we had a phone number for every senior executive.  What would be their backup number and where would be--anyway, it was a great way to get to know the company and know people in the company pretty quickly.  And I was on their executive team.  And then once I kind of got that done then I was able to sort of transition into--but I was kind of trying to do them both at the same time the diversity piece.  But, Colgate, you know, there was no lawsuit.  It was a company that was considered a best in class company, and was truly a global company.  I think 70 percent of Colgate's employees worked outside of the U.S.
Story_ID: 658506
Speaker 1: Given that and, and that diversity was part of your job, what is--what kinds of challenges are you facing in the diversity space when now you're, you have a global employee base?
Speaker 2: Well, it was really just trying to get my head wrapped around and make sure one, the CEO wanted to make sure that diversity was, you know, looked at globally that, you know, they really were a global company.  So, it couldn't be just a domestic issue, which was all knew to me.  I didn't know the global piece so it was an opportunity for me to sort of understand, you know, that outside the U.S. issues were very different.  And, we also had the challenge of people thinking, oh, this is this U.S. stuff, we don't have race issues so, you know, this really doesn't apply to us.  So, our focus initially was more around inclusion and trying to understand how different people experience a culture.  So, outside the U.S. it was looking at women and, you know, how were women experiencing the company?  So, I traveled with them to South Africa and to Brazil and I think to Europe focused mostly on gender issues.  And then I helped to start the first women's employee network group here in New York [New York] at Colgate's headquarters [Colgate Palmolive Company].  So, that was sort of just the beginning of our diversity.  And, at the same time we were looking at our numbers in, in the U.S. and, you know, I must say the leadership of Colgate was fantastic.  Reuben Mark and the, the, the president of the company [William S. Shanahan], they were very bullish about setting, you know, numbers and, and meeting those numbers.  So, I would have to meet with each of the heads of the business units to talk about, "Where's your business going?" You know, "What kind of hiring opportunities do you have?  Let's look at your current mix. Where are you short?"  And then I was also responsible for filing the REEO [ph.] reports, so we were always looking to see how we could, you know, bridge where we had gaps and how do we get more people.
Story_ID: 658507
Speaker 1: Now, you didn't stay there very long, two years, right?
Speaker 2: (Nods head).
Speaker 1: And then you started your business.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: You were at this mult- this huge com-, multinational organization, what made you make that shift to be independent?
Speaker 2: I think I was tired.  I, I was sort of burned out, you know, I had come off of a very, very fast track at Texaco [Texaco, Inc.] where, you know, I was really working flat out for about six years, went to Colgate [Colgate Palmolive Company] and that job was supposed to be 60 percent travel.  And I remembered when I was interviewing with, with Bill Shanahan [William S. Shanahan], he was my direct boss he was the number two guy there as the president, when they said 60 percent travel I said, "Oh, I, I'm sorry, I'm gonna have to pull myself out of this right now.  There is no way I can do 60 percent travel. I have two children."  My youngest one [Katherine Vallot-Basker] was two and my--they were two and six.  And I said, "There is no way I can do 60 percent travel."  And they said, "You know what--," and especially post-9/11 [September 11, 2001].  I said, "If, if that's what it is, I can't do it."  And they said, "Okay, fair enough.  You know what, let's not worry about that right now. You tell us how much you can do."  And they were very, very flexible.  So, for the first year I didn't, I didn't travel at all because I was focused on that business continuity plan and that was, that was a really big project.  So, then I did start traveling.  And I think I just needed--I, I was burnt out, I was tired and I needed to step back and take a little time.  So, when I left initially I didn't know I was gonna start my own business and I just needed to sort of catch my breath.  And, you know, I was mom who never showed up at school--
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: --you know, and I wasn't--I just wasn't very present for the kids and that bothered my older daughter [Anne Vallot-Basker].  So, I wanted to spend a little bit more time and figure out next steps.
Story_ID: 658508
Speaker 1: You did start your business in that same year though, right (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I did, I did.  I started sort of by happenstance.  A friend of ours who's a partner at Sullivan and Cromwell [Sullivan and Cromwell LLP] called me and said, you know, "Hey, do you have time to come and have lunch with us?  You know, we're working on diversity inclusion, we could use some help."  So, I said, "Sure, why not."  So, I ended up meeting with him and a bunch of the partners at the firm, and the next thing I knew they said, "Would you be interested in, you know, while you're trying to figure out next steps just working with us on a consulting basis?"  So, I ended up doing a culture assessment for them, coming up with some recommendations and kind of coming up with an action plan.  And, I realized like, oh--and I had previously sort of hired consultants when I was at Texaco [Texaco, Inc.] and, and Colgate [Colgate Palmolive Company], so I didn't do the consulting but, you know, I had a sense of what obviously, what needed to be done.  And I thought, you know, this is interesting.  I have a lot of flexibility and I started it right out of my apartment, and I could be there when the kids [Anne Vallot-Basker and Katherine Vallot-Basker] got home.  And I ended up working a lot into the night.  But Sullivan was a--Sullivan and Cromwell was a wonderful sort of first client to have.  And then they were nice enough to refer me to other law firms, and another firm started calling me and saying, "Hey, I hear you did work for Sullivan and Cromwell, you know, would you, would you like to come and talk to us?"  So, that--I started independently and then I met another consultant, a guy named Mitchell Karp, who's my current business partner, and he had been consulting for the last twenty years.  He was doing a lot of work in the nonprofit space. He too is a lawyer but he wasn't doing as much law firm work.  So, we ended up teaming up together on a project actually for another consultant.  And we thought, hey, you know, this is kind of fun working together and we have complementary synergies.  And then at some point he got asked to pitch a law firm and I got asked to pitch the same firm so we said, "Hey, why don't we do it together?"  So, we showed up together and we kind of represented ourselves as having to--having been working together all along.  And, next thing you knew we, we were kind of informally in business.  And at some point, we said, you know, we probably ought to go ahead and get the same business cards and form a corporation, which we did [VallotKarp Consulting LLC, New York, New York], and it's been about twelve years (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) It happened very naturally.
Speaker 2: It happened very naturally, yeah.
Speaker 1: And how has that affected your schedule?  Do you find yourself less busy?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) No.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) I didn't think so.
Speaker 2: No, I am not any less busy.  As a matter of fact, my kids, especially my oldest daughter would fuss and fuss and fuss and fuss, and said, "You promised you were gonna be less busy and now you're working even harder."  Well, suddenly it's a whole different dynamic.  It was like practicing law again because, you know, it was all about me going out and, you know, getting the business, and it was my business, and my name is on it, and so I had to make it right.  And the business took off pretty quickly.  And then eventually we got office space, and actually our office is, you know, right here in Times Square [New York, New York].  And we have, we've had a really, really great business.  Initially, we started with primarily law firms and then we branched out to working with global corporations.  And now we're doing some very exciting work with cultural, cultural institutions.  So, there is now this, you know, sort of new focus on museums and other cultural institutions and a recognition that there isn't a lot of radial diversity, especially not in senior and curatorial ed-, curatorial levels, so.
Story_ID: 658509
Speaker 1: How influential is the government to what happens in diversity and inclusion in, you know, these various businesses that you work in.  For example, here now the tide is turning--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --now in 2016, but it has been turning for a, a while in terms of, of, you know, a pushback against affirmative action--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --you know, there's, there's, there's a segment of the population that believes enough already for doing anything for black people or brown people, or anybody (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Or even enough for women (laughter).
Speaker 1: Well, you know, for all people except for a particular group.  This pushback has been happening for a while.  At the same time, diversity and inclusion as a category has been growing.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Many businesses are incorporating this in their company already, so I was curious about--you know, it's an interesting balance.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  It's such a great question and, and it's one of the things makes me hopeful about this new president that we have [President Donald John Trump] or it makes me hopeful about the time that we're in notwithstanding this election.  Because I think businesses have been at the business of diversity and inclusion for a long time and they know that it's good for business.  So, I remember when I first started at Texaco [Texaco, Inc.], we were all wringing our rings and we were trying so hard to make the business case.  I know we talked about, what's the business case?  Is this more than just about do goodism or morality, or right thing to do?  How do we know and what is the evidence that this is good for business?  Well, over time there've been so many studies and it's been, you know, clearly documented not only that diverse teams outperform homogenous teams, that's because if you have everybody with the same background thinking the same way you're gonna get a limited number of suggestions, ideas, innovation.  But if you mix it up and you have people from different backgrounds, you're, you're just gonna get so much more.  So, that's on the one side and then on the other side is that companies have all figured out, well, guess what, the demographics of the world are changing and we wanna sell our products to everyone.  And in order to sell our products effectively, we've gotta have people who understand the different segments of our consumer base.  That means we've got to have people who look like our consumers.  So, I think the business world, I think that ship has already sailed thankfully.  I mean, that doesn't mean that we don't have to be vigilant, because I think as diversity practitioners we are trying to figure out how do we anticipate changes that are going to come with this new administration.  But, my sense and based on what I'm reading and hearing from clients [of VallotKarp Consulting LLC, New York, New York] and in the, in the press are that corporations are pretty clear that diversity is here to stay.  That this is who we are, you know, you don't sell products to just one segment of society.  We're selling our products to everyone.  And, this is about money, don't come in and interfere with our ability to make money.
Story_ID: 658510
Speaker 1: You have been serving on the Board of the NAACP Legal Defense Fund [NAACP Legal Defense and Educational Fund, Inc.] for some years now, since 2010, I believe?
Speaker 2: Yeah, about, yeah.
Speaker 1: And just historically the Legal Defense Fund has been on the frontlines making every effort possible to bring equality for everyone, particularly, people of African descent.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: What are the, what are the challenges that you have seen their fighting for over the time that you've been on the board.
Speaker 2: Well, the, the, the biggest issue--two big issues, but first came voting rights.  When Shelby v. Holder [Shelby County v. Holder, 2013] that disastrous, disastrous [U.S.] Supreme Court decision that got its Section 5 of the Voting Rights Act [Voting Rights Act of 1965].  I actually went to the Supreme Court because I wanted to observe that hearing and LDF argued it and that was a pretty stunning hearing and it's well documented now.  Some of the shocking things that Justice Scalia [Antonin Scalia] said, I think he talked about isn't voting right--isn't Section 5 the equivalent of affirmative action for blacks?  I mean, you know, we're talking about a constitutional right and, you know, somehow analogizing voting rights to affirmative action, you know, and then Chief Justice Roberts [John Roberts] who said, "You know, we're sort of over that now.  We, we no longer need--," so, Section 5 was the provision that provided for preclearance of any changes in voting hours, voting places, any changes to voting in--I think it was nine different states primarily in the South.  Once they overturned Section 5, I mean, you know, all bets were off and immediately the day after the decision you saw in Texas the attorney general or--I think it was the attorney general who said, you know, "We're gonna put it in place," and we'd hardly begun to see some of these voter ID laws come into being and they sprang up all over in southern states.  So, we still have Section 2 of the Voting Rights Act which allows you to after the fact litigate or go to the justice department [U.S. Department of Justice].  But, you know, we already know and we have seen evidence of how these changes have influenced local elections which then ultimately influence, you know, national elections.  So, that's been just so disastrous.  So LDF has been on the ground in so many of those southern states trying to work with communities to get word of potential changes and in many cases, we've been able to write very strongly worded letters that have in some cases postponed or put off, or made people think twice about some of these changes.  In other cases, we are now in court trying to fight against some of these voter ID laws that have gone into effect.  And recently we've been successful on a number of fronts.  But, you know, that's a good question, what's gonna happen as we see changes in judicial appointments and especially with these, you know, the opening on the Supreme Court.  You don't know what's next.  So, that's one of them--the most devastating and depressing aspects of this election is thinking about the composition of the Supreme Court.  But, of course, the other front that we've been very busy fighting on is policing reform after all of these tragic killings of black men and black women.  So, we've just started the Thurgood Marshall policy institute [Thurgood Marshall Institute] inside of LDF that is focused on policing reform and trying to help make changes working with the justice department, working with prosecutors, working with police departments all over the country talking about the need for bias training for judges, for police, for prosecutors.  So, that one's not going away anytime soon, that one is gonna be with us for a long time.  But, we are very, very concerned about what lies ahead.
Story_ID: 658511
Speaker 1: I wanna ask you about your children.  The--what are their ages now?
Speaker 2: They are seventeen and twenty-one [Anne Vallot-Basker].
Speaker 1: And, I'm curious as to what their journey has been as it relates to race and racial identity, and how they look compared to your growing up experience?
Speaker 2: Yeah, that's a very, that's a very long and interesting conversation.  So, my children are biracial, my husband is white.  And, they've had to, you know, sort of figure out, you know, so what they say to people is that, you know, "My mother is black and my father is white."  My youngest daughter looks very white so, interestingly, she's a senior in high school and she had to do all of her college essays and she chose the subject of racial identity as the focus of her college essay.  And, at some point, she shared it with me but for a long time she kind of wouldn't.  I just knew she was writing about this.  And she talked a lot about, you know, my having grown up in Jim Crow South.  And some of her issue was a little bit the same but different than mine growing up in terms of challenges.  She's spent a lot of her life trying to persuade people that she really was half black.  And, she, she wrote a pretty stunning essay saying that, you know, starting sort of from kindergarten on she always knew it was gonna be sort of like a litigation or a cross examination because people would say, "Well, what do you mean you're black?  You're not black, you don't look black at all.  You look white."  And she looks more like Jim [Vallot's second husband, James G. Basker].  And, she said she would have to, you know, kind of gather up her evidence and be prepared to make her case.  And, she said at some point she just got so tired of, you know, having to prove to people that she just let 'em think she was white.  But then when she went to boarding school she joined the African American student group, and at some point, she pulled away from that group because apparently, the leadership changed and she said the focus then turned in a very ugly direction, you know, after black lives matters [Black Lives Matter] and the protests on, you know, college and school campuses that somehow the, the conversation turned to what did it mean to be black?  And who's black enough to be black?  And she said it just, it, it felt like it wasn't productive.  So, she actually got out of that club and she started or she reinvigorated the multiracial club with a friend who is also biracial, whose father is black and whose mother is white.  And interesting, ironically, Jim went to school with her dad so we reconnected and our kids have become best friends full circle.  So, the two of them have really been leaders of this multiracial club.  So, this sense of wanting to create a place where everybody could come and you could fit in and you didn't have to try to prove your identity one way or the other.  So, that's kind of Katherine's [Katherine Vallot-Basker] story.
Story_ID: 658512
Speaker 1: You were telling me your second daughter?
Speaker 2: Oh, and before I go to my second daughter--
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: So, I'm so proud of my first daughter so, guess what, just yesterday we got the news that she got accepted to Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts].
Speaker 1: Congratulations.
Speaker 2: Yeah, she's been crazy busy doing her applications, so, and this is her father's alma mater.
Speaker 1: Very good.
Speaker 2: So, she hasn't made a decision yet, but I think she--we're hoping.
Speaker 1: But being accepted is excellent.
Speaker 2: Pretty big, that's a big, a big deal.
Speaker 1: Yeah, wonderful.
Speaker 2: So, so my, my first--my oldest daughter, Anne [Anne Vallot-Basker], is--she's, she's a force of nature.  She kind of comes with the race thing a little differently.  Now, she's the one who looks more like me, so she's definitely brown skinned and she's got, you know, sort of really curly, wavy hair which I think is absolutely beautiful.  But, I think she has struggled more with race.  Katherine [Katherine Vallot-Basker] could pass for white and just looks white, and she would never have to say anything.  But, I think Anne has felt much more of a need to sort of explain, so she tells people that she's half-black and half-white.  But then she tells people sometimes, "Well, my mother's racially confused.  My mother thinks she's black but she's not really black, because her family has done the DNA ancestry and they're only 23 percent black.  They're really mostly European 'cause they're French on both sides."  You know, I said, "Anne, you don't have to tell me what my ancestry is.  Yes, of course, I'm mixed but I'm African American, I mean, my whole life I've been a black woman.  So--," but, I think it's been much more of a struggle for her starting when she was very young.  One day in kindergarten she came home and said that two of the girls at her school said, "No brown kids allowed in this play group."  Well, I marched right over to the school and said, "Oh, no, we're gonna talk about this, what happened, and that means you need to be having some conversations in the classroom."  So, Anne had some ugly experiences early on.  I think that she, she got it, she learned that it wasn't good to be a brown person because you got locked out or discriminated.  She had--there was a little white girl in our apartment building that she used to play with who would always say things like "Why is Katherine white and you're brown, and you're brown and he's [Vallot's husband, James G. Basker] white."  But she was very young and I thought, hm, that's interesting.  How could she be asking those kinds of questions? She must be getting this from her parents. 'Cause it was just too much focus on race for a young child.  And usually, at, you know, four and five, they're not noticing those things.  Interestingly one day we got invited to the parents' apartment for News Year's brunch, and in the brunch the father--they were moving, the, the mother had gotten a job working for GE [General Electric] and she was moving to Cincinnati [Ohio].  And, I said something like, "Congratulations," and said to her husband, "So how are you feeling about this?"  Because he was going to be the trailing spouse.  He said, "Oh, I'm thrilled we're moving to Cincinnati. At least there're no niggers there."  (Laughter) So, we're in their home.  I'm so shocked.  The wife turns every shade of purple and she shoots him a pair of eyes.  I, I don't think he knew that we were black or I don't know what he thought.  And I should have gotten up and walked out, I should have said something.  I was so stunned that I, I just sort of didn't know what to say.  So, I remember we kind of finished up quickly and I got out of there as quickly as possible.  But, I never confronted him or addressed him.  But, it was clear to me that the daughter must have gotten some of that from her father.  So, I think Anne had enough experiences of either feeling some form of, you know, discrimination or, you know, being ostracized that she's, she's conscience of race in a, in a very different way.  But, she, having said all of that, you know, she's the one who's always going on and on about, "Well, you know your family is only 23 percent black."  So, this has always been, even though my dad [Peter Vallot, Jr.] was fighting for civil rights and black rights.  Inside of that conversation was also always a conversation about, well, it's interesting how it just got dictated to us because of the powerful drop.  What, you know, what should make us black because you've got some black blood, you know.  So, there were always these very heated discussions around our dinner table and race was just always so present.  And, you know, one of my sisters took the saliva DNA test and sent around the results and it was kind of like, "You see, I told you.  We knew that we were always, you know, less."  And, for me, because I lived away for so long and I was in Washington [D.C.], and sort of, you know, was able to feel really good about being black, whereas, in Louisiana it's really hard to feel good about being black.  I always kind of said, "Ah, that's, you know, great, of course we always knew that but so what, you know."  That really our thinking and our whole, you know, our whole socialization has been black.  But, you know, Creole inside of, you know, being black.  So, there's always been that tension.  So, my daughter's always quick to tell people, "Yes, I'm mixed but my family's only 23 percent black, so I'm really not that black," (laughter).  So, it sort of a running joke.
Story_ID: 658513
Speaker 1: Which is, I mean, you know, so charged, there's so much in that.
Speaker 2: Exactly.  Well, because, look, she's picked up all of the messages and that's exactly how bias works, right?
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: Because you get those messages about who's an insider and who's an outsider.  And, of course, you, you know, you wouldn't voluntarily wanna be part of an outside community if you don't have to.  But, I have to say that, notwithstanding, that whole little sort of thing that she has about race, she is absolutely--and both kids are--you know, their politics are absolutely on point in terms of this election, what they think about this newly elected president.  By daughter, Anne [Anne Vallot-Basker], who goes to school at--goes to college in Paris [France], she's in her senior year.  It's a four year program but she did her junior year abroad in Beirut, Lebanon, so she's a fearless traveler.  And she's traveled all over the world her whole life, and always picked these summer programs in different countries.  And, frankly, some of it was scary for me, but she did it and she's a fearless kid.  She's majoring in Middle Eastern studies, so, her whole thing is fighting for Palestinian rights, for refugee rights, she's learning Arabic, she volunteers in refugee organizations, she's leading a refugee program at her school for Syrian kids who are refugees.  When she was in Beirut, she volunteered to work for an organization that was called Act for the Disappeared, where they are trying to find and piece together the lives of people who went missing during the Lebanese Civil War.  So, she is a, you know, a fearless advocate for the underdog, you know, and even with all of her rhetoric about we're not so black, she's definitely into fighting for black people and Obama [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama], and, you know, anti-Trump [President Donald John Trump], and, you know, fighting for you know, Palestinian rights.
Story_ID: 658514
Speaker 1: Tell me about your husband?
Speaker 2: So, my husband is, is an interesting guy.
Speaker 1: What's his name?
Speaker 2: His name is Jim Basker, James Basker [James G. Basker], and he is, he's a professor, an English professor, teaches at Barnard [Barnard College, New York, New York].  But he's also a, a literary historian so he does American history.  He's done a lot of work on slavery.  And his period is 18th century.  So, when I met him, I met him at a dinner party in Washington [D.C.] and when he told me he was a professor of 18th century English literature my first thought was, oh, god, English, 18th century.  And I'm trying to figure out the years like what, what years would the 18th century be, and like who would that be.  Well, I didn't know any of those writers and initially I felt kind of dumb talking to him 'cause I didn't know Samuel Johnson.  I mean, I knew he wrote the dictionary but he's written books on Samuel Johnson and Pope [Alexander Pope] and Tobias Smollett all those people.  And I didn't know all those people; I've learned a lot from him.  But he also has this interest in slavery because that's, you know, in that same period.  So, he's done a lot of research on slavery and he wrote this book called 'Amazing Grace' ['Amazing Grace: An Anthology of Poems about Slavery, 1660-1810,' ed. James G. Basker] and it's a compilation of four hundred poems written during the 17th and 18th century on--mostly poems written by abolitionists.  So, his whole point was that even during slavery there were people who were fighting back in their own way, and that through the literary community there were poems and there were different writings opposing slavery.  So, he wrote this beautiful book which I brought with me called 'Amazing Grace' and it's this anthology of these poems.  And, he's got a whole bunch of others.  So, that's, his period is sort of 18th century.  But, he does some interesting stuff so he, he teaches at Barnard, that's one of his jobs.
Story_ID: 658515
Speaker 1: And then he started a summer school program thirty-five years ago, for high school students.  So, Jim [Vallot's second husband, James G. Basker] went to Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] undergraduate then he went to Cambridge [University of Cambridge] in, in, in Cambridge, England where he got another--where he got a master's [degree].  And then he went to Oxford [University of Oxford, Oxford, England] as a Rhodes scholar [Rhodes Scholarship]and got his D.Phil there.  So, he spent a good part of his adult life in England.  And is really an anglophile, loves England.  But, because he so loved going to school at Oxford and Cambridge, he wanted to start a summer school program so Americans could have this experience of living and going to school in these beautiful--have you been to--
Speaker 2: I have not.
Speaker 1: It's so gorgeous.  These colleges are beautiful.  Some of them have been around seven, eight hundred years.  So, the program started very, very small and he would rent the college.  The kids would actually live in the college and he would bring in the instructors many of whom were Oxford students and other Rhodes scholars.  And they would teach these multidisciplinary, you know, courses and the kids would pick a major and a minor.  Well, fast forward thirty-five years later the program has grown, there are now thirteen different programs.  So, there are--there's one at Oxford, Cambridge, Montpellier [University of Montpellier, Montpellier, France] in the south of France, there's one in Paris [France], there's one in Barcelona [Spain], two other places in Spain, and there's a program at Harvard, at Barnard [Barnard College, New York, New York], and at UCLA [University of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California].  Anyway, he's got two thousand kids who come from all over the world, so from sixty-six different countries who attend these programs.
Speaker 2: How long is the program?
Speaker 1: So, they're month long programs.  And, they, they're life altering programs.  The kids--first of all, the kids who choose these programs are generally not kids who wanna do sports. I mean, they're kids who are academically, you know, ambitious.  And, you pick a major and a minor, and the, the exposure and the, the, the things these kids study and learn.  And they do field trips but then they do also, you know, academic work.
Speaker 2: What, what, what age are they? Where is this?
Speaker 1: So, there're two different programs.  There's a program for eighth and ninth graders and then there's a program for tenth, eleventh and twelfth.  So, in Oxford, there're two different programs. There's the prep programs which is for the younger cohort and then there's the track program or traditional program for the ninth--for the tenth, eleventh and twelfth graders.
Speaker 2: What is it called?
Speaker 1: It's called Oxbridge Academics [Oxbridge Academic Programs].  So, he just sold it last year, which was a really good thing.  And he sold it to a much bigger company that does education.  He's still running the business and is still working in it full time.  And, he's--he travels all over the world going to schools and recruiting students.  And he also does teacher seminars, so at the same time the students are getting this wonderful, you know, experience, teachers come and theirs isn't a month. It's like I think a week long, or maybe some of them are two weeks.  But, they're also getting a chance to recharge their batteries and expand, you know, their knowledge in education.  So, these programs are--I'm just so proud of the business he built.  And he did it, you know, alone.  This was his business and every summer for the last thirty-five years he's always been in Europe and he travels around, and he has like two hundred people who work in these programs.  Because a lot of kids to mind.  And, our kids [Anne Vallot-Basker and Katherine Vallot-Basker] and I have the opportunity to go over every summer and to spend some part of the summer there.
Speaker 2: Do they do it (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And the kids have each been students--
Speaker 2: Good.
Speaker 1: --have each been students in his program, yeah. And, now and for the last few summers has worked in the program as a, as a PA [program assistant].  So, yeah, the kids were sort of sad when he sold it but, you know, it was the right thing to do and it was great for him to be able to, you know, realize some economic benefits from it.
Speaker 2: Sure.
Speaker 1: But the program has such a wonderful reputation and what's neat about it is he's been at it so long that he's now seeing the second generation come through.  So, a lot of his students now have their children in the program.
Speaker 2: Fantastic.
Speaker 1: So, that's his second job.
Story_ID: 658516
Speaker 1: Then his third job, he has one more job 'cause he's an interesting guy who loves everything that he does and he's really busy.  But, he runs an American history institute called the Gilder Lehrman Institute [Gilder Lehrman Institute of American History, New York, New York].  And, what they promote is the love and learning of American history.  So, they--it started with the documents that were collected by these two philanthropists, Richard Gilder and Lew Lehrman [Lewis E. Lehrman].  And they have one of the largest collections of Americana documents, and what they have done is made these documents available online to both teachers and students.  So, they partner with teachers, students, educational institutions, museums all over the country to promote American history and to help make these documents available to teach history.  So, one of the really cool things that they're doing, the really sexy thing that he's doing right now is he's working with the 'Hamilton' production ['Hamilton: An American Musical,' Lin-Manuel Miranda].  Because years ago, like ten years ago, Jim [Vallot's second husband, James G. Basker] actually directed a show at the New-York Historic Society [sic. New-York Historical Society, New York, New York], he's on the board of the New-York Historic Society.  And he--they did the first exhibit on Hamilton [Alexander Hamilton].  And, Jim actually commissioned a short play ['Alexander Hamilton: The Man Who Made Modern America'] on Hamilton's life that one of his friends wrote and directed.  And, then now, whoever knew 'Hamilton' would be this big, 'cause he spent years of his life and the kids [Anne Vallot-Basker and Katherine Vallot-Basker] and I were like, "Yeah, okay, Hamilton, whatever, right."  And, and--
Speaker 2: For this production? But this--
Speaker 1: Well, no, for the previous.  Well, when they did the--at the New-York Historic Society.  Well, what Jim does now--as the Gilder Lehrman Institute got a grant from the Rockefeller Foundation to take, to take high school--Title 1 high school students to see 'Hamilton.'  So, they do the curriculum for the teachers to use in the school to help to teach American history and 'Hamilton.'  And then the kids actually come and see a play and they do a performance.  So, the kids all have to--I guess the ones that want to--compete to be selected to perform for the cast.  Some version of--they can pick a character in American history.
Speaker 2: How exciting.
Speaker 1: And they perform for the cast and, then that's the morning part of the program, and in the afternoon, they actually see the play.  So, the theater is closed and it's just for high school students.  So, I think Jim has taken six--there've been six, six different matinees, yesterday was one so a full day.  And, it's, it's amazing.  These are kids who otherwise would never, ever get to go to the theater.  Many of them this is their first time, and for many of them it's the first time coming into Manhattan [New York].  And they get to actually see 'Hamilton.'  And they're gonna take this on the road so they're doing it in Chicago [Illinois] and they're gonna do it in San Francisco [California].  So, they're raising monies to match the funding from the Rockefeller Foundation to get money from other foundations to take history--to take high school, Title 1 high school kids to see this play as it makes its way around the country.
Speaker 2: How creative, too.
Speaker 1: Yeah, it's great--
Speaker 2: That's great.
Speaker 1: --it's really, really exciting.  So, our whole family has 'Hamilton' fever and we're all singing the songs and everything is 'Hamilton,' 'Hamilton.'
Speaker 2: (Laughter) That's great.
Story_ID: 658517
Speaker 1: When you look over the course of your career and all the things that you've done, what do you hope your legacy to be?
Speaker 2: Yeah, that's always a really tough question.  I guess I'd want people to think that I helped to make a difference in some small way.  That, you know, I helped to make organizations a little bit more inclusive, because that's really what my consulting work [at VallotKarp Consulting LLC, New York, New York] is about, going into organizations and trying to open up the bottleneck and create a culture that allows more people to succeed and to succeed in more than one way.  So, I don't know, I hope it would be said that I maybe helped law firms to be more inclusive so that more African Americans can succeed because we don't have a good track record in law firms, that more women or people of color, more lesbians and gays can be successful.  And I'd want the same to be said of corporations and, and I guess through my work with LDF [NAACP Legal Defense and Educational Fund, Inc.], I mean, it all kind of is part and parcel of the same thing that, that we made the world a better place for more people.  And that especially at LDF, that we're, we're fighting to uphold the law and to make sure that, you know, the gains that our ancestors worked so hard for aren't taken away.  So, I guess I, I'd wanna say that I, I, I, took the baton because I, I think of life as sort of a relay race and I think, you know, our ancestors started it.  And I think about, you know, all the things that my dad [Peter Vallot, Jr.] and our forefathers did and, I mean, the real suffering and the really tough lives they had.  And that I see it as part of my responsibility to take the baton and to run, to, to, to, to try to advance what they started and to try to make it a little better.  And to pick up some time and some speed. I guess that's what I'd say.
Story_ID: 658518
Speaker 1: Do you have any regrets?
Speaker 2: Oh, gosh, do I have regrets?  Yeah, I'm sure I do, or I'm sure I should.  Yeah, I probably should of, probably should have studied harder maybe made better grades in law school [Georgetown University Law Center, Washington, D.C.] (laughter) or something.
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: I don't know, I mean, like often you, you know, you think like should I have left that job or should I have done this?  You know, it's like when I took the Texaco [Texaco, Inc.] job, I was scared to death.  I didn't know if that was the right thing to do.  But, the, the older I get the more philosophical I become and I, I think in a way everything you do is--sort of prepares you for where you're supposed to go and ultimately what you're supposed to be doing.  So, I think, ultimately, I am supposed to be doing what--exactly what I am doing right now.  And I didn't know it growing up as a kid, but I think my whole life has sort of led me to this place where part of what I'm trying to do is be a bridge builder and create opportunities.  Make it safe for people to be able to talk about these hard things like bias, hidden bias, and the fact that we have these, these things.  It doesn't make us bad people, we have these biases.  And I think I'm doing what I'm supposed to be doing trying to open up and, and create room to have these conversations and really get at the tough work of why we have these barriers for black people, for women, for gays and lesbians.  And to, to, to get people--to hold up a mirror to get people to see what's going on and to more importantly think about how you can interrupt that cycle.
Story_ID: 658519
Speaker 1: What advice would you offer to young people, particularly young African Americans, who might want to follow in your footsteps?
Speaker 2: There's a lot of need, there's a lot of work, and I, I always love it when people wanna sort of join this, this struggle, and this fight because it is a struggle.  It's not easy even though it's an easier conversation to have today.  You know, I try to give them the pros and cons that it's, it's still tough work and--but I say that it's, it's important so whether you decided you wanna do it as a vocation or an avocation that you need to be aware of these things.  I mean, often, you know, when I see young people starting law firms, you know, they're always using employee resource groups and black group and the Asian group and the women's group, and often people say, look, I don't wanna be put in a box.  I don't--I'm just a person, you know, and I go, that's good, that's fine, no problem with that.  But, you know, there's how you see yourself looking out and there's how people see you.  And, generally, after they've been in the workplace for a couple of years, they come back full circle and say, "Okay, let's talk," (laughter). "I wanna be part of the group."  Because it doesn't matter how you see yourself, it's all about how people see you and how, you know, how their biases are operating either in favor of or against.  So, you know, I just try to encourage people to educate yourself and become aware, be, you know--do your part, help out.  And whether it means joining a group or speaking up or--and to be good at what you do.  I mean, you got to work hard and be good at it but, at the same time, I think we all owe some contribution to give back and to help improve things, to leave things in a better place than when you got there.
Story_ID: 658520
Speaker 1: And for those young people growing up today who are biracial, multiracial, who have--when people are seeing them much like you and your family, and your children [Anne Vallot-Basker and Katherine Vallot-Basker], there's a question, who are you, what are you?  What advice do you have for them navigating that?
Speaker 2: I say own and be proud of all aspects of your heritage.  So, you know, for me I didn't have a choice.  When I was growing up I had the powerful drop so you were black, you didn't really get that choice of being--yeah, inside Louisiana there was this unspoken that you're Creole.  But, it was clear that I was black, I always knew that.  Today it's different, you can check a multiracial box.  I didn't have that, but I would say that people--and what I say to my kids is, "I would no more advise you to deny your white heritage, which happens to be Irish and Scottish, than to deny your African American heritage, so embrace it all."  And I think it's great, and I think the more biracial kids we have and the more that the world becomes brown and we're all mixed up, the better things are ultimately going be.  But then I say to people, own the whole thing because it's such a rich legacy and rich heritage, which is one of the reasons that, you know, doing this interview has really incentivized me to want to sort of gather this chronology and gather this history, and, and to document it so my kids and my nieces and nephews understand where we came from.  And not--don't, don't be ashamed of it.  You know, 'cause when we were growing up there was every reason I could--to, to sort of deny the black part of your heritage because, you know, just because of segregation and, and slavery.  But, what I say is embrace all sides of it and learn as much about your history and your culture as you can.
Speaker 1: Is there anything you'd like to share that I have not asked?
Speaker 2: You've been a very good (laughter)--
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Thank you.
Speaker 2: You've been a very good interviewer.
Speaker 1: Thank you.
Speaker 2: I think, I think you've covered everything.  I mean, I--the, the one thing I will say is that I'm very lucky to be a part of, you know, today you don't meet very many people who have, you know, who have six siblings, so when we were growing up that wasn't such a big deal 'cause there were people who had thirteen kids, you know, seven wasn't that big.  But I do have lovely, lovely siblings and I've been very lucky to be so close to my siblings.  You know, with seven people we don't all get along great, but, I mean, for the most part, we have a very--we have a wonderful family and my sisters have been just fantastic supporters and, and my best friends.  And, just lucky to come from such a great family.
Speaker 1: Wonderful. Thank you.
Speaker 2: Thank you.
