Story_ID: 638466
Speaker 1: I'm Denise Gines, the interviewer for The HistoryMakers.  Matthew Hickey is the videographer.  And, would you please state your name and spell it for me please?
Speaker 2: My name is [HistoryMaker] Vance Vaucresson.  And, it's spelled V as in Victor, A-N-C-E, middle name is Alain.  It's A-L-A-I-N, and last name is Vaucresson.  It's V as in Victor, A-U-C-R-E-S-S-O-N.
Speaker 1: And, can you tell me your date of birth?
Speaker 2: December 3, 1968.
Speaker 1: Your place of birth?
Speaker 2: New Orleans, Louisiana.
Speaker 1: What is your occupation?
Speaker 2: I am a self-employed sausage maker.
Speaker 1: And, the location of this interview?
Speaker 2: Location of this interview is in my mother's [Geraldine Dave Vaucresson] home in New Orleans, Louisiana.
Speaker 1: And, today's date?
Speaker 2: Today is June 10, 2010.
Story_ID: 638467
Speaker 1: Now, I'm gonna ask you a few what I call People magazine-ish type questions.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: My favorite color is black.  Not so much because of the fraternity that I'm in, Alpha Phi Alpha [Alpha Phi Alpha Fraternity, Inc.], but more so that once I started to learn about black being all encompassing of all the colors.  It really made it easy for me to look at the color as that which is very grand and, and great and, and a lot of history behind the color, and I just really took to it.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you have a favorite food?
Speaker 2: Gumbo.
Speaker 1: What about a favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: I would say, in New Orleans [Louisiana] it would be festival season, which would be around the time that we have--I'd say around April, May we have a lot of festivals in the city and you really get to see the beauty of New Orleans and its culture around that time.
Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: I would have to say California, around Wine Country.  It's very beautiful.
Speaker 1: And, do you have a very phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: I would have to say: it'll make your mouth feel happy and your tummy say yummy.
Story_ID: 638468
Speaker 1: Let's start talking about your family.  And, I'd like to begin with your mother's side of the family.  Tell me your mother's name, where she was born, when she was born if you know, and we'll go on from there.  But, tell me your mother's name, where, and when she was born?
Speaker 2: My mother's name is Geraldine Marie Dave Vaucresson [Geraldine Dave Vaucresson].  She was born July 7, 1933.  Sorry, Mom, I had to give your age away.  She was born in New Orleans [Louisiana], and I think that's--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And, now, did she share any stories about her growing up?
Speaker 2: Yes.  My mother, my mother's my hero.  In being that when you really hear what she went through, it makes you realize that you can pretty much get through life if you put your mind to it.  My mother was the youngest of five kids born to John Dave [John Dave, Sr.] and Lucille Moret [Lucille Moret Dave].  And, she was the only girl.  And, both of her parents died when she was relatively young.  Her mother died first and then her dad died in--some time after that.  And, both were sick.  And, I think my mother was in a position where with her brothers leaving, some going into the [U.S.] military and, and moving on because my grandfather was a very hardworking, hardnosed man and he butted heads with his sons.  And, it was just not an environment conducive to a young woman growing up in.  Now, my grandfather John Dave, had a sister named Anita Dave Auzeene, and she was an educator.  And, she felt that she should go ahead and ask him to take in my mother so that she could raise my mother and give her the proper upbringing.  And, possibly educate her and give her an opportunity so that she wouldn't be possibly just another statistic.  She worked up in the St. Landry Parish school system.  And, she moved my mother up to Opelousas, Louisiana and, and then from there eventually went up to Grambling, Louisiana.  My, my Aunt Anita was a very stern woman and--but very much about wanting to make sure that my mother had an education.
Story_ID: 638469
Speaker 1: After my mother [Geraldine Dave Vaucresson] finished high school, she--my aunt [maternal great aunt, Anita Dave Auzeene] gave my mom a choice: you can go to Spelman College in Atlanta, Georgia.  That was her choice.  So, she shipped my mother off to Atlanta, and my mother being young and never being away from home before, she rebelled.  And, eventually after two years came back to Louisiana, begging her aunt to come back and finished from Southern University [Southern University and Agricultural and Mechanical College] in Baton Rouge [Louisiana], cum laude degree in library science.  One of the things that was ironic because my mother always says she regretted leaving Spelman, not really knowing what that would've afford her, that type of experience.  And, not knowing that she actually went to Spelman, I chose Morehouse College in Atlanta to go to school.  And, after I had shown interest and applied and gotten in, she started to tell me some of her experiences, early experiences when she was at Spelman.  And, one of them that always, I'll always remember is, when she was a freshman at Spelman and she was walking outside the back gate of Spelman, a young man was sitting outside leaning up against a long black Cadillac.  A young man by the name of Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.].  Now, it was known that, every--all the Spelmanites knew that when you saw that long black Cadillac come around campus, that was ML.  And, every time the freshmen come in, ML had to come see the new crop.  So, it just so happened my mom was walking pass the gate and saw ML and she spoke to her and she kind of looked.  And, he asked her, "Where you from?"  He said--she said, "I'm from New Orleans [Louisiana]."  She says, "Oh, you one of them."  And, she was like, "What do you mean?"  She says, "You one of them from New Orleans; the light skinned Creoles."  She says, "Well, what do you mean by that?"  She--he said, "Well, you wouldn't be interested in me 'cause I'm too dark."  And, my mother said, "That has nothing to do with it.  You reading me the wrong way."  And, I just thought that was funny in that you hear such great stories about Martin Luther King, and then here kind of a human angle to it.  And, he was a man, and you know, I'm sure he, when he was younger he was a ladies man from what we all know.  Anyway, but, to, to know that much about our culture down here and that possibly that she wouldn't even wanna date him because of, of a color difference  I thought was kind of astute on his, his point.  But, you know, she enjoyed the experience but she came back and she told me when I went to Morehouse that was one of her regrets, leaving that institution.
Story_ID: 638470
Speaker 1: She got a degree in library science and did she actually work in the libraries in New Orleans [Louisiana]?
Speaker 2: Yes.  My mother [Geraldine Dave Vaucresson]--after graduating [from Southern University; Southern University and Agricultural and Mechanical College, Baton Rouge, Louisiana], my mother told me that she had gotten a job in the public library system with New Orleans, New Orleans public libraries [New Orleans Public Library].  And, at the time, it was a very tumultuous time.  I mean, we had civil rights, and there was a, you know, they were starting to integrate a lot of the, the different areas in New Orleans: the schools, the different services.  And, she was approached by a gentleman who was over the library system and said, "Well, we want you to work at the branch, the library branch on the corner of Napoleon [Avenue] and Magazine Street here in New Orleans."  And, he wanted her there because, he knew that it was time to integrate the library system, the way everything was going.  And, he felt that she would probably--probably because of the way that she looked, would be a comfortable person to, to make that change.  And, she told me that the day--she had been there about a week, and people were coming in the re- the library looking for the black woman that, that integrated the library but they couldn't find her.  'Cause of course, my mother does not have--she's very light-skinned women and have--and I guess at the time they were looking for what was stereotypical.  But, that wasn't the case; in New Orleans there is no stereotypical person of color.  And, she told me that they, they hung a doll, a black doll out on a noose outside the library in protest of the library being integrated.  Now, she said the police were out there and everybody was out there just to make sure there was no incident.  But, a week had gone by and they still hadn't identified who the woman was that integrated the library system.  And, she always thought that was funny because she could see them come in and they were just looking, peeping, trying--at least see who it was.  And, that's funny about our culture in that we always wanna label.  And, we always wanna look at things for face value and say--and put a label: this is black, this is white, this is Hispanic, this is--.  Well, nowadays it's not the case.  We're--you know it's--our culture here is so mixed and we have connections to so much of an ethnic background that, you know, it's hard to put a label on us.
Story_ID: 638471
Speaker 1: Now, you talked a little bit about your, your [maternal] grandmother [Lucille Moret Dave] and your grandfather.  Now, her, her mother and father died so you really, you know, you did not get to know them.  Did you know your Aunt Anita [Anita Dave Auzeene]?
Speaker 2: I knew my Aunt Anita.  Every summer we would drive up to Grambling, Louisiana and spend a little time with her.  She, she taught at Grambling [Grambling College; Grambling State University, Grambling, Louisiana].  And, that was probably the first example of how strong the Dave women are in our family.  She was very much a--very sternful women.  You know she was very much about doing things the right way; speaking correctly, making sure that when she interacted with the kids, you know, asking us about our school and how we're doing and making sure that we act correctly.  And, we say the yes ma'am, no ma'am, yes sir.  But, she did have a playful side.  And, I can see where my mother [Geraldine Dave Vaucresson] got that strength and that resolve that she had exhibited a lot of times during her life.  The interesting thing was when my mother came up, she came up in a very humble beginnings.  They didn't have much.  I think my mom told me she hates bananas because I think she used to al- someone worked in--at the fruit company [United Fruit Company; Chiquita Brands International, Inc.] and they used to always bring bananas.  And, she would always eat bananas all the time 'cause they didn't have anything to eat.  And, to this day she's like, "I hate bananas.  But, the doctor tells me I need my potassium.  So, I gotta eat these bananas."  And, it's kind of an example of her humble upbringing and--because my, my grandmother was sick on and off.  And, my grandfather was a jazz musician.  He played with the Sam Morgan jazz band [Sam Morgan's Jazz Band].  He was a banjo player.  And, you can find pictures of him in the band and pictures--they had some pictures in New Orleans Airport [New Orleans International Airport; Louis Armstrong New Orleans International Airport, New Orleans, Louisiana] of the band.  And, I look at him and I can see I resemble him--he and my cousins, we resemble him a lot.  And, here's a man who played an instrument that obviously it's, you don't find too many people playing it nowadays.  But, he had established himself enough to where he's, he's a part of New Orleans' [New Orleans, Louisiana] jazz history.  And, it's something to be proud of.  And, it's interesting because we, we're a very musical family.  My oldest brother [Robert Vaucresson, Jr.] at the age of fifteen decided he wanted to take voice lessons 'cause he wanted to be an opera singer.  And, he went on and pursued that and did that to a level of success; sing with the New Orleans opera company [New Orleans Opera Association], and touring in Europe singing in different opera productions.  And, that particular interest kind of connected to the fact that my grandfather on my father's side [Robert Levinsky Vaucresson] was a lover of opera.  He would sit and listen to opera for, for, for hours on end.  And, a lot of people don't know that New Orleans has a very rich music history not only in jazz but in opera having one of the first opera houses in the United States [French Opera House, New Orleans, Louisiana].  And, so, having that musical background is one of the thing that for us was always a pleasure.  And, we were a very hardworking family.  My mother's dad found work where he could.  He was kind of a jack of all trades; he could do anything with his hands, and fix anything.  And, he, he was a--from what my mother told me, he was a very strong man, very strong man.  But, he and my grandmother, they didn't have a long life.  They died relatively young.
Speaker 1: And, what was your grandfather's background?
Speaker 2: Johnny Dave [John Dave, Sr.], he was from New Orleans.  I really don't know too much, I don't remember too much of this background.
Story_ID: 638472
Speaker 1: Let's talk about your father.  Tell me his name and where and when he was born.
Speaker 2: Robert Anthony Vaucresson, Sr. [Robert "Sonny" Vaucresson] was born July 25, 1931 to Robert Levinsky Vaucresson and Julia LeBlanc [Julia LeBlanc Vaucresson].  And, he was born in New Orleans [Louisiana] and my father was second generation butcher slash sausage maker.  And, he was--his father, Robert L. Vaucresson, was a man who came from very poor beginning.  But, worked hard and did very well for himself.  He opened a meat market and during the war [World War II, WWII] had done very well through the WPA act [Work Projects Administration] and some of the certificates that they gave for people to have food.  And, he was a very industrious entrepreneur acquiring a lot of property and land.  And, and really doing well for himself at a time when, I guess, a lot of the people within the community that had money were professionals, doctors, lawyers, and things of that sort.  And, and he tried to use his money to make certain investments.  He invested in starting an--insurance companies, Safety Life Insurance Company [ph.].  And, he also along with his properties and getting rentals, just made product and sausages and meat and really served the area for a very long time.  Being that he came from a very humble beginning, not really educated--I think he may have stopped in elementary school with his educational level--he just saw education as a priority.  He was married three times.  In his first marriage [to Jennie Vaucresson] he had three girls.  He--in his first marriage, I don't remember who he was married to but he had three daughters who--my Aunt Lydia [Lydia Vaucresson], my Aunt Blanche [Blanche Vaucresson], and my Aunt Mildred [Mildred Vaucresson Bordenave].  And, he decided to try to educate them as best as he could.  At the time, it was, you didn't really send your kids away to school.  He sent my aunts to Knoxville College in Tennessee [Knoxville, Tennessee] to, to get educated.  And, and made sure they had violin lessons and piano lessons.  And, he just tried to give them a better, a better life than what he had.  He valued education greatly.  And, and then, he didn't have any kids with his second wife [Edna Cohen Vaucresson].  But, his third wife, Julia LeBlanc, he had what he was looking for so badly which was a son.  And, it was my dad.  And, I'll never forget they told me a story when he was at the meat market and they came over and they told him that he had a son.  All the workers in the store, everybody in the store, they started singing and song that was big at the time called 'Sonny Boy.'  And, they were singing (singing), "Sonny Boy, Sonny Boy, you got your boy, Sonny Boy."  And, that actually was how my dad got his nickname of Sonny.  And, and then after that my, my, my grandfather had two daughters: Glenda Vaucresson Charbonnet and Marlene Vaucresson Gonzales.  And--but my dad stayed and worked in the business.  I think all siblings worked in the business to an extent.
Speaker 1: Let me just have you go back a little bit--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --talking about your grandfather.  You told me his name was, was Robert.  Spell his whole name and give me some background as far as his background, where he originally came from.  Or, was he born in New Orleans?
Speaker 2: I believe my grandfather was born in New Orleans.  His name was Robert Levinsky.  It's L-E-V-I-N-S-K-Y Vaucresson, V-A-U-C-R-E-S-S-O-N.  And, he was born, his father's name was Levinsky Vaucresson, and his mother's name was Odile Gaillard, O-D-I-L-E, G-A-I-L-L-A-R-D [Odile Gaillard Vaucresson].  And, Levinsky was a French Polish Jew who married a French woman of color, Odile Gaillard.  And, I believe he was from, they were from the outside Alsace-Lorraine region of France.  We have some research to do because there's actually a town about nine miles outside of Paris [France] called Vaucresson, France.  And, we seem to feel that somehow our surname was taken from the town.  And, since then I've come to find some other Vaucressons.  So, we believe that Levinsky and Odile came from that region of France and had my grandfather here in New Orleans.
Story_ID: 638473
Speaker 1: So, go right--go ahead and continue to tell me about your father [Robert "Sonny" Vaucresson].
Speaker 2: My father was, from a young age, basically worked very hard for my grandfather [Robert Levinsky Vaucresson] in the meat business.  Being that he was the only son he, you know, from hearing stories from my aunts, my gr- my father kind of rebelled a little bit.  He was, he had done some things just being a young boy, a young man that any rebellious young man would do.  But, he, he worked hard most of his life alongside my grandfather; learned how to, to cut meat and to make sausage and to, to do all the things that my grandfather wanted him to learn.  My grand- my father had more of a, I guess, an unsettled side to him.  He wanted a little bit more than just being in the meat bus- in being a butcher and having a meat market.  So, after my--my dad went off to serve [in the U.S. military] during Korean War.  He served in Europe and France, and then he came back.  And, when he came back he enrolled at Xavier University [Xavier University of Louisiana] in New Orleans [Louisiana].  And, after his sophomore year in college, his dad died and he then had to leave Xavier to go back into the family business and take over.  He had a brother-in-law, we called him affectionately Papi [ph.], Leon Bordenave who was married to my Aunt Mildred [Mildred Vaucresson Bordenave].  And, my Uncle Papi had worked alongside my grandfather in the meat market.  And, he was pretty much that foundation, that consistency that my dad needed when he came aboard to really help to continue that particular entity.  But, my father, my father was, was, was a true entrepreneur.  And, I mean, he had a personality that he could win you over with his smile.  And, he'd look at you and by the time you left him you felt like you had a good experience in engaging with him.  And, from that and with that personality he ventured off and really went into areas that were not really available to people of color at the time.  But, my dad didn't have--he was very, very fair and had light blue eyes, sky blue eyes, and was a, from what they tell me, was a very handsome man to the point where one time he was stopped in the French Quarter [New Orleans, Louisiana] by a director of a movie called 'The Cincinnati Kid' that Paul Newman was starring in.  And, the gentleman asked him if he wouldn't mind being a stand-in for Paul Newman since there was such a resemblance.  So, I had to hear that most of my life about how, you know, "I, I'm so handsome, I look like Paul Newman," you know, so.  But, it, it--he was a, he--but, what really made him was his gregarious personality.  But, my father didn't want you to tell him he couldn't do something because he would find a way.
Story_ID: 638474
Speaker 1: When he was younger he would, he would go out into the French Quarter [New Orleans, Louisiana], Bourbon Street, and get to know a lot of the, the movers and the shakers.  And, at the time, French Quarter, especially Bourbon Street was run by two, two families: the Karno family, which had more of a French background, Italian background--I mean a French and Jewish background.  And, the Caraccis, which were Italian.  And, he got to know both of the families from doing business in the Quarter, on the Bourbon Street.  And, he also go to know a Jewish art dealer by the name of Larry Borenstein.  And, Larry Borenstein was responsible for starting a music hall by the name of Preservation Hall [New Orleans, Louisiana], along with a gentleman named Allan Jaffe.  And, Larry had a building at 624 Bourbon called the Forte House [ph.] that--he basically sat down with my dad and said, "You know, you ever thought about opening a Creole restaurant?   You know, that we could probably put something here."  And, he knew my dad was in the food business.  And, so, they got together and decided to open up a Creole restaurant called Vaucresson's Cafe Creole [New Orleans, Louisiana].  Now, they had not had a, a black owned business on Bourbon Street since Reconstruction.  So, this was not something that was gonna be allowed at the time.  But, most of the people that knew my dad knew him as Sonny [Robert "Sonny" Vaucresson].  They didn't see him for--him being, he--'cause my dad told me a long time ago, he said, "Son, I never passed for white."  He says, "But, if people assumed and would treat me a certain way and do business with me a certain way and allow me to move forward," he says, "I made sure that they dealt with Sonny.  They didn't deal with a person--it wasn't--if they asked me, I told 'em I was black."  He says, "But, if they were willing to take me for who I was and deal with me without the basis of knowing whether if someone was white or black--," he took advantage of that.  And, and proved to a lot of people that you could do business in a way without having to be categorized and put in a box.
Story_ID: 638475
Speaker 1: I'll never forget he told me a long time ago when they was, when he--they were about to open the restaurant they had a group of--called the Bour- Bourbon Street Merchants Association [New Orleans, Louisiana].  It's a group of business owners on Bourbon Street who met and talked about the different topics and needs of the Quarter [French Quarter, New Orleans, Louisiana] at the time.  And, they had a meeting and at that particular meeting there was a big buzz about the fact that, how in the world did they let a nigger get on Bourbon Street?  And, so, everybody was walking around--that was the hush of the meeting.  So, they had a white gentleman that came and sat down with Larry Borenstein and my dad at his table.  Now, my dad knew this gentlemen from dealing with him in the Quarter for some time.  And, he had gotten to know my dad and liked my dad.  And, he came over and greeted my father and Larry and they were sitting down talking.  And, all of a sudden he leaned in real quietly and got real hushed in his tone and he said, "Did y'all hear?"  And, they said, "What?"  He said, "They done let a nigger get on Bourbon Street."  He said, "Lord, our property values are gonna go down.  All them people gonna start coming in our businesses, it's gonna, I mean, it's gonna mess everything up."  He was very, very upset.  So, Larry said, "Well, you know what, I know him, I'm a introduce you to him."  So, the man's looking around the restaurant and said, "Please do.  I wanna know him so I can watch him."  So, the man says, Larry said, "Well, you know Sonny Vaucresson [Robert "Sonny" Vaucresson], right?"  He said, "Oh, yeah.  I've been knowing Sonny for a long time."  He says, "Well, that's the new nigger on Bourbon Street."  And, he looked at my dad, and he says, "Sonny," he says, "you black?"  He says, "Yeah, I'm black."  He says, "Oh, my god."  My dad told me the man turned real, real pale and got up and walked away and left the meeting.  And, my dad says, he said, he told me, he says, "You know I used to see that man all the time in the Quarter.  He'd walk away--he'd make sure to avoid me."  He says, "You know, but I--he didn't avoid me because he hated me because I was black.  I believe he avoided me because he was too embarrassed."  He was too embarrassed.  My dad went on and had that restaurant I believe from like mid-'60s [1960s] to about mid-'70s [1970s].  And, it really afforded people of color a place that they could call their own.  Because at that time Bourbon Street, you could work on Bourbon Street but you couldn't go and actually have a place to sit in the courtyard and have a function.  And, you know, my dad was, he was a hustler, to basically put it plainly.  And, he got to know a lot of people from a lot of different backgrounds.  And, he had a group called the Creole Fiesta [Creole Fiesta Association], which celebrated the culture of Creole people, and they used to have parades every year.  And, one of the things that they definitely could not do is parade in the French Quarter, especially on Bourbon Street.  Well, my dad got with Ben Bagert, who was a representative at the time.  And, and got with him to get a permit to parade in the Quarter.  Now, this was unheard of.  So, they went and got some buggies and got their dresses and everything and the Creole Fiesta paraded in the French Quarter, down Bourbon Street, and disbanded at 624 Bourbon Street at the Vaucresson's Cafe Creole [New Orleans, Louisiana] and had their celebration in the courtyard outside in our restaurant.  And, at that time, that was a big thing for the community.
Speaker 2: Do you know what year that was?
Speaker 1: I believe they had made my dad king at that time, and Leah Chase's daughter, Leah [Leah Chase Kamata] was the queen.  I believe that was 1970.  I believe so.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And, and then, since then that was a--the restaurant became a place where people of color of many different shades would come in and eat, have a place to, to celebrate and have a piece of Bourbon Street that they weren't really allowed to do at that time.
Story_ID: 638476
Speaker 1: Before we go forward, you can tell me more about, about the restaurant [Vaucresson's Cafe Creole, New Orleans, Louisiana], tell me how the family got into the meat business.
Speaker 2: I believe I had a great aunt who had a store and my grandfather became a butcher by trade and learned to butcher and was cutting meat at the time in her store.  And from--
Speaker 1: Was it, I'm sorry, was it your grandfather or your great-grandfather?
Speaker 2: My, my great- my [paternal] great-grandfather [Levinsky Vaucresson], and my [paternal] grandfather learned the trade from him.  And then, at the time they had an outdoor market called the St. Bernard Market, which is now the Circle Food Store [New Orleans, Louisiana].  And in the St. Bernard Market they had, they allowed people to come in and have different stalls.  They had many different butchers and a lot of different other people vending out there.  It was an open market.  And my grandfather had a stall in the St. Bernard Market.  And he would butcher, make his sausages, have other things like produce and other little things.  And he would also do home deliveries from there.  And his business had grown to the point where he decided to move outside of the St. Bernard Market and get his own location.  And his--the first place he moved to was 1937 St. Bernard Avenue, on the corner of St. Bernard and North Johnson Street which is now a Liberty Bank building [Liberty Bank and Trust Company, New Orleans, Louisiana].  But it was his first building where he had his meat market.  And then the business was there for some years and then he moved from there, 'cause I believe he was renting that place.  And then he bought his own building which was on St. Bernard.  It was formerly a pharmacy called Belfield's Pharmacy.  Now, the Belfield family, they had a pharmacy and a sweet shop and things of that in there.  And they sold the building to my grandfather, and they were actually cousins.  So, when they--when he bought the building at what is called the point because it's one of these buildings that sits on an area of land that's bound by three streets.  On the point is where our meat market that most people knew of, was--had--was established and really made a name for itself.  My grandfather cut meat, had various butchers under him.  We made sausages from our cuts and various groceries, you know.  We had produce and it was like a little, little market.  And, and, then we also delivered.  Our guys would deliver groceries and meats to people on bicycle.  So, you could order and, you know, Mr. Vaucresson [Robert Levinsky Vaucresson] would have somebody to come and deliver the, the order to your house.  It was, you know back then when you, when you had these small markets like that and small groceries, they would really be able to service the immediate community.  I guess, within maybe a two to five mile range.  And it really became a hub for, not only where you could get a lot of your sausages and meat products and groceries, it also was a social hub.  A lot of people would come in, they knew my grandfather.  He give 'em credit, you know.  And, and it was a place where you could come and meet people and see things.  It was part of a social history within the 7th Ward [New Orleans, Louisiana].
Story_ID: 638477
Speaker 1: What part of town would you consider this in?
Speaker 2: This, the meat market was in what is known as the 7th Ward of New Orleans [Louisiana].  New Orleans is broken up into wards: 1st, 2nd, 3rd, 6th, 7th, and the 7th Ward of New Orleans is where you find a lot of the history of the local Creole community.  It's an area where a lot of Creoles settled and lived and cre- raised their families.  And it was a very close knit society.  The Creole community back then was a model for a true closely knit, caring community.  A lot of people knew each other.  A lot of people grew up together.  A lot of families knew the other families.  A lot of relation.  And one thing about the Creole community, you were identified by your last name.  A lot of beautiful old French families, their--they have branches of them within the Creole community.  You'll heard the names like Charbonnet, Tervalon, Dufauchard, Moret, LeBlanc.  You'll have Haydel.  A lot of these names are really connected either through being relations or having done business together.  Because a lot of times within these communities, especially before integration, a lot of these places--especially within the 7th Ward, we, we had our own infrastructure.  We had all our own schools where all the Creoles went.  We had Corpus Christi [Corpus Christi Catholic School, New Orleans, Louisiana].  You have Valena C. Jones Elementary School [New Orleans, Louisiana].  At one point, you had Xavier Prep for high school [Xavier University Preparatory School, New Orleans, Louisiana].  You also had different stores.  We had doctors.  We had lawyers, A.P. Tureaud.  We had Dr. Frederick [ph.] and Dr. Haydel [C.C. Haydel] for, for medicine.  You had, you know--just, we had our own community and we, we serviced our own community.  And a lot of these families made livings and were able to raise their family and, and grow within that community.  And it was very rich in culture.  Creoles have a mixture of French, Parisian French, and, and Spanish due to the occ- different occupations.  But, we also have a long lineage of West Indian, Haitian.  We also have some mixing with direct French descendants as well as, African and, and different other entities.  And so, when you start looking at your family history, it's kind of hard to label us.  I think it's, you know, at one time Creole was--the older Creoles tended to make Creole a race.  Because back then you had the whites which were, I guess European, French and Spanish.  And then because of the, the mixing that went on between the French and the Spanish and the blacks and the Indians [Native American], and the West Indians, you started to get this mixture of people of different shades and colors.  Creoles are all different colors, from very dark to very, very light.  And there's a lot of different in between.  We--it's ironic, you'll see members of the same family, some being very, very fair, and then you look at a brother and they'll be quite olive.  And that's the beauty of, of our African ancestry is that once you start mixing the African in with any other thing, you never know when it's gonna show it's face within your bloodline.  So, you see a lot of different mixtures of colors within the Creole community.
Story_ID: 638478
Speaker 1: And because of that, like a lot of other cultures, you had where those French landowners who had children with their mistresses, their black mistresses, believed in making sure that their children were educated.  So, you had these French landowners who may have had say plantations outside of the city where their wives lived with their families.  But then you also had, they had property in the Quarter [French Quarter, New Orleans, Louisiana], or in the Treme [New Orleans, Louisiana], or different areas, where they had their black mistress and the children that was made from this woman, they would educate.  A lot of time they take these children and they would send them to France for proper education.  They would have--would be given property and different rights and lands.  And so, within that you found that the Creole community was a very rich community, not only culture but in, in holdings.  A lot of us had land, businesses that were passed on from our French ancestors.  And, and because of that, I think that the Creole culture caused a different, an added tier system.  You had whites, you had Creoles and then you had blacks.  And within that structure, there was a little animosity and tension where the whites didn't really fully accept the Creoles even though a lot of 'em were related.  I mean, in New Orleans [Louisiana], you have whites and Creoles and blacks with the same name--last name.  Like Charbonnet, and Haydel and, and Moret, and, and Frederick and, I mean we can go on but they'll be adamant to say that they're not related.  Well, you know, nowadays a little DNA'll make sure to solve that, that question.  But, that's just the way our culture was, you know, it was separated.  Everything was separated.  So, within the Creole community you had a lot of tension not only from the whites and the Creoles, but the Creoles--light-skinned Creoles and the dark-skinned Creoles as well as those that don't consider themselves Creoles, just dark-skinned blacks.  And that tension was probably perpetuated because the fact that the light-skinned Creoles had property and land and businesses and tended to look down on, and it was perpetuated that way.  And so, as you get to deal with older generations of Creoles, especially now are the older people, they look at Creole as a race as opposed to a culture.  Because they don't want you to call them black, you know.  With post-Jim Crow when they started labeling everything, you know, they tended to group and say 1/46th drop of black blood you were black.  A lot of them Creoles was like, "Well, I'm not black; I'm Creole."  And that's really, when you look at it, it's incorrect because we're a cultural ethnicity, and we should be treated as such.  And if somebody asked me what I am, I'll say, "I'm a black man."  African American that's pretty new in terms of political correctness.  I like to call it what it is.  I'm black.  I went away, went away to college in Atlanta [Georgia] at Morehouse [Morehouse College], oh, I was a hot topic 'cause they had so many guys looking at me like, "Well, man, what are you?  Are you mixed?"  And I said, "Well, more than you'll ever know; it's kind of hard to decide."  But, it's fine.  It's fun educating.
Story_ID: 638479
Speaker 1: We were talking about the, about the meat market and then the restaurant.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: What year was the, were we in for--what year was the meat market started?  Do you have any idea?  Well, you said the restaurant was 1970, but the meat market do you have any idea when that was started?
Speaker 2: The meat market I know--we're looking at around in the '50s [1950s], '40s [1940s] and '50s [1950s] when we had the meat market into the '60s [1960s].  And because of my [paternal] grandfather [Robert Levinsky Vaucresson] and my dad [Robert "Sonny" Vaucresson], it had been around, it had been established.  My dad went off--excuse me (cough).  My dad went off and started different businesses after my grandfather died.  He managed the family properties.  He had another brother-in-law [Leon Bordenave] who had a liquor store/package store, so he went into business with him.  Wound up having a liquor store, having a vending machine company, vending cigarettes, Sons Vending [Sons Vending, Inc., New Orleans, Louisiana].  He also had a property investment firm, V and F Investments [ph.].  He kind of had a little entrepreneurial spirit and branched out into different businesses and--as well as kept the meat market going.  And then, of course, he opened the restaurant in the mid-'60s [1960s] and when he did that, the restaurant itself, Vaucresson Cafe Creole was really a hub for a lot of activity.  Not only from blacks, 'cause now blacks had a place to go and eat within the Quarter [French Quarter, New Orleans, Louisiana].  Now, you had established restaurants around the city that served blacks for years.  But, to have a place on Bourbon Street, especially when you had a lot of these black musicians coming from all over the country playing jazz, knowing that they have a place that they can go and eat.  I remember researching--I ran across an article about the fact that Cannonball Adderley famous jazz musician, used to love to go to Vaucresson's Cafe Creole [New Orleans, Louisiana] and eat that chaurice and them red beans.  He says, "Because man, that was our place in the Quarter."  And not only did you have him, you had a lot other musicians that would play at Preservation Hall [New Orleans, Louisiana] and other venues of the Quarter, afterwards would go late night and go eat at the Cafe Creole.  And it wasn't only blacks that ate there, you had, you had a lot of whites and a lot of other tourists and different people that came in.  And it was great mix of people in the Quarter at the time when--it was interesting, when you had such a segregated society, Bourbon Street in the Quarter had its own rules.  Now, the business owners were very, very clear, they wouldn't allow for certain things to go on, but you weren't gonna own anything.  They kept the money strictly for them.  But, when it came down to the Cafe Creole, it was a place where, you know, that was kind of a mixture of things.  You had my dad as an owner, you had--Larry Borenstein was Jewish.  So, he was a lot more liberal in regards to looking at race.  He was more accepting, especially with the, the jazz music and dealing with a lot of those, the jazz musicians.
Story_ID: 638480
Speaker 1: So, you had a l- a great mix of people.  We had waiters who worked for us who were white.  We had--and, and a lot of them loved their experience at the, at the Cafe Creole [Vaucresson's Cafe Creole, New Orleans, Louisiana].  One of our waiters was a guy named Vernel Bag- Bagneris [Vernel Bagneris].  Okay, some people say (pronunciation) Bagneris.  But, it's also known whole time Bagneris.  Vernel Bagneris is the guy who's responsible for creating 'One Mo' Time,' a Broadway musical.  And he was one our early waiters.  And, and, then as you get into some of the stories of the people that used to patronize the restaurant.  I never forget, my dad [Robert "Sonny" Vaucresson] told me about this crazy, crazy white artist who would come and sit in the restaurant all day and would paint.  And after a while, they just let him have a little spot in the corner and they'd let him paint and stuff.  And he was very, very--he was an eclectic personality.  He lived in the Quarter [French Quarter, New Orleans, Louisiana].  He, he used to brag about that he had, back then I guess, what would've been at that time his Viagra because he said he would take this stuff and would be able to party all night long.  But, he was sitting there and he would just paint all day long.  You know, everybody got to know him.  And his name was Noel Rockmore.  And Noel Rockmore happens to be--I did some research on him.  He's a famous artist who was a child prodigy.  He was born of a famous writer [sic. illustrator, Floyd MacMillan Davis] and a famous artist [Gladys Rockmore Davis] and came and moved to New Orleans [Louisiana] and did a large body of work called the Preservation Hall jazz series ['Preservation Hall Portraits,' Noel Rockmore].  He painted a lot of jazz musicians, portraits and a lot of other portraits.  And then left and went back to New York [New York].  And he died in 1995.  And when he died, his works were, of course, as an artist, they just grew in value and in interest.  And I'm like well, who's this Rockmore guy? And I never forget, my mom [Geraldine Dave Vaucresson] and dad would tell me about him and how crazy he was.  But, he was actually a very famous artist whose his works had been shown in, all over in New York and different famous galleries.  And Sacha Borenstein [Sacha Borenstein Clay] who was Larry Borenstein's daughter met my mom at the New Orleans Jazz and Heritage Fest [New Orleans Jazz and Heritage Festival].  Not--saw her again, and told her, "Look I have a portrait of your husband, you know, that Rockmore did.  I'd like to give it to you."  So, she said okay.  So, you know, it's an interesting portrait, very dark portrait and painted him as a very, as an older man, even though at the time, he was only thirty-seven years old.  But, that was how he saw my dad.  And so, I said well, who's this Rockmore?  I did a little research and found out that this is someone who walked amongst the regular people that wound up to be a very great person in, in the art world.  And so, we cherish that painting of my dad because it was one thing that we were able to salvage from Katrina, Hurricane Katrina that, that connects us back to the restaurant.  And he had a lot of other characters and people like that, and we had politicians.  I think we had, they told me Senator Edward Brooke [HistoryMaker Edward Brooke], first black senator of--since Reconstruction in the country.  He ate at the restaurant.  And we have a lot of those types of stories of people who would come down and, and would eat at the restaurant and, and get a little bit of that culture and, and, and leave that place in our history.
Story_ID: 638481
Speaker 1: You also told me that you have met some of the white patrons of the, the restaurant that they shared some of their experiences eating there.  Do you remember any of those?
Speaker 2: You know, going around, I really appreciate when people would come up to me and give me their, their little history.  Their little experience of, of the Cafe Creole [Vaucresson's Cafe Creole, New Orleans, Louisiana].  A lot of guys who were my dad's age and who affiliated with my dad [Robert "Sonny" Vaucresson] or went to eat there, would stop me at different places once they--'cause Vaucresson is not a common name.  If you have the last name Vaucresson, you probably related to me if you're in New Orleans [Louisiana].  And the only Vaucressons I know in New Orleans right now is my mom [Geraldine Dave Vaucresson], myself, of course, my aunts, but they have married names.  And then my brother [Rene Vaucresson], he lives in California; and my kids [Kyce Vaucresson, Vance Vaucresson, II and Hilary Vaucresson].  So, someone will come up and they're say, "Oh, were you the one's with Cafe Creole?"  And I be like, "Yes."  And they say, "Well, you know, I used to go down there every Monday and eat that special of red beans and rice with chaur- hot chaurice sausage.  Oh, that was the best sausage in the world.  And I used to go there after lunch," I mean, "I used to go there after and, and work before I went home," or, "I went there for lunch."  And there's people of all walks of life and they would just never know and they would share stories of the fact that they would go in there, and some of 'em knew Noel [Noel Rockmore] and the crazy painter in the corner.  Or, or they would sit in there and they'd see my dad and talk with him and really just eat good Cre- versions of Creole food.  And I never forget, my dad told me, he said, "You know, when we were looking to put together a menu for the restaurant, we really looked at a lot of resources that we knew--recipes that were developed by Creoles."  And one resource, a lot of recipes that were from people of color, Creoles, was the old Times Picayune cookbook ['The Picayune Creole Cook Book'].  Times Picayune used to put out a cookbook every so often with recipes of New Orleans.  And a lot of those recipes were from--developed and were written up and were put together by Creole cooks.  And so, when he needed to find a good place to find some good recipes to start the restaurant he, that was one of his resources.  And he--and then of course, over time different people that he had working in the restaurant different--put their own spin on it.  But, they were mostly Creole cooks who would go in there and, and put their tag on the food in the restaurant.
Story_ID: 638482
Speaker 1: And it's interesting, within the restaurant [Vaucresson's Cafe Creole, New Orleans, Louisiana], I say cooks because back then, they weren't, as today they're chefs.  You know, having the official letters from Johnson and Wales [Johnson and Wales University, Providence, Rhode Island] and all that.  And that's, you know, that interesting because you have all these chefs who have come in town who are not from here who have supposedly become the kings of Creole and Cajun cooking.  And I know Creoles have a little bit of a--we, we really have some issues with that because a lot of the food within a lot of the great cooking establishments in the Quarter [French Quarter, New Orleans, Louisiana]: Galatoire's, Antoine's, Brennan's, all these restaurants.  A lot of that food is developed by Creoles, people of color that were in there cooking that food and made those menus what they were.  And then I guess after a certain time frame, I think the Brennan family really started something.  They went to Paris [France], they had a cutting edge cooking and culinary movement going on in Paris.  And they took some of those ideas, they brought 'em back to New Orleans [Louisiana] being that the Creole food culture has--lends a lot to Parisian cooking, and really took Creole and made it their own.  But, a lot of those cooks were pushed aside for chefs who maybe went on and were educated within culinary schools and then were more marketable, as we could say.  I mean, you know, Commander's Palace [New Orleans, Louisiana] had Paul Prudhomme, Emeril Lagasse.  And I don't know how Emeril Lagasse became the king of Creole cooking.  He's from Falls River, Massachusetts [sic. Fall River, Massachusetts].  He has a Portuguese and Italian background.  But, when he came down here, he learned, he learned how to cook and he was the marketable product.  But, you had chefs like Louis Evans who was the chef at Pontchartrain Hotel [New Orleans, Louisiana] for years.  That when they let him go, he couldn't get another job as an executive chef in a major food establishment because he didn't have those papers, as you could say.   There's a lot of other chefs like that.  But, that's just another--those are also, I guess, some of the collateral damage from the Creole heritage kind of being swept up into a miseducation of what our culture is.  I think when the whole Cajun craze came, you had a lot of things that were Creole swept up into that.  Because they really pushed the market Cajun as the next food craze.  You had Italian.  You had Mexican.  You had Chinese, and now you had a new food that you could put out there and push.  A lot of dishes were thrown in there.  I mean, literally, I saw places where people called shrimp Creole Cajun food.  Okay, I don't know how more simple I can tell you that it's not.  But, and, and I think lately we have taken control of our own heritage, Creole heritage.  And really try to promote and educate people that it's separate from Cajun.  And that Cajun came from a different angle.  Dutch Nova Scotians that were settled in, into northern and middle Louisiana, more of a rustic type background.  They were more coureurs des bois, trappers of the wood, and, and their cooking was more rural.  Now, Cajun food is good food.  I'm not knocking it at all.  But, it's different than Creole which has a very distinctive Parisian French experience.  A lot of this, the cooking with the trinity: the onions, and the bell peppers, and the celery, and the garlic, and, and as they say in French, the etouffer, which means to smother, and those sauces.  A lot of that is a rich French experience.  And that has a lot to do with Creole cooking.  A lot of Creole cooking is not hot in spice as they tend to market Cajun food.  It's just, it's layered with so many flavors.  And that's what a lot of people, when they come to New Orleans and they eat good food, they're eating good Creole cooking.
Story_ID: 638483
Speaker 1: Talk about the sausage because I'm--I heard you mention a type of sausage.  Is your--is there a specialty sausage, if you wanna say, or?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, we, we've always made a very popular sausage in the area called hot sausage.  But, back then it was called chaurice, hot chaurice, and chaurice is very similar to the French, it's a French version of sausage.  Even though the French word for sausage is saucisse.  You have, if you look within the Spanish community you'll hear, you see chorizo.  It's very similar.  It's pretty much a derivative, it's a French derivative of--and, chaurice, and it's a spicy pork sausage.  Hot sausage has become more of a beef sausage nowadays.  But, and then you've had different versions of it being mixed beef and pork.  But, chaurice is more of a--linked with the Creole community.  Very--it's a spicy sausage, but it's not hot where it burns your palate.  It's more, the heat is more of an added layer of flavor.  Because we tend to pride that our hot sausage is more flavorful than it is hot; the pepper will hit you a little bit but it won't hurt you like some things.  And I think that's one of the things that tends to get lost in our cooking is that everybody expects to come in and, "I want something hot and spicy."  That's not always the case.  But, we've always made sausages as we say, from the heart.  We make our products with love.  We've made chaurice, hot sausage.  We've made green onion sausage.  We've made also hogshead cheese, which in some parts of the country they call souse.  And it was interesting when we had our meat market we would, you know, cut meat, the different cuts of meat, and then a lot of the trimmings and sometimes some of the cuts that had a little age to it, we would then take that and grind that up and make our sausages.  And in order to make the hogshead cheese, my [paternal] grandmother [Julia LeBlanc Vaucresson], she would do it at the house.  She'd boil the, the hog's head, and would mix everything there and she would take these old coffee cups and she would use those as her molds.  And she would make the hogshead cheese and she'd pour it in the coffee cups.  And then she would take the molds of the coffee cups and she would take 'em and she'd place 'em on a table by a window so they would cool because you need the hogshead cheese to cool down and get firm.  And then once it was firm, then she'd take it to the market and they'd sell it out the market.  And it's interesting, because I hear these stories nowadays with the different levels of inspection.  You got the USDA, [U.S.] Department of Agriculture inspection service, the state--Louisiana Department of Agriculture [Louisiana Department of Agriculture and Forestry] inspection service, and all these rules in terms of meat processing.  It's funny, back then, they used to hang the meat outside, you know, and when you want it, they used to cut off of it.  And we used to make things like the hogshead cheese at the house and have it cool down outside of a window.  And I don't think of any people having a grash recall--I mean, a great recall of who got sick and all of this.  But, that was just the way we did things.  And those are some of the, the things we made, hogshead cheese.  We used to make Italian sausage, and a different--not too many other products, a little breakfast sausage.  But, that was basically just to--as a butcher, you made sausage to make sure you didn't waste anything.  You know, when you would buy whole hogs or sides of beef, after you make all the primal cuts, you had these trimmings.  And you would buy these carcasses by weight.  So, in order for you to make sure you maximized your profit, you use up everything you could.  I mean, you pickled your lips, you pickled your tongues.  You sold beef tongue.  You had--we used to cook the ho- the head down and take the skin off of that, and we'd make the hogshead cheese.  You take the--then you got the pig, you got tails.  And so, what you did, you wound up with, making sure that from a sausage, you made everything you could.  And that's pretty much how we got to making good sausage by making sure we saved.
Story_ID: 638484
Speaker 1: I'd like to go back a little bit.  You were talking, we understand that the restaurant opened about 1965 or so, in the mid-'60s [1960s].  And the first parade, black parade that was allowed on Bourbon Street was started by your dad [Robert "Sonny" Vaucresson] in about 1970.  Tell me a little more about the parade and, you know, what happens during the parade and even why they have the parade.
Speaker 2: Well, the group's name is the Creole Fiesta [Creole Fiesta Association].  And the Creole Fiesta was a group that celebrated the culture of the Creole community, and the 7th Ward Creoles and the culture within the Creole culture.  And it was a group, some of the mainstays of the group are Earl Barthe, Bernice Bozant.  And they, they would plan for a, a ball, you know, within the Mardi Gras season you would have certain balls and celebrations.  And so, the Creole Fiesta celebrated by the culture of the Creole community, we would have a ball and we would have a coronation of our king and queen.  And, and the king and queen would then have a parade that would then end at the, the celebration, the ball and where the king and the coronation was.  Back then, being that we didn't really parade within the French Quarter [New Orleans, Louisiana] or the market--I mean the Bourbon Street, my dad having the restaurant on Bourbon Street allowed us an opportunity to actually parade within the Quarter and wind up at the restaurant.  Now, this wasn't really something that was popular at the time.  I don't think that a lot of the business owners really wanted to allow for a colored group to parade within the Quarter, especially to wind up at an establishment and then congregate in large amount--amounts of people.  But my dad had grown to develop a very good political connections over time and getting to--know a lot of people.  And the Bagert family was a family within politics.  The father [Bernard Bagert, Sr.] was a judge.  The sons Ben [Ben Bagert], and Brod went into politics.  One being state representative and then eventually state senator; that being Ben Bagert.  And then Brod Bagert becoming a councilman, councilman of District D in the city.  But they were very much, very liberal in their thoughts.  They saw that, you know, this--there's no reason why that these people shouldn't be afforded the opportunity to celebrate within their cities that their culture has actually help to build.  So, senator--State Representative Ben Bagert helped us to get all the permits, the proper permitting and kind of helped us to get all that done.  And then once it was pretty much set up, they went ahead and planned for the parade to start in the 7th Ward [New Orleans, Louisiana] and wind up on Bourbon Street at the restaurant.  So, they had a very large route.  And I remember those pictures.  I mean, the gowns, big old gaudy gowns with, I mean, we had some of the greatest seamstresses in the Creole community.  And they made these beautiful gowns and the horse and buggies that, that, that paraded through the city and wound up at the Quarter.  In that year, I, because my dad allowed or help to put it together, they made him the king.  And he chose Le- Leah Chase's daughter, Leah [Leah Chase Kamata] as his queen.  And they--it was a beautiful time, and a beautiful day for the Creole Fiesta because it, it, it validated their existence.  And it validated their ties to not only the French Quarter, to Bourbon Street, and to the Creole community having their time to celebrate, especially at an establishment like the Cafe Creole [Vaucresson's Cafe Creole, New Orleans, Louisiana].  And then from then on, the parade went on after than until we closed the restaurant, or we sold the restaurant in the mid-'70s [1970s], and it dissipated then.
Speaker 1: Who did you sell the restaurant to?  Who was it sold to?
Speaker 2: I, I don't know.
Speaker 1: Was it--did it remain a Creole restaurant?
Speaker 2: It re- it kept the Cafe Creole as the name.  I don't believe it was sold to another person of color.  But it, they dropped the Vaucresson obviously, and it was just called Cafe Creole.  And then for some time after that, eventually it closed.
Story_ID: 638485
Speaker 1: Is there anything else that you can tell us about your father and his business and his involvement in the community?
Speaker 2: My dad was, he was an inspiration for me because--my dad really didn't have a great education when it comes to the books.  He--we always laugh because they say he finished last in his class, Xavier Prep [Xavier University Preparatory School, New Orleans, Louisiana].  And then he went on to Xavier [Xavier University of Louisiana, New Orleans, Louisiana] and after his sophomore year, he left to take over his dad's business.  Of course, in between that he went to the [U.S.] military.  But my dad learned a lot from being on the street, meeting and getting to know a lot of people in business, and really leaning a lot of things the way his dad [Robert Levinsky Vaucresson] did.  My dad--grandfather may have had an eighth grade education but he was a very brilliant man when it came to business.  And my dad became a very good businessman.  And a lot of his business dealings came because he knew how to deal with people.  He knew how to make people comfortable.  He knew how to make people feel good himself--about themselves as well as feeling good about knowing him and their relationship with my dad.  So, my dad would go and he had the opportunity, he would see an opportunity and would seize it.  Now, most people would say, you know, you gotta write a business plan, you gotta do all of this research.  My dad would just see an opportunity and he would just go with it.  He knew some people.  He knew who could make things happen and he did that.  One time when he was looking to buy some property, he didn't have all the monies needed to bid on, maybe they were selling like property in groups of, different groups and he had five properties he wanted to get and he needed about fifty thousand dollars to do it.  So, they had a gentleman by the name of Joseph Maselli.  Joseph Maselli is known as being one of the backers behind the Italian American community here in the city.  My dad went to see him, and he knew Joe--Mr. Maselli from the French--Bourbon Street, and in the Quarter [French Quarter, New Orleans, Louisiana], and just basically from that relationship, Mr. Maselli gave him the money.  My dad brought the property and then V and F Investments [ph.] had five properties which went on to expand and grow his, his, his real estate holdings.  The, where my dad was gonna get the liquor store, he had a package liquor store.  The people that owned it had gotten to know my dad so well that when it was time to sell, they wasn't gonna sell to anybody but Sonny [Robert "Sonny" Vaucresson].  They didn't care who came through.  They said, "We're not gonna sell to anybody but Sonny."  And so, because of his relationship with these people he, he was sold the liquor store and that's when he had his brother-in-law [Leon Bordenave] to run it for him.  And then as time went on, because of my dad's personality and the way my dad treated people, opportunities presented 'em, presented themselves to him.  The restaurant [Vaucresson's Cafe Creole, New Orleans, Louisiana], his relationship with Larry Borenstein, I mean, if wasn't, if he hadn't known Larry, he wouldn't've been comfortable enough with Larry for Larry to say, "Hey, I've got this property, let's open up a restaurant."  And it afforded my dad an opportunity to put together this entity and also do that.  My dad didn't know--had--didn't know anything about a restaurant business.  He said, "It's an opportunity, we're gonna do it."  And he did that a lot of ways.  He started a vending machine company called Sons Vending [Sons Vending, Inc., New Orleans, Louisiana] basically by knowing John Georges [sic.] who owned Imperial Trading [Imperial Trading Company, New Orleans, Louisiana], and sold cigarettes and had cigarettes machines.  And he saw an opportunity where my dad knew a lot of these guys in these bar rooms and different places and he said, "Hey, if you, if you lease me the machines, I'll maintain 'em, fill 'em up with cigarettes and I'll find locations."  And my dad basically went, knew all those people in those bar rooms and said, "Look, can I put a cigarette machines in your place?"  "Oh, yeah, Sonny, sure."  Next thing you knew, he's got cigarette machines all over the city and it was called Sons Vending.  And it's these types of things that just happened.  He just did it.  It wasn't about going and getting university students to help him propose a business plan.  I don't think I ever saw my dad do a business plan.  He just made things happen.  And he just had all these different entities.  And--
Speaker 1: Did he put a number of people to work for him?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.  Back then he had a lot of people, he had a number of people working with him in the meat market.  He had people working within the restaurant.  And it wasn't just--at the restaurant it was a mixture of people; it was whites and blacks.  The Sons Vending he had people doing the route.  So, employed, over time he had a number of people that he employed.  But he also was a hustler.  So, a lot of times he would do a lot of things himself just to make sure it would get done.
Story_ID: 638486
Speaker 1: One of the things, opportunities that came his way, in the restaurant there was a gentleman by the name of George Wein.  George Wein is the founder of the New Orleans Jazz and Heritage Festival, and had been putting on fest- music festival for some years.  He had started the Newport News Jazz Festival [sic. Newport Jazz Festival] and some other ones.  Excuse me.  And he as a friend of Larry Borenstein and Allan Jaffe who at that time was running Preservation Hall [New Orleans, Louisiana] for Larry Borenstein.  And so, they had a meeting at my dad's restaurant [Vaucresson's Cafe Creole, New Orleans, Louisiana] basically talking about George's experiences with the Newport News Jazz Festival.  And Larry Borenstein and Allan Jaffe were bringing up the notion of, well, how come the birthplace of jazz does not have a jazz festival?  And so, from this particular--it's this brainstormed meeting, it wasn't planned, it just kind of happened, out of that came basically the idea for the New Orleans Jazz and Heritage Festival.  At that table, they started talking about music and what it should be and how it should be about the heritage.  And even asked my dad [Robert "Sonny" Vaucresson], you know, when it comes to food, would you sell food at the event.  And so shortly after that George came back in, in late '69 [1969], '70 [1970], they had the first New Orleans Jazz and Heritage Festival at Congo Square, which is now Armstrong Pork--Armstrong Park [Louis Armstrong Park] in New Orleans [Louisiana].  And they had a few food vendors.  My dad was one of 'em.  He sold po' boys hot sausage, hot chaurice po' boys at the festival.  But he would make 'em at the restaurant, wrap 'em in foil, and bring 'em to the booth, and sell out the booth.  He had Buster Holmes, had his fried chicken.  You had the Roman Candy man with his candy, had a motley crew of vendors but that was the first one.  Now, it was always said that they had more musicians at the festival then they actually had people at--to see the festival because it was new.  A lot of people were like, well, jazz and heritage festival?  But it laid the groundwork for what has now become a very large, one of the world's largest music festivals.  I remember they had pictures of Mahalia Jackson, and Duke Ellington walking around the festival; they were playing.  And Woody Allen was a big, big jazz fan and a friend of Larry Borenstein, who--he came because Woody Allen was a very accomplished clarinetist and would love to come down here and play.  He'd sneak down here and play clarinet and sit in with guys and would, would--was a big fan of the Humphrey brothers who played in Preservation Hall.  One played clarinet [Willie Humphrey], and one played trumpet [Percy Humphrey].  So, you know, these are the ties that people don't know of, and people how much, you know, they were in the beginning of some of these great events.  And, and, so, as it is today, we're the oldest vendor at the jazz and heritage festival.  We're the only original food vendor left.  We've been there for forty-one years and that's just a part of our family now to be a part of that institution.
Story_ID: 638487
Speaker 1: There are two things that I wanted to ask you about as far as--when you were talking about Creole, I'm just gonna go back a little bit just to put a pin right where we are so we're gonna go forward.  But when you were talking about the Creole culture and how close knit the, the people in that neighborhood had become, and there were certain last names.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: When it came to people beginning to get of age to marry, was it a problem knowing who your cousins were and who weren't, and was that an issue?
Speaker 2: Well, the Creole culture had become such a close knit group of families, everybody knew each other.  Everybody went to the same schools.  They went to the same elementary, middle, high schools, college.  It was a, it was its own environment.  Everyone, it was the same thing, you either went to Valena C. Jones [Valena C. Jones Elementary School, New Orleans, Louisiana], or Corpus Christi [Corpus Christi Catholic School, New Orleans, Louisiana] for elementary.  You went to Xavier Prep [Xavier University Preparatory School, New Orleans, Louisiana] for high school.  You went to Xavier University [Xavier University of Louisiana, New Orleans, Louisiana] for college, Straight Business School [New Orleans, Louisiana] or Dillard [Dillard University, New Orleans, Louisiana], whatever.  So, it was this close knit--everyone got to know each other.  And from a neighborhood and a family aspect, you as a child growing up in the 7th Ward [New Orleans, Louisiana], it wasn't like you could get away with anything.  I mean, if you were two blocks away cutting up, by the time you got home you had gotten, whipped, scolded, and everything else from probably about three or four different people that knew your people.  So, by the time you got home you really--you knew you had a whipping.  But you had already gotten scolded and reprimanded on the way because everybody knew whose child was who.  Or, which your ma- who your mama was, who your daddy was, and it was, it was a closeness that even to this day, we have certain organizations that have, LA Creole [Louisiana Creole Research Association, Inc., New Orleans, Louisiana], which is trying to preserve the Creole culture and, and preserve that which was unheard of anywhere else that we had known of.  We had never know of where you can say someone's last name and feel comfortable in the rapport with that family 'cause you knew their father, their grandfather, there's the cousins.  You knew that these cousins were this family, and this that and the other.  And it--and even so within the Creole community, they very much wanted to promote keeping that community together.  So, they would try to find--when it came to marrying, they would try to find good Creole families to marry into.  Now, I'm sure some of them Creoles they did they little do, and, they would go around and this one would mess with this one, or this one would do this and do that.  Then you had other kids that we didn't know about or other children and you kind of had to ask some times, who your mama's name was, or who's your mama maiden name, who your daddy was, so that we can make sure we didn't kind of get too close.  If were dating 'em or whatever.  I mean, my mother [Geraldine Dave Vaucresson] even stopped me from dating a girl.  We were so close to getting a little further on in our relationship and I was telling my mother about her one day and she said, "Well, what's her mama's name?"  And her mother's name was Jackson [ph.].  She said, "What's her mama's maiden name?"  And I went back to the girl, I said, "Well, what's your mama's maiden name?"  And she told me her maiden name was Bijou [ph.].  So, I came back and I said, "Her mama, her mama's maiden name was Bijou."  She said, "Oh, lord, that's your cousins."  She says, "We related to them Bijou," my mama gave me all the family history.  So, I--even though it was distant, it was far removed, still, you don't, you try--if you know, you don't, you leave that alone.  And a lot of times when you don't know, you find out afterwards.  But ain't nothing you can do about that.  But that's the one thing about the Creole culture, you intended to have the promotion of, if you knew this good Creole family and you had a son, and you knew his good Creole family, you try to get 'em to intermingle so that you can have those two families to make a marriage.  And then both families would be like, "Oh, that's some good Creole match up, they could make them good Creole babies.  And oh, that's gonna be a good--keep our traditions going."  Well, that was a special time.  Of course, it's not the same anymore.  But that was a very special time.
Story_ID: 638488
Speaker 1: The other thing was you talked about how the Creoles have their--it was like a third category.  You had the whites, the Creoles, the blacks.   And Creoles had special--well, were treated a little different or above the blacks or the black Creoles.  And when civil rights came along, because this really was happening before--because New Orleans [Louisiana] was different from any other culture--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --and, when civil rights came alone and said, you are black and it's black and white.  And some of those whites were taken away, was there any discussion from any of your family about how the Creoles felt about civil rights and the Jim Crow laws when they were enacted?
Speaker 2: You know when, when, when civil rights came and it was really about segregating and, and--in New Orleans it was kind of funny the way Creoles adjusted.  The Creoles had a lot to do within, with Civil Rights Movement.  I mean, Plessy v. Ferguson [Plessy v. Ferguson, 1896], where Plessy [Homer Plessy] challenged the ability to ride on the train, I mean, he was very fair-skinned man.  They didn't know he was black.  And that's how he was able to challenge that, because they didn't know.  And a lot of times, a lot of Creoles when, you know, it was about challenging these rules.  I mean, you get a lot of these old Creoles that, that--who were very fair and who could get away with--.  Now, you had some that, you've heard of passe blanc where in the '50s [1950s], '40s [1940s], '50s [1950s] where they moved to California.  A lot of New Orleans Creoles would moved to California and then settle in California.  And some of 'em maintained their Creole heritage and, and would tell you they were Creole.  But a lot of 'em went on to California and we ain't heard from 'em since 'cause they crossed that line and, and became white, and we, you know, that's just the way it was.  If they passed, they did.  They did it for opportunity for a better way of life for their family.  But the Creoles here, they tell--a lot of stories I heard about how our system was manipulated.  You know, back on the, when the, when the, when the streetcars and the busses, they had those plates where if, if you were sitting you--the blacks sat behind the marker on the bus or the streetcar.  And then of course, if a white came on and they needed a seat, you had to take the board and move it back so that they could sit.  Which I always thought was funny 'cause I mean, if they didn't wanna, they didn't want us to, you know, swim in the same pool, why would you wanna sit in a seat that we were just sitting in?  But anyway, that's for another day.  So, a lot Creoles who were very fair, you couldn't tell, they used to sit in front that thing.  If they can get by with it, fine.  If they couldn't, they moved.  But it was kind of that, that whole premise of, you know, you're telling us we can't do something, well, how are you gonna police it if you're looking at me and you're trying to figure out what I am?  And that was the thing, my dad had some stories where--my dad grew up, he was very good friends, one of his best friends coming up was former mayor of the City of New Orleans.  The first black mayor, Ernest "Dutch" Morial [Ernest Morial].  And Dutch was very fair complected as well.  And they had three good friends.  It was Dutch; my dad, Sonny [Robert "Sonny" Vaucresson]; and another friend Tony Houlemard [ph.].  Now, Tony was their good friend, but Tony was one of them Creoles that was a little more olive, a little brown.  So, Tony couldn't get away with some of the stuff that Sonny and Dutch would do.  And like Sonny and Dutch, used to tell me, they used to go in the French Quarter [New Orleans, Louisiana] to the nightclubs, and get in and go dance with the white women.  'Cause they could.  It wasn't because they said, "Oh, I wanted to get with a white woman," or whatever, just I can get over, you know.  And that was some of the things they used to do.  And one time, and when they'd go out with Tony, one of the things they told me they used to do, they used to go to the white drive-in to see the latest movies.  But what they had to do was they had to pull over, put Tony in the trunk, and then once they got to the gate after they got through, they drive in, park and they let Tony out the trunk so he could watch the movie.
Story_ID: 638489
Speaker 1: And these were some of the things that they would do just because, you know, they, they, it didn't matter.  You had a lot of Creoles that--who--they saw a lot of the, the whites in New Orleans [Louisiana] who, you could see they were probably mixed too.  We had a governor, former governor of the State of Louisiana, Earl K. Long.  Earl K. Long made one of the, one of our most profound, one of the most profound statements of New- of Louisiana culture, especially within the Creole community, and how everything came to be.  He said, he could feed a pure white man in the State of Louisiana--he could feed all the pure white people in the State of Louisiana with a pound of red beans.  I mean could cook a pound of red beans and I could feed every pure--the purest white, all the, the purest white people I could feed with a pound of red bean, 'cause it doesn't exist.  It does not exist.  And that's the thing, as you go on and you find out, you found--I mean, we did our, we did our family history and we found out that we're related to a former governor of State of Louisiana named Andre Bienvenue Roman [Andre B. Roman] because his brother used to like to go in the back and make babies with the slaves.  And so, we found out that one of those is our relation.  And so, when you start looking back and going here, you find all of that, you know.  But some people don't wanna, they don't wanna expose that history because then it brings apart--brings about a lot of questions.  And my question is, especially nowadays within the Creole--the talk of the Creole food and Creole culture, and you hear people talking about that they are purveyors of Creole food and Creole this.  Well, my thing is, well, if you're a Creole, 'cause there are a lot of white who say they're Creoles because--Webster's Dictionary, the formal definition is, first generation born of French settlers makes you a Creole.  Well, the entomology of that word, the word has changed.  We feel that Creole is someone who has a diverse ethnic background.  And you're gonna have a mixture of things.  And a part of that mix is an African, West Indian, Haitian background, which you have a background of color.  So, if you are a white person in New Orleans with a surname that's the same as some of these Creoles, I'm sorry, let me swab your mouth.  I bet you I'll find out.  Just like Bush [President George Walker Bush] found out he was related to Obama [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama], and Cheney [Dick Cheney] found out he was related to Obama so far away.  But it happens.  That's just a part of this multicultural society.
Speaker 2: Do you know if any of your family members that are, are passing for white?
Speaker 1: I do know of some that have gone and done it.  Yes.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Story_ID: 638490
Speaker 1: Is there anything else you wanna tell me about your, your father's [Robert "Sonny" Vaucresson] life or your, your mother's [Geraldine Dave Vaucresson] life?  Because we're gonna move on and now talk about your life.
Speaker 2: Well, the last things I'd probably wanna say about my mother's life, she did come from humble beginnings, a very hard life.  And if it wasn't for my aunt [maternal great aunt, Anita Dave Auzeene], she would not had been afforded the ability to get the education that she received.  And because of her background and because of the way she came up, she developed this thick skin, and this drive that enabled her to get past a lot of, of negative things that happened in her life.  You know, she didn't have the, always the easiest road.  But the thing what she never gave up, she never quit.  And my mother is a three time cancer survivor.  And she was--had cancer in the '60s [1960s].  She had cancer about maybe fifteen years ago, ovarian cervical, cervical.  She had breast cancer in the '60s [1960s].  She got through that.  She got pregnant with me within that first cancer bout and they wanted to abort me.  But she had enough strong, enough will and religious conviction to say, "No, I'm gonna give his--I'm gonna give him to the Virgin Mary and I'm put those cards--and let her play them, play that hand."  And I was born and after that, they said that there was no sign of cancer.  So, she call me her miracle baby.  I said well, don't put too much pressure on me.  But--and then after that she was told, last bout of cancer, she had three months to live.  And that was fifteen years ago.  And then recently, she was diagnosed with breast cancer again.  And recently went through the whole chemo [chemotherapy] and they said she beat it again.  So, for me coming up, I could never really quit anything.  Because how could I look in her face and tell her I quit something when I saw that she never did for us.  So, that's why I call her my hero, you know.
Story_ID: 638491
Speaker 1: And then my dad [Robert "Sonny" Vaucresson], my dad was a, a man who showed me you did not have to have--if you had enough of a will and you believed that you could do something, you can do it.  Now, he made a lot of mistakes.  He didn't always do things the way he should have in terms of the planning aspect of it or whatever.  But he amassed enough of a legacy, which for us was validated at his funeral.  I mean, I've never seen a funeral that big.  I mean, literally, the priest had to close the door of the church, couldn't let anybody else in.  I mean, it was just thousands and thousands of people that came to see a very modest and humble man.  But these were the people's lives that he had touched.  And it just made me feel good because, you know, I saw my dad as a man who worked hard.  Did the best he could regards to his relations to his family, his sons [Vaucresson and his brothers, Robert Vaucresson, Jr. and Rene Vaucresson].  And he loved us a great deal.  And he accomplished a lot of things that, yeah, to some people it might not have changed the world or the city itself [New Orleans, Louisiana].  But it was enough for us to see that he was the type of person that, he trail blazed and he, he saw things in the world in a way--it wasn't about color; it was about accomplishment.
Story_ID: 638492
Speaker 1: All right.  Tell me, what is your earliest childhood memory?
Speaker 2: (Pause) That's a good one.  (Pause) My earliest childhood memory would probably be sitting on my dad's [Robert "Sonny" Vaucresson] lap.  He had a recliner and he used to always sit in his recliner to rest.  And I remember just climbing up and just sitting on his lap and watching TV.  That was probably when I was real, real young.  That was one of the memories that I remember the most.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Is sitting on his lap on the recliner.
Story_ID: 638493
Speaker 1: Tell me, when you were growing up, say your elementary school years, we'll talk about your elementary school years first.  Tell me about the neighborhood in which you lived.
Speaker 2: I kind of lived--I lived in a, my parents had moved to a, a neighborhood near the lakefront in--Vista Park [Gentilly, New Orleans, Louisiana].  Well, before that I was born on Allen Street in the 7th Ward [New Orleans, Louisiana].  And I was probably three to six months old when we left and moved and came to where we are now which is more towards the lakefront area of the city in an area called Vista Park.  And, and, then I lived here at this place the rest of my days before I moved away to go to college [Morehouse College, Atlanta, Georgia].
Speaker 1: Okay.  In your elementary school years, tell me what this neighborhood looked like.  Who were your neighbors?  Who were your friends?  If you knew what their parents did for a living.
Speaker 2: In this neighborhood it was--we moved into a neighborhood where it was predominately white.  And it was kind of a challenge to find kids to play with.  A lot of the kids that I wound up playing with my mother [Geraldine Dave Vaucresson] sought out.  We had some other families that had moved in the area, we just didn't know where they were.  Then once I started my first year of kindergarten at the elementary school [St. Frances Xavier Cabrini School, New Orleans, Louisiana] around the block, we came into contact with other families.  Some of them that my mom and dad [Robert "Sonny" Vaucresson] knew.  And then I had started to become friendly with the sons at school.  So, my mom sought out to get to know the parents and try to get us together so we could have play dates and friends that we could go by each other's homes that--especially they felt comfortable--to, to really play.  And for a long time growing up, I was, it was just me and my mom.  I had two older brothers [Robert Vaucresson, Jr. and Rene Vaucresson].  They were eighteen months apart, but yet they were nine years apart from me in age.  So, they were--I kind of grew up like an only child in a lot of ways.  And at a very young age, it was just me and my mom around the house.  I'd follow her around.  She used to complain, talking about, "Boy, stop.  You're clipping my heels, following me around like this."  And she eventually got me out the house.  Got--put me in camps and different things.  She did a lot to really supplement that, when my dad worked all the time, my brothers didn't wanna be bothered with me 'cause I was--there was such an age difference.  And she really did a lot to make sure that I had a good transition and by seeking out friends my age and other things, and put- getting involved in a lot of things.  And it--my youth was, even though it was kind of like an only child--I mean, I knew my brothers were around, I lived with them.  But they were doing their own thing.  They didn't really bother with their little brother, sometimes.  But as they got older, I didn't see them as much.  And, and, I think that's why I was very close to my mother because she was always the constant.  She's the one that, if she saw that she needed to get--and keep me involved or get me into doing things, she would make sure.  And so, I attribute a lot of the things that I was exposed to is to my mother.  Broadway musical series, growing up, we used to always go see all of the Broadway plays, traveling groups that would come to the Saenger Theatre in New Orleans [Louisiana].  And so, I got to see Richard Harris in the king, in, in--I got to see Robert Goulet in 'Show Boat' [sic.].  I got to see Elizabeth Taylor in 'Little Fox' ['The Little Foxes,' Lillian Hellman], Rex Harrison in 'My Fair Lady' [Frederick Loewe and Alan Jay Lerner].  All of these great actors.  'Cause my mom wanted me to be exposed to different aspects of life and culture.  So, that, that, you know, I owe a lot of that to my mother, my youth, and the closeness that I have to her today.
Story_ID: 638494
Speaker 1: Tell me the, the elementary school that you went to.
Speaker 2: I went to St. Frances Cabrini elementary school [St. Frances Xavier Cabrini School, New Orleans, Louisiana].  It's actual ar- it was around the block from my mother's home.  So, literally, I could walk.  And I'd never forget the first day my mom [Geraldine Dave Vaucresson] brought me to school, we walked over there.  But I was so scared and I was crying and everything that she literally walked me around the block, walked me across a major street and then the school was right there.  She dropped me off at the teacher's class and left.  She went back home.  Next thing you know, I'm at the back door, crying, ringing the bell.  I done walked back.  I didn't wanna stay.  And she was like, "Boy, how did you walk across those streets and all that way and found home?"  I was maybe in kindergarten at the time.  So, she, she made sure, make sure to wait until the teacher got there.  And then after that it was pretty much a very good situation for me.  Cabrini was the type of elementary school that--it was a good mix.  We had about probably percentage-wise it might've been, the average time I was there, it may have been maybe 65/35, white to black.  And a lot of the black families that were there were good families, you know.  Just families we had known already.  And, and, even the kids that I got to know that were white or had some Indians, Indian family, East Indians there.  I mean, it was just a good mixture.  It was a very good elementary school and it gave me a good well rounded appreciation for what a diverse society could be and how you could get around--get along with everyone, whether it be white, black, or other.  It doesn't exist anymore.  It was torn down after Katrina [Hurricane Katrina] and replace by a high school of a different name.  But a lot of the, the people that went there, I'm still in touch with and we still definitely look back on our old Cabrini days.
Speaker 1: Who were some of the teachers that might've encouraged you or inspired you?
Speaker 2: Well, I know--I had a couple of teachers.  I had Mrs.--I had Mrs. Johnson [ph.] was one.  That was my fifth grade teacher.  I had the sweets on her.  Oh, I loved Ms. Johnson so, she was a blonde, pretty blue eyed girl--woman, and I mean, I guess that was one of my first crushes: Mrs. Johnson.  But Mrs. Johnson was very stern.  And I think at that time she also helped to expand some of my getting out there and actually participating in different things and opening up my personality.  I also had Mrs. Watson [ph.], who was another crush.  I think I was starting to get them crushes around third and fourth grade.  And but, then I had Mrs. Laiget [ph.] for eighth grade, another stern woman who had been there for years.  But the discipline, it was a Catholic school, so the discipline that they gave you was, it was very strict.  But it was a very loving, loving experience.  Mrs. Shane [ph.], Mrs. Fanilara [ph.].  Some of these teachers that came across my life, you know, left indelible prints on my personality and, and who I am today.  It was a great experience.
Story_ID: 638495
Speaker 1: Who--what was your favorite subject?
Speaker 2: You know, my favorite subject in elementary school [St. Frances Xavier Cabrini School, New Orleans, Louisiana] probably was reading.  And it didn't always start out that way.  My mother [Geraldine Dave Vaucresson] actually got me a tutor when I was younger to help me with reading.  And the young lady was so good, she was a neighbor's daughter, Mrs. Woods [ph.].  And her daughter was getting her teacher certification.  I remember she'd come over and we would sit down and read Disney books.  And the actual stories of the movies.  Like, I know we read 'The Rescuers' [Margery Sharp] and then there was another one, the 'Lady and the Tramp' and those.  And she would really take her time and work with me on actually reading it properly.  The way that it's supposed to be read, your voice inflections, how you stop at the punctuations and, and really, and kind of helping me go get out of my shell and being able to speak and read clearly and so that it would--that definitely left an impression on me as I went on to high school [Brother Martin High School, New Orleans, Louisiana] and further.
Story_ID: 638496
Speaker 1: Were all of your teachers lay teachers?
Speaker 2: No, we had some nuns.  We had a few nuns.  Our principals were nuns, a couple of--we had, oh, sister--aw, I feel so bad I can't remember some of these sisters' names.  But they were, they was so sweet and they were very nice.  But oh, you--they would hit you with those rulers on your hands.  I know they, they would slap the desk with 'em.  I mean, it was definitely a Catholic school discipline factor.  And I guess, my parents [Geraldine Dave Vaucresson and Robert "Sonny" Vaucresson] wanted to keep in that particular mode because I went to a Catholic based high school, all boys with these brothers and they would put their hands on you too.  So, I guess, you know, the discipline was what was needed 'cause you know, I got a little rambunctious sometimes.
Speaker 1: Do you remember who the principal was [at St. Frances Xavier Cabrini School, New Orleans, Louisiana]?
Speaker 2: We had Sister Cynthia [ph.], was one of our--my principals.  And then we had Sister Adele Lambert [ph.] was another principal.  Sister Cynthia was a very laid back, very nice, more of a, I guess, more of the administrator.  Where Sister Adele, if you got called to Sister Adele's office, God help you.  I mean, she was--she didn't play.  And I never forget around eighth grade we went to, I guess, like a, there's a thing like Close Up [Close Up Foundation] where you take the kids to D.C. [Washington, D.C.].  And we went, sixth, seventh, and eighth graders.  And I got there with some of my friends and we cut up a little bit.  And we had a, we had a room, an adjoining room, but it was locked.  And the girls were on the other side and I had a little knife and I picked the locked of the adjoining room.  And so, we got into the girls' room.  And I say it, we--nothing happened, it's just the fact that we were together.  And I'll never forget, it came out that we--the teacher came up to me one day at school, when I got back and said, "Were you in the girls' room?"  And I said yes, 'cause I didn't know who she had talked to so I hadn't gotten with anybody just to, to get the story right.  So, I admitted it and, and I'll never forget, they brought us--there was four of us, they brought us into Sister Adele's office.  And now we, we were all about to go to high school.  I was accepted to Brother Martin High School [New Orleans, Louisiana], and you know, all of us--some guys were accepted to Jesuit [Jesuit High School, New Orleans, Louisiana] and some other nice schools here and we didn't know what was gonna happen.  All we knew, the severity of what we had done and the possibility that at this late stage, we could get kicked out.  So, we're sitting in there and this--my friend Serro [ph.] and I got Jay [ph.], and Ron [ph.], and she's like, she just said, she had pink slips on her desk.  A pink slip for us was, that was the standard.  If you got a pink slip, you had to go get it signed by your parents, and no telling what would happen to you.  But if you got three, I think you got suspended and then if you have some after, you got kicked out.  But anyway, she had this, brought us in the office, and she says, "Well, what do you think I should do?"  And we all standing there and none of these guys said anything so I'm--I started to lobby.  I said, "Well, Sister, I'm a be honest with you.  Okay, you got us.  Okay, I say you give us all pink slips."  'Cause if I knew, none of us have ever gotten but one of us, one of 'em has gotten one before.  But it was the end of the year.  I said, "Give us all pink slips," I said, "because at this point in time, we're all going to school.  We're all accepted.  And it would really not be, it would be almost lame, a lame duck issue to kick us out since we already got accepted to the high school.  And if you give us a pink slip at least it would be on record.  They'll know you disciplined us."  And she sat there, and all the guys looking at me, and they sat there and they said, "What are you doing?  What are doing lobbying for a pink slip?"  You know.  And so, she said, "You know what, you spoke up, you spoke well, you defended your stance."  So, she wrote us all pink slips and sent us home.  And all my friends were scared.  They're like, "Man, if you hadn't stood up and said something, we might've got kicked out."  I said well, shoot, when you get to the point where you either gotta you know what or get off the pot, you'll be surprised what you say.  You know, so, I lobbied for myself then, and so, that was--I guess, I should've been a lawyer, I don't know.
Story_ID: 638497
Speaker 1: Were you involved in sports or music during that time?
Speaker 2: Actually, I was.  I was involved--I played, I was in the choir in elementary school [St. Frances Xavier Cabrini School, New Orleans, Louisiana] because of my, my oldest brother.  My oldest brother was studying to be an opera singer.  So, he would always sing around the house.  But it wasn't like he was singing Motown [Motown Records].  It wasn't like he was singing R and B.  He was singing arias and doing all these vocal exercises.  And all I remember out of that was my brother singing all these operatic notes and my mother [Geraldine Dave Vaucresson] hollering through the closed door, "Ooh, Robert [Robert Vaucresson, Jr.], would you please stop all that hollering.  Ooh, it got--my nerves is bad."  My mom use to always sit down and smoke them Benson and Hedges Menthol Lights 100s.  I remember that, because I had to go buy the packs, of course, when I was of age.  But then she starts, "Boy, go to the store and get me some Benson and Hedges Menthol Lights 100," and all that.  Oh, but, but he would sing and, I guess I was a boy at the time and he was playing, I never forget, he was playing and learning an aria and he played it back and Leontyne Price was singing on the record.  And so, I started to mimic her.  And I had a soprano voice as a boy, and he was like, "Wow," he says, "you know, you can really sing."  And I said, "Oh, thank you."  So, he would have me sing all of the female parts.  He'd have me learn the female parts, and then he would rehearse and I would do the female parts.  And so, he eventually brought me to his voice teacher and had me audition for him.  And he actually wanted to take me on as a student.  But I was at an age where I was either, voice lessons for opera, or play football and baseball.  And so, I opted for the sports.  And I played park ball football, played baseball, very awkward as a youngster.  I didn't have good--I just was not, I didn't, was kind of awkward.  But kept working at it.  Went to camps for basketball.  Went to my brother, Rene [Rene Vaucresson] was a great baseball play- excuse me--great baseball player and he helped me.  And every time, I just kept working at it, I got better.  And actually, I was recruited to play basketball at high school level.  Like, they saw me in elementary and I was recruited by three schools.  I went to Brother Martin [Brother Martin High School, New Orleans, Louisiana] to play basketball, and I wound up playing basketball, running track and playing football, as well as, singing in the chorus.  And that came about because I have no, no plans singing in the chorus at Brother Martin until when we were doing scheduling, the chorus teacher was at the table and I picked up some elective and he saw my last name, he said, "Vaucresson [HistoryMaker Vance Vaucresson]?"  He said, "You got a brother name Robert?"  I said, "Yes, sir."  He says, "Oh, man, I sang with Robert at Loyola [Loyola University New Orleans, New Orleans, Louisiana]."  He's like, "Well, here give me that card back, you're gonna take chorus," he says, "'cause if you're his brother, you gotta have some talent."  So, from then on I started singing in the chorus.  And was--I, it just kind of took off.  I started to love to sing and I was all-district and all-state in the chorus and recruited to sing in college [Morehouse College, Atlanta, Georgia].  I didn't really do it to go to college as a music major.  But I sang in college with the Morehouse College Glee Club, took voice and, and really just have kept singing since.
Story_ID: 638498
Speaker 1: Before we go on to high school, because you kind of went there and we're gonna go there in a second, I wanted to ask you about religion, religion in your home.  Tell me about the religion at home.
Speaker 2: Well we, we were, we were raised Catholic.  Most people within the Creole community or in New Orleans [Louisiana]--it's a very Catholic city.  So, we were raised Catholic.  And even within my Catholic upbringing, which I went to Catholic elementary school [St. Frances Xavier Cabrini School, New Orleans, Louisiana], Catholic high school [Brother Martin High School, New Orleans, Louisiana].  With, even within that upbringing I got to see different sides of Catholicism.  My parents [Geraldine Dave Vaucresson and Robert "Sonny" Vaucresson] got a little more involved in a movement within the Catholic church called the charismatic Catholic movement.  And it's a lot more spiritual based, praise and worship based type of version of Catholicism where you tend to believe in praying in tongues, being--receiving the Holy Spirit, being, being, being slain in the Spirit.  Also, being anointed in oil.  And as I got older I realized a lot of that was similar to some aspects of the Baptist, Pentecostal, the United Church of Christ, things of that.  So, it gave me a deeper sense of respect and connection within the Catholic church.  Even though when I went on to college [Morehouse College, Atlanta, Georgia], it was in the Baptist Bible Belt and he was harder to really keep that consistency within the Catholic religion, and you know, going away.  But I'm still very active and still participate within the Catholic church.  And I, and I'm almost a defender of the Catholic church because nowadays a lot of people are leaving the Catholic religion because I feel the Catholic religion is a little out of date.  You know, if you look at it like a business, you have all these other churches that are popping up: non-denominational, Baptist, things of that sort.  And then marketing themselves with a lot more praise and worship music, a lot more interaction within the che- teachings of the religion and everything.  And so, you--we tend to have some Catholics fall off because the Catholic church is still a very strict, specific in how we worship type church.  But it's a--I have a lot of respect for it and very, have a deep connection to my religion.
Speaker 1: So, are you a part of the charismatic--
Speaker 2: The movement?
Speaker 1: --movement?
Speaker 2: I'm not a part of it.  But a lot of my beliefs within the Catholic church were because of the charismatic movement.  I believe in how we praise and worship and music and in prayer.  I believe in, you know, that you can receive the gifts of the Holy Spirit.  I've been slain in the Spirit as a young boy.  Didn't understand it.  Have come to kind of think about it and really getting an understanding of that.  So, there's a lot of aspects to that aspect of the charismatic movement that I do still hold dear in terms of my own spiritual relationship with God within the Catholic church.
Speaker 1: Did you wanna talk about any experiences?  You said, you were slain in the Spirit.  Do you wanna talk about what that experience was like for you?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, being slain in the Spirit, it's one of those things a lot of people try to figure it out, but you can't.  I remember it; I was totally cognizant.  I couldn't move.  I was just laying there, heard people talking about me, seeing if I was all right.  I mean, my eyes were closed, I could heard everything.  It's just, it was just a peace.  One of the most peaceful times that I can think of.  Just laying there, and just being in a state of just peace.  And there's other aspects of, you know, you know, you pray and you worship, you cry, you let all of that anger out.  You just thank the Lord for, for, for allowing you to have this relationship with Him.  And, and that's what I try to tell people, you know.  You know, my dad--when you look at your parents and with--how they influence you, my dad was a man that, you know, he gambled, he you know, just did his thing.  But then he came to a part in his life where he changed and he gave his life to God and he got into charismatic movement.  And then the way my dad was with people, he then added that extra element to where, where'd see you, he'd look at you, and if he saw you where you look like you were troubled, he'd say, "What's that matter?"  He say, "Something heavy on you?"  And you know, he'd say, "You know what, let me pray with you."  And he would just pray with people out of the blue.  Didn't know if they were Catholic.  Didn't know if they were religious at all.  And he would pray with 'em.  And just ask God to touch 'em and remove whatever was on their heart.  And I've seen grown men just start crying.  I've seen people just look at my dad with a, with like, what are you doing?  And, and, then I would see people come up to him afterwards.  A long time from when he would do that.  And they would thank him, because that day he didn't know what was going on in their life, but he touched them that day.  And I just try to live with that type of spirit.
Story_ID: 638499
Speaker 1: Let's move onto high school.  Tell me about your experience.  Now, you said you, you played sports, and in music.  Tell me about your experiences there, the subjects that you liked, and some of the teachers, and some of your friends.
Speaker 2: High school, Brother Martin [Brother Martin High School, New Orleans, Louisiana] was a great experience for me.  It was run by the Brothers of Sacred Heart [Brothers of the Sacred Heart], a very strong religious group.  And had a lot of friends there so it wasn't too much of being acclimated socially.  I had two older brothers that I watched them.  And when they went to school, in high school--
Speaker 1: Tell me their names and what their (unclear)--
Speaker 2: My oldest brother was Robert Anthony Vaucresson, Jr. [Robert Vaucresson, Jr.], and my second oldest brother was Rene Andre Vaucresson [Rene Vaucresson].  And both them went to a high school in New Orleans [Louisiana] named St. John Vianney Preparatory School.  And it was actually a high school that the Archdiocese of New Orleans [Roman Catholic Archdiocese of New Orleans] started to specifically target the vocation of the priesthood to these young men.  A very small school.  But it was a full scale high school; had sports, had all of things like that.  And both of my brothers--it was a small setting, and I think they both benefited form that type of a high school.  Both were active.  My brothers, my brother Robert played basketball, ran track and sang in the, in the Vianney Singers.  And early on he showed his musical acumen.  He won some regional singing competition and, and that catapulted him into music, to go and sing music in Loyola [Loyola University New Orleans, New Orleans, Louisiana].  My other brother was all world.  He was a four sport letterman.  He was all-district in every sport.  Won a state championship in baseball.  So, coming up and seeing them so active, by the time I got to high school, or even in elementary school [St. Frances Xavier Cabrini School, New Orleans, Louisiana], I wanted to emulate them.  I wanted to be just like them.  So, I played sports, did the singing 'cause of my brother.  So, when I got to high school, I tried to do all that as well.  Stayed very active, tried to compete at every level.  Chasing a dream of what I've come to realize was, I was just trying to get my brothers' attention.  Being that they was such a difference in age, I just wanted to--them to say, "Hey, notice me.  Look what I'm doing."  And I look back at that, I think that if I had it to do differently, I might not have done as much; trying to just follow in their footsteps.
Story_ID: 638500
Speaker 1: But high school [Brother Martin High School, New Orleans, Louisiana] for me was, was great.  I learned a lot about competition.  I learned about competing at a very high level.  And not only academically, but within the, the sports realm.  I didn't--my dreams were to play college ball like any other young boy who felt he had some athletic acumen.  But it didn't happen.  Basketball was--I competed all four years and didn't achieve that next level.  Track, it just didn't happen.  Football, I played too late, this was my senior year.  And where I wanted to go to college for sports, I had scholarships to go for music from every school in the state because of the fact that I was all-district and all-state and all kind of stuff.  I wasn't gonna do that.  So, high school was a great time.  It made me have a deeper relationship with God because the brothers there, and some of the men there, who were very Christian kept me focused.  That you as a student--you're a student and then you're an athlete, but you're a Christian.  And I contemplated joining the order of the Brothers of the Sacred Heart.  I became an associate.  I went to some meetings, went to some retreats.  And I really contemplated because I really felt that there was a calling that I had to serve within the Christian community.  Opted not to join the order, but, still have always wanted to participate within my Catholic church.  And I have through the music ministry, and other things.  But high school was very good for me.  Toward the end it was very, it was, it was tumultuous my senior year because, you know, when you put all your eggs in one basket hoping to go to college for the sports, it didn't work out, you know, kind of got a little down and, and things of that sort.  But it--overall it was a great, great experience.  And I have a nephew that's there now, and he's an athlete.  And I try to tell him, "Look, I'm not gonna let you make the mistakes I made."  I say, "You're a student athlete.  You gotta get these books."  And I didn't get the books like I should have.  I started out an honor student, kind of got away from that.  I regret that.  But hey, that's life, you learn.
Story_ID: 638501
Speaker 1: I only applied to one college.  That was Morehouse.  Morehouse College in Atlanta [Georgia].  One of my guidance counselors in high school [Brother Martin High School, New Orleans, Louisiana] called me in and said, "Have you thought about it?"  I said, "No."  I was way behind schedule, and he opened this large book of schools and he went to, he said, "Ever thought about going to a black school?"  This is a white guidance counselor.  And I said, "No."  So, he opened up Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.].  He opened up Morehouse.  And when Morehouse opened up, it was almost as if something just called me.  And so, I started reading about it, started looking at it.  And then I started asking people questions about it.  And everybody's response was, "Morehouse?  You wanna go there?"  As if this was something that was unheard of.  I said, "Well, yeah, I'm interested."  And so, went ahead sent my application in and was accepted.
Speaker 2: So, actually, this was the very first time that you knew about Morehouse?  Had you done any research on any historically black colleges [HBCUs]?
Speaker 1: No.  Only black colleges I knew were Xavier University [Xavier University of Louisiana, New Orleans, Louisiana] and Dillard University [New Orleans, Louisiana].  That was it.  Morehouse, it's just something about it.  And then I just started reading about.  I heard Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] went there.  Some local people here knew about the school, had great respect for it.  And as I kept reading and reading, and then the fact it was an all male, all black--the only one in the, in the country that made black men better than what they thought they could be.  Plain and simple.  You go there, you had no idea of what that school could afford you within growing and shaping a young black man.  And they tell you that.  They tell you.  They says, "We--that's our mission."
Story_ID: 638502
Speaker 1: Who was the president of Morehouse [Morehouse College, Atlanta, Georgia] while you were there?
Speaker 2: President of Morehouse had just turned over.  The president of Morehouse when I got there was Dr. Leroy Keith [Leroy Keith, Jr.].  That was his first year.
Speaker 1: And what was the experience like for you?  Had you been away from home before?
Speaker 2: No, I had not been away from home.  And we drove up.  I got to, got to my room.  My dad [Robert "Sonny" Vaucresson] and my aunt, my cousin [Patricia Romain Newell], my mom [Geraldine Dave Vaucresson] went.  And it was kind of a homecoming for my mother being that she went to Spelman [Spelman College, Atlanta, Georgia] for two years.  And I didn't know this until I said I was interested in Morehouse.  I'm like, "Well, how come you--," I didn't even, I didn't know anything about my mom.  I found that out like later on that she went to Southern [Southern University; Southern University and Agricultural and Mechanical College] in Baton Rouge [Louisiana], and that she was a--went to Spelman for two years.  It's kind of like, "Well, why don't--you haven't told me anything."  So, anyway I went up there and it was, it was an adjustment because first of all when I got there my room- my poor roommate was from Griffin, Georgia whose name was Fuller [ph.].  And he was sitting in the room and the first person he saw was my aunt, my dad's sister, who, very fair, could may be taken for Spanish or something of that sort.  So, he was like okay.  And he saw her daughter.  And then my dad walked in, who, very fair, blues eyes, looked white.  And he was like, oh, my god, my roommate's white.  'Cause it wasn't unheard of that they had white students to go to Morehouse.  So, then I walked in and he still doesn't know what's going on.  He's trying to figure it out.  It wasn't about a week later after we had stayed together he asked me what I was.  And I told him, you know, I said, "Well, you got a little time, I'm explain to you how this thing works."  And for the longest time, I couldn't understand him.  He had a very deep Georgia accent.  And I used to always say, "Huh?  What" to get him to repeat.  And at one point, he came to me and he says, "Man, you have such an accent it's hard to understand you."  I said, "What do you mean?"  I said, "I can't understand you."  He says, "Oh, you can't understand me?  I thought you were hard of hearing 'cause you keep asking me, 'What?  Huh?'"  So, but, that was like one of my first experiences.  But Morehouse for me, I needed to get away.  My mother actually told me, she says, "I want you to go away to college."  She says, "The best thing for me that I didn't take advantage of and I want you to have that experience."  So, she, when she knew I wanted to go to Morehouse, she was in full support.  My dad, on the other hand wanted me to stay and maybe go to Xavier [Xavier University of Louisiana, New Orleans, Louisiana] and still work in the business, help him out.  But my mom was very adamant about sending me away and, and growing from that experience.  And Morehouse for me was a place where it defined me as to who I was to be as a man.  Met a lot of different guys from a lot of different backgrounds.  A lot of PKs, preacher kids, whose daddies had these large churches in different cities.  But you would never know 'cause they cut up so bad.  But eventually, you know, you found out that they settled in and went on and accepted whatever journey they were to take.  But they mold- Morehouse molded me as a man.  It was such a great institution for young men.
Story_ID: 638503
Speaker 1: What year did you graduate from high school and then go to Morehouse [Morehouse College, Atlanta, Georgia]?
Speaker 2: I finished Brother Martin High School [New Orleans, Louisiana] in 1987, and went to Morehouse in the fall of '88 [1988].
Speaker 1: You graduated in June?
Speaker 2: May (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Oh, May of '87 [1987]?
Speaker 2: May of '87 [1987].
Speaker 1: And so, you didn't start 'til the following year?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Fall of '88 [1988].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: And what was your major?
Speaker 2: My major was business with a concentration in marketing.
Speaker 1: And you chose that with anticipation of working in your father's business?
Speaker 2: Yes.  'Cause my father [Robert "Sonny" Vaucresson] made sure growing up that he let everybody know that he introduced me to that: "This is the one that's gonna take over my business."  He made sure to tell everybody that.  So, coming up, I felt going to college, I had to go to college with a major in business.  I rebelled against it though.  I rebelled against it.  I spent more time in the music department than I did in the business department 'cause I wound up taking voice lessons and singing.  I didn't major, and you know, minor in any music but was very involved in, in the whole music department through the glee club.  And we toured the country singing and it was, it was a great experience, you know, spring and fall, with that organization.
Speaker 1: Who was in, in charge of the music department?
Speaker 2: Dr. Calvin Grimes was the head of the music department.  But we had had a, our great leader had died right before I got there.  His name was Dr. Wendell Phillips Whalum [Wendell Whalum].  And he was really the man that built the music department up and really established the reputation of the Morehouse College Glee Club to what it was at that time.  So, it was going through a lot of change at that time.  And I just happened to be there and just kind of see it all, all happen.  You know, the new director was getting a lot of--Dr. David Morrow was getting a lot of flak from the guys not wanted to really accept his leadership.  And the music department was going through a lot of changes.  And even the school, the president [Leroy Keith, Jr.] actually, it was his first year.  So, he was coming in making a lot of changes because our former president, Dr. Hugh Gloster had passed--I think he, I think he just retired.  And so, it was a lot of change.  But Morehouse is an adaptable place.
Story_ID: 638504
Speaker 1: Who were some of the professors that you had?
Speaker 2: I'll tell you, the guys that shaped me, one of, one of the first professors that really influenced me was Dr. Aaron Parker [Aaron L. Parker].  He taught philosophy.  First day of class Dr. Aaron Parker walked into a full class of students, and we had some cross pledge students who you would, you could take a course at Morehouse [Morehouse College, Atlanta, Georgia] from--if you were a Spelman [Spelman College, Atlanta, Georgia] student, you could take a course at Morehouse; we could take a course over there.  So, we had some females and stuff.  And Dr. Parker came in and sat down and said, "Okay.  I'm gonna give an A right now to a student who can answer two questions for me.  If can you can answer two questions for me correctly, I will give you an A for the rest of the semester."  So, everybody's, you know, kind of jiggling in their seat, all right, all right, give it to us, give it to us.  We're ready.  He says, "Okay," he says, "I will give an A to the first person who can name everybody in here by their first and last name."  So, some people tried.  "Oh, I know this guy, this--."  Obviously, no one could do it.  He say, "Well, see no one can do that because as a, as a community of people nowadays, we don't take the time to get to know each other."  We don't even ask everybody who their name is when we introduce ourselves.  So, he was, he used it as a lesson point.  And then the second question that he asked which he would've given us an A for, he says, "Okay.  I'll give you an A, another chance at an A for the rest of the semester if a student right now can pull out a gun and put it on the desk."  One guy who was from Chicago [Illinois] was like, "Man, can I go to my car?"  Well, that didn't happen.  And another lesson was the fact of a, you know, he said if you have a gun and you put it in--pull it out in class and on the desk it speaks a lot about what the problem and the ills of society is, that you have to carry a gun into an institution of higher education.  And some of the lessons that he taught me really made me think.  It changed my whole thought process to the point where it caused such a strain on my parents [Geraldine Dave Vaucresson and Robert "Sonny" Vaucresson].  Because Dr. Aaron Parker and some of the other teachers, Henry Car- Steve Carey [ph.], my English teacher, Dr.--I can't, I can't think of, the guy was over the chapel, they would constantly give us these speeches about manhood and about social awareness and things of that sort.  I came back home for Christmas and I was Malcolm X, Jr.  I mean, I was telling my parents at the dinner table how their thoughts were wrong.  How they didn't see society the proper way.  How we gotta stand up and fight and do all this other stuff.  And my pa was like, "Lord, why did you do this boy over here?  Come back with all this militant thinking."
Story_ID: 638505
Speaker 1: And I never forget one time my senior year [at Morehouse College, Atlanta, Georgia], the Ku Klux Klan [KKK] was marching on King's holiday [Martin Luther King Jr. Day] in downtown Atlanta [Georgia].  So, I went to the march in protest and they had all the riot police and everything and I'm standing right in front, right in front of the riot police.  And we're (gesture) chanting and everything else and the Ku Klux Klan is passing and somebody from the back threw a bottle and it went short and hit the police.  Well, the police pa- gave an order and he started pushing back, pushing back.  So, I got hit by one of the shields and he, he, he--I got a cut over my eye.  I was bleeding and everything.  So, I got back to the hall, I called my mom [Geraldine Dave Vaucresson] and dad [Robert "Sonny" Vaucresson] and I couldn't wait to tell 'em.  I said, "We were protesting the Klan, and we started fighting with the police, and I got hit, and I'm bleeding all on my face."  And my dad sitting in background saying, "That's it.  Bring him home. He's going to Xavier [Xavier University of Louisiana, New Orleans, Louisiana].  I ain't send him over there, pay all this money for all this foolishness."  And I got on the phone and I said--they were, "That's it."  They said, "Why are you doing this?"  And I told them I said, "Greater men have died for less."  My pa said, "That's it," said, "bring him, bring him home now.  I'm not gonna have him coming up here--."  I'll never forget that.  That was so funny.
Story_ID: 638506
Speaker 1: And that was just a part of what you learn when you go through that process.  I had a lot of great teachers.  And even in my experience with the glee club [Morehouse College Glee Club], where they taught me about, you know, order, time, and, and how you can bring forty to fifty black men together and they can actually sound as one, and make some of the most beautiful music.  We sang in Russian, German, French; we sang in African, Yoruba dialect.  We sang in Latin.  We sang stuff that, I mean, when we would perform in front of people, it was an experience.  And we were the only, sometimes the only Morehouse students that these people would see.  And we were actually a recruiting arm of the institution.  And they would tell us, they said, "You need to know every member of the organization's first, middle, last name, classification, major, and home town."  And we were like, "Why?"  And then when we would have these receptions after the concert, you would have somebody that would come up and say, "Where that boy from Tampa [Florida]?"  And we could say, "Oh, you mean, George Wilson [ph.].  He's over there."  Or, if somebody would say, "Well, what's the, what are the requirements to get into Morehouse [Morehouse College, Atlanta, Georgia]?"  We had to know that.  We were basically a recruitment arm for the school.  So, it gave us the ability to understand, that you as a black man, you need to know ten times more information and you have to achieve ten times more just to be on the same level of acceptance.  So, that was just one of the lessons we learned.  You just gotta keep fighting.
Story_ID: 638507
Speaker 1: What year did you graduate?
Speaker 2: I finished Morehouse [Morehouse College, Atlanta, Georgia] in '92 [1992].
Speaker 1: So, so, your father didn't bring you home.
Speaker 2: He didn't bring me home (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) He decided to let you stay.
Speaker 2: He didn't bring me home.  He did come get my car one year.  I had a car that he gave me.  And the grades didn't come back too right.  So, I was walking for the next semester.  But that was all right.  You know, you need those types of things to humble you.  And I brought my grades up and it worked out.  I got a car back.  But I think for him, he started to see--he started to see me change into a man.  And I don't think he was ready for that.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, tell me what happens after graduation.
Speaker 2: After graduation, leading up to graduation my parents [Geraldine Dave Vaucresson and Robert "Sonny" Vaucresson] came up and my dad said, he made plea, he said, "I really need you to come back and help me with this business.  I need you to help, come back and take over."  At the time, I was kind of of rebelling.  I had got a job offer from Kraft General Foods [Kraft Foods Group, Inc.] to start at an entry level of GSO position, great grocery sells type person.  So, I thought about it and came back home, work with my dad.  And was depressed for like six months after I came back because I felt that my friends and everything--like they was stuck in time.  That no one had advanced to the level of understanding and knowledge of which I had--.  And all my friends are going to college but, you know, just still, it just seemed like everybody's mentality, everything was stuck in time.  So, I worked with my dad in the business for seven years after that.  We accomplished a lot of things together.  We fought every day.  The way we got along was, if we didn't holler, scream, and fight every day, something was wrong.  Because that was just how we got along.  He had a way of doing things.  I'm bringing in new ideas of a way of doing it.  And we butted heads constantly.  But we, we, we had a lot of battles in business together.  We fought against--in the meat business, of being a black company we were already--a true minority, they didn't have that many, that was trying to be a processor.  The thing about Vaucresson Sausage [Vaucresson Sausage Company, New Orleans, Louisiana], we were a department of agriculture [Louisiana Department of Agriculture and Forestry] inspected facility that, that sold sausage to grocery stores, institutions, things of that.  And that's a larger realm than just a meat market.  Now, I'm dealing with a lot of major meat businesses and a lot of 'em did a lot of things to try to knock us out, put us out of business and do things like that.  But we just kept fighting.  And we kept finding a way to stay alive.  And, and, one of the first people that gave us a chance was a guy named John Schwegmann, S-C-H-W-E-G-M-A-N-N [John G. Schwegmann], and he had the largest supermarket chain in the city called Schwegmann supermarkets [Schwegmann Brothers Giant Supermarket].  And he said, "You know what? I'm a give you a shot.  I'm a, I'm gonna--you can bring your product in and sell it in the stores."  And from there once we starting showing that we could move product, it opened the door for us to go into Winn Dixie [Winn Dixie Stores, Inc.] to go into some other, some other major chains in the city to where at one point, we, we had a large distribution within the grocery stores in the city.  And then we went into institutional business.  And that was a business that was really much cornered by certain firms.  So, we really had to, you know, kind of fight our way in there and to, to try to get our place in there.  We did.  We wound up doing some institutional work with the Orleans Parish School Board and with the prisons in the area.  And it really put us in a place where, from the department of agriculture standpoint as well as the meat community, that we were, we were here to stay.  And we were at least a viable company.  We were just not a fly by night.  Because they had originally said that we weren't gonna last five years.
Story_ID: 638508
Speaker 1: So, when you first came back home, was the business still a meat market and then became a processing plant?
Speaker 2: No, actually (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Or, had a processing plant?
Speaker 2: Actually, my dad [Robert "Sonny" Vaucresson] had closed the meat market at one point after his brother-in-law died, Leon Bordenave, he closed it.  But he still made sausage.  He had customers, like we've been selling to Dooky Chase's Restaurant [New Orleans, Louisiana] for over seventy years.  I mean, she's only used our hot sausage in that timeframe.  So, he couldn't not provide his sausage to his customers so he kept making sausage in different little places he had.  And my dad--no business plan, no nothing, said, "I wanna open up a sausage plant.  I wanna make sausage."  So, he approached the Louisiana Department of Agriculture [Louisiana Department of Agriculture and Forestry] at one time and had plans with his business partner at the time, my godfather, Maurice Fonte [ph.], to open up a processing plant [for the Vaucresson Sausage Company, New Orleans, Louisiana].  Well, at the time, it was in the '70s [1970s], time they basically said no.  We--they found a reason to tell my dad no, 'cause they knew it was gonna be a black company.  Fast forward about ten years, he met a black veterinarian by the name of Dr. Charles Raby [ph.] who he told of his desire to open up a plant.  And Dr. Raby walked us through the department of agriculture 'cause he was a--he worked for the department of agriculture, he walked us through, got us our certificate, and, we opened up in October of 1983.  Our plant in an old grocery store on the corner of North Roman [Street] and St. Broad Avenue, a building my dad had, it was formerly Willie Earl's Meat Market and Supermarket [ph.] and we just--when he left the business, we opened up and renovated it.  My dad used all his own resources to open up the meat--this, this plant without any real customer base.  He just kind of like my dad did, off, off the cuff, and, and we opened up.  And he got his old friend, who was the mayor at the time, Dutch Morial [Ernest Morial] to come and do the grand opening, to cut the ribbon.  Which, you know, I'll never forget that, he pulled up in a black sedan, came out, and did his little thing and shook some hands, cut the ribbon and, and went about his business.  And just from then on, we just really worked on really building the business.
Story_ID: 638509
Speaker 1: The fights that you and your dad used to have (laughter) daily, what were some of the things that you got across that really helped to advance the business?
Speaker 2: A lot of the fights we had had to do with just, just different practices to make us--to where our final product was--the way we did things, the way we did things, how our final product looked going in the stores.  Really having the attitude of service, really pushing for a better attitude towards customer service for our stores and some of the people we had to deal with from grocery store level.  And it was a battle because I don't think my dad ever had any one of this sons to really stick around.  My older brothers were in and out of the business.  They really didn't have a desire.  My oldest brother [Robert Vaucresson, Jr.] wanted to be an opera singer.  So, he would work in the business but when he got a singing job, he would leave.  And then my other brother [Rene Vaucresson] he just really didn't, it wasn't for him.  He was most like my dad.  I think they butted heads the most.  They say when you're most like the person, you butt--.  So, he just didn't wanna have anything to do it.  So, when my dad and I got into business together, we fought and we brought one of our other cousins [Patricia Romain Newell] in to manager the office.  And I think we really, over time, just put together an organization that allowed him to back away a little bit more and to let me have a little more responsibility.  And a lot of our fights were basically just, you trying to do things in an older way, and me trying to do it in the right way, which was told to me by the department of agriculture [Louisiana Department of Agriculture and Forestry], and by the--our customers, how they wanted things done and things of that sort.  And I remember we had an inspector, Judy Voss, for the department of agriculture.  I mean, Judy as a hardnosed inspector.  I mean, when she walk in a plant, you would put our head down like, "Oh, she's gonna put us through it today."  Well, Judy came in one day, my dad was so scared.  Not scared, but he was nervous because he felt that they were, they were gonna make him do stuff that would slow the day or he'd have to--he didn't wanna do.  I never forget, Judy came in to inspect some product we had for a bid, for a bid coming up, and she opened up the case.  She said, "Open the case up."  And it was Italian sausage.  And she was looking at my dad.  My dad was fidgeting and everything.  And she said, "What's that?"  And he pointed to a piece of fat within the, just the texture of the sausage.  And my dad just blew up.  "Oh, Judy, there you go, you're trying to--why you messing with me?  Oh, I can't take this.  My nerves so bad, Judy, why you--?"  She said, "Mr. Vaucresson [Robert "Sonny" Vaucresson], calm down.  I just pointed to a piece of fat.  I just wanted to see what you were gonna say."  He says, "Oh, well, just deal with my son."  And from then on, my dad never dealt with the inspectors.  I dealt with the inspectors.  And I got to understand them, and know what their needs were.  And it allowed us have a working relationship so that we could just operate above and aboard their rules and not have an issue with the inspection service.
Story_ID: 638510
Speaker 1: And I guess, it started to show him [Vaucresson's father, Robert "Sonny" Vaucresson], he needed to back away.  He was kind of okay, I can't do any more for this business [Vaucresson Sausage Company, New Orleans, Louisiana].  Then, he kind of started letting me do things.  And then when he passed in '98 [1998] of a massive heart attack, I was doing a festival called the Alligator Festival [Alligator Festival of Louisiana] in Boutte, Louisiana.  I'll never forget, he came one morning, the last morning of the festival just to come check up on me.  And I got, and we got in an argument and I told him, "Why, why do you do this?  You show up to do what?"  He don't do anything; I do everything.  "You just coming to bug, to bother me.  Go home."  So, he kind of put his head down, and got in the car and left.  That was the last thing I said to my dad.  And I regret that 'cause he had a heart attack that day and died.  And me and my cousin [Patricia Romain Newell] we kept going, we kept the business going until Katrina [Hurricane Katrina].  And then Katrina really wiped us out.  We got flood waters up to five, six feet; all of our machinery, everything.  And that's when I leaned that I wasn't fully covered insurance wise.  I had about four policies dealing with an agent that we had dealt with, my dad dealt with his dad.  I was dealing with the son.  But the coverage was no--three of the four policies had flood exclusions.  And being that it was really flood that destroyed the place, those weren't applicable.  And then we didn't max out our flood insurance so we were pretty much in a lurch.  And then we evacuated.  We were living in a different city.  My wife [Julie Frederick Vaucresson] had a baby [Hilary Vaucresson].  She had complications after that.  She was in the hospital.  She then had four surgeries in a year.  It just really, in terms of getting the business back up and running, you know, there's a lot of stuff we didn't know what was going on down here.  I'm trying to take care of my family.  It was just really hard at the time.  And since then, it's been a hard time coming back.  You know, my wife still, she just had surgery recently.  Still trying to get her whole.  Trying to navigate through some of the issues in regards to really getting the business back up.  But we're, we're working on it.  We're getting there, so.
Story_ID: 638511
Speaker 1: Tell me your wife's name and when you got married.
Speaker 2: My wife's name is Julie Elza Frederick Vaucresson [Julie Frederick Vaucresson].  And we got married November 10, 2001.  Yes.  I think that's right.  I think I'm right.  Oh, well, if I win the prize.  I don't know.
Speaker 1: And your baby?
Speaker 2: My baby.  My--well, I have a, I have--my oldest son is, lives in Dallas [Texas] with his mother.  I have a son named Kyce Alain Vaucresson [Kyce Vaucresson].  He's nine.  He lives in Dallas.  And then my son with my wife Julie is seven, and his name is Vance Alain Vaucresson, II [Vance Vaucresson, II].  I didn't make him a junior.  But I call him V.J. so that I can't keep turning my head when somebody calls Vance.  And then I have a daughter, four years old.  She's Hilary Frederick Vaucresson [Hilary Vaucresson].
Story_ID: 638512
Speaker 1: I just want you just to--you kind of rushed through the Katrina thing [Hurricane Katrina].  And it really was devastating.  So, I want you to tell me the story about how you evacuated, and when you decided to evacuate and actually the extensive damage to, to your business [Vaucresson Sausage Company, New Orleans, Louisiana] and your home if it was damaged as well.
Speaker 2: You know, everybody went through Katrina had different stories who lived here.  For us in particular, we knew the storm was coming so all the cool heads convinced me to leave and go to New Iberia [Louisiana] by my, my wife's [Julie Frederick Vaucresson] people for the storm.  I wanted to stay.  I had a large order the next day to go out.  We were starting a school bid order and I had like ten thousand pounds of product in the freezer.  I was like I'm not going anywhere.  I'm a ride it through, like most people do and get ready to, you know, be--save my product from any spoilage or outage or anything else.  Well, when we, when we had to evacuate and we go there, we realized the extent of the damage--and, it took a while for us to really understand what was damaged because you couldn't really see.  We were trying use satellites to see our homes, we're trying to get information off the TV.  And we had evacuated and was staying in a house with, it was three bedroom house with fifteen people.  And my wife was five months pregnant [with Hilary Vaucresson], and I'll never forget that first night, we're staying in one of the rooms.  It was me, my wife, and my kids, and I'm laying on the floor 'cause I made sure my kids stayed in the bed and I just didn't, didn't know what was gonna happen next, like most people.  But after we assessed everything, we saw that we, we lost basically everything in the business; food was spoiled, all the equipment was affected by water.  We didn't get vandalized, but we really didn't have to.  I mean, it was enough damage.  We had other properties that we had owned that had received extensive damage that we had to then try to figure out plan on how to re- to, to rehab this property and get it back up and running.  But we couldn't do anything 'cause they wouldn't let us in the city for a very long time.  So, we really couldn't assess the whole damage for some months.  And then I had had a house fire a year before Katrina.  And I had left, we moved into my mother's [Geraldine Dave Vaucresson] home, my family, and we were like three weeks away from getting back in our house when Katrina hit.  And so, whatever I lost in the house fire, I definitely lost it in--at my mom's house 'cause my mom got ten feet of water, up the, to the roof.  So, everything in her house was gone.  But yet, where my house was being rebuilt, we only got six inches.  So, we, we eventually rebuilt our house and got back in our house.  My mother, we--I had to tear out her house.  We eventually tore it down and rebuilt a new house.  Any extended family, nephews, I mean, my brother-in-law, we had to get their house together.  So, it was--we stayed in New Iberia about two years.  And we bought a trailer out there and put it on some land that some family had, and we just basically rode it out.  My wife had her baby.  She had some complications afterwards.  She got sick.  We went back.  She had another surgery which then led to other surgeries, about four in a year.  So, it really put me in a position to try to figure out what I was gonna do.  It was more than just Katrina; it was a ripple effect that happened.
Story_ID: 638513
Speaker 1: Did you have a cousin who was working in the business [Vaucresson Sausage Company, New Orleans, Louisiana] as well?
Speaker 2: Yes.  My cousin, Patricia Romain Newell, she had joined the business a while back.  And she had worked with us maybe like fourteen years.  She was the backbone of the business, literally.  She kept, kept everything going in the office.  Really kept us going.  When we evacuated, everybody, she went to Texarkana, Texas with her family.  And, and she really, really took Katrina [Hurricane Katrina] hard; it affected her mentally.  She really was depressed, and even after she moved back into a property that my aunt had across the river which wasn't affected by the flood waters, she still wasn't happy.  She still wasn't comfortable.  She still suffering from, I guess, you would call posttraumatic stress syndrome, or deep depression, that she decided one day, that was it.  And she, she took her life and her two kids [Sean Newell and Ashley Newell] with her.  And it was something where we, I had seen her, I hadn't seen her in a long time and she met with us at my aunt's house in Slidell [Louisiana].  And she had never seen my daughter [Hilary Vaucresson].  And so, she came and I mean after hearing about all the stuff she was going through, she seemed so at peace at my aunt's house.  She held my daughter.  She just seemed so peaceful.  And then two days after that, that's when I got the call that she had just, she shot her two kids and then killed herself.
Story_ID: 638514
Speaker 1: So, did you reach out to some other companies to, to help you get started again in the business [Vaucresson Sausage Company, New Orleans, Louisiana]?
Speaker 2: Yes.  When we, when we were trying to participate in--New Orleans Jazz and Heritage Festival had called and said, "We're gonna have the festival no matter what.  We're gonna keep going."  And, I made, I wanted to make sure I stayed a participant.  I wanted to find, where could I make some product?  I didn't have any place to make anything at the time.  And, Patricia's husband knew of a guy who had a plant and they kind of mentioned my situation and he was receptive to talking with me.  So, I went to see him.  And, it's a guy named Jerry Hanford and he owns Crescent City Meats [Crescent City Meat Company] out in Metairie, Louisiana.  And, I told him my situation and he understood 'cause he had a hard time coming back.  He had some problems, losing his roof and losing product.  So, he says, "Hey," he's a good Christian man, he says, "you know what? At this time, we need to help each other even though we're competitors."  So, he helped me in regards to make--getting my product made.  And, just from the time of us being together and getting to know each other and really understanding, you know, where--what we did as businesses and our customers and what we try to accomplish.  We really got to know each other, became really good friends.  And, and he has really helped me to continue to make product.  He's even said, "Look, rather than making such an expenditure to get your own processing facility up, utilize mine until you can get to the next level."  So, I've continued to utilize his facility to make product that will enable me to get back in the stores and to do my festivals and to still sell to my customers.  So, it's really--and it wasn't just us.  They had other processors that teamed up with other processors who were in other cities in the, in the state to continue to make product.  And, it really spoke of just a really good--something in business you don't see.
Speaker 1: Well, that's great that--so, you see the business really coming back?
Speaker 2: Yes.  It's coming back.  I've been doing more festivals.  I'm working on getting back into the grocery stores, really getting, making plans to get back into a retail environment of my own with minimal prod- production on my own part to just service those people that wanna come into a facility that I had.
Story_ID: 638515
Speaker 1: Tell me about any organizations or civic groups that you might belong to or that your business [Vaucresson Sausage Company, New Orleans, Louisiana] is involved with?
Speaker 2: Well (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Personally or with your business.
Speaker 2: Well, for me personally, I'm a member of a fraternity called Alpha Phi Alpha Fraternity [Alpha Phi Alpha Fraternity, Inc.].  Obviously, there's a lot of things that we do to serve the community.  But, other things, I tend, I tend to look for groups that I have personal connection to.  A long time my business would partner and donate product to Project Lazarus [New Orleans, Louisiana], which is, it's a home where you have AIDS patients who, they're--pretty much don't have anywhere else to go.  Pretty much they've gone to where they're moving toward full blown AIDS [acquired immunodeficiency syndrome].  And, this is just a private place for them to go and live out their life in peace.  And, being that my brother, my oldest brother, Robert [Robert Vaucresson, Jr.], died of AIDS related renal failure at thirty-three from a homosexual lifestyle, I've always felt that, you know, I always wanted to serve within the community with AIDS patients, and also cancer patients.  So, those are two things personally that I've always tried to do my business by working--if there's a certain organization that's doing something to raise money for cancer, or for AIDS like the NO/AIDS Walk.  I would participate in the NO/AIDS Walk to raise money for the AIDS research.  Things of that sort--sort that would be an extension of my own family's experience.
Story_ID: 638516
Speaker 1: What is it that you have not done that you would like to do in your life?
Speaker 2: I would like to pursue my musical side.  I have some cousins that are accomplished musicians--jazz musicians, John Boutte and Lillian Boutte and, because of the musical, musical background that my [maternal] grandfather [John Dave, Sr.] had, and I have Kirk Joseph who's an established musician.  I'd really like to, I've written some music that's been recorded.  And, I'd like to do some performance on my own.  And, I think that's one thing that I would like to accomplish before I close my eyes.  It may not--I may not sell one unit, but at least it'll be, that would, that would be something I've done.  I'd also like to continue to work in the business [Vaucresson Sausage Company, New Orleans, Louisiana] and grow it to where it's not just a business where, of course, I wanna make money, but I also wanna affect the immediate community and really do something to educate people on the Creole community, our heritage and really be a cornerstone for not only the continuance of Creole culture but also the continuance of examples of Creole food product.
Story_ID: 638517
Speaker 1: In that sense, what would you like your legacy to be?
Speaker 2: I'd like my legacy to be that I was man who really appreciated his background and his culture.  And, in all aspects of life tried to show you an example of it, whether it was through my business [Vaucresson Sausage Company, New Orleans, Louisiana], whether it was through my interaction with people, through my own education of people about it.  As well as to help--to be one person that really tries to help to pass on a better and positive example to future generations.  If I can be a man who exhibits manhood to another young boy, if he can look at me and say, "I knew Mr. Vaucresson [HistoryMaker Vance Vaucresson].  And, Mr. Vaucresson helped me.  Mr. Vaucresson taught me, and Mr. Vaucresson showed me--," then I can close my eyes in peace.  As long as it's one boy that I affect.
Story_ID: 638518
Speaker 1: Is there anything that you would like to talk about that we did not speak about yet?
Speaker 2: You know, The HistoryMakers is something that I've heard of and I've gotten to become educated as to the people that you've interviewed through the many emails and websites and different things.  And, I thought that it was a great vehicle, something that we definitely would need in society.  I've heard of other groups doing things like this but I think that y'all have more of a long term mission to really document as much stuff as possible.  And, in being that, you know, we in New Orleans [Louisiana] suffered from Katrina [Hurricane Katrina] and have lost so much of our own history, I thought it was very important that, that what you're doing is, is an asset to our community.  I really feel that there's generations coming that really will not know where they came from if it wasn't for vehicles like this.  And, I really appreciate the opportunity to participate in something like this.
Speaker 1: Well, I thank you for taking the time out of your schedule to give us the history that we can leave for the future generations.  So, we appreciate you allowing us to come into your home.
Speaker 2: Thank you.
Story_ID: 638519
Speaker 1: This is my [maternal] grandfather, John Dave [John Dave, Sr.].
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.  Next one.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: (GERALDINE DAVE VAUCRESSON):  Your [maternal] great-grandmother, she was Mary Gautier Dave.
Speaker 2: This is my great-grandmother, Mary Gautier Dave.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.  Next one.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: This is my [maternal] grandmother, Lucille Moret [Lucille Moret Dave].
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  All right, next.  Okay.
Speaker 1: This is my father, Robert "Sonny" Vaucresson at the New Orleans Jazz and Heritage Festival.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Do you know which year, approximately?
Speaker 1: Approximately 1995.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.  Next one.
Speaker 1: This is my father, Robert "Sonny" Vaucresson and myself, [HistoryMaker] Vance Vaucresson at our plant in New Orleans, Louisiana, approximately 1993.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Do you know who the people in the picture are?
Speaker 1: This is my mother and father's wedding picture.  My father is in the center to the left, Robert Vaucresson, Jr. [sic.].  My mother's to the right in the center, Geraldine Dave Vaucresson.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: This is my great-great-grandmother on my mother's side.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: This is my great-great-grandmother on my mother's side.
Speaker 1: (GERALDINE DAVE VAUCRESSON):  No, your daddy's side.
Speaker 2: My--
Speaker 1: (GERALDINE DAVE VAUCRESSON):  I mean your mother's side, I'm sorry.  (Unclear).
Speaker 2: This is my great-great-grandmother on my mother's side, Mary Dutille Gautier [ph.].
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.  All right.
Speaker 2: This is my father in the center, Robert "Sonny" Vaucresson.  My oldest brother on the right, Robert Anthony Vaucresson, Jr. [Robert Vaucresson, Jr.]  And myself on the left, Vance Vaucresson, on the outside of our business, Vaucresson Sausage Company [New Orleans, Louisiana], approximately 1990.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.  All right.
Speaker 2: This is my father's grand- this is my [paternal] grandfather, Robert Levinsky Vaucresson.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 2: Picture on the left is a picture of my grandfather, Robert Levinsky Vaucresson, Sr. [sic.], and my father, Robert "Sonny" Vaucresson, Sr. as a young man, approximately in the 1940s.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  And the one on the right?
Speaker 2: And, on the right--
Speaker 1: (GERALDINE DAVE VAUCRESSON):  That's your two great aunts.
Speaker 2: A picture of my two great aunts, Cornelia Frances Townsend [ph.], on the left; and, Bertha Vaucresson Roussell on the right.  These were my father's aunts.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 2: This is a family portrait of my family.  My mother, Geraldine Dave Vaucresson; my father in the back, Robert Anthony Vaucresson, Sr.; on the front row left is Robert Anthony Vaucresson, Jr., my oldest brother.  That's myself in the middle, Vance Vaucresson.  And, on the right is my second oldest brother, Rene Andre Vaucresson [Rene Vaucresson].
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: Okay.  This is my wedding photo--I'm sorry, I apologize.  This is my wedding photo.  My wife Julie Elza Frederick Vaucresson [Julie Frederick Vaucresson] and myself, Vance Vaucresson, approximately, November 10, 2001.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  All right.  You ready?
Speaker 1: All right.  This is my mother, Geraldine Dave Vaucresson with my two children, Hilary Frederick Vaucresson [Hilary Vaucresson] and Vance Alain Vaucresson, II [Vance Vaucresson, II].
