Story_ID: 192466
Speaker 1: My name is Julieanna Richardson, I'm the interviewer.  And Scott Stearns is the videographer, and Samuel Vance is observing.  And I want to start out, we're gonna slate it at first, the interview.  So, I need to have you start out by stating your name and spelling it for us, including middle name and your date of birth.
Speaker 2: My name is Valarie, Omega, middle name, Justiss, my maiden name, which I use as my middle name now, Vance.  And that's V-A-L-A-R-I-E, I spell it with two a's rather than two e's as most people do; Omega, O-M-E-G-A, and Justiss, J-U-S-T-I-S-S, and the last name is Vance.  Most people spell it J-U-S-T-I-C-E, all of our relatives did.
Speaker 1: And your date of birth?
Speaker 2: Oh yes, I'm sorry. January 7, 1913.
Speaker 1: You know, we, the dog cannot bark.  Well, he can bark, but--And can I have today's date?
Speaker 2: Yes, today is Thursday, the 22nd of April, 2004.
Speaker 1: And our location?
Speaker 2: This is at my home, 1433 West Hines Street in Santa Ana, California.
Speaker 1: And your occupation?
Speaker 2: Retired social worker.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 192467
Speaker 1: --I ask five questions of everyone.  They're a little People magazine-ish, short answers.  I'd like to know what your favorite food is.
Speaker 2: My favorite fruit?
Speaker 1: Food.
Speaker 2: Food. Well, I guess my favorite food is, maybe I shouldn't be saying, but its watermelon.  (Laughter).
Speaker 1: No problem saying that.  Your favorite time of year?
Speaker 2: My favorite time of year would have to be during the summer when it's warm.
Speaker 1: Favorite color?
Speaker 2: Green.
Speaker 1: Favorite place to vacation?
Speaker 2: That would be the Virgin Islands, St. Thomas, particularly.
Speaker 1: And favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: My favorite phrase or saying?  I guess it's, God willing.  Whenever I do anything or promise to do something, I always say, "God willing."
Story_ID: 192468
Speaker 1: I'd like to start out by asking you to give me, you know, information about your mother.  I'd like to have her name, and what you know about her family and her growing up.
Speaker 2: All right.  My mother's name was Beatrice Ann Price.  Her father was Mose Price, not Moses, but Mose, M-O-S-E, Price.  He was a farmer, and a very successful farmer.  He had been a slave, of course, and was freed under President [Abraham] Lincoln's Emancipation Proclamation of January 1st, 1865.  And at the time he met my grandmother, he was just a little over eleven years of age.  But slaves, male slaves, were considered adults at eleven, whereas female slaves were considered adults at nine.  And he had a nice working relationship and agreement with his owner, who was a medical doctor.  And that's the reason why we know his birthdate to be March 8, 1864.  And we could figure his date of departure from that.  He died March 6, 1920, and would have been, I'd like to say sixty-five, but he just didn't make it.  He was very prosperous.  And the agreement he worked out with his employer after he was freed was that he was to receive 25 cents a day for the normal ten to twelve hour day of work, or sun-up to sundown, plus three acres of land every week.  And every so often--determined by the master I'm sure--an animal, a work animal.  I don't know too much more about my grandmother.  Maybe the best thing I know about her is just looking at her picture over in a book that was published several years ago.  And unlike most books published by the white gentry, a black person would not have been mentioned.  But because she was the color of a sheet of paper, and it was known that her master was her father, she was given three or four pages in this book, 'Heroes and Pioneers of Titus County, Texas'.  She was not from a big family, as one would expect, for slaves who--or people who had been part of the slave system and didn't know anything about family planning.  She came from a family of four, well, there wer three, a family of three.  And my grandfather came from a family of four, but they had a family of eight, six girls and two boys.  And all of them married off well.  But only my mother went on for a considerable education.  It was my grandfather's feeling that the boys needed as much education as possible, but the girls would be housewives.  Women in those days were held not to have any marketable skills, as many of them are today, occupation housewife.  But my mother said what was good enough for the boys, she thought was good enough for her.  So that she went on to school.
Story_ID: 192469
Speaker 1: When each one married, each girl, he [Vance's grandfather, Mose Price] would give her a home that was already paid for, because he knew that the average--we were called colored in those days--the average colored man did not have the money or the resources to build or furnish or even to start his children in life.  And so, for that reason he felt it was better that he start them off with a home.  But just after that--my father [Jacob Justiss] was possibly the most learned of men around there.  And he had the house, which my mother [Beatrice Ann Price] came to on her wedding night, built--a big five-room house in those days, it was a big house.  And compared to what they had in slavery, it was a tremendous amount of property.  And so, that was the sort of thing that Mother carried over into her own adult life, because she wanted to give each one of her girls--and she had three girls and a boy--a house that she had bought and paid for.  I think it's a good gift, if you can afford a house in today's market.  Right, now the houses such as this one, this house is valued at four hundred and some thousand dollars.  I could get that much for it in Santa Ana, California today.  However, I only paid about a total of sixty thousand for this house, and the house which I built for my son right behind this house.  And mother married at about eighteen or nineteen, which was unusually late for most of the girls in the area.  But there again, she had gone to school and had taught for a while.  For some reason, and I don't know in what manner, her ability--not necessarily she couldn't control the students so that they were no longer behavior problems--because I hate the word control.  But she had established some sort of a rapport, a working relationship, with students, particularly the boys, and she was intolerant of behavior that just didn't measure up.  And so, she always taught the classes for the boys who were maybe incorrigible.  And she was able to carry on into her own adult life the same type of authoritarian approach that she had when she was teaching school.
Speaker 2: Now where did she teach, ma'am?
Speaker 1: This was down in Texas.
Story_ID: 192470
Speaker 1: --How do you know so much about your family, your mother's [Beatrice Ann Price] side of the family?
Speaker 2: And so little about my father's [Jacob Justiss] side.  Maybe it was in the personality of the two parents.  My mother was gregarious.  She came from a family in which there was a great deal of interaction, whereas my father was something of a loner.  Not only that, he was very studious, and therefore, since he had to make certain contributions of that twenty-five cents a day that his mother earned, he didn't have an opportunity to go out and be with the boys, as you would say.  And mother's family was always visiting her from the country.  She was a country girl from Cookville, Texas, whereas my father's family grew up in town.  And whereas her father was wealthy with his eight children, and on his side they were not wealthy--again, with eight children, but just a difference--six girls and two boys in mother's family, but six boys and two girls in my father's family.  And we actually never got to know all of papa's family the way we did all of mother's family, because they were always back and forth visiting us.
Story_ID: 192471
Speaker 1: What do you know about your father [Jacob Justiss] and his family.  What, I know you know the number that were there, but do you know anything about their background?
Speaker 2: No, I can't say that I do.  I'll say one thing.  They were tall, handsome men.  And my father was only 5'11 and a half.  And he had brothers who were 6'2, 6'3, 6'4.  And yet the youngest child was just down there at about 5'7 or '8.  My father was the one who went to school, and surprisingly enough in that little town, took the newspaper which came in from Dallas [Texas], The Dallas Times.  And it is recalled by members of the community that was he who announced the sinking of the Titanic on April the 12th, 1912, because he had the newspaper, in the absence of television and radio and cable.  And that was the sort of thing that not only set him apart, but made him a target for certain people who weren't interested in seeing too much progress for people who were definitely their inferiors when it came to the law, and who just didn't have the means to be subscribers to a paper like that.  And so, my father, in terms of the profession which I chose--you know, we have the ego, the super ego, and the id.  My father had a very well-developed super ego, of wanting to advance, of wanting to know what was going on, and that sort of thing.  And to an extent, a meager extent, he was allowed to, say, attend some of the affairs around there.  If somebody came to Dallas to speak, he might go into Dallas, and so on.  But his, his siblings actually didn't go in for the law, or anything else, as he did.  One of my uncles recalls my father always saying to him, "Fella, you ought to read the newspaper."  And he was saying, "Well, I can read yours."  But of course, he lived in town, and Papa had lived for a long time in the country.  But later on, we did move to the town, and the uncle had an opportunity to read my father's newspaper.  And Papa talked about what went on in the world.  He was studying to be a lawyer.  And the tortuous process they had of achieving that kind of lost its status.  And so, he just kept up with everything because of all the--definitely response to the everyday concerns of people.
Story_ID: 192472
Speaker 1: Now, how did your parents [Beatrice Ann Price and Jacob Justiss] meet?
Speaker 2: That's always been one of these things that we wondered about.  But they both met when they were in school.  Mother's father [Mose Price] was well enough off to send her to school, although he very much wanted her to stay at home like the rest of them.  But my father was able to pay his own way in school by cleverly picking up all of the coal and the seeds, the cotton seeds that were thrown off the trains as they came to Mount Pleasant [Texas].  And he was warned that he wasn't supposed to pick up those seeds, you know, the seeds from cotton.  Because this was a cotton area, such as it is not now.  And he was just to leave them there, but he couldn't believe that they wanted them swept up and done away with, when it would be so useful to him.  And so, he had been picking up the seeds for a long time.  And all of these he saved until it was time to enter school.
Speaker 1: Now, Mount Pleasant, is it, how far away is it from Dallas?  You mentioned Dallas, I mean--
Speaker 2: Not too many miles, really.  And the only we judged that was the fact that once you had a horse, and you continually had a certain route, the horse would remember.  If you fell asleep and didn't give him directions, he just kept on until he got home.  And the same was true of this horse, because he made trips to Dallas so frequently.  He knew the route from Dallas to Mount Pleasant.  And it facilitated my father's visiting my mother, because he was in town, and she was out in the country in Cookville, Texas.  Then, as now, people made fun of the folks from the country, the country bumpkins, the "Saturday boys," you know, because they came in to sell their produce and other things on Sabbath.
Story_ID: 192473
Speaker 1: Your siblings, let's establish them, who your siblings were.
Speaker 2: I have--my siblings?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: I have three siblings: my sister, Marie, who was born October the 16th, 1911.  And then my sister, Juanita, who is right behind me, was born October 25, 1914.  And my brother, Jacob [Justiss, Jr.], who was born May 2, 1919.  One other little fact that you didn't ask me about with regard to them--early on, my mother [Beatrice Ann Price] was interested in family planning.  Because between the birth of my sister, Marie, the oldest of the three girls, and my younger sister, who died just two years ago on the 26th, Mother liked to point out that from October 16th, 1911, Marie's birthday, to October 25th, 1914, Juanita's birthday, is a lapse of three years and nine days.  And actually, she had a baby every year for three days.  (Laughter).  And she told us that early on.  And at the time, I didn't appreciate the fact that, see, the quality of education was as good as it was, and yet it left much to be desired.  But at the same time, it didn't include such advanced courses as family planning.  And many of the home ec [economics] courses don't do that even today.   And so she just got caught, as they say, in this haste to have all their children at one time, in a little package, so that the first one, Marie, the oldest girl, and the last girl, who also was born in October, that there would be this very great closeness.  And I think my mother for the rest of her life suffered with what people called in those days, female problems, because she had her children so close together.
Speaker 1: You think that was the reason?
Speaker 2: There were some people who gave credence to that.  I don't know whether it was the reason or not.
Story_ID: 192474
Speaker 1: You lived in Mount Pleasant [Texas]?
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: Until you were six years old, right?
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: Now, what, what was the, what caused your family to move to Toledo [Ohio]?
Speaker 2: It was the oppressive nature of Negro/white relationships.  Now, that's not what caused them to move to Toledo; that's what caused them to move to Lima, Ohio before they moved to Toledo.  But he [Jacob Justiss] was still thinking in terms of the South.  And so much opposed was he to the social conditions that he always referred to the South as the "low down dirty South."  I thought "low down and dirty" was part of the name for a long time, (laughter), until I realized that people who are not too fond of the New York Yankees called them "damn Yankees."  And people thought "damn Yankees" was part of the name, too.  But it was that.  And then there had been a situation which caused us a great deal of heartsick.  One of my mother's cousins had been shot dead by the owner of his small home, right on the courthouse steps.  And as far as we knew there was never any procedure, or justice, to bring someone to justice for having killed him.  They felt that the unfortunate tenant who had felt that he had paid for his house, had not paid for it, and therefore he should not have insisted that he had.  He came in to make his payment to the real estate office.  The man was a lawyer, a real estate man.  And he said, "Just think, I won't be coming back here to see you anymore," he said, "because I'll be through."  He said, "I'll own that house."  And he said, "No, you won't," and so on and so on.  And then my cousin was more persistent and insistent.  He said, "I can go home and get you the papers."  He said, "But you can't bring any papers that will say that."  But he knew he could, and he came in and brought them.  And then he said the lawyer, the agent, real estate agent said, "But I said that you couldn't prove it.  I don't care what those papers say."  And my cousin was said to have become a little uppity.  But there was never an attempt on the part of the lawyer to pay him, or to say "Let's take it to court."  It was on the part of my, it was on the part of my cousin to hold out, "Yes, I paid for it."  And this other man is saying, "No."  And as it was reported down to my father, following his murder right there on the courthouse steps, "Now, Jake," my father's name was Jacob, "you know, you've lived here long enough to know that you can't talk to us white men the same way you talk to colored men.  You can't tell us we're wrong, because we're always right down here."  And my father said that was the only thing that kept him from having left Texas long before then, because he just felt that they would see the wrongness of their actions, and attempt to change or want to change.  But they didn't.
Story_ID: 192475
Speaker 1: So, who was in, I want to say Lima, Ohio?  Who was there, and how did your family end up choosing Lima, Ohio?
Speaker 2: Well, my father [Jacob Justiss] probably had--oh, yes, how he chose Lima was because during the War, World War I [WWI], my father had seen some service.  And he knew from the young men who were in service that Lima was a great place to stay.  Now, this is the same type of delusion that girls over in Europe fell for when they met boys from the [United] States-- each one lived in a virtual mansion and had everything, and so on.  And the girls were eager to come to the United States.  But when they got over here, they found a one or two-room shack with no inside facilities, or anything of that sort.  And by that time they would have become disenchanted with the United States, and so on.  Well, at that point, that's so many of us social workers stepped in to help them understand the--well, just to understand the United States, and the pride these kids had in their hometown.
Speaker 1: Now but, so you stayed in Lima.  How long did the family stay in Lima?
Speaker 2: We got to Lima in October, 1919.  And we moved to Toledo [Ohio] in June, 1920.
Speaker 1: So, you weren't there very long, not even a year?
Speaker 2: No.  We knew nothing virtually about Lima.  My grandmother, my paternal grandmother and I possibly knew more about it than anybody else, because of a mishap.  She'd always fished all of her life.  And so, she wanted to go fishing, and had been told where it was and so on.  And she said, "Come on, let's go, Valarie."  I said, "Okay."  And without telling anybody, and without knowing anything about Lima and its streets, we set out to go fishing.  And we did fish for a small part of the afternoon.  And then as we saw it was getting a little dark and we were quite a ways from home, we decided we would go on our way back.  And that's the point at which I made an observation, to never again go fishing or going away from home without letting folks know where we are, and how we're going to get there, and what time they could expect us.  And--
Speaker 1: So, you almost got lost?
Speaker 2: We didn't almost; we did.  We did get lost, and we just kept asking different people.  And the amazing thing is that Lima is such a small town, that each person was giving us directions, it seemed, from his knowledge of where we lived, and sometimes in a helpful gesture, that's all it was.  They said, "I'm sure that if go down this block and you turn here, and then you turn there, you will find the place."  And we didn't get home until a little after the police had set up a station, and directed all calls, "If you see these two people, a small seven-year old girl and a very elderly grandparent with her, please send, try to hold them," and so on.  And it would have been wonderful if we had done that, but we couldn't.  Because it was getting too dark, and we figured every moment of additional darkness would be hazardous to our getting home, and recognizing anything which might be valuable for future excursions.  But that night we went out, and we never went again, fishing, the two of us together.
Story_ID: 192476
Speaker 1: Toledo [Ohio] is where the family ended up.  So, it's your mother [Beatrice Ann Price] and father [Jacob Justiss] and four girls [sic, three girls and one boy] then, you know, go to Toledo.  Where do you live in Toledo?
Speaker 2: It's an old place called 741 Chiswell [ph.] Street in Toledo, Ohio.  And it's interesting, because it was near the tracks in the days when the trains came through.  And at the same time, it's only two blocks from, as they say out there, the mighty Maumee River [Ohio].  Now, I'd like make a little preface about this place, because we lived on Chiswell Street, 741 Chiswell Street.  And the former occupants of the house were named Chiswell, because they were part of that legendary Chiswell people.  And they must have had somewhat good funds, because they had a well-developed inside bathroom.
Story_ID: 192477
Speaker 1: We were very fortunate.  Because my brother [Jacob Justiss, Jr.] came down with infantile paralysis, and we were fortunate, that after being sick for two years with infantile paralysis, when he recovered he had no residual crippling, which was unusual.  And so, we felt that we were very blessed at that time just to have that.  But then shortly thereafter when he was only a year old, March 6, 1920, my grandfather died.  And see, my brother had been born May 2, 1919.  My grandfather died, and we had no money to go back, or anything of that sort, you know, to the funeral and so on.  But he passed, and different matters occurred.  And it was a great blessing to us, because he got intestate, and nobody in the Justiss family or the Price family since that day has ever died intestate. Because they had such a ramble, and there was so much hard feelings because there was no will, and everybody wanted everything.  My grandmother wanted the two boys in the family and the youngest girl to have everything.  And there were folk equally as adamant that they not have it, and that they just divide it and take eight equal parts.  That was all there was to that.  We lived in that house [in Toledo, Ohio], and then years later, oh, maybe five years later, everybody had inside facilities.  We were the most popular kids on the street, because we did have those facilities.  It's so interesting.  There would be a house right across the street from us.  And one over there. And their parents would call them when it was time for the evening meal.  "Mrs. Justiss, may I use your bathroom?"  They lived right across the street.  But the novelty of just, you know, being able to flush the john (laughter).  And every time they'd leave, even if we had paper this big, the roll of paper, everything was just gone, because they just enjoyed the whole process (laughter).
Story_ID: 192478
Speaker 1: I want you to take yourself back--
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: --to that house and that neighborhood [in Toledo, Ohio].  And I'd like you to think about what sights, smells and sounds remind you of growing up there.
Speaker 2: Well, for most of the time, we were the only African-American family on the street.  There had been another family, but the mother had died during surgery, and everyone had attributed her death to fright of going under the knife.  But years later when several other deaths occurred just like that, we found out that it was due to the fact that they had a trace of sickle cell, or either they had the sickle cell themselves.  And so, you need just more oxygen when you have sickle cell surgery.  So, you want me to say what was it like growing up in that community?
Speaker 1: I want to know, if you think about what--let's start with smells.  What smells remind you of growing up?
Speaker 2: Well, almost everybody on the street was Catholic except the man next door and our family, and that other African-American family that lived there for a short while.  And many of them, particularly one family across the street, the father was not a Catholic, but he had seven children.  And the mother were, and his sisters, you know.  And what he would do, every time you saw him, you thought of dandelion greens, because when the dandelions began to grow, he'd call us over.  "Now, I'll give you a dollar," big money, "if you'll pick me a whole bushel of dandelion greens."  Well, if we'd been thinking, we would have known that just putting them down there would be the answer that we ought to press them down.  And when we pressed them down, it would be maybe two or three bushels or baskets (laughter).  And he always acted, particularly on Friday or Saturday evenings, as though he'd had a great time already.  And another smell in that neighborhood, and one which even now I wish I had, was the smell of bread coming from the bakery.  Now, that was before the days of sliced bread.  Now we lived, let's see, we lived near Utah Park, six blocks from the bakery.  And I kid you not, when that bread came out of the oven, as far away as we were, six blocks, we could literally smell it.  There's nothing that smells better than baked white bread.  And you knew it was time, about twelve o'clock, when the big baking was over.  Because if you got out in the street, everybody was running to go and get the bread.  Now, of course, we didn't have pre-sliced bread, and you had to take a knife and just saw it.  And we'd have a slice about this big, when it was over.  (Laughter).  But there was nothing that smelled so good, tasted so good, as that bread.  And we'd just have it just stacked with butter, and it was hot.  I can remember running down to get our loaf, and running all the way back.  So, by the time that I got back, it was still hot.  And we put--I just wish I could pick up some even now.  But by the time we get to the grocery store, the day is well-spent and the bread is gone.  And they baked all night and so on.  But that was one smell that tied me to the community.
Story_ID: 192479
Speaker 1: I think a third smell originated there in grade school [Navarre School, Toledo, Ohio].  The weather was so bad in Toledo [Ohio].  It was not unusual for you to be going to school at eight, ten, and twelve below zero.  So, the school system still wanted us to go out and play.  We had to go out and play, as though it were just a comfortable spring day.  But you would be so cold, and I was cold and frozen every morning that I came to school.  I would leave home as well-dressed and equipped as my other three siblings.  But as the day, as the morning wore on, and I was standing out there waiting to be admitted to the school--all because my mother [Beatrice Ann Price] had a real fetish about being on time.  And she just couldn't stand anybody, tolerate anybody who couldn't get there on time.  So by the time we'd get there and the doors were ready to be opened, I had already been standing out quite a while, and I was very, very cold.  So, what they decided they would do, the PTA [Parent-Teacher Association] would sell a cup of hot chocolate for five cents.  I think it was about 25 cents a week, your total coffe, plus one or two graham crackers.  Now, I know that part of this is the overlay of childhood, and talking about by-gone days.  But in those days, a cup of hot chocolate and a cup of graham crackers (unclear) just meant everything to you.  Now, some people say that maybe we shouldn't have been subjected to these intensely hot side dishes before we could be there and actually settle ourselves, and get it sort of integrated into our system.  It would do us better than going out there and suddenly bursting out into cold air, you know.  But it always worked just like that.  And I would actually wake up in the morning longing for ten o'clock to come for recess, so I could get my cup of hot chocolate.  (Laughter).  So, these are the things I think that--  One other thing.  Right around from our house was a potato chip factory.  Now, I have a pressure problem now, which may have had its origin from those potato chips. (Laughter).  And if the potato chips were, say, about a week old, they'd--I'm sorry, I never had so much coughing, stand by.  And so every day, there would always be some out there, potato chips.  See, the potato chips of say, Monday--and this is now Friday--would be out there on Tuesday and then next day for Saturday, and so on.  We loved them.  Never did potato chips taste so good.  That's the thing about childhood, things can be very, very--they can be touted always at the supreme level.  But that started a lifelong passion for potato chips.
Story_ID: 192480
Speaker 1: Can you describe your family life, I mean what it was like, and what your parents [Beatrice Ann Price and Jacob Justiss]--or just some memories of growing up in Toledo [Ohio] or--?
Speaker 2: Yes, it was a very close-knit family.  And I can say without being challenged that while both of them were wonderful parents, never should the two of them have married.  But Mother was extremely gregarious, and my father was a loner.  He was a member of Church of the Living God, and Mother was a Baptist.  And my entire childhood, I don't believe he attended church four times that I can remember.  And he was supremely critical of the Baptist church, because the people there were real peasants, they'd all immigrated from the South.  As one member would come up and get a job, and if there was a vacancy he'd immediately tell the employer he had a man for the job, and so on.   And so, they lived lives that were rather disorderly, outwardly very religious, but inwardly--because they had left with varying ones' husbands and wives, and that sort of thing.  My father liked to quote the minister. And the whole neighborhood--now, let's see here.  There were two whole blocks that you could say in that neighborhood were given over to church members.  And there were a few hold-outs who went to church elsewhere.  So, the central figures in that area was the church and its minister.  And the minister was fond of making predictions, and my father was equally fond of quoting him.  And we'd have these big December 31st meetings at the end of the year.  You know, what do we call them?  Watch night services.  And our preacher would have a favorite prediction that my father would get a big belly laugh out of every time he remembered them, and would quote them.  "I predict that people will die this year who never died before."  (Laughter).  So, the first person who died, "He said it, he said it."  Now, the logic of the thing never occurred to people, but to my father it best indicated who they were and how they felt.  And that church, even though there were people who were like my father, members of other churches never--Methodist--but this was a Baptist church, was the central focus of that neighborhood, it really was.
Story_ID: 192481
Speaker 1: But at the same time, this man from Georgia had always been accustomed to going all over Georgia.  So that, when he came to Toledo [Ohio] he wanted to go all over Ohio and attend the conventions and the associations.  And he knew all the places.  For instance, he would talk about these little towns which were about the size of this board here.  One of them was Waycross, Georgia.  And I remember an occasion in biology class, this girl had come in from Waycross, Georgia.  And she was immediately recognized as not one of the elite.  And the biology teacher said, "Now, where are you from?"  "I'm from Waycross, Georgia."  Well, that was impertinence, as far as our teacher-- I don't care to know directions, because if I want to get there, I can ask somebody else.  "So, where are you from?"  "I said "Waycross, Georgia."  (Laughter.)  And here she was, she didn't want to be associated with me, the top student.  And she's white and I'm black.  You know, she had these feelings, and it seemed as though the teacher was anxious to push us together.  Now, in our home--I'm getting back to where you said what was it like growing up?  You had my father [Jacob Justiss], who didn't attend church six times the whole time I was growing up.  And yet, he would tell the time that he was a member of The Church of the Living God, something of a splintered church from the Pentecostal church.  Mother [Beatrice Ann Price], of course, was a member of the Baptist church.  And she was there every Sunday, but he was scarcely there.  If he attended four Sundays the whole time I was growing up, I would say that that was an over-statement.  Now, Mother was a strict disciplinarian, and my father was rather passive.  And Mother was a disciple of the, spare the rod and spoil the child.  So, never would that be said about her, because she could jump you for sometimes the most simple things.  And my oldest sister was the type was always the watchman for the whole family, you see, so that she would be whipped and beaten, and stuff of that sort.  But later on as I studied psychiatry, I realized that she was the type of person who had a need to see people suffer.  And if you have people like that who are teachers or in law enforcement, the ordinary man would have a hard time staying there.  It was the type of church--family in which we had chores, everybody had chores.  Let's see, it was the type of home--my mother was really the queen of the family.  My father would come home every day from his job and go out and pick some crawlers, and be on his way in a matter of minutes to go fishing.  And he went fishing every night unless it was raining and it was too difficult for fishing.  But Mother would care less, and would say, "I don't know what you get out of just sitting out there looking at the creek," she'd say creek every time.  And my father would respond, "You'd be surprised how you can settle problems, and how you can get away from bitterness and things of that sort."  And he would go for a long time.  They were not on speaking terms, but shared the same bedroom.  I was unaware that they actually had separated, but were living together for the benefit of the children.  I think our lot might have been a little better if my father had a stronger, more firm hand in our rearing.
Story_ID: 192482
Speaker 1: Was education stressed?
Speaker 2: The heart and soul of everything.  For instance, when we'd come home from school, "Mother [Beatrice Ann Price], what do you want us to do?"  And she'd say, "Hit the books."  And we didn't have any work to do, because she wanted us to excel.  And she always had these cards, these little place cards, so that you could excel in math.  And then she had the cards with, it was words and their meaning.  And the fact that they stressed education could be seen from the fact that from day one, I was told that I was to get a PhD degree.  The girls older than I, and the girls younger, both had master's degrees, and my brother had a doctorate.  But that's about the way my mother would want it.  She'd been a teacher herself, and my father [Jacob Justiss] had studied law.  So, she couldn't understand why we didn't help our friends to understand a little bit better about schooling.  For instance, a girl in the neighborhood who had a fantastic ability to cause people to laugh--she should have been a stand-up comic.  The difference between our ages was a matter of six days.  She was born January 1, and I was born on January 7.  And she was always saying, "Oh, why do you go to school so much?"  And Mother would say, would respond, "If you stay home, you'll find that your mind is the devil's workshop," you know.  Now, they talked education.  And my father possibly had more books in his personal library than any of the teachers that we had in the school.  For instance, he had a degree, but in our school you could teach with two years of normal, as they would call it in those days.  We were infused with education.  I can tell you that when I was no more than four years of age, I knew the difference between "their," the possessive, and "there" meaning place.  Now, Mother had taught us that.
Story_ID: 192483
Speaker 1: I can recall an incident with my grandmother.  She had come to visit from the country, of course.  She had all of her children off, married and so on.  And she was just talking; she had no education herself.  And she said, "I 'sot' there, meaning I 'sat' there."   Well, Mother [Beatrice Ann Price] had taught me better.  So, I said, "Grandma, it's not 'sot' it's 'sat.'"  And the words had scarcely gotten out of my mouth before she was over there beating up on me, and my head was hitting the little, about that size, washbowl in the kitchen for us to wash our hands when we came in from outside, and it stood just about that high.  And I'm correcting her English, and she came over and hit me, and hit me well.  And Mother said in a compromising way, which I didn't appreciate at the time, "No, Grandmother, they know better, but they're here, and they'd like you to join in with everybody else."  And of course, Mother didn't feel the same way, because the boys hadn't been feeding her.  They would get their food, they'd get everything.  And Mother just had the feeling that unless you emphasized education--and my father was the same way--as much as you emphasized the rest of your life, you weren't getting anyplace.  My father says that his mother worked for twenty-five cents a day.  When she'd come in every evening she'd hand him the quarter, and said, "Buy a book," and then they they'd go out and forage for food.  And of course, you see, he was born in 1882, and they had been freed in 1865, just seventeen years.  And they very seldom bought anything from the grocer, except that flour and meal and salt and pepper, things of that sort.  But somehow, if he didn't find a book that he liked, he would stash the money and then they'd go fishing.  And once in a while, you'd find vegetables which were growing up; I think they called them growing free.  Nobody had actually planted them, but maybe they'd been fertilized by what would that have been--bees, and things of that sort.  And they seldom ever went to the store to buy anything, because everything was for education, for the book.
Story_ID: 192484
Speaker 1: As a young person, what did you want to do, and what were you like?
Speaker 2: Well, because I'd been told from day one that I was to get a Ph.D. in school, I looked forward to that.  And because I liked to read--we had a public library, a division of the public library in our public schools.  Now, you're rarely going to see that.  As a matter of fact, I'd like to pay tribute to that public school, and maybe to the system.  It was a new building that we went into in September, 1920.  And that had followed that disastrous school fire in Cleveland, Ohio two years before, in which almost every child burned to death.  You see, the doors opened this way in, instead of pushed out.  And that's the reason why all public buildings, from time that on, the doors must push out rather than push in.  So the kids were all piled up there against the door, and the door couldn't open because it pushed in, and they needed to push out.  So, there was this new building, and it had all the amenities.  For instance, slate or some other element was used wherever wood was called for to be used.  For instance, we had a public library division right there in that school with hundreds and hundreds and hundreds of books.  You'd just leave your class and go right on down to the public library, right there in the school.  We had a regulation gym, and of course, all the home ec [home economics], and all that sort of thing.  And one of the things I liked so much about the home economics class, everybody had an opportunity to cook a meal, and then come and eat the meal and show how well you observed how you sat at the table, and what your behavior was, things of that sort.  Because you see, we were in a neighborhood which drew from southern Europeans, Hungarians, Bulgarians, and people of that sort.  And it was so different, just to see them eat, you know.  They'd be eating there with their fingers, just stoking it in, as it were.  We also had industries in that school.  I was in the bee industry, and it just cost me forty cents to be in there.  And we had bees, and the bees, of course, would give off honey.  And just as you got a statement and you earned something from the stock market--I earned two combs of honey on my payment, you see.  (Laughter).  And then we had--down in the basement, all the paper we brought in was used either to make a high grade of paper with rag content, or used along with the play that was, an original play that was made up by our teachers to buy nothing but original art.  Now here in my house, I have some forty-odd pieces of art.  But other than items of social protest, everything's original.
Story_ID: 192485
Speaker 1: Now, with some you can say more--she's "more beautiful," but you can't say she's "more better."  And that particular day he [Vance's father, Jacob Justiss] was with my favorite, watermelon, he was cutting so nicely, he was an artist about anything like that.  And I'm just entertaining him, hopping up and down and talking to my favorite parent.  And I said, "It's more better." And he laid down the knife, grabbed me, "How can I make you know that it isn't 'more better,' it's 'better?'"  The only other time he spanked me was the night before I left for college, at eighteen.  Now, obviously, we didn't have enough money for me to go to college, and my sister and I were both in the same grade.  My sister was a little slow, and Mother [Beatrice Ann Price] didn't start her in school until she started me.  And so she was always older than other people.  And then I said, "Well, I'm willing to work."  Well, I had no experience with college, so how did I know that one really couldn't work off all the college expenses, but I showed my (unclear) willingness.  And they kept discussing about how my grades would go down.  I graduated in second place in grade school and second place in high school, too.  And I was second place in college incidentally.  And so, Mother said, "Do you want that?"  And Papa said, "You could probably always take college in five or six years.  It's not mandatory that you finish in four years, but it's a four year college."  Finally, it occurred to me, I said, "You must remember, I didn't ask to come here."  Now, my mother could become very active with anything of a sexual nature.  And of course, in those days I didn't know it took two to tango myself, until it was--And my father was looking in one of his law books, he was looking up something.  I said, "If I were in this case, I'd be arguing this case," and so on.  "Mother, did you hear that?"  Finally, it occurred to him what I had said.  He laid down that book and hopped to me and grabbed me, and he went into me.  Mother was a stern disciplinarian.  I got a beating almost every day in school, from what my sister, Marie, would say that I had done.  Now, if you're making all As, how much time do you have to fool around and cause discontent?  And yet, even when--in one of my classes, I wrote better than the teacher, and she had me writing all the assignments on the board.  Now, somehow, Marie's going to get a little something out of that, and so I got spanked.  But, you see, a previous teacher in the second grade was so fond of writing, that twenty-one of us in the class got A in Palmer certificates.  And when I'd bring my work home from school, my father said, "I don't want to see that.  I want to see what you did.  Don't bring me the teacher's writing."  And they were really incompatible.  They lived together until my brother was twenty-one, and the moment he was twenty-one, my father felt he could leave home.  But he might as well say he had left home already, because he was there every night.  They never even spoke to each other.  If there were visitors, they might speak.  But the moment the visitors left, tightened up.
Story_ID: 192486
Speaker 1: How was it decided that you were gonna go to Howard [University, Washington, D.C.]?
Speaker 2: Oh. Now, you have launched me on one of my favorite stories.  (Laughter) One of our ministers, the Reverend Jackson C. Taylor [ph.], pastor of the Friendship Baptist Church [Toledo, Ohio], was in the Ford Theater [Washington, D.C.] the night [President Abraham] Lincoln was shot.  He was, well, he wasn't inside the theater, he was out in the yard where people would be parking their cars.  They left their animals there, and he was tending his master's animal.  When John Wilkes Booth ran by with the gun, you know, waving it, he learned later that the president had been killed.  Well, now, Reverend, Mr. Taylor liked to tell that story, and he liked to say that Frederick Douglass was always a visitor in his home, and things of that sort.  Every Lincoln's Day, that was part of the real tradition in Toledo [Ohio] schools, to hear Reverend, Mr. Taylor talk.  He had graduated from Howard University in (unclear), in what was the only course that was available, which was the ministerial course, and he had talked about Howard.  From the day I heard him talking about Howard and all this--and it was founded in a prayer meeting at the Second Congregational Church, this fired me up.  So, I had to go to Howard, and yet Howard didn't give scholarships to entering freshman.  Yet, I was having such a hard time, and I'd written and said I didn't have any money.  But we're sorry after you come here. One of the teachers, an English teacher who I didn't have, remembered that my chemistry teacher just really didn't like me, I don't know what it was.  And I had gotten As the first ten weeks, A the second ten weeks, and A on the examination, and got a B average.  And I ran into them, "You made a mistake."  She's going to tell me I made a mistake, that I made a mistake.  I said, "I don't mistakes, you make mistakes."  So, then I ran to the principal, "Why are you threatening my job?  Teachers have independence in their classroom."  And everybody was talking about it.  That happened before in that school, and so she knew about it.  And she wrote Howard and said, "This is the type of student you would like to have, and we know it."  And she gave them the background and they wrote me, because I'd written them previously, and welcomed me in there.  Tuition in those days was $150 a year, you know.
Speaker 1: At Howard?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Now, this was really your first time away from home, in a way?
Speaker 2: In a way, in a way it was, because you see, in our church, the Baptist Church, we had the convention and the association.  And if--the chances of Toledo getting the convention would be very good.  And so about every four or five years, they'd have the convention.  And every two or three years, the association, or something of that sort.  And so, we were always delegates, because I was usually the--I say Sabbath school, but it wasn't Sabbath school.  I was usually the Sunday school secretary.  And that almost assured my going someplace.
Story_ID: 192487
Speaker 1: Give me the names of your elementary, junior high, and high school.
Speaker 2: Okay.  The elementary school was Navarre School [Toledo, Ohio], named after Peter Navarre, a great Indian trapper.  And my home was--in Toledo was at Yondo [ph.] and Navarre.  And the high school, Morrison R. Waite High School [Toledo, Ohio], is named after Morrison R. Waite.  He was the only Toledoan who was ever a Supreme Court Justice, no, Chief Justice of the Supreme Court of the United States.  And I was there say, four years and graduated second in a class of 429, four blacks and 425 whites.  And then I went to Howard [University, Washington, D.C.], graduated in second place again.  And the class, I don't know how large the class was, but I was still in second place, magna cum laude.
Story_ID: 192488
Speaker 1: Well explain to me how Howard [University, Washington, D.C.] was.  How was that experience?
Speaker 2: Fantastic situation.
Speaker 1: Who was president at the time?
Speaker 2: [President] Franklin [Delano] Roosevelt.
Speaker 1: No, president of Howard?
Speaker 2: Oh, Mordecai Wyatt Johnson.  You've heard of (unclear)--This man could take any subject and expatiate on it, he didn't have to have notes.  And he'd walk across the platform.  If you didn't see him with his brown-skinned wife, about my color, you'd swear he was Jewish.  He talked extemporaneously, and when it was announced that he was going to be the speaker of the day, you did well if you wanted to hear him, because we had no amplifiers in those days.  Now, you don't get there in time where you could stand out in the foyer, or you could stand outside and hear what's going on--So, in those in days--and he was a brilliant speaker.  And when it was announced that he was going to speak, you came early, not at a quarter of eleven.  You got there at ten o'clock, maybe 9:30, in order to get a seat.
Speaker 1: And how many women versus men were at Howard at the time?
Speaker 2: Well, it may have been more of a parity thing.  Possibly, we were just about equal, not this nine to one ratio that we have now, nine women to every one man.  I wouldn't be in a situation like that.  If I were there, it would be eight to one, because that's unhealthy.  Most of our men worked.  And one of the things that bothers me when I think about their work, here's a boy who was getting $200 a month, or $150 a month at his job.  "What is your job?" "I represent Chesterfield."  "Yours?"  "I represent whatever."  I don't remember too many of those tobaccos--But they'd walk around, "What tobacco do you use?"  "I like Chesterfield."  "Well, have you thought of so and so?" (unclear) And you know, already seducing our young men into a life that wasn't going to be profitable--
Story_ID: 192489
Speaker 1: Can you tell some of the people who, you know, we might know, who were in your class or were there [Howard University, Washington, D.C.] at the time?
Speaker 2: Who made good?  Well, let's see.  There was Kenneth Clark, you know, Kenneth Clark and his wife, Mamie [Phipps Clark].  Mamie was the daughter of a doctor in Hot Springs, Arkansas.  She died early of cancer.  Ken is still around. And a lot of them were very well-known.  Did you know Roy Weeks [ph.]?  He lives in Los Angeles [California], and he was the president of our class for three and a half years.  Actually, Kenneth Clark and his wife who spearheaded so much of the civil rights stuff of the time.  I hate to think that there's nobody that did so well that--Many of them are professionals, and doctors and lawyers.  Now, Thurgood Marshall was at Lincoln [University, Pennsylvania] while I was at Howard.  And Bill Hastie [Governor William Henry Hastie, Jr.], who later became the first governor of the Virgin Islands stationed at St. Thomas became our first federal judge.  I can't think of--well, Robert H. Terrell, after whom the law school is named there in Washington-- wasn't there at Howard at that time.  Really, I guess Ken and Mamie Clark.  And I hate to say just those two, when I'm sure there were people who lived such good lives.  But they may have had good dollars, and made a lot of money.  But Ken and Mamie translated theirs into civil rights work, and stuff of that sort.
Story_ID: 192490
Speaker 1: Who were the professors that influenced you [at Howard University, Washington, D.C.]?
Speaker 2: Lucy Diggs Slowe, a dear woman, Kelly Miller.  Now Kelly Miller made an observation; he was professor of sociology.  And he was very wrong, though.  Kelly Miller said that as much as he hated to think it, but if black people were to earn money and get ahead in the world, they'd choose one of two fields: entertainment or sports.  He said that's a way of life for us.  And when you see what has happened, and that was--And I graduated from Howard [University, Washington, D.C.] in 1931, and he had been preaching that doctrine long before that.  And then of course, there was Ralph [J.] Bunche.  Dr. Bunche's mother was dying of tuberculosis when they came from Detroit [Michigan] through Toledo [Ohio].  And her condition worsened, so that they just stopped right in Toledo.  It was incompatible with her going forward in an open quote "buggy" car.  The interesting fact here is that when her life was so tenuous, he was put into school for whatever period they would be here.  And when she died and was buried here, well, he continued on to the coast.  After he became, he was never the full Secretary of State; he was assistant Secretary of State.  He came to Toledo and stopped off at Gunckel School [Toledo, Ohio], which he attended for a year while his mother was ill.  And he's walking down the hall, and the principal, "Young man, you must stop at the office.  And what is your name?"  He said, "I'm Ralph Bunche."  "The Ralph Bunche?"  He said, "Well, I am Ralph Bunche."  And he said, "And I was just coming here to look at our class picture.  I was in the class of so and so." "Yes, of course."  All these pictures were spread out there in the hallway.  He got up there and they went through all the pictures, and his year was not there.  She said, "Every picture's here."  Then finally she called the janitor.  He said, "There's one old beat up picture down here."  Well, that turned out to be the one of Ralph Bunche.  (Laughter) Of course, that became the centerpiece of all pictures, you know, because she scattered all these other pictures--"Ralph Bunche attended school here."  (Laughter) The message was clear to the students--attend this school, and you could possibly be another Ralph Bunche (laughter).
Story_ID: 192491
Speaker 1: What made you want to pursue a career as a social worker?
Speaker 2: Its potential for good.  My father [Jacob Justiss], who was a great reader, had introduced us to Jane Addams, who was at the Hull House at 7th [Avenue] and Halsted [Street] in Chicago [Illinois], and he was very fond of the work that she had done.  That was the heyday of settlements.  We don't have too much settlements now; we don't think about settlements.  But, and even when she came through Toledo [Ohio] to speak, we were down there to hear her.  And then when I was at Howard [University, Washington, D.C.], she was one of the Sunday speakers.  I was just fascinated by what happened at settlement houses, and its potential for change.  I wanted to live in a settlement house myself, but my sister and I had to settle for my being on the board of a settlement house and being in charge of the nursery school division rather than actually living there, and enjoying the fellowship of the noon meals and all the other things that one thinks about at settlement houses.  And I had been in the YWCA [YWCA USA] when they first started studying club structure at Navarre School.  And in the seventh grade, beginning in the seventh grade, you could be a member of any club you wished, and we wanted to be members of the YWCA [YWCA USA].  And when we looked at some of the things that happened at YWCAs, I just decided that social workers were people who staffed YWCAs.  I decided then and there that I wanted to be a social worker.  So I volunteered as a director of women's--girls' activities, not women's--girls' activities (unclear) when I was at Howard for the entire four years I was there.
Story_ID: 192492
Speaker 1: Now, where's that picture, you know, I think it's your sophomore year at Howard [University, Washington, D.C.], where it's the International Conference of Social Workers.  It has W. E. B. Du Bois in it.
Speaker 2: Oh, that was the First Intercollegiate Social Science Conference.  I had been elected the secretary of the historical society.  It was fortunate for me when I first got there, that within a week everybody on the campus knew me.  Because I thought maybe it would help me get a job better, and it did.  And we were having a, we were at the women's league meeting.  And the dean wanted to speak to all the women.  And she gave us twenty-five names and said, "Anybody who can tell me one fact about each one of these names, hold up your hand."  So, I held up my hand, and I thought they'd all assembled the name of the Japanese Christian leader.  But they talked about a lot of things, and they were so impressed.  And finally, she took it to some of the junior and senior classes, and I was the only person in all of this.  And then we went to the men's division, and nobody knew.  And then within two weeks, everybody knew who [HistoryMaker] Valarie Omega Justiss [Vance] was.  And so, I went to the dean (unclear) and said, "I'd like to live in the dormitory."  See, at that time I was living at the headquarters of the National Association of Colored Women's Clubs at 14th street in northwest Washington, and she allowed me to come in.  Your question was what?
Speaker 1: My question was, I think my question was what made you choose social work as a discipline? But I had asked specifically about the conference that, you know, where you were in that picture.
Speaker 2: Oh, yes.
Speaker 1: You know, and I wanted you to talk with me about it.
Speaker 2: That was the International Conference on Social Welfare.  And that was in Bristol, England.  And--
Speaker 1: Bristol?
Speaker 2: Bristol.  I'm sorry, Brighton [England].
Speaker 1: It was in Brighton, England--
Speaker 2: Brighton, at the headquarters of the Labor Party.  See, when I first went to Africa in 1974--
Speaker 1: Well, let's not go to 1974.
Speaker 2: I'm just, this is a point of departure--I had spoken to the students.  And as a result of that, since I was at the international conference then, I was asked by people about my speaking.  And I'd said "Well, I've given college commencements and that sort of thing.  And you can get a real hearing at the international conference since you have so many minority people there."  And so, that followed routinely my having been a speaker, and having also having been a planner at one time.  And then the background that I had in Toledo [Ohio] working with the kids and so on, and I just felt that I didn't want to go into history, even though everybody said, "Oh, you ought to go into history."  History was good, but in terms of what was happening out there daily, it was social work.
Story_ID: 192493
Speaker 1: And you wanted to be where the action was?
Speaker 2: Where the actual action was.  I always have a disagreement with people who feel that they've really arrived, if they're up there at the top, you know.  That's not where I want to be.  I feel that you, if you are an administrator, you're only as well advised as the people who are two or three layers below you, because you derive whatever you know from them.  But even though you get better pay and more renown, the action occurs down there at the ringing of the doorbells and meeting the people, just like that.  And that's what I wanted, more people, meeting more people.
Speaker 1: Now, you said that while you were in school, you stayed at the offices or the residence of the National Council of Negro Women?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: You stayed--
Speaker 2: Not the National Conference--it was the National Association--
Speaker 1: National Association of--
Speaker 2: --of Colored Women [Clubs, NACWC].  You see, that was established at the old 19th Street Baptist Church in Washington, D.C. in 1896.  That's the first organization of a national level founded by the former slaves.  And I lived at that residence.  I was paying fifteen dollars a month to stay there.  And they said, "We're doing this for you," et cetera.  But when I got to the fabulous dormitories over at Howard which had just been built that year, we were only paying ten dollars a month.  And there was something to staying there.  And while I was staying there, I had a room with a girl who was a Seventh Day Adventist, and that's how I was influenced to become a Seventh Day Adventist (laughter). She was right there in the room with me.
Story_ID: 192494
Speaker 1: What attracted you to become a Seventh Day Adventist?
Speaker 2: The first thing was that Seventh Day Adventists are people of the Bible.  We go to church on the Sabbath, and the day begins at sunset and ends the next morning.  But according to the way we feel, is that the day begins at midnight.  But if you read the first chapter of the Bible, it says, "And the evening and the morning--" It always begins with evening and moves on to the morning.  Jesus and all the prophets and the apostles attended church on Saturday.  And I thought that if I were a follower of Jesus, I would attend church on the Sabbath, too.  And that's exactly why I came over.  It seems so simple to me.  I don't understand why people--"Well, they changed it to Sunday after he rose."  No, they didn't, it wasn't changed.  Because the Bible says that "He went into the temple, and as was his custom, he got up to read."  He was in the temple on the Sabbath day.
Speaker 1: So, what did your mother [Beatrice Ann Price], you know, think of you in the Seventh Day Adventist since you had been Baptist?
Speaker 2: Well, my mother was of the old persuasion that I was Baptist born and Baptist bred, and when I'm gone, say Baptist dead.  (Laughter).  She couldn't understand, and yet she said, "Well I reared my children to think."  But she didn't rear us to think out of that Baptist church, and she didn't like it.  So, when I made my first trip home after I'd become an Adventist, my sister Marie was getting herself together, my younger sister.  "Come on and stay home with me.  You don't want to go to that mess."  I told her, "Yes, I do, too."  Well, you see, my sister, Marie, was the first one to be baptized.  I'm the second child in the family, and I was the second one to be baptized.  We came in, and were baptized in an orderly manner.  I've never seen anything since then that has caused me to think for one day that I'd rather not be in the church.  I felt deeply for the Catholic church recently when it had so many scandals.  And our minister said, "Let's not rejoice in this."
Story_ID: 192495
Speaker 1: So you get out, you graduate [from Howard University, Washington, D.C.].  What is your first job?
Speaker 2: My first job?
Speaker 1: You're not married at this point?
Speaker 2: No, because I didn't marry until I was forty.  The very first job, it was an interesting situation.  For the summer, that first summer, I was out, because I was accustomed to working summers.  For three summers, I'd worked for Mrs. Saks at Saks Fifth Avenue, so I enjoyed that relationship.  But the next summer, I had finished college, and I didn't want to go back working for her, for ten dollars a week.  So, we were starting a little black newspaper in Toledo [Ohio], The Toledo Press.  And the man who was started it needed brains to continue.  Well, I had been the news editor at [Morrison R.] Waite High School, and I'd been the social editor of the Hilltop at Howard.  And so, this was just a larger following.  And I took over the job, because we had learned all of the basics of writing in high school.  We knew about the galley proofs and all that sort of stuff.  We knew what headlines to apply to an article as to its importance, and where the most important articles were, and all that stuff.  So, we knew all that sort of stuff.  And so, since I'd been news editor and then had been editor of two columns at Howard, this man, in starting a newspaper, just solicited me to help him.  Well, I kept the paper until I was ready to go back to school and get my master's degree.  And the reason why I didn't keep it going, was that the history of these papers had been very erratic in our time.  And there was the Chicago Defender and the Pittsburgh Courier, and the Washington Afro-American [later, part of Afro-American Newspapers]. So, they were so much better established than our little paper.  Let's see, there was no need for our little paper.  And then the man got a little aggressive toward me, and I said, "Well, I'll let this go."
Story_ID: 192496
Speaker 1: You were, as you said, you were at Lane College [Jackson, Tennessee]?
Speaker 2: Yeah that's '36 [1936], '37 [1937].
Speaker 1: Right.  And you said that they, you taught English, but you shouldn't have been?
Speaker 2: No, I shouldn't have been there; I should have been elsewhere.  And I was only there then because especially they were looking forward to Plessy versus Ferguson [Plessy v. Ferguson, 1896] being overturned.  And two, because the girl who regularly taught that course was on maternity leave.
Speaker 1: And then what made you want to go to the Chicago Welfare Administration [Chicago, Illinois]?
Speaker 2: That was just about the only thing that was available.  Of course, Chicago had not paid its school teachers for years, and was paying them only in script.  And I wanted to stay in Chicago because the reasons, for one, I already had a master's degree, and most people didn't have a master's degrees in social work.  But I wanted it, so that I could come under the influence of Edith Abbott. Her sister, Grace Abbott, was head of the Children's Bureau, and Edith was the dean of the school of social work [University of Chicago School of Social Service, Chicago, Illinois].  And Sophonisba Preston Breckinridge (unclear).  And these were leaders in the field of social work.  And I just wanted to be there and sit under them and be able to grasp some of their thinking about social work, and why they were so interested in unpopular causes.  See, they were among the first people to go out here and think about Social Security.  Because Social Security had been all over Europe for years and years.
Speaker 1: Tell me, what were the [social] issues of the day at that time?
Speaker 2: Well, for instance, the juvenile court, and the fact that too much emphasis was being placed on juvenile delinquency.  In those days, only about two percent of the kids were juvenile delinquents.  And so, you'd think that that wasn't any big thing.  But it had been blown up, and people had become very famous and popular if they trounced the juvenile delinquents.  And so, there was social security, unemployment, because we had had [President Herbert Clark] Hoover and his "trickle down" theory.  And then there had been the reversal of all of our fortunes, with the closing of the stock market in October, 1929.  And so the economic basis of the [Great] Depression, we were studying also at that time.  There was also the fact that too many southern Europeans were immigrating to the United States.  I think maybe those were the big issues.  Of course, they did speak a great deal about not giving women the correct--have women's salaries on a parity with men's salaries.  They still haven't reached that.  You know, you could be sitting right next to a guy who does half your education and she'll [sic.] be getting three times your salary.
Story_ID: 192497
Speaker 1: [Sophonisba Preston] Breckinridge and the Abbotts [Edith Abbott and Grace Abbott], what were they known for?
Speaker 2: Well, they, all of them wrote these ponderous books on various subjects, particularly the Poor Law [Amendment Act, England].  These people thought a great deal about Poor Law, which came into fruition in 1603 under the first Queen Elizabeth.  And they wanted the Poor Law overturned.  Now, by the Poor Law, if your sister became poor and couldn't get work or any money, before she could apply to the State, she would have to see how much you could give her, and how much the mother and father and all the other siblings could give her.  And they felt that what that was doing was pauperizing people who were themselves poor.  And they wanted all the poor laws banished.  You could be held responsible for your grandparents, even though your grandparents never gave you any money or much money, or anything of that sort.  You could still be held responsible for them.  And in those days, they were fighting the furlough.  And all of the best students in the School of Social Service administration [University of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois]--it wasn't called the school of social work, like so many of them--were invited to write books, their master's theses on the social--I mean on these laws I just finished talking about, the poor laws of their particular state.  And they were hoping to build them up, so that we had poor laws for all forty-eight states.
Story_ID: 192498
Speaker 1: You then returned to Washington, D.C. though, after a few--after two years?  To work in the public school system there.
Speaker 2: Nineteen forty [1940].
Speaker 1: Yeah, 1938 to '40 [1940] was Chicago Welfare Administration (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Welfare Administration.  1940 to 1958 was the research assistant in social work in the [Washington, D.C.] public schools.  And these jobs in public schools were jobs that were held onto tenaciously.  They were good jobs, and paid better than other jobs.  Well, they paid maybe on a parity with what you would get in the government as a lower paid position.  But at the same time, you had a whole summer, and you could work and do other things of that sort.  So, what happened was that Anna Johnson [ph.], whose sister was married to Dr. Charles H. Wesley, she was staying at the home of the head of the department of chemistry.  And that was Professor Percy [Lavon] Julian, who had his Ph.D. in German and chemistry from the University of Berlin [Berlin, Germany].  And, but her husband was also about the lowest paid worker in the department of chemistry, and they became attached.  Her husband came home one evening and found her and Percy Julian in the same bed.  And so, that job became vacant.  And a friend of mine from my old days at Howard [University, Washington, D.C.] called me and said, "Valarie, apply for the job."  Well, it was 1938, and I was going to the New York World's Fair [New York, New York].  And I dropped by, and I said, "No, I don't know when that job will be available."  But right then he was writing it up.  And so, in 1939 it was made available, and I took the test.  The test was a five-day test.  You had to have a master's degree in social work.  Your emphasis must have been child welfare social work, and you must have had three years of child welfare service work.  Now, if you had less than three years, but you had more of something else, then you could substitute, you know.  And I hadn't had three years of child welfare because I'd been working in Chicago Welfare and Relief Administration; I'd been working in family welfare.  But because I--they tested so much working in the family agency of Chicago Welfare and Relief Administration, and I took every advantage of work policies that allowed me to go to school.  And you could, instead of working from 8:30 to five, you could work from 8:30 to four, and get off work and go to school.  So, I did that all the time.  And sometimes you'd have to get off earlier than four o'clock; you'd get off at maybe three, 3:30.  But you see, I was building up hours of work while no experience.
Story_ID: 192499
Speaker 1: So, when it came to my applying, and having three years of child welfare [sic. family welfare] experience, I just didn't have it.  So, what I did, I applied, and the first day what we had was on social work.  Because you came in that morning at nine, and you could stay until four.  Well, of course, I knew the stuff.  And the next day you had research.  And the third day, you had the importance of eliminating alcohol and smoking from your intake.  And then on the fourth day, you had physical examinations.  And finally, on the fifth day you had the personal examination, one to one.  Well, I got virtually one hundred percent on all those things, because I was in school all the time.  And mainly, those people who applied were in sociology, and there were people who felt that sociology and social work were the same, which were different disciplines.  So I got the job, and I came back to Washington [D.C.] in November of 1940 and stayed until around June of 1950, even though I was married at the time.  And my son and I would come back and forth on the Greyhound Bus to Boston [Massachusetts], and be there for just the weekend.  But it was a good weekend.  And I was interested in Samuel getting to know his father, rather than on an itinerant basis, you know.  I didn't want any more of that knowledge that we had as kids.  Well, I got the job, and they didn't notify me that I had the job.  I took the examination in August, and here it was October, and I hadn't been notified.  And suddenly I get a letter that morning in the mail that--one letter said, "You're still number one on all exams."  And the second letter said, "We're offering you the position if you wish it."  Well, I came back and I put out some news among my friends there.  And to my great surprise, Miss Proctor [ph.], who was the head of the office and was only making $250 a month herself, had held this same job before.  And she said to me, "Before you become so enthusiastic, let me tell you.  You don't know Washington, D.C., and you won't be able to make it, because you don't have this and all this."  I said, "That's strange.  I was there for four years and made it."  "Oh, well, I was going to offer you a very pleasant situation."  And she mentioned the name of one of the girls who had taken the examination, but hadn't done too well.  And she said, "Now, she has a job paying $165 a month working with tuberculosis patients in their homes."  Well, now that's the last place I wanted to be, that close contact with these folks, you know.  And I said, "No, I'll just continue to keep that job."  And even after I married, I continued to hold that job.
Story_ID: 192500
Speaker 1: And what was it like to be a teacher in the [Washington] D.C. public school system during those twenty years?
Speaker 2: Well, it was one of the top jobs in the United States, believe it or not.  Here in Toledo [Ohio], folks didn't get much.  And Chicago [Illinois] teachers weren't being paid; they were being paid by script, hadn't been paid for years.  But there, when you said to a person, "Well, what kind of work do you do?"  "I'm a teacher.  You know, why should you ask?  Can't you tell?"  People--it was a social job.  There were people who had generations of teaching in their background.  And there were all sorts of set-ups and links.  For instance, the sororities were, for instance, AKA [Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority] was founded at Howard [University, Washington, D.C.].  And of course its brother fraternity--
Speaker 1: Alpha--
Speaker 2: Alpha Phi Alpha was founded at Cornell [University, Ithaca, New York].  I often wondered about that.  You couldn't have had but a handful of black men at Cornell when it was founded.  And of course, it preceded AKA being founded.  We had almost all of the headquarters there.  It was wonderful, because there were so many meetings in Washington.  For instance, all the land grant colleges met in Washington every year.  And you'd get to hear these presidents, and get to know what was going on in their schools.  So, the boules usually were having something there, and so on.  And so, it was really a wonderful situation.  But there were various well-known stores that had signs out, "We do not cater to colored people."
Speaker 1: So it was a very segregated community still?
Speaker 2: One of the most segregated communities.  For instance, when [President Thomas] Woodrow Wilson was president--and he was a southerner.  He had, he said that all blacks would leave by the back door.  And he wanted all drinking fountains for blacks separated from whites.  And so, they had to be black, you know, where you were supposed to drink.  Little things like that, black people felt were hard to chew and take, as they will tell you.  Until one day, something very interesting happened, for which I could really appreciate.  You didn't eat at the same time; you had to eat later, and all this sort of thing.  And this one girl, and from Toledo, interestingly enough, came over--a white girl--"You're not supposed to eat now."  And she said, "How would you know?"  "Well because they said--." She said, "Do you want to test it?"  Before they knew it, they had the roughest fight they ever had.  You know, and immediately thereafter, there was no more, "You eat first, and you eat second."  (Unclear) just stopped it.  And I wouldn't have thought of this girl Jones.  They said, "Oh, yes, she was always very aggressive."  But I hadn't thought of it.
Story_ID: 192501
Speaker 1: What was good about [Washington] D.C. society at that time, and what was bad?  You know, in D.C. you always hear about the brown paper bag test.
Speaker 2: Well, it was good, because it gave status to people who made a habit, or a profession, of looking into books on etiquette and how to act, and so on.  Second, it was as high as we were ever going to get at that time.  The law school which I attended, the Robert H. Terrell Law School [Washington, D.C.], was named after attorney [Robert H.] Terrell, who was the first person of any stature that was appointed by a president, [President] Theodore Roosevelt.  He was made judge.  And you've heard of his wife, Mary Church Terrell, whose father was possibly the first black millionaire in the United States.  And he was run out of Memphis [Tennessee] by white people.  Well, that was his wife.  And they had a very open house policy there.  If you were new in Washington, and you had a substantial job--Now, you may have been down, down, down, down, but if you were in certain agencies--For instance, the government printing office wouldn't employ any black printers, I don't care if you were a graduate of Tuskegee [University, Tuskegee, Alabama] or Hampton [University, Hampton, Virginia], which had these schools.  And there, you could meet people, you know, of your same status and so on.  And that helped to penetrate some of these agencies that wouldn't allow blacks in there, you know.  The interesting thing about [President] Woodrow Wilson and his saying, "Use the back door," was when it was all said and done, they were using--the back door actually was the front door, which whites used.  (Laughter).  They had grand balls.  For instance, Kappa Alpha Psi had the Easter Monday morning formal.  It would start on Sunday night and wouldn't finish until Easter Monday morning, things of that sort.  And you didn't have the feeling of being as deprived as you actually were.
Story_ID: 192502
Speaker 1: You got your Ph.D. in 1949--
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: --from [The] Ohio State [University, Columbus, Ohio].  But that's during the time you're teaching also.  How did that come about?
Speaker 2: Well, how did it--?
Speaker 1: Because you went to Ohio State, right?
Speaker 2: Yes.  You see, I'd been at the University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois], which was a hundred dollars a quarter.  That's a private school, the Rockefellers, you know, got it together.  When I went to Ohio State, I was paying my tuition.  And I said, "How much is the tuition?"  And she said, "Twenty-four dollars a quarter."  I said, "You didn't understand.  How much is the tuition?"  She said, "Do you want to make a gift to us or something?"  Well, I went to Ohio State, because Ohio State was one of the original schools of social work, for one.  It may not have had the status of the University of Chicago School of Social Service Administration, but then it still was a very good school.  And then we knew from times past that Ohio State made sure that any black person who wanted to get in, got in.
Speaker 1: And did they have that policy?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: That was an unusual policy.
Speaker 2: Yes.  And we checked it out.  Once we were visiting, all the graduate students and so forth.  We were visiting the Newark Training Center in Newark, Ohio.  And after a long of visiting training centers, we stopped off at the agency to have dinner.  And that was going to be quite an experience, but not in the way in which we thought.  We washed up and came to dinner.  And lo and behold, as we looked up, all the whites were sitting on one side away from us, and only one white was sitting there with us.  And he said, "See, I'm a southern gentleman."  He said, "Do you notice where all your white friends are?"  He said, "Over there."  Well, I dropped by the dean's office just to speak to him the next day about it.  He said, "That didn't come about haphazardly."  He said, "That was really programmed by us."  He said, "You must remember," he said, "We have 47,000 students on campus."  He said, "And all the big basketball players are from Ohio."  And he said, "And all these people are taxpayers.  And when we find out that somebody's here from the South, and maybe he's getting away with a little too much, we call them in and say, "Look, these are the people who run the State of Ohio and whose children can go to Ohio State.  They might want to go to Chicago, they might want to go to some of the other schools where the tuition would be greater."  He said, "But the fact of the matter is, you have to get along with them.  And if you don't get along with them, then you're out."  He said, "And I watched every one of 'em," while I got out of that seat where he was sitting.  And every one of those white kids from the South was sitting with people from the North.
Story_ID: 192503
Speaker 1: Let's go to when you went to Massachusetts for working with the adult blind.
Speaker 2: In Massachusetts, old, old state, tradition bound.  But they have a policy whereby state and federal agencies sometimes work together.  For instance, if it's a good state agency, rather than just starting a duplicate federal agency, the feds will give money to the state agency to help offset any losses it may have, or anything of that sort.  And so, I got--the salaries were much lower in Massachusetts than elsewhere, because people were just happy to be in Massachusetts, even at the low salary, you know.  I recall I was making $220 a month as a social worker in Washington [D.C.].  And there was a girl making ninety a month, and she just felt she was on top of the world.  Well, that association, "MAB" we called it, Massachusetts Association for the Adult Blind, it never had an African-American worker.  And I applied.  Well, they knew all these other people and the sort of settings they had been in, and so on.  But mine was different, and I felt no burden at all applying, even though I would be the, maybe the--not only the black worker of the agency if I were hired--or I might be early fired, or something of that sort.  And as it turned out, there was no problem at all.  They were unusually happy to see me.  And you had such people as the owner of the fur company.  Let's see, another member of the board was the wife of the Senator from Massachusetts.  We had people on that board--oh, yes, people who developed the Steinway Piano were on the board.  These people weren't involved in a lot of the grubby, penal things every day--"So and so would go out early and she didn't come back," and so on.  And I have to say that I was as well treated there as anyplace.  And Samuel [Jones (ph.) Vance] particularly--now, we had this big recreational facility, and this pond right there on our--I call it a pond.  Maybe it was a river, but I called it a pond.  And Samuel was interested in learning to swim.  A girl from South Carolina would take him swimming all the time.  And from that standpoint, it was a very good agency.  However, just for the privilege of working in Massachusetts, your salary was very low.
Speaker 1: Now, you, at this point in time are the issues different, or are they around this--you say here it's poverty.  Are they still around the issues of poverty and, you know, uplift people?  But in Massachusetts you were really working with the adult blind?
Speaker 2: Adult blind, absolutely.  And anybody under the age of adulthood was not expected to apply, they wouldn't be helped.  This was such an old, old agency that they were still working on money that had been given to them back in, oh, the early 1800s.
Story_ID: 192504
Speaker 1: What brought you to Los Angeles [California] then?  Because that's such a, you know, you go (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Jump.  Massachusetts, one end of the country and then--well, the marriage broke up.  I was married to a man from Howard [University, Washington, D.C.].  He was a very smart man.  He was an electrical engineer.  He--
Speaker 1: His name?
Speaker 2: Samuel Jones Vance [ph.].  He just died two years ago.  And he, for instance, his transcript will show four A's in math, college math; four As in college physics; four in electrical engineering, and one A in English, which I didn't expect, because I never saw anybody in Mississippi who spoke correct English.  But anyway, he and his mother did.  And he was just brutal beyond words.
Speaker 1: He was?
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: And how old was he compared to you?
Speaker 2: Oh, he was somewhat younger than I.  When he died, he was seventy-nine, and I'm trying to figure out much older.  I was about eight years older than he, I imagine.  But his father had been a wife beater, and he felt that was alright, being a wife beater.  I didn't think so.  And so, I had just finished completing the entire War on Poverty program for the tripartite of powers of Los Angeles [California] city, Los Angeles County, and the Board of Education.  And I just wanted to get away as far as I could from him.  I figured that if he moved any nearer than the 2,500 miles we were away then, I would have to take a tent and be out on the Pacific Ocean in a tent.  And so I just came on out to California, and we prospered all since.  Because California has laws with Massachusetts, that if there's a person in Massachusetts that needs help and she still has a residence in Massachusetts, she will be encouraged to apply to Massachusetts, whereas at the same time they will be sending her all the relevant laws that would be helpful to her.
Story_ID: 192505
Speaker 1: When you were in Boston [Massachusetts], did you come across [HistoryMaker] Ed Brooke at all?
Speaker 2: Did I come across--?
Speaker 1: Edward Brooke?  Ed Brooke? Senator--
Speaker 2: Ed Brooke, yes, of course.  And it was interesting, because as senator, he was, his office was in the State House Building.  And I would get off the subway at Winter [Street] and Summer [Street], and would walk up through the Bunker Hill.  And right next--see, the state offices were here, and some county offices were here.  And I would see Ed Brooke lots of times--he and--well, this man was once our attorney.  The two of them would come, would come through.
Story_ID: 192506
Speaker 1: He [Robert C. Weaver] had real status, because he was one of a kind, and held a job, one of a kind, there in Washington [D.C.].  Most people thought he was easy to talk to and get along with, probably except for his wife.  And she was a very attractive young woman, but she had a way of arguing with him in public places, which is bad.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: But they were known in all the social places where people would go, anybody who was in government, and who held a job higher than clerk/typist or something of that sort.  He was immediately snagged and sent around to the public schools to talk to the students.  The theme always was, "Do you see what so and so did.  You can do that, too."  But it really wasn't that easy.  He did a good job.  At least he held onto his job for more than one tenure.  Ordinarily, when men come in, they want to displace these other people and put in their men.
Speaker 2: And he served under what administration?
Speaker 1: Huh?
Speaker 2: What administration did he serve, did Robert Weaver serve on?
Speaker 1: Oh, I can't, let's see.  Now, he started under, he wasn't under any of the conservatives.  He came in on that, in one of the Roosevelt administrations [President Franklin D. Roosevelt].
Speaker 2: Okay--
Story_ID: 192507
Speaker 1: You worked with the City of Los Angeles [California] up until 1970.  That's what it says here.
Speaker 2: Well, I moved from Los Angeles in '69 [1969].  As I always like to tell people, we flew in the face of superstition--we came into, let's see, we came into Orange County [California] on Friday, February the 13th, 1969.  I never regretted it, even though I spooked Friday the 13th (laughter).
Speaker 1: You never regretted moving here?
Speaker 2: No.  And yet, people were saying Orange County isn't Los Angeles.  And I said, "Yeah, I know."  Because they felt that you'd get anyplace you wanted to in Los Angeles, plus they had plenty of blacks in public places.  I came back feeling for the simple reason that you had Watts [Los Angeles, California] there, you know, and you had so many people who were living in Watts who couldn't make it.  But then on the other hand, you had enough people in places who had graduated from schools like Berkeley [University of California, Berkeley, Berkeley, California] and UCLA [University of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California] that could help you along if you showed an inclination to go somewhere and be something.  And every time you'd think about the fact that they had two or three black men in Congress--one was a woman--it showed that you could get along, you could make it.  You see, we always had a feeling if you couldn't make it in Chicago [Illinois], Washington, D.C.--and let's see, there was one other place--you couldn't make it because there was so much to do and so much to gain.
Story_ID: 192508
Speaker 1: Were the [social] issues when you first started out [in social work], did they change over time?
Speaker 2: Well, now, for instance, we really didn't have a concerted official Social Security.  You know, Social Security had been in Europe for years.  We first, and they got Social Security in 1896, which was the year in which we started championing for.  Social work has always been relevant.  Out here, we talk about the greats, and Cesar Chavez.  I don't know whether you know him, but we have, we celebrate Cesar Chavez's birthday out here in California.  And during the [Great] Depression, of course, we were very active, we were always active in cost-of-living read-outs.  We feel that the cost-of-living should approach the income.  For instance, out in California here, the minimum wage is $6.75.  Out in the other states, it's six and a quarter.  And it's true, a friend of mine told me just this past week.  We were talking about minimum wages and things of that sort.  And she said, "Everybody knows the minimum wage is eight dollar and seventy-five cents, because I have a woman who gives me twenty dollars worth of work a week."  That's what she gives her.  That's just what that agency happens to pay that woman to come in.  For instance, women who come from the home health are paid ten dollars an hour, because it's all personal work, and all that sort of stuff.  But that doesn't mean that because they are paid by a social work agency, that that's the minimum wage.  That's something that social workers have always been in the forefront for--more money for minimum wage.  We haven't always been successful, because in this last administration, [President William Jefferson] Clinton administration, we were trying to bring the minimum wage up to eight dollars.  We didn't get to first base.  And that's the thing about social work.  We change as the problems change, and the focus of people's attention changes.  For instance, we were back on the fact of people working in the professions.  We thought that doctors and lawyers should be unionized.  Well, that was just antithetical to what they were thinking. Well, I have to join a union? And I'm a doctor.  You know, that doesn't set well with some people.
Story_ID: 192509
Speaker 1: Now, do you think that there's a different methodology required today than when you first started out in social work?
Speaker 2: No, not really.  You see, even though the Abbotts [Edith Abbott and Grace Abbott] and [Sophonisba Preston]Breckinridge were in social work years and years ago, so much of their aura has pervaded social work that we keep what they were talking about, with additions from other agencies.
Speaker 1: And what were they talking about?
Speaker 2: Well, when I first became a social worker, the big thing that they were talking about, of course, was the economic picture.  We felt there should have been--you know you'll never get parity with wages of people who are self-employed--but we felt that you should have been nearer to what was going on, this business of $6.75, $6.25, $6.50.  You couldn't live on that, and that was the thing.  We were always out there championing.  We've been in the forefront of this Medicare business, and the fact of drugs and so on.  But if you don't get a hearing from a substantial member of the people, it can really die out.  And this is one of the things that AARP has done for us.  And you remember that AARP used to stand for the American association of retarded people--retired people--and now it's just the American Association of [Retired Persons]. They have kept in mind that we're not getting a large enough percentage, or slice, of the dollar pie.  I believe they're right.  Nobody lives on $6.25, or even $6.75 an hour.
Story_ID: 192510
Speaker 1: Ma'am, when you got started in social work, you said you wanted to be in social work because it--you know, you didn't say this--but basically it was a noble profession, and you wanted to help.  You weren't wanting to necessarily make a lot of money, but you wanted to make a difference.
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: Right?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: And I want to ask you.  When you look back over your life and the work that you've done, not just here, but also the work you've done by traveling to other countries and staying there.  How would you sort of sum up, you know, the--your sort of life and times in many ways?
Speaker 2: Well, I think I made a difference.  And it would be devastating to me to think that I didn't.  For instance, when I became a social worker in the public schools of Washington, D.C.--and I was the only social worker the whole time I was there, from 1940 to 1950-odd on--social workers had the same day, in terms of hours, as anybody else.  But they were in the school system, and I figured if they were in the school system their hours should be the same as the schoolteachers.  They weren't, of course.  And there were some great inequities.  For instance, you got paid so much, but because you were never really paid enough, you couldn't save for summer.  So therefore, when summer would come--and this is the last day of school and you had your last paycheck until September--if you were going by a bank, you'd see lines of people standing outside the bank.  What does that do to people who have to live twenty-four hours a day, and you give them only enough--even though it's a little more than the body politic--you give them only enough to last them for a certain limited period.  You don't help with the idea of trying to balance budgets.  You don't help with the ideal of trying to live within your means.  You don't help with the idea that even though you may have more education, that whatever you're doing from the body politic is important, and not more important than the people who live here, but very important.
Story_ID: 192511
Speaker 1: When you look at society, what makes a good society?
Speaker 2: Restate that--
Speaker 1: When you look at society, what do, what do you think are the things that make a good society, a good and healthy society?
Speaker 2: Well, I think you have to start out with--the society must be a caring one.  See, we never had the feeling that Russia was a caring society.  And that means that it must want for the lowest member of that society--whatever it takes to make that lowest member feel that he is loved and appreciated, and there are people who want to see him make good.  Well, sometimes people don't want to see you make good.  I recall my own sister.  And I didn't recall, I didn't know then that she was one of a group of people who have a need to see people suffer.  And I think that we must look at this suffering thing, about people who need to see other humans suffer.  I think a society must want the best for every one of its children.  If a child is autistic or if he is mentally retarded or feeble-minded, get him the best that is within the reach of that's child ability.  That hasn't always happened.  I think a society, if it's going to be helpful, if it's going to get it's children ahead, must have at every level, from kindergarten--well maybe not kindergarten--from first grade on up through twelfth, or maybe beyond--it must have at every level people who will help, whether it's through money--and usually that isn't as helpful as actually putting a child down to study--but through tutoring or what not, so that child can be able to maximize his potential.  I think we have failed when there are kids who can be good students, and instead they're out there knocking one another off.  And I've known that to happen so many times.  I think that society must see that the even the elderly are cared for, not because I'm elderly and I'm thinking about it, but sometimes we dismiss people because they're elderly or because they're immigrants, or something of that sort.  What I'd like to see also is a closing of our borders to so many immigrants.  Even [President] John F. Kennedy, in his book that was so widely received, says that we're all immigrants, which of course is true.  And surely no more truer than, say, in Europe, and the Irish society of which he's a member.  But I think that we have to understand that we cannot take in the whole world.  And we have this global idea just to let people in.  I think there's a point beyond which we go out to help those people their governments, so that living at their own government, their own state, can be just as attractive as living outside, and they can stay to make it better.
Story_ID: 192512
Speaker 1: Now, what are your hopes and concerns for the black community?
Speaker 2: The black community won't get any higher--somehow this always looks like a person is sitting beside me--and the black community won't get any higher than they themselves determine that they should be.  So many people have determined that, "I can't get any higher, because I don't have it.  They're against me," and all of that.  I believe that there is within this government of the United States--for black people as well as for whites and others--I believe there is room enough for all of us, if we can get people where they can be helped, and they can work the best.  It bothers me to see some people seeking to the level of say, just a teacher, when this is a person who could do anything, but who has a fear that if he applies and exposes himself, he'll be turned down.  There's a great element of fear among people.  (Unclear) "No, they will never think of anybody like me."  Why not?  Why not?  And if you take Jet Magazine--and I go through Jet page by page, not for the swimsuit of the day and all that sort of stuff, but to find out what we're doing.  You'd be astonished, absolutely.  Now, I look at Dr. [Condoleezza] Rice.  I wouldn't want to be in her position, not because it's pretty high caliber right now, but she virtually has no life.  She isn't married, she doesn't have children.  When she leaves the high powered arena in which she functions, and she comes home, what does she come home to?  I think that we're going to have to do more with--and I'm not championing my own cause.  We have to do more with the business of unmarried parenthood.  Crisis Magazine says seventy percent of all black children are born out of wedlock.  And then as you get into the article it says, "No, sixty-seven percent."  The rate is so high that you don't even add a percentage point or a half point.  I mean, sixty-seven percent in itself is shocking.  Now, why say seventy?  You're not rounding out numbers, you're talking about people.  And there's something here about this business, that we're going to have to make fatherhood compatible with everyday life for men, rather than some men, "Oh, I don't plan on marrying until I'm forty or fifty."  Your best years are gone for helping a child.  I like the idea that we have now many black millionaires; there was a time when we didn't.  And we have, from what I understand, two black billionaires, Oprah and the man [Robert L. Johnson] who used to own BET, Black Entertainment [Television].  I would not want to be said to be jealous of Oprah, or anything of that sort.  But it bothers me that we don't have enough people who can see that a good life lived, a moral life lived, is just as important to our children as a good economic life.  Now, Parade Magazine says she shares her bed every night with, what's this man she likes?
Speaker 1: Stedman Graham.
Speaker 2: That isn't a good theme for our children.  It's just not a good thing.  And yet, when you see people who ordinarily wouldn't flock to a black woman like they're flocking to her, that must make her feel very good, you know, that's the way to go.  But you must know who Stedman Graham's parents are, and all that.  Well, he had it made even before she had it made, you see.
Story_ID: 192513
Speaker 1: I would like to see parental training centers set up, or courses on parenting, as help to our children.  If you come from a home in which there has been a deteriorating lifestyle, how can you be expected to transfer to your children an appropriate lifestyle, which makes them able to look the world in its face?  You can't.  Now, I've seen too much of that.  As a social worker, you obviously expect to see some.  But now, nobody thinks about living around with a man.  Then, they said they wanted the woman.  Now they say they living with the man.  But it's not healthy to children.  Interestingly enough, the federal government--not the government--the state governments, all state governments have statutes which make it unlawful to have unlawful intercourse.  Nobody's going to prosecute you nowadays for that.  Why have it on the books?  I think maybe there's some real reason to have it on the books.  It's always an ideal we can reach up to.  For instance, in Virginia, the state of Virginia has a law on fornication.  How often do you arrest somebody for fornication?  Never.  I think we've made more progress with the black race than any other race, when you consider what we came from.  And when you understand that the people who enforced slavery the most were Christians, they were Christians.  There's a book in Howard's library which is called the Bible's defense of slavery by a man named Smith [ph.].  I think he ought to re-write--of course, he's dead now.  But I think the book ought to be re-written, and all that sort of stuff.  Phyllis Wheatley was a slave, and she was a slave in a home in Boston [Massachusetts].  She wasn't down in Alabama, or Mississippi, or Georgia.  See, we've set some very bad examples around here.  And when we talk about juvenile delinquency, and when we have wars in which we boast about how many people we killed and all of that, we're not helping our children.  And I'm just destroyed by the fact that so many people want to tell you how many Germans were killed, and how many--whatever else is out there, how many of those people have been killed, as though life is not precious anymore, but it is.
Story_ID: 192514
Speaker 1: What do you want your legacy to be?
Speaker 2: Well, that I love God and I love my fellow man, and I want, I would want my fellow man to live as well as I have tried to live, and to be able to pass that on to the next generation.
Story_ID: 192515
Speaker 1: The program was called the 'Americans All'.  And we were the first people on radio, and the first consecutive program for sixteen years without missing a Sunday at eleven o'clock.  There were people who said that we flew in the face of conventional wisdom.  After all, black people were known to be very religious, and how dare we put that program on at eleven o'clock, the eleven o'clock hour on Sunday.  Well, Dr. Todd's [Tomlinson Todd] father was a graduate of Lincoln University [Pennsylvania], 1906, School of Divinity.  And certainly he didn't--when he found he couldn't support his family being a minister, he wanted to, he had to go into government in order to support them.  That didn't mean that he loved God less, or anything of that sort, or that he was trying to lure people away from Sunday worship, or whatever term they worshipped.  That was just the time when he could get free radio attention, and that was what he was striving for at the time.  Now, there could have been a lot of politics involved in that.  But Tom kept the politics out of it.
Story_ID: 192516
Speaker 1: So you were talking about how he [Tomlinson Todd] had envisioned this [radio] program ['Americans All'], and that this teacher at school [Howard University, Washington, D.C.] thought, you know, she would have you speak.
Speaker 2: Yes, [Lucy] Diggs Slowe.  And she sent me over, and I could choose my own topic, or anything of that sort.  And after the meeting was over, a very diminutive little light-skinned woman with red hair came up.  And she introduced herself, and she said, "I'm Mrs. Todd, Mary Todd [ph.], and I have a son, John Todd, at Howard.
Speaker 1: I said, "Well, yes, he's in my class."  And she said had a daughter, Victoria, who was applying for the Elks [National Foundation] oratorical contest, and would get the top prize of $1,000 to help with college if I helped her, because she felt that I could help her.  Well, I didn't necessarily take it on, but I noticed that she said that to me that night.  And then that Sunday, there was a knock on my dorm door, and I said come in.  In came a light-skinned woman with brown hair, reddish brown hair, and her daughter.  And she said she was in that contest, and wanted me to see what she had written, and how she was going to speak, and so on.  So, I had her go through it.  And I didn't like it, and told her that if I were a judge, I wouldn't choose her.  (Laughter).  And so, I told her what I thought she should--and she kept on practicing it.  And that summer, she did win the Elks oratorical contest.  This was a thousand dollars, fantastic money in those days.  So, she sent me a check for two bucks [dollars], thanking me.  She need not have sent me anything 'cause I knew what it cost when you have four kids in college, it's something.
Story_ID: 192517
Speaker 1: And then she [Mary Todd (ph.)] said she had this other son at Lincoln [University, Chester County, Pennsylvania], Tomlinson [Todd].  And she asked me whether I'd ever heard the name Tomlinson before, and I said no.  She said, "Well, one of Kiplings, in one of [Joseph Rudyard] Kipling's poems, Tomlinson was the hero.  And she was pregnant at the time, and she said, "I think I'll just name our son, if that's what we're going to have, Tomlinson." So, shortly thereafter, Tom came around.  And we dated until the end of the school term, and so on, and we took up the next year.  Tom was a people person.  He just met people, and people were interested in what he had to say, because he was interested always in doing things.  He may not have had any courses up to that time in marketing, but he certainly knew how to market his idea and market himself.  And in addition to that, he had to fight off the people who wanted to come in on this new program and use it as a tool.  "You know, just tell me, how many brothers, APA [Alpha Phi Alpha Fraternity] brothers you've had?"  "Oh, I don't know, I've never asked.  I may not have had any."  Well, you just didn't ask that information.  Because when we were striving for goals and everything, we weren't going to be all that parochial, and just pick whatever was our fraternity.  It just so happened that neither one of us was affiliated, and this made it good.  So, but any time he heard of anybody of any importance, a black person coming to town, he immediately got that person on the line and signed him up.  Or he would look over the various meetings of black organizations and sororities and fraternities that would be meeting in Washington [D.C.] and when.  And he'd have them signed up, you know, so that he was always on top of what was current to them.
Speaker 2: Now, when did the show occur?
Speaker 1: In the early 1940s.
Speaker 2: And what was the name of it?
Speaker 1: 'Americans All,' Station WOOK.
Story_ID: 192518
Speaker 1: And who were some of the people that you interviewed [on 'Americans All']?
Speaker 2: That we [Vance and Tomlinson Todd] interviewed?  Anybody and everybody who was important, or who had a following, who had an important job, who represented many people.  For instance, of course, Mordecai [Wyatt] Johnson, the president of Howard [University, Washington, D.C.], would be interviewed, and the president [Rufus E. Clement] of Atlanta University [later Clark Atlanta University, Atlanta, Georgia], and people important to the world, in finance and so on, if they were black.  And of course, we were funded, because the Federal Communications Commission [FCC] said that every station, whether radio or TV, who uses the public domain must give so much time to educational work.  And of course, this was educational.
Speaker 1: Was this affiliated with Howard at all?
Speaker 2: Not even affiliated with Lincoln [University, Pennsylvania].
Speaker 1: He [Tomlinson Todd] just, he got the time?
Speaker 2: And yes, he had the idea, and they liked the idea.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  And how long did the show last?
Speaker 2: Well, almost up until Tom's death in March, 1987.  He had turned the club into club international, made up of spouses with foreign spouses.
Speaker 1: And so, it lasted how many years?
Speaker 2: Nineteen years.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And you were with it for how long?
Speaker 2: Well, I was never with it during the summer, because I was overseas studying for finals work with the University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois] and Ohio State [University, Columbus, Ohio].  But as long as it was during the regular school year, I was always with it.  And he and I would get the subjects together, and he had, he had a write-up of the--The big discs, you know, at the time we had those big things.  We always had one of those for each program.  Now, many of those are in the possession of Howard University.  I don't know where the rest are.
Story_ID: 192519
Speaker 1: You at this point, you were one of the first women or black men on radio?
Speaker 2: Yes, we [Vance and Tomlinson Todd] were.  Yes, we were.  My son [Samuel Jones] says it's a little more meaningful to him.  He says Tom [Tomlinson Todd] is the father of black radio, and I'm the mother of black radio.  (Laughter).  I never dispute him, because he has carefully crafted that.  But we had anybody of any importance who had a message.  And as a result of that, Tom got two honorary doctorates.
Speaker 1: So, his mother really played the match-maker, right?
Speaker 2: Yes, (laughter).  And she called me, when we started dating, she called me her daughter-in-law. "How is my daughter-in-law?"  And I said, "Oh, fine, Mrs. Todd."  (Laughter).  "You know you are my daughter-in-law, or you're going to be my daughter-in-law."  And of course, I had turned Tom down, because we were different religions, and he was a divorced man.  You know, you can marry a divorced man if you divorce because infidelity and all of that sort of stuff, but it wasn't that.  Yep, he was a fantastic person.
Story_ID: 192520
Speaker 1: And then one, the Supreme Court decision, D.C. versus Thompson [District of Columbia v. John R. Thompson Co., Inc., 1953].  What was your role in that?
Speaker 2: Well, Tom [Tomlinson Todd] was the one who found--he didn't find those laws--actually, who--I can't say discovered.  But he was--I was out of town, and he was doing some research in the Library of Congress [Washington, D.C.].  And now, nobody actually just goes down to the Library of Congress for an afternoon of enjoyment and entertainment (laughter).  But he did.  On that particular day he was down there, and he started that--on civil rights legislation from day one, as it were.  And he got to 1970--I mean 1872 and 1873, in which these laws were made, that any well-dressed self-respecting--well, I mean clean, or whatever it was--man or woman or person who desires to eat in a restaurant downtown or to sleep in, you know, beds downtown could do so.  But that was kind of taken out of the Code in 1910 without anybody, along with us, knowing about it.  And he was down there one day and happened to see that.  So, he called me and said, "What should we do?  Hurry on home so we can--" I said, "Those were laws in 1872 and 1873, and we are not benefitting from them now."  I said, "We can't afford another day of discrimination."  I said, "Call some of your men."  And the men who were in Washington [D.C.] who were real legalities, were Thurgood Marshall, who was Solicitor General, the man who prepares the government's cases for the court.  Bill Hastie [William H. Hastie], who had graduated in first place and summa cum laude from one of the schools--I guess it was Amherst [College, Amherst, Massachusetts].  And then there was [Charles Hamilton] Charlie Houston, who was dean of the Howard University Law School [Howard University School of Law, Washington, D.C.], he was fantastic.  He never got as much as publicity as these other men, but he rock solidly knew the law.
Story_ID: 192521
Speaker 1: Well, any rate, he [Tomlinson Todd] got together all these men and they went over the laws.  Well, if they were still on the books--there was no evidence that they'd been revoked.  Then we still had those courtesies, or those, what shall I say, rights.  But we didn't.  And so, they got together and they decided that they would make a trial gesture as to whether they were still effective, and of course, they were turned down at every place they went to.  So then they got a committee, and it was the District of Columbia versus Thompson's [District of Columbia v. John R. Thompson Co., Inc., 1953].  Now, Thompson is not necessarily a famous restaurant.  It became more famous maybe because it was attached to this case.  But it was more like--see, what, I don't know, I don't recall the restaurants in Chicago.  I know there were lots of them.  It would comparable to a restaurant which has a great volume of business.  And they went to the Supreme Court, and the Supreme Court said it was okay; that restaurant was okay.  And that really should have been the end of it.  But they won the case, and blacks went on to go to restaurants and hotels.  But at the same time, our public schools were discriminating against lots of people.  And because they were discriminating, then we had to go back, and that's the time when we overturned Plessy versus Ferguson [Plessy v. Ferguson, 1896].  Yeah, we just about forgot that one, didn't we?   I have a feeling the laws weren't lost; they had to be taken out of the Code maliciously and with malice of forethought.  "Let's see how long it will be before these Negroes realize that this is no longer in here," and so on.  And if it hadn't been for Tom--and this was in the 1940s and '50s when he so-call found the laws.  And I guess that's the thing that he's best remembered for.  Because I say to people all the time, anytime you can go into any restaurant and expect to be served, or anytime you can go to any hotel, and as long as you have the fee and you can pay for it, and you can get to stay there, I say that's another brick, and I say a monument to Tom Todd.
Speaker 2: Okay, so he was an amazing person?
Speaker 1: He was.  We have pictures of him being greeted by President [John Fitzgerald] Kennedy and all the other great men of the day, the solicitor general, and all the other people.  He was quite a guy.
Story_ID: 192522
Speaker 1: James Willard Hill, Sr.  He was the first black person hired in our secondary school in Toledo [Ohio] as the superintendent of education, because the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] and others were clamoring for a person who was prepared.  So, I don't recall the date of the picture there.  He is a good looking, he was a good looking man.  (Laughter).
Speaker 2: Okay, next.
Speaker 1: Tomlinson Todd.  I have his birthdate.
Speaker 2: Could you spell his name, his first name?
Speaker 1: T-O-M-L-I-N-S-O-N, Tomlinson.  And Mrs. Todd got that name from one of [Rudyard] Kipling's poems.  I never read the poem until she told me, and she was pregnant at the time.  And she said, let's give him that name.
Speaker 2: Next.
Speaker 1: Now, that's Samuel Jones Vance and Valarie Justiss Vance on the day of our marriage, August 15th.  Now, this year will be fifty years, won't it?  August 15, 1945.
Speaker 2: That's a pretty picture.  Next.
Speaker 1: Well, that's a first cousin of mine, Mrs. Samuel Ida Nooner [ph.]--Mrs. John Nooner.
Speaker 2: Can you spell Nooner?
Speaker 1: N-O-O-N-E-R.  And her mother, my first cousin, received more money from the estate of my grandfather, Mose Price, who died March 8--March 6, 1920, than anybody else.
Speaker 2: Next.
Speaker 1: Valarie Vance over in Ireland attending the European Regional of the International Conference of Social Work.
Speaker 2: Next.
Speaker 1: That's just a few years ago.  I don't understand why (unclear)--And I was on TV in a little station in which I was a speaker.  You can tell, that's me over here, looking like a, what is that, a tiger or something, all checkered out.  And these, and most of these people are members of an organization such as--one or two are from the [U.S.] Army, and how the Army could use the facilities of the public schools in Los Angeles [California].
Speaker 2: Do you know what year this was, Ma'am?
Speaker 1: No, I don't.  Samuel, I don't remember the years of these things.  Because, you see, I didn't look to see.
Speaker 2: Okay, next one.
Speaker 1: Yours truly there, Samuel Jones and Valarie Justiss Vance, and members of the family.  This is my beautiful mother [Beatrice Ann Price].  Isn't she beautiful, Beatrice Price Justiss.
Speaker 2: She is.
Speaker 1: Yes.  And of course, I can't wear high heels.  But you see, at the age of sixty-five or so, she had on heels and was--
Speaker 2: She was sixty-five then?
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: She's looking good.
Speaker 1: Well, she was always good looking.  The only one of all of her siblings, girls, who went to college.  Because the father wasn't going to send the girls to college, and she said--
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  That's you and Madame Josephine Todd Walker.
Speaker 1: Yeah, this is, that's Samuel, of course, my son.  And this was last weekend in Washington, D.C. with Mrs. Josephine Todd Walker, well, Dr. Walker, but the sister of Dr. Tomlinson Todd.
Speaker 2: Next.
Speaker 1: Do you know who that is?
Speaker 2: Who?
Speaker 1: That is Tomlinson Todd when he was first born.  I didn't want that picture included, but he did.  Because I said if you're including that, why don't you include a picture of my sister and me?
Story_ID: 192523
Speaker 1: [HistoryMaker] Valarie Justiss Vance in the August, 1936 issue of the Crisis Magazine [NAACP], having received a master's degree in social work.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: Okay, next.
Speaker 2: I don't know--
Speaker 1: Well, it's this--who is that?  Is it Josephine Baker?
Speaker 2: Right here?  No.  I'm the black-skinned one.  (Laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And this is Brazil's most famous dancer, she's a black woman (unclear).  And this is 1964.  I spent six weeks there.
Speaker 1: Okay, next picture.
Speaker 2: Oh, what is that?  I can't quite see it.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  That's the one at Ida and John's house in Pacific Palisades.
Speaker 2: Oh, yes.  Oh, that's Ida and John Nooner at their home in Pacific Palisades in 1965, at the time of the riots there in Los Angeles [California].  And Mr. Hill and my sister, he was married to my sister, spent one month for two summers rebuilding a house which I'd picked up at a very low rate.  They didn't charge me a dime, I just paid all their expenses and so on.  It's nice to have sisters like that.
Speaker 1: Okay, next.
Speaker 2: On the left is Georgia Harris Logan [ph.], who was head of the department of math in the Los Angeles Public Schools.  And this picture was in 19--we'd had just got to California and--well, we had just got there.  That was 1964.
Speaker 1: Okay, next.
Speaker 2: That's Samuel.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  No, that's Daddy Vance and Grandmother.
Speaker 2: Well, at the time--I don't have a date on that.  That's, he had founded a school, CMI [ph.], in Mississippi.  And he returned later and was able to get his own degree.  But his wife, my mother-in-law, Mrs., let's see, her maiden name was Jones, too, wasn't it?  No, her husband's name is Jones.  No, her maiden name was Jones, and Mrs. Annie Jones had graduated from Philander Smith [College] the year I was born, 1913.
Speaker 1: Now I know that you said it--but Samuel said it, but you didn't say it.  You have to say the man's name for us, please.  You said Daddy Vance--
Speaker 2: Oh, yes, I call him Daddy.  John Vance is his name.
Speaker 1: Is that your, was that your father-in-law?
Speaker 2: That's my father-in-law.  He founded this college, CMI, and didn't have a college education himself.
Speaker 1: Okay, thank you, next.
Speaker 2: Well, next is the group that went over to Europe.  We were studying in Denmark at the college there.  And you can tell the grinner up there, that is I, Valarie Justiss--Valarie Omega Justiss.  And that year was 1963.
Speaker 1: And what is the group again?
Speaker 2: Americans for Democratic Action, ADA.  It was the most fantastic trip I've ever had in my life.
Speaker 1: It was '53 [1953].
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, 1953.
Speaker 1: You say that now the previous photo was 1953?
Speaker 2: The previous photo was 1953, thanks for the correction.
Speaker 1: Thank you, and go ahead with this one.
Speaker 2: Oh, what's the date I have on this? (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  You just put "1940s," you didn't know the exact date.
Speaker 1: Yes, I was speaking on the radio at WOOK in August, 1940, and my subject was the unmarried father.  You see, my book for my dissertation, the 486-page book, was on the unmarried father, and I was talking about it.
Speaker 2: And what was the subject of the dissertation, what was the thesis behind that?
Speaker 1: What was the--?
Speaker 2: 'The Unmarried Father,' what was the thesis?
Speaker 1: Well, the unmarried father, well, the main reasons for being an unmarried father is some of them are afraid of fatherhood, you know, some of them.  And I speak to girls and things of that sort.  But I had made a study of English, Norwegians, and Danish laws.  The Danish are particularly admired, because here in America, a man is allowed to challenge a girl's statement.  And he can bring in friends of his who will say, "Yeah, I slept with her," when they actually didn't.  But in Denmark, the lawyers, if you bring in a man and he says, "Yes, I had sex with her," judge will say, "Oh, you did?"  "Oh, yes."  "Mr. Jones, how much money do you make a week?"  "I make seventy-five dollars a week."  Oh, that's just fine, that's a big salary in Denmark.  "Okay, Mr. Jones, come to my office with twenty-five [dollars] each week for the girl, until the child reaches twenty-two."  And they stopped that stuff there.
Story_ID: 192524
Speaker 1: [HistoryMaker] Valarie Justiss Vance, the cover story of, for the month.  And the date is right here, Samuel [Jones], in the corner.
Speaker 2: It's fall of 1992.
Speaker 1: Nineteen ninety-two [1992].  You don't have a picture of Jacob there.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Oh, that's on the Great Wall of China.  I was trying to walk the Great Wall, Valarie Justiss Vance.  And that was the summer of 1980.
Speaker 1: Okay, next.
Speaker 2: I attended the Social Science Conference, of which I was the chairman, even though I was just a freshman, Valarie Justiss.  You will note on there, W.E. Burghardt Du Bois, Ralph Bunche, and the white-haired gentleman here is from Lincoln.  And the little short man here is Dr. Fred Minnis, who was the first inter-collegiate--
Speaker 1: How do you spell Minnis?
Speaker 2: M-I-N-N-I-S.
Speaker 1: And then, you are, point to where you are.  You're in the second row?
Speaker 2: Right here.
Speaker 1: To the left?
Speaker 2: Uh-huh, second row to the left.
Speaker 1: To the left, right?
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: What year?
Speaker 2: Nineteen thirty-two [1932].  That would have been, I entered in 1931, so 1932, that's the spring of the year.
Speaker 1: Okay, next.
Speaker 2: Oh, that's 1953, and I'm on the top of, Valarie Justiss Vance is on the top of St. Peter's in Rome.
Speaker 1: You traveled a lot, didn't you?
Speaker 2: Well, I've been, I haven't been to India or Australia.  Oh, that's another picture.  Samuel, that's a little too small, isn't it?  That's another little picture of me at Ida and John Nooner's house in Pacific Palisades.  To us, it was very important, because otherwise we wouldn't have gotten there on our own.  We didn't have any such connections, but we were happy about that.
Speaker 1: Okay, next.
Speaker 2: That's Valarie Justiss Vance in France, 1953, the summer of 1953 with ADA, Americans for Democratic Action.  I was trying to tell the man I didn't want to be snapped, and he took this snapshot.  (Laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay, next.
Speaker 2: This is Valarie Justiss Vance in Albuquerque, New Mexico, attending the National Association of Colored Women's Clubs in 1997.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: This is Valarie Justiss Vance at the International Social Welfare Conference in Brighton, England in 1990.  And I was addressing a group who had broken off into small groups, and I was addressing the group.
Speaker 1: Okay, next.
Speaker 2: Valarie Justiss Vance, in doctoral regalia, March 18, 1949.
Speaker 1: Your Ph.D.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: Go ahead.
Speaker 2: Go ahead?
Speaker 1: Yeah, tell us about who this is?
Speaker 2: Oh, that's my father, Jacob Justiss, Sr., spelled J-U-S-T-I-S-S, and not J-U-S-T-I-C-E.  The folk in the family say that the folks who have the white blood spells it with 'I-S-S.'
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: On the left, talking to President John F. Kennedy [President John Fitzgerald Kennedy].
Speaker 1: This is Tomlinson Todd.
Speaker 2: Samuel, I don't have the date for that.  Is there a date on it?
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Well, I think it was right when Kennedy--in 1960.  It was right when he had gotten into office, I think.
Speaker 2: Uh-huh, 1960.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay, talk now.
Speaker 2: Yes, Valarie Omega Justiss, sitting for a portrait by Laura Wheeler Waring.
