Story_ID: 21919
Speaker 1: All Right, my name is Larry Crowe.  I'm interviewer with The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Matthew Hickey.  Sir, could you please state your full name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: My name is Demetrius Venable.  First name is D-E-M-E-T-R-I-U-S, middle name is Dante, D-A-N-T-E, and last name is Venable, V-E-N-A-B-L-E.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, is there a story behind the name Demetrius?
Speaker 2: No, other than my father was probably being poetic.  He had read, I think the story he told me, he had read perhaps it was 'The Robe', one of the stories recently at about the time I was born, and he liked the name.  So he thought he'd--
Speaker 1: Yeah, that's the character in the story of 'The Robe', that's right.
Speaker 2: That's correct.
Speaker 1: And I think it was a sequel called 'Demetrius and the Gladiators'--
Speaker 2: 'Demetrius and the Gladiators', right.
Speaker 1: Victor Mature.
Speaker 2: Um-hum, that's correct.  So I think as far as I know that's where he got that name from.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: I was born October the 11th, 1947, and I was born in Powhatan.  That's P-O-W-H-A-T-A-N, Virginia.
Speaker 1: And what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: I'm a professor of physics.
Speaker 1: Currently at Howard [University, Washington, District of Columbia].
Speaker 2: At Howard University, that's correct, in the department of physics and astronomy.
Speaker 1: All right, and what is today's date?
Speaker 2: Oh, ghee, this is, let's see, June the 14th, 2012.
Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: Right now, we're in Thirkield Hall which is the physics building on Howard University's campus, 2355 6th Street, N.W.  And we're in the faculty conference room, Room 107.
Story_ID: 21920
Speaker 1: All right.  Now, before we go into depth, there are five light-weight questions we always ask as sort of a warm up.  And they only require a short answer.  The first question is, do you have a favorite food?
Speaker 2: Probably seafood is my most favorite.  That's about as specific as I can get with that one, but I love seafood.
Speaker 1: Okay, do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: Well, I guess if I had to pick a color, blue.
Speaker 1: Okay, do you have a favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Summertime.
Speaker 1: Okay, a favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Not really.  I don't vacation a lot.  When I'm away from home, when I'm living away, my vacation is always spent going back to Powhatan, and so right now, I don't have a favorite vacation spot.
Speaker 1: Okay, and the last question is, do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: Let's see, "Knowledge is a value in itself.  It need serve no purpose other than to expand the world view of the individual learner."  I read that somewhere, and have no idea who it's from.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Thirty years ago, I think I came across that statement, and I just thought it was an interesting statement.  I truly believe that knowledge has a value in itself.
Story_ID: 21921
Speaker 1: Okay, well, I'm gonna ask you about your family history.  I'm gonna ask about your mother's side of the family and your father's side, but we'll start with your mother's side first.  Then we'll put 'em together, you know.
Speaker 2: Sure.
Speaker 1: So, can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: J. Viola Venable.  The 'J' is Josephine, and she never used that.  So, J-O-S-E-P-H-I-N-E, V-I-O-L-A.  Her maiden name is Bell, B-E-L-L and then Venable.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what is her date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: She was born in February 20--1921, and she was born in Powhatan, Virginia as well.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, what do you know about your mother's side of the family?  How far back can you trace that side of the family and what were they doing in history?
Speaker 2: Several generations.  Her grandfather, her grandfather, I believe, maybe her great-grandfather, John Tyler Bell, Jr. came to Powhatan in the 1800s, late 1800s, post-Civil War.  I don't know exact timeframe and purchased land there.  And one of the family stories I think they would tell us is they raised turkeys to pay off the, the cost for the land, he and his wife.  And they had several children.  I don't know, maybe eleven, twelve, somewhere in that range.  And my grandfather, my father's--my mother's father was John Waddy, W-A-D-D-Y, Bell.  He and his brothers and sisters stayed in that area as they grew up, which was customary in those days.  They were not really farmers.  They were mostly, mostly construction workers.  My grandfather was a contractor, he built homes.  So, so in that sense, I think we can go back three, maybe four generations on her side of the family.  There is a family history that was done of them by one of my cousins and so we have a family reunion every other year in August, on even years.  So we'll be having one this August, and (unclear) a couple hundred people attend.  It's a nice event.
Speaker 1: Okay, are there any stories about what the family was doing like prior to the Civil War?
Speaker 2: No, we don't have any information on that, at least I'm not aware of any information on that?
Speaker 1: Did you, do you know if John Tyler Bell served in the Civil War at all?
Speaker 2: Not, not to my knowledge.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Or any information about how he came to purchase land and by what, you know--
Speaker 2: No, I don't, I don't know the specifics on it.  I think perhaps some of the members of the family may know the answers to these questions.  I don't want to, to say we don't know as a family, but I personally don't know.  I believe he came up from the North Carolina region, as I recall hearing the story from some of my relatives and moved into Powhatan.  I'm not sure if I can tell you why it was Powhatan.
Story_ID: 21922
Speaker 1: Now, is Powhatan like an African American-friendly place?
Speaker 2: Powhatan is in Central Virginia.  African-American friendly, you know, I grew up there in the '50s [1950s], right, so it was segregated, I think is the first thing you say about it.  And I wouldn't say it was African American friendly, but I would say that there was not a whole lot of interaction between the blacks and the whites in the region, not a whole lot.  There was certainly some, but not a whole lot.  Schools were being integrated in the '60s [1960s] and things like that just, you know, they certainly caused issues.
Speaker 1: I guess what--
Speaker 2: But I don't think it was as bad as being in the deep South.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I'm just wondering if there was a lot of black land ownership or business opportunities in Powhatan or a strong black community in Powhatan?
Speaker 2: There was a very strong black community.  There was, most of the blacks who lived there owned land.  Most of the land was rural.  It was not a town.  It was a rural place.  Powhatan is the name of the county.  There is no town incorporated right there.  Most of the land was handed down, you know, from family member to family member in that sense.  So the land started as large crops and sort of got broken down to smaller and smaller spots as generations passed on.  But it was a, it was a good, tight-knit community.  There were only about maybe four or five African American families--and I have to, you know, restrict it to the part of Powhatan that my family grew up in.  The neighborhood that my mother [Viola Bell] lived in was called Moheminko (ph.) which is Native American--
Speaker 1: I'm sorry.
Speaker 2: Mohemenko.  It's a Native American name.
Speaker 1: Can you spell that for us?
Speaker 2: M-O-H-E-M-E-N-K-O, I think that's the way it's spelled.
Speaker 1: M-O-H-E-
Speaker 2: Yeah, M-O-K-E, Mohemenko (ph.).  I'm not a hundred percent sure of the spelling, but I think it's, yeah, it's a Native American name.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That was the particular neighborhood that she grew up in, and her family or her family, which was the Bell family and then the Morris family and the Taylor family, were the dominant African American families in the neighborhood.  And at that time, there were probably no whites at all living in that neighborhood.  So they, they, I think they were a very vibrant community in that sense, very, very much involved in the Civil Rights Movement and things in the '50s [1950s] and the '60s [1960s].
Speaker 1: Okay, I just wanted to put it in perspective 'cause there're some areas where there are mostly just sharecroppers, black sharecroppers.
Speaker 2: No, they weren't sharecroppers.  They were, they were, they mostly owned their own land.  There were not a lot of really large farms there.  You know, the people who lived there, some of them had smaller farms.  They worked to make a living.  A lot of them were doing things, they were self supporting.  There was a private school for, Catholic school for boys and girls in the area, St. Francis de Sales High School for Girls and St., a military academy for boys.  There were full communities developed around those two schools.  And a lot of the family members worked there on my mother's side of the family, at least, worked there.
Speaker 1: Okay, so they were, they were, on your mother's side, they were teachers and--
Speaker 2: There were, there were teachers, and there were trace persons, primarily.
Speaker 1: Okay, was there a particular college associated with your family more so than another?
Speaker 2: Not really on my mother's side.  A couple of her sisters I would say probably went to St. Paul's College [Lawrenceville, Virginia], Virginia Union University [Richmond, Virginia], and then Virginia State College [Petersburg, Virginia] would have been the closest colleges that they would have attended.  So for those who did attend college, and, and a lot on my mother's side, until my generation at least, didn't, probably didn't attend college.  By my generation, you know, that was much more typical to go to college.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But a couple of my mother's sisters graduated from college. She did not.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 21923
Speaker 1: Did your mother talk about what her aspirations were growing up, what she wanted to do?
Speaker 2: No, my, my mother [Viola Bell] was the kind of person who sort of liked being outdoors.  And she also enjoyed being a caregiver.  I think she was very much, very much like to help elderly people.  I think if she had any aspirations, it was to continue to be a caregiver and children.  She spent a lot of time, taking care of the neighborhood children and the family children.  I think almost any child who grew up in that area would have at least spent some days at my mother's house being cared for.  She never, never really worked, you know, as anything other than just a babysitter or caretaker for a family or something like that.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So she spent most of her time at home as a, as a domestic housewife.
Speaker 1: Now, she did have any stories about growing up that she shared with you, that you remember?
Speaker 2: You know, I don't recall any specific stories from her about growing up that come to mind.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, so she--did she have a chance to finish high school?
Speaker 2: Yes, she did.  She finished, Pocahontas High School which is the same high school I finished in the area.  While she was in school, they, you know, they moved from the, in the South, in the '30s [1930s] and the '40's [1940s], then, even in the '50s [1950s] in some places, they had the community-based schools, the one-room schools.  She started out in a one-room school in Mohemenko.  But by the time she was in high school, they had merged and had a county-wide high school for African Americans.  So--
Speaker 1: That was Pocahontas?
Speaker 2: That was Pocahontas, um-hum.
Speaker 1: Now, the names here, Powhatan, Pocahontas, these are the names of--
Speaker 2: Native American Indians.
Speaker 1: --Native American, yeah, they were, I guess, in the, some of the early stories of conflict with, you know, the European settlers, the English of Jamestown and--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, well, Powhatan was the name of the chief of the Powhatan Confederacy which was a loose confederation of tribes.  And they were mostly in the eastern part of the state, in the Jamestown area, in that area.  The, as far as I know, the Powhatan Confederation didn't stretch West of Richmond.  Powhatan, where I live is about forty miles west of Richmond [Virginia].  The confederation did not stretch that far.  The name is, is a historical name.  So they, you know, at the time that the county was established, they picked that name.  I think the name of the school, Pocahontas, was picked because the county was named Powhatan.  So.
Speaker 1: Yeah, Pocahontas, being the daughter of Powhatan.
Speaker 2: Right, right.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Right, and there was a, Powhatan High School was the white high school and then Pocahontas High School was the African American.  And I say high school, there was also the elementary, it was a one through twelve.  All twelve grades, they were in the same school, Pocahontas High School, Pocahontas Elementary School.
Story_ID: 21924
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  All right, so now, let me go on to your father's side of the family.  Can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: Yeah, James, J-A-M-E-S, B. Venable, V-E-N-A-B-L-E.
Speaker 1: And what is his date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: He was born in 1913 in New York City.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, what can you tell us about your father's side of the family?
Speaker 2: Okay, now, my father's side of the family also came from Powhatan [Virginia].  Okay, and they were, the ones I know, they were, they were more teachers and professionals.  My grandfather, his father was James Blaine, B-L-A-I-N-E, Venable.  And James Blaine, who was born in Powhatan, but moved to New York at a young age--well, not a young age, as a young man.  And that's where my father was actually born, in New York.  Now, he, he died when my father was only two years old.  And my father and his twin brother moved back to Powhatan at that time and were raised by the sister and the brother of their father.  So.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, James Blaine, that was a political figure of the late, latter 19th Century, James G. Blaine.  You figure his name is probably, had something to do with--
Speaker 2: Well, I'm not sure about that.  Let's see.  What I know about the family on that side, I think the first thing that, that I know was maybe in the 1870s or 1880s, Louisa Stewart Venable, purchased land from John Cock.  John Cock was the son of Philip St. George Cock, and he was a very well known plantation owner and was one of the largest slave owners in the, in the--
Speaker 1: Is it Cox or--
Speaker 2: Cock, C-O-C-K.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, Cock, C-O-C-K.  He was a historical figure during the Civil War and owned a lot of property right there where the family grew up.  So Louisa and her two sons, Jefferson and Richard--Jefferson and Richard, yes, purchased land from, from the son of Philip St. George Cock.  And they bought that and in the deed, the statement was that, you know, she wanted to have land that her children, that she could pass on to her children.  So she bought it along with them.  Richard died without having any children.  But Jefferson would have been my father's grandfather, and he was James Blaine's father.
Speaker 1: This would be your great, great grandfather.
Speaker 2: Yeah, something like that--
Speaker 1: Jefferson--
Speaker 2: Let me see, my great--
Speaker 1: --Venable?
Speaker 2: Jefferson Venable, right, T. Jefferson Venable.  I assume it's Thomas Jefferson Venable, but he, I know he went by Jefferson.  So, I think his name was legally Thomas Jefferson Venable.  He had, he had several children, James Blaine, being one.  Christiana Venable.  I always called her my grandmother because she raised my father, okay, but she was really my father's aunt.  And then Thomas Carlyle Venable, Thomas Carlyle Venable was my father's uncle, Christiana's brother.  And the two of them, they, they all still lived in the same land.  And they raised my father and his twin brother.  Now, they were, Thomas was a lawyer and Christiana was a school teacher.  She actually taught in the Mohemenko school system.  So they were both college educated people.
Speaker 1: Thomas Carlyle is another historical figure--
Speaker 2: That's correct.  He, I don't, not gonna say it's the same one and don't know how the name, but, but Thomas, my father's Uncle Thomas, died in the early 1940s, probably in that timeframe.
Speaker 1: Now, just for the record, there was a white author of a book called "An Occasional Discourse on the Nigger Question", named Thomas Carlyle in the latter part of the 19th Century.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: That was when the question of what to do with black people after Reconstruction, you know, what are we gonna do with them.  He wrote this book, and it's much discussed in black history classes, a white fellow named Thomas Carlyle.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Interesting, I, you know, so a lot of these names, James Blaine, Thomas Carlyle, they're all like, you know, reflect some kind of pattern.  It may not be.
Speaker 2: Well, well, it also could be.  I don't know of the name Carlyle being in the family prior to him, at least none of the names I've seen were Carlyle.  And "Blaine", I think was the first time I've seen that.  But James and Thomas were very common names throughout the family.  But--
Speaker 1: I think James G. Blaine ran for president a few times and barely lost.  He was very well known.
Speaker 2: Okay, yeah, I'm not a historian, so I don't always know all these names, but, yes, it's quite interesting.
Speaker 1: I'm just putting it, for anybody watching this, they may be able to get a little reference in case they--I don't know--it doesn't necessarily have to do with your family forward progression, but I just--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But as I say, they were, they were fairly well-educated people, and they, they maintained the land there.
Story_ID: 21925
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Now, my father, my father and his brother, they didn't, they lived, you know, they lived with the aunt and uncle, but they were, they went away to school.  They weren't educated in Powhatan.  I mean, 'cause first of all, he was about seven years older than my mother [Viola Bell].  So he was, at the time, they didn't have the school systems in place as well.  So he actually, to go to high school, he went to Richmond [Virginia].  And I, I don't really know this, but I think that in that timeframe, you know, it was not uncommon for African American, colored kids in those days, right, to be, to go to, say to Richmond or to a larger city where they could actually go to and get an education.  So he actually, I think he went to Norfolk [Virginia] for some of his elementary schooling, and then he went to Richmond to Armstrong High School, and they would come home in the summer times, you know, but during the year, they would be probably living with a family in those areas.
Speaker 1: Now, what's your father's twin brother's name?
Speaker 2: Thomas.
Speaker 1: Thomas, okay.
Speaker 2: Thomas died in 1970.  My father died in--1972 Thomas died.  My father died in 1995.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay, so, what did your father [James Venable] say about growing up?  Did he have any stories about, you know, his trying to get an education or--
Speaker 2: You know, I mean my, my father [James Venable], he, he was, yeah, he was a school teacher in Powhatan County [Virginia].  So, so he was, he was fairly well respected, and again, when you talk about African American school systems where you'd go from grade one through twelve, and I think there were probably three men teaching in that whole system.  And he was one of those.  He taught math and history in the school system.  He was a fairly respected individual.  He, he obviously was a role model, I think, for a lot of the young men, always pushing us to get an education.  He felt very strongly that that was the way for African Americans to improve themselves, was to get an education.  And so I think a good part of his goal was to get as many people from the area to go on to college as he possibly could, both men and women.  And he sort of pushed that along.  So stories, I, you know, he, he didn't tell me a whole lot of stories about youth.  He would tell some adventures about he and his brother when they were in Powhatan [Virginia], I guess, during the summer, but just the kind of things that kids would do.  So, you know, just being, being boys growing up in the country, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, where did he, where did he go to college?
Speaker 2: He went to Virginia Union University [in Richmond, Virginia] until the War [World War II].  And then he went into the War and when he came out, he went to Virginia State [University in Petersburg, Virginia].  I think, I think he actually got his degree actually from Virginia State, and then he stayed there and got a master's degree as well.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, he was almost, I would guess he'd be on the borderline in terms of eligibility in World War II.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Born in 1913--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, he--
Speaker 1: --he would have been one of the older people in the War.
Speaker 2: What he, what he tells me is that, you know, he, when he was in college--and he did not like to talk a lot about the war.  So that's, you have to understand that he was, he didn't--he used to think that it was wrong for anybody to argue that they wanted their sons to go to war and be in combat.  You know, that was a big issue with African Americans, as to what role they played in the War.  And he, he was in combat, and he was, the [United States] Army was not segregated, but he was one of the few blacks who actually served in a non-black regiment at that time, but the Army wasn't officially segregated.
Speaker 1: Now, this is World War I--
Speaker 2: World War II.
Speaker 1: Two, yeah, World War II.  So the Army is segregated.
Speaker 2: I'm sorry.  I misspoke.  The Army was not integrated.
Speaker 1: Okay, right.
Speaker 2: Thank you for, yeah.  So he was one of the few blacks who served in a non-black regiment (unclear).
Speaker 1: What did he do?
Speaker 2: He, you know, he was in, he was trained in artillery, but let me just tell you.  The story that he told me was that he, he wanted to get into the Army and get his service in and get out before the war started because he realized the war was going to start, and there would be a draft.  So his, his goal was to get in, serve his time and hopefully, get out before the war started.  And he did go in, you know, he volunteered to go in.  But, but he, he, his--the war started before his time was up.  So he actually was there from, you know, from day one to the end.  He was trained in artillery, and he also served on a, a staff of some general.  I don't know the details of it, but I do have his Army records.  He, he retired as a captain, stayed in the reserves [US Army Reserves] for a long time and retired as a captain.
Speaker 1: Okay, so he went in as an officer.
Speaker 2: He went to OCS [Army Officer Candidate School].
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: Yeah, so.
Speaker 1: And where did he serve?  Was it in the Pacific or Europe?
Speaker 2: Europe.
Speaker 1: Europe.
Speaker 2: Yep, and as I say, he was there from D-Day on through.  So he, probably France and Germany.  I don't know what other places.
Speaker 1: So he had a political analysis of the struggle of African American soldiers in the War.
Speaker 2: I don't know if I'd go that far to say a political analysis.  He, he, he didn't particularly think that it was appropriate to argue that you wanted your soldiers to necessarily be on the frontline.  I mean he didn't have anything against the philosophical idea of, of what it meant, you know, as a race.  I don't think he had a problem with that.  His problem was you get shot at on the frontline, and you got killed on the frontline and that, you know, that's not the ideal place to be.
Speaker 1: Okay, I misunderstood (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: He was from a very practical standpoint when he would say that he didn't think that's what you wanted to argue, that you, your people should be.  I mean he wasn't arguing that they should be digging latrines.  That was not his argument 'cause he didn't think that was right either.  But he was simply saying that, you know, you, when you argue that you want people on the frontlines, you have to realize that a lot of bombs are being dropped on your head when you're there.
Speaker 1: Okay, let me go back and put this in some kind of perspective.
Speaker 2: Sure.
Speaker 1: So he's saying that he thinks that there was a, the fact that black people were arguing that they wanted to be in combat was wrong ended argument, that they, they should, if they were gonna serve, they should be behind the lines--
Speaker 2: No, no, no, that's not what I'm trying to say.  And that's not what I think he was saying.  I think what he was saying was that it doesn't matter whether you're black or white or anything else.  Ideally, you don't want to be in a war to start with.  Ideally, you don't wanna be shot at.  But when you're making the argument that, you know, Jim Venable, do you wanna go on the frontline or do you wanna go and serve on this general's staff, he was saying that, you know, as far as he was concerned, he'd rather go and serve on the general's staff.  Now, if you asked him, do you wanna be on the frontline or go and dig latrines, I'm sure he would have said, 'cause he's not the kind of person who would like to have settled for that, he would have to be on the frontline.  He was simply saying, in my opinion, and I, you know, and I do not have this detail, but just from listening to him over the years, he was simply saying that you have to be cautious about making arguments that we want our boys in combat because when you put your boys in combat, your boys get killed.  He was not a passivist.  He was not opposed to war.  He was simply saying that the consequence of being on the front line is that you get killed, and that when you say you want your son to be on the frontline, you have to understand that you are really increasing the chance that your son is gonna be killed.  I, I hope I'm articulating this the way I think he said it.  He was not a passivist.  He was not opposed to war.  He was opposed to African Americans fighting in the war at all.  He was simply saying that, that's a dangerous place to be, you know.  That's, that's a dangerous place to be and you don't necessarily wanna argue that that's the ideal place for your son to be.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right--
Speaker 2: Hopefully, I've said that the way--I'm trying to represent what I think he truly believed.
Story_ID: 21926
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So you were saying that your father [James Venable] tried out for the Tuskegee Airmen, he had applied?
Speaker 2: Yeah, he had applied for the Tuskegee Airmen.  So I'm saying he's not opposed to, you know, combat, but he, he had said to me that he passed all aspects of tests or whatever they need to qualify, except for eyesight.  He had very poor, depth perception.  So he said he did not qualify because of his eyesight.  So, you know, that's that story.  I don't know much about it, and I think he'd only mentioned it to me two or three times that I can recall.  But I specifically remember him saying that he was not able to get in, only because of his eyesight.
Speaker 1: Okay, are there any other stories from the war that he talked about that--
Speaker 2: My father did not like to talk a lot about the war [World War II].  He, in fact, I think when people started talking about the war, quite often he would get up and run and go and leave--not run, that's a bad word, bad choice, and leave the room.  He was injured.  He had a, he had a shrapnel wound to the head and actually had a plate put in.  So, you know, it was in (unclear), my mother [Viola Bell] tells me she thought for a long time that he'd actually been killed, you know, because, because of his injury and obviously, the communication in that day was not very effective.  So he was very concerned about, you know, about the war.  He, he just didn't talk a lot about it.  He, he didn't, he never, he never thought about it in any kind of a glorious way.  He, you know, he said it was bad, war is bad.  And that was his attitude about it, yeah, necessary, necessary.  He didn't argue the need for it, but he just said it was bad, yeah.
Speaker 1: Well, he seemed to serve longer than most people because he joined before the War and then went through the whole end of the War?
Speaker 2: Yeah, and then he stayed in the reserves afterward, right.  And he went through the whole end of the War.  I don't think you got to get out in those days once the war started, as I recall (laughter), of course, not, as I think.  I don't think that, you know, after your tour of duty, you could go home.  I think you, I think everybody stayed till the end, right.
Story_ID: 21927
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, you said when he [Demetrius Venable's father, James Venable] came back [from World War II] he went to Virginia State [Virginia State University, in Petersburg, Virginia].
Speaker 2: Came back, he went to Virginia State, and he started teaching at Pocahontas High School [in Powhatan, Virginia], okay.  And he stayed at Virginia State as a part-time student and got his, both is degrees.  I said, part time, not a residential student, you know, a commuting student, and got both his undergraduate degree and his master's degree.  I think his master's was in guidance.
Speaker 1: Okay, like a lot of black teachers in those days, he had the greater degree and teaching in a small school.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And so, now, is there a story about how your parents met?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I don't know that.  You know, they, they both grew up in the same community, albeit my father was there primarily during the summer times because he was away to school other times.  But I don't really know how they met.  I don't think I've heard a story to that effect.
Speaker 1: Okay, they met prior to World War II, I guess?
Speaker 2: Yes, they did.  Um-hum, yeah, they were married in '41 [1941], I believe.  I think he was probably in the military at that time, but I think it was probably before the war, before the U.S. became part of the war, I believe.
Speaker 1: They were married in (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: I think it was '41 [1941], I believe.
Speaker 1: '41 [1941], okay.  All right, now, when you think about your parents' personalities and their habits and dispositions, their likes and dislikes, their looks, who do you think you take after the most?
Speaker 2: Probably my father from a standpoint of looks, I think, you know, structurally, I'm a lot like he is or was.  In fact, I wear a lot of his, I can wear a lot of his clothes.  I'm not a fancy dresser as you can see, but I, but I could always wear his jackets and shirts and things like that.  So, we were pretty much the same size.  He had, this balding spot was his.  That's where I got it from.  And so we're, in that sense we were very much the same.  My, my mother [Viola Bell] was a little, little different, not, not quite as serious a person, I guess, you know, as my, as my father was.  She was, she, she--as I said, she liked children.  She liked taking care of people.  And that was sort of the way she kept herself comfortable, but, you know, and she raised us.  So.
Speaker 1: Okay, can you name your brothers and sisters in order and tell us where you fit in?
Speaker 2: Yes, my oldest sister's name is Yvonne, Y-V-O-N-N-E Charles.  That's her last name.  And then my middle sister, her name is Xochela, X-O-C-H-E-L-A, last name is James.  And then me, I'm the youngest.  So it's three of us.
Speaker 1: Now, is there a story behind her name?
Speaker 2: You know, again, I think they were being overly poetic.  My mother said she heard the name on the radio, okay.  It's Spanish in nature, obviously.  And so my mother said she heard the name on the radio and she liked it, so she named her Xochela.
Speaker 1: Okay, and so you just have the two sisters?
Speaker 2: Um-hum, just the two sisters, and then me.
Speaker 1: And you're the youngest?
Speaker 2: Yes, I am.
Story_ID: 21928
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Now, do you have an earliest childhood memory?
Speaker 2: Wow, you know, earliest.  I, I remember, and I guess I was probably pretty, I was five years old or something like that.  My mother [Viola Bell] was helping an elderly lady, white lady, who lived in the, what we called the courthouse district, right, okay.  (Unclear) (voice drops) So if you (unclear) with the area, so this was sort of like a courthouse district.  And I would go with her when she went down there.  And I can remember playing there.  I remember playing with the, with the kids in that area, the white kids.  And, you know, we got along fine 'cause I'm a little guy.  Nobody feels threatened by a five-year old, right.  And so, I think, I think I remember playing and just having fun, just being a kid in that neighborhood.  So, and that sort of stuck with me.  It was a Confederate monument that had, you know, a statue on the top of it and it was a hill.  So I remember running up and down that hill, and maybe that's why it stuck with me 'cause it, you know, once I realized it was a Confederate monument.  But we used to play there, and there was little young, a little girl named Ann, who, she and I were very good friends.  And we just, and we just played on that hill all day long.  That was what we did.
Speaker 1: Did you feel differently about it when you found out it was a Confederate monument?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, at that age, I don't think it mattered one way or the other to me.  It was a hill.  That's what I cared about.  When you get older and you realize it, you know, you look back, and there's probably a lot of things I did in my life that I was sort of race neutral about.  As I said, Mohemenko (ph.) where my family grew up, I, my mother [Viola Bell] and father [James Venable] actually lived right beside the school which was, you know, about three miles from where my mother actually grew up and eight miles or five miles from where my father actually grew up.  But I didn't interact a lot with whites as, as I was growing up.  And even, and after that time, I did not interact a lot either because I went to, you know, I went to a segregated school system.  So I just, I didn't think anything about it, didn't think anything about it, and probably when I got older and realized it, I didn't think a whole lot about it then either.  You know, still to me, it was a hill to play on.  It was fun.
Story_ID: 21929
Speaker 1: Okay, so describe the house you grew up in.  You say it was next to the school, I mean about how far away and were there other houses close by?
Speaker 2: Okay, let's see.  I grew up on, there were no street names.  It's rural life, so it was U.S. Route 60, and my address was Route 1, Box 16, Powhatan, Virginia.  I remember that very well, didn't have zip codes in those days.  Well, when I can remember back, there were not zip codes.  But this was a house that was built by my mother's [Viola Bell] father, John Bell, who was the contractor.  He actually built the house for them.  It was a good-sized house.  It was, it was about, I would say less than a quarter of a mile from the school, the elementary school and the high school, Pocahontas, were right there together on the same, same lot.  They were two separate buildings, but they were adjacent to each other.  And as I said, my father [James Venable] taught in the high school there.  So that house was the house that, that we grew up in, it was the family house.  We still own the house now.  But that was house we grew up in.
Speaker 1: Two-story house or one--
Speaker 2: It was, it was a two-story house, right.  It was, if I count the bedrooms, one, two, three bedrooms downstairs and another one, two, three, four upstairs.  Okay, it was a fairly large house.
Speaker 1: Now, I've seen some rural Virginia houses in the black community, kind of like a box like, but two stories going up.  Did it look like that?
Speaker 2: Ghee, it was, it would have been long ways with the door on the short wall or the rectangle and then long ways.  So when you come in, you come into a little vestibule area, and then to your right would be the living room.  And if you go to your left, there was a, it was actually a bedroom, but it was my father's den.  And then you go further down the hallway, there was another bedroom and two more bedrooms in the back there.  It was only one bath, by the way.  So a big difference today.  But, you know, we had running water and indoor plumbing, and that was not unusual in that neighborhood, but it was, certainly it wasn't that everybody had running water and indoor plumbing.  So we, we--it was a small lot.  I think it was only like three acres or so.  My mother had a small garden that she kept, and I think, you know, from time to time, we raised chickens, and we raised pigs and I remember a really nice grapevine in the backyard which my mother would go out there, and we'd pluck grapes, and she'd make jelly from it, so, that she preserved.
Story_ID: 21930
Speaker 1: Okay, now, we're already in this territory now, but we always ask this question this way.  And the question is, what were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up?
Speaker 2: Hmm, I don't know how to best answer it.  You know, certainly, it was country, it was urban [rural].  When you raise and at that timeframe, you certainly smelled the pigs.  There's no question about that.  Now, I don't think that was a memorable smell.  I can't think of any odor or scent or sight that I could say, you know, really, sort of I look at and I see it, and it makes me think about home.  I don't wanna say that.  If anything, there were these oak trees that surrounded the house.  There were about, I guess five or six of them that sort of go all the way around the house.  And they were large when I was a kid, you know, and they're still there now.  So when I see big oaks, I do think about that, that line.  I mean they're really big now, but they were, to me as a kid, they were big.  So I think the sight of big oak trees, perhaps, nothing other than that that I could probably put my finger on.
Speaker 1: Okay, sounds, smells?
Speaker 2: I don't know about sounds.  You know, we lived off of U.S. Route 60, which was a little bit different.  Mohemenko [Virginia], you'd actually be off on the side road where my mother [Viola Bell], and a little further on where my father [James Venable] grew up.  But the thing that was different was automobiles.  You know, you'd hear automobiles going up, near Route 60, whereas if you were back on the side roads where my parents' homes were, you'd see two or three automobiles a day.  So, yeah, in that sense, I do remember as a kid thinking about how many more cars went by my house than went by my grandparents' house or my great aunt's house.  I thought about things like that.
Speaker 1: Well, what about smells?  You said, you talked about the pigs.
Speaker 2: Well, yeah, I mean obviously, when you raise pigs, you know, you smell pigs.  But we didn't raise pigs all the time, but from time to time, we did.  So I remember that.  But I don't really associate that smell with home in that sense.  So there is no one smell that I can say I really associate with home or growing up.
Story_ID: 21931
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, now, was the church nearby?
Speaker 2: Well, let's see.  My, my mother [Viola Bell] was a member of Mount Zion Baptist Church, and that would have been about five miles west of us.  And my father [James Venable] was a member of Green Briar Baptist Church, and that would have been about, I guess five miles--well, but you would west and then go north into the Mohemenko County.  So it was Mohemenko.
Speaker 1: This is Green Briar--
Speaker 2: Green Briar.
Speaker 1: Was it a Baptist or--
Speaker 2: Um-hum, Baptist.
Speaker 1: So they're both Baptist.
Speaker 2: They were both Baptist, um-hum.
Speaker 1: But they went to two separate churches?
Speaker 2: Well, remember, again, there were lots of little community churches, right, so every five or so miles, there was a community church.  And they were mostly tied in around several different families as far as getting them started.  But they grew up, my father's family attended Green Briar, and my mother's family attended Mount Zion.  They were about, you know, five or six miles apart, not that far apart.  Now, now, it's a lot of interaction.  As they were older, when they, you know--my father taught Sunday school at both churches, okay.  But he was a member of Green Briar.  He was a Sunday school teacher for both churches.
Speaker 1: Was there any one church that you attended the most of the two?
Speaker 2: I would say the most probably Mount Zion.  I was baptized at Mount Zion, but we attended both of them a lot, but probably Mount Zion a little bit more.  I think I, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, was church a big part of growing up?
Speaker 2: It was a big part of Sunday, that's for sure.  Yeah, you know, it was, you get dressed up and you go to church.  Yeah, it was a big part of growing up in that sense, absolutely, very, very much--you know, my grandfather [John Bell], my mother's father was the superintendent of the Sunday school; didn't have any preachers.  But my, her father was the superintendent of a Sunday school and one of her brothers became superintendent of the Sunday school.  If you go back to Jefferson Venable who I, my father's grandfather, he was actually a founding clerk at both of those churches.  So, he was involved with the starting of both of them.  So, yeah, the church played a very critical part.  My father's aunt was very much involved, the one who raised him.  She was very much involved in the church.
Story_ID: 21932
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Now, so when you were growing up, did you have an experience that, when you were growing up that put you on the path of science?
Speaker 2: You know, because it was such a small school, my father taught me, obviously, okay.  So, and my father  [James Venable] taught math.  And he was a very good teacher.  So I mean I really loved math, and I was, I was really good at it and certainly because of his influence.  I mean he taught me algebra, and that's, that was sort of the start for me of really having a love for math.  So I would say, if there's any influence that got me into science, it would have been having him as a math teacher, and just growing, building from there.  I remember solving math problems with my father and geometry.  It was a small school, so we did not have a lot of math.  I had two years of math in high school.  I had a year of algebra and a year of geometry because that was what they taught.  So, so in that sense, I wasn't overly prepared, but what I knew, I knew very well.  What I knew, I had learned well.  So I had a real good foundation to pursue it, so that was why I went into, in fact, I started as a math major my very first year and changed to physics because I, I just, I liked the math and wanted to utilize the math, but I also enjoyed the science aspect of it.  So I thought by being in physics, you get to do both things.
Story_ID: 21933
Speaker 1: So you started grade school when, in 1953?
Speaker 2: I don't know (laughter).
Speaker 1: When you were about five then or what?
Speaker 2: No, I was six when I started.  We didn't have kindergarten.  I was six, and I was born in October.  So I would have turned seven quickly thereafter.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So I was six when I started in August or September.
Speaker 1: This would be '54 [1954]?
Speaker 2: I think it'd be '54 [1954], probably, yeah, I graduated in '66 [1966] yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you start there at Pocahontas, right?
Speaker 2: Pocahontas Elementary School [in Powhatan, Virginia], um-hum.
Speaker 1: And you went all the way through high school in the same school, right?
Speaker 2: Um-hum, all the way through high school.  No middle school.  Just elementary and high, and I remember I had, you know, and it was, it was--my father [James Venable] worked there, so, you know, everybody knew everybody.  I had an aunt who taught there, one of my mother's [Viola Bell] sisters.  She was my third-grade teacher.  You know, I had the lady who lived across the road, whose home, whose house was across the road from our house.  She was my fourth grade teacher.  So it was, it was, it wasn't like, say, going to school today, you know, where you have no idea who your teachers are.  And everybody knew everyone, I guess is what I'm trying to say.
Speaker 1: So, you, you know, so being a serious student, you were liable to get good help then from--
Speaker 2: Yeah, but also, also, you're liable to get told on if you weren't being a serious student (laughter).  I use that word casually, "told on" (laughter), but, yeah, I mean (unclear).  You could get, you could get good help.  I think that it wasn't a very large school.  My graduating class had twenty-five or so people in it.  So it wasn't, you know, it wasn't very large classes.  But obviously, it was larger back in the first grade and the number falls off.  But, yeah, you could get good help, and, and I guess, you know, me and my sisters, we were sort--well, my sisters and I, we were sort of, had an advantage because our father worked there.  So everybody knew us and there were always expectations of us.  And so we had to live up to those.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you had like, did you feel that you had to set, you know, be a role model, I mean for what a student ought to be?
Speaker 2: Nah, I won't say that.  You know, I honestly believe that I should be a good person.  I don't think it had anything to do with being a role model.  But I, that's probably the religious upbringing.  But I, I thought it was important to be a good person and do the right thing.  But I didn't think about that as being a role model for anyone.
Speaker 1: Well, I guess I was meaning it in terms of being a student too, you know, being an exemplary student because your father was a teacher there and your aunt was there.  Did you kind of feel like you had to--
Speaker 2: I, I, a lot of being a student for me, a good student for me, came naturally.  And I'm sure that was because, you know, of my father.  But I don't think I made any conscious thoughts to say, I've gotta do well on this test 'cause my father is teaching me.  I always, I did well on tests, you know, and, and I could have not done anything.  But I certainly didn't feel that was the thing to do.  I, you know, I felt that it was important for me to be a good student, to do the right thing.  I think doing the right thing was, you know, if you could be a good student, be the best student you could.  So, I always did well in school, and that was, that was, I guess that's what I can say about it.
Speaker 1: Okay, was math your favorite subject?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, math was my favorite subject.
Speaker 1: And your father, I guess, you said he was basically the major force in your math education, I guess.
Speaker 2: Yeah, he taught me math in high school.  That's correct, right, you know, all the math I learned, he didn't teach me arithmetic.  I learned that from other people, but, but all the math I learned in high school, he taught me.
Speaker 1: So he just taught the high school courses.  He didn't teach the elementary?
Speaker 2: Right, he taught high school math and high school history.
Story_ID: 21934
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, so, now, did you--when you were growing up, like did you have any heroes, role models?
Speaker 2: I guess the closest thing to a role model I had was my father [James Venable].  So I would always say that.  He was a very well respected individual, and when I was growing up, I certainly felt that I couldn't go wrong by being like him.  So he was, he was a role model for me.
Speaker 1: What would you think that people or how did--what was your personality like as you look back on it growing up?
Speaker 2: I was quiet, I think.  I wasn't a real pushy person, an outward person or anything else.  I was sort of quiet.  I fit in, I tend to fit in well.  You know, I'd make friends easily, didn't make enemies, so quiet.  I think that's the easiest way to describe it.  I got along well with most people, didn't get into fights as boys do.  So, you know, I think it was okay.
Speaker 1: Okay, so what did you do for fun growing up?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, I played baseball.  That was, that was my sport, played baseball in high school.  And in, you know, as well as locally.  So that was my sport, that was the thing that I did.  I was also--
Speaker 1: What position did you specialize in or--
Speaker 2: Well, I played short stop and first base mostly.  I played outfield some.  I think the thing that I was probably best at was probably playing outfield because I, you know, was real fast and quick.  I could cover lots of ground, but I didn't have a super strong palm.  So most of the time I played first base.  I was a good, steady, reliable player.  I was never like a power hitter or anything like that, way too small for that.  But I was, probably appreciated by the coaches, always finding a way to get on base, you know, with a walk, or bunt or, you know, beat out a throw or something like that.  So I was, my getting on base average was pretty high.
Speaker 1: Okay, that's always valuable (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yeah, you know, they called us scrappy players, is what you would call it, right, you know, do whatever you can to get to first base.  That was the whole--
Speaker 1: Did you have a favorite team?
Speaker 2: Right now?
Speaker 1: No then.  I'm talking about then, yeah?
Speaker 2: Oh, you know, other than the Pocahontas Indians (laughter).
Speaker 1: Was that a black team?
Speaker 2: No, no, that was my high school team.
Speaker 1: I was joking.
Speaker 2: Brooklyn, obviously, you know, I think in those, in that timeframe, the Brooklyn Dodgers [American baseball team] were the team that we all rooted for.
Speaker 1: Okay, and why?
Speaker 2: Well, 'cause of the history, you know, 'cause of Robinson [Jackie Robinson].  So, because of the history, you know, my father was a big Brooklyn Dodgers fan, and so it just sort of, all of us thought the Brooklyn Dodgers were the team to be.
Speaker 1: I'm sorry.  I'm asking obvious questions, but I just want it on tape.
Speaker 2: Sure, sure.
Speaker 1: That's the reason why.
Speaker 2: Absolutely.
Speaker 1: I know why (laughter)..
Speaker 2: Absolutely (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay, now, were you influenced much by radio and television growing up?
Speaker 2: Not really.  You know, we didn't have a television until I was probably about, I don't know, eight years old, maybe something in that timeframe.  And again, you lived out in the country, so very limited how many stations you could get.  The same thing was true with radio.  We couldn't, I don't, we had a radio, but I don't ever remember listening to a radio until I was maybe 12, 13 years old.  Then I, you know, started listening to music on the radio.  But before then, I don't remember listening to radio.  And we had, as I said, we didn't have a television until I was maybe seven or eight, and that was--so, so, no, I was not influenced a lot by either one of those.
Speaker 1: Was there a movie theater around?
Speaker 2: No, you know, the closest town was Richmond [Virginia] which is forty miles away.  So you didn't get to go--I think probably in my childhood, I would have gone to maybe half a dozen movies totally.  But they'd take us up to see a Disney movie.  That's about it, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, so it'd be a big excursion to go.
Speaker 2: Yeah, it was, it was an outing.
Speaker 1: Okay, so in, so how many were in your graduating class in high school?
Speaker 2: About twenty-five.  I think, I don't remember the exact number.  It was either 25, 26, 27, so about 25.  It was not, it was less than 30, 26, 27, yeah.
Speaker 1: I would have to guess that you were one of the top students.  Is this true?
Speaker 2: Yes, yeah, I was the valedictorian.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  And when you were on the--now, did your little high school have like clubs and things like that, like the bigger schools?  Were you a member of any clubs or?
Speaker 2: No, we didn't, we didn't have any clubs.  I mean we had a choir.  I was not a member of the choir 'cause I couldn't sing so that, you know, that eliminated that.  But, you know, like, did you have a drama club?  No, we didn't have a drama club, but we did do some plays, and I was in a couple of plays, I think, maybe, my junior year and my senior year.  But it was no such thing as a drama club.  There was no band.  No, we didn't have a gymnasium.  We played basketball on the dirt court outdoors.  So, but, but we didn't have formal clubs, but we had some extracurricular things.
Speaker 1: Okay, I know when you were growing up, the [American] Civil Rights Movement was heating up, and I know this one case filed by Vernon Johns' niece, I guess, the State of Virginia lawsuit, I mean was caused by her.  I don't know if she actually filed it herself.  But the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] filed the case.  Were your parents, did they talk a lot about the Civil Rights Movement?
Speaker 2: They did, particularly, on my mother's [Viola Bell] side of the family.  They were very much into all, into Civil Rights Movement.  You know, the schools were integrated while I was in high school.  I think the year I went to the ninth grade was the year they officially integrated the schools in Powhatan [Virginia].  And it was a choice, you know, you could choose to go to Pocahontas [Elementary School and High School; formerly for the African-American students] or you could choose to go to Powhatan High School or Powhatan Elementary School [formerly for the white students].  I stayed at Pocahontas and my father said something because he teaches there.  And that's where I was gonna go.  But, but most of my cousins and almost all of my relatives on my mother's side of the family went to Powhatan High School.
Story_ID: 21935
Speaker 1: Okay, now, what did, how did desegregation affect Pocahontas School [in Powhatan, Virginia], your father's career and your, the other teachers, other black teachers?
Speaker 2: Well, again, you know, and I was a teenager then, so I don't necessarily have all the facts from my memories of things.  In, I think it was '63 [1963] I guess or '62 [1962], somewhere in that timeframe, the citizens of Powhatan were given the option to attend either one of the two schools in the county.  You know, one was the African American school.  The other was the school that the white children went to.  So that would be Pocahontas for the African Americans and Powhatan for the white students.  And I, I, I would say probably about maybe fifty African American students opted to go to Powhatan Elementary and Powhatan High School.  Now, so, so at the time that I was a student, through '66 [1966], it was still a matter of going to the school that you choose to go to.  So as I said to you a few minutes ago, I stayed at Pocahontas, as well as my sisters.  My oldest sister [Yvonne Charles] had already graduated, but my youngest sister [Xochela James], we stayed there as well.  A lot of my cousins, a lot of members on my mother's [Viola Bell] side of the family went, went on to Powhatan.  The, and I don't remember if it happened right at that time.  I don't think so.  I think it happened later when in '68 [1968], something in that timeframe where they moved away from this choice system, and they said, you know, you have to go to this school.  So high school became the same high school for everybody.  So it wasn't a matter of whether you wanted to go to Pocahontas or not.  So the school systems were changed then.  Powhatan High School became the only high school in the [Powhatan] county.  And I think this was '68 [1968], '69 [1969], somewhere in that timeframe.  Pocahontas High School became Pocahontas Middle School.  And that was an integrated school.  And Pocahontas Elementary School remained Pocahontas Elementary School.  So the county then had two elementary schools, a middle school and two high schools.  I don't know if there was a second middle school or not.  There may have been.  I'm not really sure.  But, but in any case, at that time, the teachers were shuffled around.  So I know that my aunt, for example, who was my third grade teacher, actually, was moved to teach into one of the white schools.  That was a part of the integration, was to shuffle some of the teachers around.  My father [James Venable] at that time had become principal, just before then, had become principal at Pocahontas High School.  So he was principal there.  This was a year after I graduated.  And then when they did the, you know, the full integration and they changed it from Pocahontas High School to Pocahontas Middle School, my father stayed on as the principal.  So he end up being the first principal at a fully-integrated school.  So, that was, you can imagine a challenging job because now, all of a sudden, you have white students in the school.  And you have parents concerned from both sides of the fence for lots of different reasons, and, but I think by all accounts, he did a very good job with it.  When he retired about, I think he stayed on the job for maybe four or five years before he retired, he was extremely well respected.  I've had a lot of students of his to, would come up to me and say, well, your father was my teacher or he was the principal when I was in school.  And they always said positive things about him.  So I think, I think he handled it well, but, obviously, it was a challenge.
Story_ID: 21936
Speaker 1: Okay, now, before we move on, tell us about how St. Frances de Sales Girls School and St. Emma Military Academy affected the community (unclear)?
Speaker 2: The, you know, the neighborhood of Mohemenko, the Saint Emma and St. Frances--that was basically, they were--let me start over again.  St. Frances de Sales, this was a Catholic girls' school, actually founded by, by St. Catherine Drexel in the 1890s.  And St. Emma Military Academy was, again, a Catholic boys' school and founded in roughly the same timeframe, late 1890s.  And they taught academic programs there as well as agricultural and trade programs.  So the whole, the whole community grew up around that.  In other words, there was a whole little town where you'd go, and there was a general store, and there was a shoemaker and a wagon-making shop there.  And so all this grew out of the efforts to teach trades to the--
Speaker 1: What did they call that little town that they--
Speaker 2: Belmead.
Speaker 1: Belmead?
Speaker 2: Belmead, uh-huh.
Speaker 1: How do you spell that?
Speaker 2: B-E-L-M-E-A-D, yeah, that was named after the plantation.  I mentioned Philip St. George Cock earlier.  He, the sister, Sister Catherine, St. Catherine, she actually purchased the land from him, from his family.  So that's the name of the plantation, the Belmead Plantation.  So they, I think they bought a couple thousand acres from him for those two schools.  So in any case, that became sort of a real central part for the African American community to, to grow up and to be a part of that.  So it was like a little small community, almost self-sufficient in that sense.  My experience with that, I was, I didn't, didn't go to school there, although some of my cousins did because their parents were working either in the school and somehow the other are working in the shops there.  I, my experience was that, was that when the, when the students would come to visit, or when the parents would come to visit their students--These were boarding schools, so when the parents would come to visit their children, there were no hotels, you know, particularly for African Americans.  This was in the '50s [1950s], right, so there were no hotels for them to stay in.  They'd have to go all the way back to Richmond [Virginia].  So they would essentially stay at, at a local family.  So my parents always would have someone from Ohio or New York or someplace like that that would come in and spend a couple of days with us as they were visiting their children at either St. Frances or St. Emma.  And, and I just remember the experiences with that.  It was, it was one of those things that you sort of start out with in a very small way, but it makes an impact on your life.  I remember going to a summer bible school classes that they had St., St. Frances, and these bible school classes were set up for, you know, for the local community, for children of people who worked there.  It was my first experience with the Catholic religion, and again, it was just a good, positive experience.  Everybody treated you well, they were nice to you.  They, we learned some things, and when I go--the schools have been closed since the 1970s.  But there're still nuns that are resident there.  And I go over, and I talk to them now, you know, and I tell them that, that, you know, I have fond memories of the place and it introduced me to a lot of things I just had never known before.  So, so to me, it was a good impact on my life as a child growing up.  I have very fond memories.
Story_ID: 21937
Speaker 1: Did you get a chance to travel much when you were growing up, outside of Virginia?
Speaker 2: You know, the biggest traveling we did was to visit my father's [James Venable] brother, who--he lived in Detroit [Michigan].  So every couple of years or so, we would go to Detroit.  And that was about it for me.  I didn't, I don't remember doing much more travel than that.  And he worked, he worked up in, you know, the automobile industry.  So.
Speaker 1: Okay, so, now, so when you were on the verge of graduation--
Speaker 2: High school?
Speaker 1: Yeah, from high school [Pocahontas High School in Powhatan, Virginia], did, had, how did you choose your college?
Speaker 2: Well, I wanted to do math, you know, or science, you know, was my first thing.  So this was 1966, okay, to put it in perspective.  And Virginia State [Virginia State University, in Petersburg, Virginia] was probably the, you know, the one school that was, that was most affordable for us to go to.  So that was one of the main reasons I went to Virginia State.  I applied to go to the University of Virginia [in Charlottesville, Virginia] and was not accepted.  So, I went to Virginia State.  I don't know if I would have gone if I had been accepted, but they eliminated that as an issue for me.  So I went to Virginia State.  It's a local school.  For us, it's, Petersburg is about fifty miles away, and it's either that or Virginia Union [Virginia Union University, in Richmond, Virginia].  And State [Virginia State] was a little broader in its educational programs.  And, you know, quite a few of the students from my high school, both before me and after me, would have gone to Virginia State.  So.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It was called Virginia State college in those days.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, in those days Petersburg, I found out later in life, you know, the significance of Petersburg.  Did you know the historical significance of Petersburg when you went to school there?
Speaker 2: You know, I guess I was aware of it.  I would say that it probably was not a big impact on me.  Again, there were still a lot of Civil Right issues going on in that time, so I remember actually going on some Civil Rights march into Richmond, the capital, from Virginia State.  That was a big effort on the part of this, some people in the state to change the name of Virginia Tech.  Virginia Tech, it's in Blacksburg which was one of the two large state-supported schools.  It was the agricultural school, okay, and then there was also University of Virginia which was the other large school.  But, but Virginia Tech was Virginia Polytechnic Institute.  And there was something in the legislature to change that to Virginia Polytechnic and State University.  And the people at Virginia State thought that was a bad idea because it was, you know, we were Virginia State College.  So they said, where does that put us?  And there were a lot of talk at that time about merging black schools, historically black schools with larger majority schools.  And, you know, like you, it's being done in the sense of economics and practicality and duplication programs.  So Virginia State was never merged, but there was discussion about possibly merging it with Richard Bland College which was also right outside of Petersburg, and Richard Bland was a community college at that time.  And there was a lot of discussions about merging Virginia State and Richard Bland and putting it in the same context, let's change the name of Virginia Tech, you know, to Virginia Tech and State University.  And a lot of the African American community felt that this was gonna lead to things that were not in our favor, in favor of, you know, education of African Americans.  They feuded as a way of actually, at some point, just simply closing down Virginia State.  And, you know, there are other examples.  But that's happened.  So it was very much of a concern.  But from a standpoint of the historical significance of Petersburg, I, I, again, I didn't think a lot about it.  You know, you couldn't somewhere drive into Petersburg without seeing signs for the battlefield, you know, and you studied U.S. history, and we studied Virginia history, I guess, from my perspective of studying Virginia history in high school, it was, you know, the books were very biased to a southern perspective on it.  I do recall that, but, again, you know, our teachers were all African American, and they, I think they did a lot to say, well, you know, you gotta think about it this way sometimes too, not just the way the book says it.  So that was, so, so, you know, we thought about it.  But I wouldn't say it made any impact or any difference to me one way or the other as I went through Virginia State.
Speaker 1: Okay, well, as a math major, then who were some of the teachers that you met along the way.  And were there any particular teachers that were mentors, as such, or--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, Dr. McDaniel.  His first name was Ruben, I believe, was a math teacher and was very influential in my studies and my doing well in math.  Dr.--I also, you know, I didn't say this before.  But in the summers when I was a high school student, I had the opportunity to go to, you know, some summer programs.  I think it was an old NSF [National Science Foundation] summer institute program I went to at Norfolk State [Norfolk State University, in Norfolk, Virginia] and actually took some math there from Dr. McDaniel's brother.  So they were both very, very good teachers, extremely good teachers.  From physics, James Davenport.  He was just an excellent teacher.  He was the one who convinced me that I certainly could, you know, do physics.  So, he was a real inspiration for me, I would say.  If I had a model of teacher in that timeframe, it would have been Dr. Davenport.  So those two individuals probably are the most influential in my career.  The one thing that, when I went to college, see I, you know, because I came from such a small school and such a, I would say, sheltered-type environment, I never really had to study in high school.  You know, it's just, just of what I did was just sort of natural.  And when I got to college, I had to learn how to study real quickly.  So I think my first semester there I really worked hard just learning how to study, you know, learning how to work at the pace in which college was moving as opposed to the pace in which high school was moving.  And so I didn't, I wouldn't want--I don't wanna say I struggled, but I, I worked real hard at it.  And I think by the end of my first semester, I really, I had it, I had it down.  I understood what I had to do and how to go about getting it done.  So, you know, once I got past the first semester, then college was, it was, it was real good for me, yeah.  It was real good for me, so, but to answer your question, Davenport and McDaniel.
Speaker 1: Now, was it unusual for a student to enter Virginia State with just two years of higher math?
Speaker 2: No, I mean if you came from a school system like I did, you know, and even then, they would have called where I came from the country, you know, as compared to the kids who came out of Richmond or Norfolk or even Petersburg because they had much better school systems.  So, yeah, so I think that I would say it would not be unusual, but it would probably be unusual to be a math major because you just didn't have the, you know, the exposure that the other math majors from the much larger school systems would have had.
Speaker 1: And so it was really crucial that your father was a math teacher.
Speaker 2: It was, and, and what was the most crucial thing in my opinion was that what I learned from him, I learned very, very well.  You know, I had the building blocks to go to the next level so I could always rely on, you know, I could do algebra and I could do geometry and what I studied.  But I knew how to do those things, and I could use that foundation to go and to do the calculus that I needed to be able to do.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And the trig [trigonometry] because I didn't have high school trig.  But, you know, I picked it up in college just from, from that foundation.
Story_ID: 21938
Speaker 1: Now, physics is math, largely, but so, but why did you choose to get involved in physics?  What was your first (unclear) (interviewee cough).
Speaker 2: Excuse me.  Well, well, I got into physics, you know, I didn't take physics my freshman year.  I took physics in my sophomore year.  But, you know, I immediately saw the, the application of the math through physics.  So this is what you can use the math for as opposed to just proving a theorem.  So that was the thing that interests me first of all.  And then secondly, I was really interested in hands-on, being able to go into a laboratory and build things and do things and show how that relates back to, you know, to the mathematics, how the physical principle can be worked out in the laboratory experiment.  And I really had never done that type of thing before.  My science in high school was like in, very limited.  I think I took a course in biology and a course in chemistry, but that, it was somewhat limited.  In any case, and Dr. Davenport's teaching.  You know, that was influential and just the subject matter itself, the application of the math, right.  So I liked it, I enjoyed it and then it also allowed me to focus more on science and math than a math major.  A math major required me to do more additional things.  I think math was more geared--they didn't sell it this way, but it was traditionally more geared to, you know, making you a high school teacher, to teach high school math 'cause that's where that market was.  But physics wasn't geared so much that way.  Physics was really geared to, get you to go to graduate school in physics.  And I always wanted to go to graduate school.  So I was, those were some of the factors.  So I said, let's do physics.  And I loved it, you know.  I really did.  I, I, the subject, I just loved the subjects.
Speaker 1: Now, were you inspired by the space program and some of the other science innovations of the--
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.
Speaker 1: --sixties [1960s] and the type of thing that was (unclear) (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: Absolutely.  I wouldn't say that I came out of sixty, you know, in '66 [1966] saying, ghee, I wanna be an astronaut, probably didn't have that inspiration 'cause I, you know, I would have said to myself, well, now, who are you kidding?  But, but, yes, I was certainly inspired by the science programs, by the space exploration.  Like, I watched that as much as anyone, absolutely.
Story_ID: 21939
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, now, did you have a, much of a college social life?  I mean did you join a frat [fraternity] or anything or--
Speaker 2: Not really.  I didn't, I didn't joint any fraternities.  I, I had a good college social life.  But I was not a member of any fraternities or any clubs or anything.  I didn't play any sports or anything.  Most of my focus was on, was on study.  You know, I, I was a member of honor societies, several different honor societies and participating through things like that.  And most of, you know, where I got to go was to go to science meetings and things like, you know, I don't know.  Are you familiar with Beta Kappa Ki?  Beta Kappa Ki is a honor society for sciences in high school, for science college students.  It grew out of the African American community, and includes all sciences.  So I was a member of that.  And Alpha Kappa Mu was a similar organization for math students.  I was a member of that, and Sigma Pi Sigma, that a little different.  That's a traditional, that's a, you know, traditional honor society in physics.  I was also a member of that.  So, so mostly just honor societies.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, now, you say you got involved in some of the marches and stuff from around (unclear)--
Speaker 2: Yeah, I wouldn't, I was never a leader in any of those organization, any of those efforts.  I certainly had college friends who were leaders.  I was supportive, but I was always, I was, you know, in the background, in the periphery, participant, I guess is the best way to say it.  It was never out front with any of those efforts.  So, to me, I don't know how best to--again, you know, you don't always think about why things are the way they are.  But I guess my priority was, if I had to say, now, what are you gonna focus on today, I'd say, let's go study some physics.
Speaker 1: Okay, was the Richmond Improvement Association still doing, active when you got there?
Speaker 2: I don't, I was not aware of them at that time.  I mean, and most of what I heard about and learned about was the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People].  And most of the, you know, most of the things that we would have done, as I recall, was through some NAACP effort.
Story_ID: 21940
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: I didn't get to go to the March on Washington.  I was a little young for that.  I think my oldest sister got to go.  But--
Speaker 1: Now, you were in school when Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.] was killed.
Speaker 2: That's correct.  That was--
Speaker 1: A junior, I guess?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I'm trying to think.  Let's see, that would have been my junior year?  No, I don't, what time of year was that?
Speaker 1: Sixty-eight [1968]--
Speaker 2: But what time?
Speaker 1: April 4th.
Speaker 2: April 4th.  I'm trying to remember.  I don't, no, I don't remember the, actually, where I was when I heard that.  But, yes, I would have been, I would have been in school in '68 [1968] in April.
Speaker 1: Do you remember how the students reacted to it or the school reacted to it?
Speaker 2: I honestly don't recall, yeah.  I don't recall.  I don't recall any sort of uprising or something to that effect.  I don't recall that.  So.
Speaker 1: No memorials or anything?
Speaker 2: Well, again, I'm just simply saying I don't recall.  I'm, I would assume that there were a lot of things going on and a lot of things that were done.  I just honestly don't, can't bring back any memories of something that happened at that time.
Story_ID: 21941
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So, and I've heard a lot of people that, the people we've interviewed that are into physics or the sciences, that they, you know, their existence and the school segments, really focused on, on the subject and it just, so much so that it, they don't do a lot, other than that, you know.  So was that, would you describe yourself like that?
Speaker 2: I would say by far most of what I did was focused on the subject, absolutely.  That's not to say I never did anything else, but, you know, I certainly went to basketball games and football games and that sort of thing.  But, but most of what I did was focused on study, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It's a discipline that requires an awful lot of time and effort, dedication and, you know, so you, you have to make that commitment when you decide you wanna do that.
Speaker 1: Now, when you graduated, were you, did you graduate as a math major or physics major?
Speaker 2: Physics.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, so you came out in '69 [1969]?
Speaker 2: '70 [1970]--
Speaker 1: '70 [1970].
Speaker 2: I graduated in 1970.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, '70 [1970].  All right, so what were your prospects?  What were you thinking about in terms of graduate school?
Speaker 2: Yeah, well, I knew I wanted to go to graduate school.  So I just, I had applied to, I don't know, maybe half a dozen or so schools.  I think I was, probably, I think I was accepted at all of them I applied to.  I decided to go to American University here in Washington [District of Columbia].
Speaker 1: Okay, I just thought about it.  Most physics majors really, have to go to graduate school, (laughter) don't they?  Because (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Well, you know--
Speaker 1: Because there's no way to be a physicist unless you do, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, but that's not the only way to get employed.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: If you wanna have the title of a physicist, you know, then 99 percent of those jobs are gonna require you to have some type of a graduate degree, not all the time, but probably 95, 99 percent of them.  But there are lots of employment opportunities for people with an undergraduate degree in physics, who don't go to graduate school.  And those are in more of the applied and engineering oriented positions.  It's, it's something like a general engineer.  You know, you're not an electrical engineer, you're not a mechanical engineer, but you know the basic science behind those things.  And I can think of a lot of the student who were in school with me, you know, a couple of years before me or a couple of years after me, didn't go to graduate school.  Some of them went to work for airlines, airplane manufacturers.  Some of them went into the government, quite a few of them went into things like the CIA [Central Intelligence Agency], you know, things like that because there was just a need that analytical skill that comes with being a physicist.  Don't, I can't tell you what they were doing, maybe analyzing photographs.  I don't know, but there was this analytical skill that you get trained in.  So, so I think that in physics education--I may be getting ahead of myself here, though, you know, one of the things you wanna say to people is that it's, it's important to go to graduate school.  It's good to go to graduate school.  But you certainly can have a career if you do, in undergraduate major and decide not to go to graduate school, there's still lots of opportunities.  You can go into photography, okay, and be a great photographer because you know some things that some of the other photographers may not know.  I mean you can go into lens designing.  You know, it takes a, if you wanna do that, and today you have these computer programs, you push the button and the lens pop out.  But trust me, if you don't know what you're doing, you push the button, and you're gonna get the wrong lens popping out or you're gonna waste a lot of money with the lens that pops out.  So, you know, it, it's important to, to think that there are lots of career opportunities for, for people who don't go to graduate school.  Now, having said that, I think statistically, and I, and I know at one time this was true.  I think it's probably still true today, that roughly 50 percent of people who get a degree in undergraduate physics, will go on to graduate school.  So most, probably most people do go to graduate school.
Speaker 1: Thank you 'cause I didn't, I didn't realize the other opportunities.
Speaker 2: Yeah, lots of opportunities.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And then teaching as well.  Obviously, that's another big one, high school teaching.
Story_ID: 21942
Speaker 1: Okay, so American University in D.C. [Washington, District of Columbia].  Now, how did you manage to choose American University?  What was it about American University that attracted you?
Speaker 2: You know, I, I didn't wanna go too far from home.  I guess that was one thing.  I had a lot of friends here at Howard [Howard University, in Washington, D.C.].  One of my mentors was actually on the faculty here.  And, you know, we certainly talked about going to school here.  But, but I think, I didn't wanna go too far away, you know, and I had applied to quite a few schools.  And, and I, I wanted to, first of all, I wanted to make sure that I could get in, get out in a reasonable period of time.  I didn't wanna be one of the horror stories of spending twelve years to get a Ph.D.  They had a good reputation of, you know, getting students out in a timely manner.  But I would say probably that the one thing that made the biggest difference was coming in for an interview, sitting down and talking to them.  And I was, I was impressed with the people there.  So, mostly just the faculty, the staff, people I talked to.  It's a small program, specialized in mostly nuclear physics, but--
Story_ID: 21943
Speaker 1: Tell us, first of all, before we go into American University, who is your mentor at Howard?  Who is the--
Speaker 2: Arthur Thorpe.  And Arthur Thorpe is still on the faculty here today, okay.  So this is 1966, I mean 1970, right.  My, Dr. [James] Davenport, who I spoke about earlier, was a graduate of Howard [Howard University in Washington, District of Columbia], and he and Dr. Thorpe were colleagues here.  So Dr. Thorpe actually would come down to Virginia State [Virginia State University in Petersburg, Virginia] and served as my senior thesis advisor when I was at Virginia State.  So he helped out a lot with developing and strengthening the program down there.  You may have heard of John Hunter.  John Hunter was one of, probably the third African American to get a Ph.D. in physics.  And John Hunter established the program in physics at Virginia State.  And that program went on to produce a lot of well-known people who became physicists later on.  Dr. Branson was a graduate of that program.  And Dr. Branson was here as chairman of the physics department at Howard.
Speaker 1: That's Herman Branson.
Speaker 2: Herman Branson, uh-huh, was a student of John Hunter's.
Speaker 1: He was president of Central State [Central State University, Wilberforce, Ohio].
Speaker 2: President of Central State, right.  I sometimes tell a story about, you know, those connections there.  You go from John Hunter to Herman Branson to Arthur Thorpe and then to me, you know, so I can draw lines between us, right.  And I tell my students that, you know, you need to put your name on there and put a line there and go to work at a, at a nice institution and, you know, send some folks along as well, make the line longer.  But in any case, Arthur Thorpe was my mentor here at Howard.  And he's been a real strong supporter of my entire career.  He was instrumental in my coming back to work here, in fact.  So, yeah, quite a good supporter.
Story_ID: 21944
Speaker 1: Okay, did you have any African American instructors at American University [in Washington, District of Columbia]?
Speaker 2: No, no African American instructors.  My thesis advisor was Richard Kay, and Dick Kay was from Arkansas, University of Arkansas [in Fayetteville, Arkansas]was where he came out of school.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: The area of study was what we traditionally call AMO, Atomic Molecular Optical, that's sort of nuclear and solid state and AMO.  I was in AMO, focusing mostly on the optical parts.  My dissertation involved looking at multi-photon transitions--photon is a little quantum of light, looking at how light interacts inside a piece of solid material.  So that was what my dissertation was based on.
Speaker 1: Okay, well, what did you find?  Can you explain what you found in layman's terms?
Speaker 2: Well, number one, you know, normally, when you look back at your dissertation, fifty years later, you say, well, that was a bunch of crap.  But, you know, it was okay (laughter).  I didn't find anything that was earth shattering.  It, it was clearly indicative of the work of a graduate student, I think a dedicated graduate student.  And it wasn't anything that would have won anybody a Nobel Prize.  But we did show that you see some, some nonlinear effect.  In other words, instead of these things adding like one, two, three and they add like, two, four, eight.  So we, we saw some nonlinear effects.  We weren't able to actually overly quantify that, but I think the bulk of the work was building the system, building the laser system I needed, a high-powered laser to do this in and building the sample to actually be able to do the experiment.  And then to demonstrate that there were some nonlinear effects going on inside these solids.  What we showed was, if you look at if, whether the light was what we refer to as being circularly polarized versus being linearly polarized and it's sort of a technical term by other, the vectors of the light, you know.  Light is something we refer to as an electromagnetic wave, and it has like an  E vector which represents the electrical part of the wave and an M vector which represents the magnetic part of the wave.  And when you say the light is polarized, each little quantum of light, each little photon will have its vector going in one particular direction.  If it's not polarized, the first little photon may have its his vector going this way, and you normally just specify the E vector.  And the next one may be going this way or the next one will be going this way.  So they're sort of going--But polarized means they're all lined up and going in the same direction.  And then there's something circular polarization which says that if you look at the light, their, E vectors are rotating around in a well-defined fashion, okay.  So they have this rotating circularly polarized light.  So what we were able to show was that if you use circularly polarized light, you've got a different effect than if you use linearly polarized light.  And there were theoretical arguments as to why that should be the case.  We, we essentially did an experiment to try to support those theoretical arguments.  I did not do the theoretical arguments.  I was doing from an experimentalist's perspective.
Speaker 1: Okay, and this research informed the use of lasers?
Speaker 2: Um-hum, yes, absolutely.  We had to actually build this, and this was 1970.  So lasers had been around a couple of years, but and that's the first time I think we built a high-powered laser at American Institute in order to do this.
Speaker 1: Okay, so what was your typical day in graduate school?
Speaker 2: You come in the morning, go in the lab, work all day, go home at night (laughter).
Speaker 1: From what time in the morning to what time at night?  That's the issue.
Speaker 2: Well, let's see.  I was married then.  My first daughter was born, so I would--my wife was working.  I'd get up and take care of my daughter, get her breakfast and take her to the babysitter.  So I probably got into work around, between nine and ten [o'clock]. And, you know, you in and, when, when I had to take classes, and you'd be taking classes and studying, and I'd probably leave at nine o'clock at night.  So I, typically, do twelve hours a day, yeah.
Speaker 1: So that was typical for the whole (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yeah, that was, I think that's even typical today, you know, twelve hours a day because between studying, studying for exams, writing and then also trying to build an experiment, it's, it's a time-consuming effort.  But I was fortunate, I got it all done in four years.  Yeah, things (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Now, this, is this like--a lot of people in science that we talk to go straight through.  They don't really take a break, for, "now, I've got my master's."  They just go right through--
Speaker 2: That's true, I went straight through.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: Yes, I did, uh-huh.  I went straight through.  I got my master's degree, essentially, you know, it's when you, what we call passed the qualifying exams for the Ph.D. program.  And if you passed them, they give you your master's degree 'cause you would have taken all the courses that are required.  And it was never a break, or to me I didn't even go to any ceremony or anything.  They just said, you know, here's your piece of paper saying you have your master's degree, and just, the next day was the same routine as the day before.  So no breaks there.
Speaker 1: Okay, sort of like a speed bump along the way to--
Speaker 2: Yeah, and you just, you know, it was like, it's like going through a toll booth and they hand out a ticket and you just keep going, right, say, here, take it and just keep going.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 21945
Speaker 1: Now, let's go back to, now, where did you meet your wife?
Speaker 2: My wife.  When I was an undergraduate at Virginia State [Virginia State University in Petersburg, Virginia], I participated in the summer program called the Harvard Yale Columbia [Harvard University in Cambridge, Massachusetts; Yale University in New haven, Connecticut; Columbia University in Manhattan, New York] Intensive Summer Studies program.  And this was a program that was designed for students from southern HBCUs [Historically Black Colleges and Universities].  I don't think we called ourselves HBCUs in those days, okay, but for southern HBCUs to go to Harvard or Yale or Columbia in order to do some work in the summer to have us get prepared to go to graduate school.  And I, I went to Columbia because Columbia was where the students in math and physics were going.  So I went to Columbia for two summers.  And my wife's brother was also in that program.  So she was not, but she's from Brooklyn [New York].  So I met her through him in that program.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, so--
Speaker 2: She was a student at NYU [New York University in New York City] at the time.
Speaker 1: Okay, so in New York [City], okay.  So it must have been good to be in New York for the summer, I guess?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, the, the, as a college student, you wanna do something in the summer, right?  It's either that or go to work, 'cause you had to make some money, and this program was an educational program.  Plus, they paid, they didn't pay you a whole lot of money, but they paid you, plus, you know, you were getting more education.  So that was important to me.
Speaker 1: This is the summer of 1970?
Speaker 2: No, this would have been the summers of '68 [1968] and '69 [1969].
Speaker 1: Okay, so you were still at Virginia State.
Speaker 2: I was still at Virginia State, right.  This was, this was designed to get students prepared to go on to graduate school, to sort of strengthen (unclear), so, and I took some physics there.
Speaker 1: So did you get married before you graduated from Virginia State?
Speaker 2: Yes, I did.  I got married in my senior year, beginning of my senior year.
Story_ID: 21946
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So, now, so anything else about American University before we move you on to a career?
Speaker 2: No, I think that it was, it was--I had a good graduate education.  I was well trained, had a very good advisor.  I got along very well with my advisor.  We worked well together.  He allowed me to have a lot of independence, and I moved through the system in a timely manner.  So I felt good about that education.
Speaker 1: Were there any other black students matriculating through--
Speaker 2: Yeah, there were, let's see, at least one other, a guy by the name of Hermenzo Jones, who was really a bright student, theoretician, I mean.  So when I needed to do quantum mechanics, I'd say, well, Hermenzo, I need help, you know.  So he was the one who would help me out in understanding some of these theoretical concepts.  So, he was, he was a good student.  But he was the only one.  There was one other student, and I don't remember his name, but he was a part-time student.  But Hermenzo was the, the one student I remember the most.
Speaker 1: Now, early '70s [1970s] was a time for a lot of black professional organizers.  Was there an organization of black physicists established?
Speaker 2: There was, there was the National Society of Black Physicists [NSBP].  They were established, I don't remember the time, maybe '74 [1974], somewhere in that timeframe, '73 [1973].  The, they were established out of primarily Howard [University in Washington, District of Columbia], Fisk [University in Nashville, Tennessee].  They started out by having what they referred to as the day of scientific lectures.  And then I think, after two years, they expanded that to have a professional meeting as well.  They chartered themselves.  I joined the National Society of Black Physicists probably maybe about three years after it was actually started.  I think I was still in graduate school I think the very first year.  The first meeting I remember coming to was a meeting here at Washington at Howard.  I don't honestly remember where I was at that time, but I was not working at Howard.  But I came to my first meeting of the National Society of Black Physicists and that organization still exists.  It obviously has changed an awful lot over those years, but it still exists.
Speaker 1: Okay, (unclear).  Was it exciting to meet other black physicists and to--
Speaker 2: I, you know, I think the answer to that is, yes.  It was good to meet other black physicists, but, but the thing is that in that timeframe, there was probably not more than 200 black Ph.D.s in physics, just a number off the top of my head.  It may be 400, but I think 400 would be really stretching, so I'm gonna say it's probably closer to 200, black physicists.  And I knew a good many of them through, you know, my association from being around Dr. [James] Davenport and Dr. [Arthur] Thorpe.  So I knew a good, a good number of the people because of that association already.
Story_ID: 21947
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So, well, when you so, now, you went on to work for IBM [International Business Machines Corporation].
Speaker 2: Yeah, when I, when I finished Virginia--Virginia.  When I finished American University [in Washington, District of Columbia], my first job was at IBM.
Speaker 1: Whoa, I'm sorry.  What year is this that you finished American University?
Speaker 2: 1974.
Speaker 1: 1974.  Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, August, 1974.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So my first position with IBM in East Fishkill, New York.  I was a senior associate engineer, and I worked with noncontact optical measurements in monitoring the properties of semi-conductors.  So that was how my background in optics tied in.  So we would, we would--let's see if I can explain it.  IBM at East Fishkill was making chips, semi-conductor devices to go into computers, right, so that was the manufacturing there.  And a part of that process was that one had to monitor those devices and you didn't want to physically contact them because they were so fragile.  So, ideally, you didn't wanna say, take a meter and stick on it to make a measurement.  So we were developing optical techniques, where you would actually shine a light on the device and be able to deduce certain properties.  For example, if you wanted to know the thickness of something, you could do that by reflecting light off it.  If you wanted to know how much electricity it conducted, you could do that by shining light through it.  So we were working on developing those type of technologies.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So, how long were you at IBM?
Speaker 2: Two years.
Speaker 1: Two years, okay.
Speaker 2: Um-hum, I left IBM and I went to--I left IBM primarily because I wanted to be professor.  I wanted to, you know, I wanted to be in a university.  I also left IBM, and this, I don't want this to be taken as a negative, but, you know, I wasn't really motivated in helping IBM make another dollar 'cause they had so many dollars.  And, yeah, I thought what I was doing was important, no question about that.  But I, I don't think I was truly making a difference, you know, 'cause they were gonna make money no matter what I did, one way or the other.  So, I wanted to, I was more of, I wanted to be involved in something that I could be more of an impact.  So I always wanted to go back to teaching, wanted to teach.  I didn't get a good teaching offer when I first came out of American [University].  I think the only teaching offer I had was at a community college.  So I decided not to do that.  So I, so I went to St. Paul's [College], and that would have been '76 [1976].  That's in Morrisville, Virginia.  And I served as the assistant professor of physics and director of the cooperative physics program.  And the cooperative physics program was a program that was being run out of Howard [University in Washington, District of Columbia] here, whereby students at smaller colleges like St. Paul's that did not have a physics major, we had this program whereby I would teach some physics to the students.  And then the students would come to Howard during the summertime and take the additional, the rest of the physics that they need.  And that would allow them to actually graduate as a physics student.  And so I worked with that program for two years.
Story_ID: 21948
Speaker 1: Okay, tell us something about St. Paul's.  Now, I know it's a black Episcopal school, right?
Speaker 2: Um-hum, it's a small school, you know, I don't know, four or 500 students, my guess.  It's certainly less than a thousand students when I was there.  It was, again, I was, you know, I was doing science.  There were not a lot of science teachers there.  There was a gentleman who taught biology and a gentleman who taught chemistry and they were both Indian.  There was a lady, African American, who taught physical science and then myself.  And then there were some math teachers.  Let's see, there was another young lady in biology.  So there were probably, about half of us were African Americans, but all of the people didn't have Ph.D.s.  So it was a science faculty of maybe, you know, six or seven, so just one science department.  And my role was just to, to teach the physics and to help the students get ready to come up for the program here at Howard in the summer.
Speaker 1: Okay, did you actually enjoy that better than working for IBM?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, yeah, I mean didn't make anywhere near as much money, but (laughter), but I enjoyed it because you, you know, I was teaching.  I was making an impact on somebody's life.  So, yeah, I enjoyed that immensely more.  Absolutely.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 21949
Speaker 1: But I also wanted to do research.  And I didn't have much of an opportunity to do research at St. Paul's [College in Lawrenceville, Virginia].  I think the only, in the summer, at the end of the summer, I went to, went into an ASEE [American Society for Engineering Education] program.  That's an engineering society program where, you know, young faculty could get these appointments for the summer.  It's a fairly traditional thing, even today.  And I went to Brooks Air Force Base in San Antonio, Texas.  And I worked with a laser physicist there, Mexican American gentleman by the name of John Taboda (ph.).  He was quite an accomplished physicist.  And we were looking at optical damage to the eye due to intense laser radiation.  Brooks is a, you know, a military base, Air Force base and one of the concerns of the military at that time was laser weaponry, and somebody realized, you didn't have to take the laser and shoot the airplane out the sky.  You could just take the laser and blind the pilot that was just as effective.  So we were looking at, you know, exposure of laser light to the retina and what kind of damage that would cause and how much light you needed, you know, what were the conditions under which you would cause damage or not cause damage.  So.  And we were, you know, I would say our perspective was the safety perspective.  What's the minimum amount of exposure that a person could take without having eye damage?  So we were studying those things.
Speaker 2: Okay, it would temporarily blind the pilot?
Speaker 1: No, actually, you could do permanent blinding as well, but temporary blinding was more than sufficient to bring an airplane down, yes, yes.  So, so, yeah.  So I think the way we actually defined damage, you'd look for a spot at the back of the retina and you would see if there was a permanent change in pathology of that spot.  That doesn't necessarily mean that the person was blind, but you're beginning to start damage.  So then you write the spec to say, well, you know, for that particular laser, for that particular wavelength, that's the intensity that beyond that, you'd start having damage.  So you want to, particularly if you're using lasers for communication 'cause that was another concern from, you know, from the ground to airplane, you don't wanna be shining something brighter than that at your pilots trying to communicate with them.
Speaker 2: Okay, so did they actually deploy this method--
Speaker 1: Well, you know, I, I can't talk about what the military did for the number one reason, I did have a clearance at that time, but number two, I have no idea what they did.  So (laughter), but I'm, I know that it was, that there're certainly laser weapons, not from a security standpoint.  I just know it from, you know, everyday experience.  You know that there are laser weapons.  You know that one can communicate over laser beams today.  So, so I don't think any of the things that I did would have led to a direct deployment, but certainly, I think they would have gone into the standards of what was safe and what was not safe.
Speaker 2: Okay, okay.  So what were, I guess, so how long did you stay at St. Paul's?
Speaker 1: I stayed at St. Paul's for two years.  My second summer, I went to a similar assignment at NASA [National Aeronautics and Space Administration] Langley [Research Center in Hampton, Virginia].
Speaker 2: This is '78 [1978], I guess?
Speaker 1: This would have been September of '78 [1978], yeah.  I went to a similar assignment at NASA Langley, again, working on radiation light, transporting this time through the water environment.  But that was just a summer thing.
Story_ID: 21950
Speaker 1: And from there [St. Paul's College] I, I went to Hampton University [in Hampton, Virginia], Hampton Institute at that time.  And I made that transition because I, I felt that there were good research opportunities for me at Langley, at NASA Langley Research Center which was, as you know, about seven or eight miles from the campus.  And, and I wanted the opportunity, I wanted to teach.  I wanted to stay at a historically black university, but I also wanted the opportunity to do research.  And Hampton [University] and the location to do that.  So that was the reason I made the choice to go to Hampton.  And Hampton was a good school and still is a good school.  So I went there, and started my career there as an assistant professor, started developing a research effort there in physics.  Physics did not have a graduate program at the time I started.  In fact, it was combined with chemistry in the Department of Physics and Chemistry.  So, one of the things that I did was to work toward getting it to a departmental status, getting the physics department, getting a research program active and ongoing there, mostly early on through NASA [National Aeronautics and Space Administration] funding.  I got several grants from NASA to help with that.  And then eventually, actually, implementing a graduate program there, first a master's program and then later on a Ph.D. program in physics at Hampton.  So I went through the ranks there, went in there as an assistant professor and then became chairman of the department and associate professor and full professor and then became, what vice--dean of the graduate school and assistant vice president for research.
Speaker 2: Oh, wait, wait a second.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) I'm sorry.  I'm just going through--
Speaker 2: Let's see if we can maybe give a chronology to these increments here.
Speaker 1: Sure.  Sorry.
Speaker 2: So, you can just maybe start over and give us kind of a chronology, I mean some dates, you know, for the--
Speaker 1: Oh, okay, let's see.  Well, I started in '78 [1978].  And at that time I was assistant professor.  I honestly can't give you exact dates for all these, okay, not off the top of my tongue (unclear).  My vitae, I think, it's all listed.  But, so in '78 [1978] I came in as assistant professor.  The, the next year, I became the, the director of the dual-degree engineering program.  So the goal there was that Hampton, at Hampton, we wanted to ultimately develop an engineering program.  And we had a dual-degree engineering program with George Washington University [in Washington, District of Columbia], and you're familiar with a dual-degree program.  The student would take, you know, two years or three years at Hampton, and then do two years up at George Washington.  Well, I was asking, talked to the president, and I guess between the two of us, we decided--if you ever worked for Bill Harvey, he makes the decisions, okay.  So he made the decision, but I was certainly in agreement with him that, you know, it would be valuable for us to try to start strengthening engineering and the sciences in general.  So, so he asked me to be the director of the dual-degree engineering program, and to move the program from George Washington to ODU [Old Dominion University in Norfolk, Virginia].  We didn't have an issue with George Washington.  That was not the problem.  It's just that the vicinity, it was, you had to come to Washington [District of Columbia].  So the student actually had to leave Hampton and go, come to Washington.  And we didn't have any students.  So we thought that moving the program to ODU, which was, you know--
Speaker 2: Now, that's Old Dominion University.
Speaker 1: Old Dominion University which is in Norfolk, which, you know, right there in the neighborhood.  So we redesigned the program so the student could actually start some of the engineering courses while they were still at Hampton because it was within commuting distance, as well as, once the student went to Old Dominion, if they needed to, they could still be taking some courses at Hampton.  So that was more of a integrated program as opposed to three years here, stop, and then two years there.  So that program was actually much more successful than the program we had at George Washington.  So I was in charge of that.  And then two years later, we made a commitment to do engineering.  We didn't start engineering, but we simply made a commitment to, you know, to pursue an engineering school at Hampton.  We were still doing the dual-degree program, and at that time, the department physics broke off from chemistry.  So it became the department of physics and engineering studies.  So this would have been, I think, my third year there, I believe, the department of physics and engineering studies.  And I was named the chairman of that department.  So I was responsible--
Speaker 2: Who was president of Hampton then?
Speaker 1: Bill Harvey was president.  He's been president since 1978.  So he came the same year I did.
Speaker 2: All right.
Speaker 1: Um-hum, yeah, so, so I was responsible for, you know, both developing and growing engineering, and at the same time, I said, well, you know, I said if I'm going to do this I also want to, to develop and grow physics.  And we started a master's program in physics at about that same time and--
Speaker 2: This is about 1981?
Speaker 1: This was early '80s [1981], yes, '81 [1981], um-hum.  So we started our master's program, and we started implementing, you know, expanding our research efforts there, started getting several, several grants.  Again, initially, they were primarily NASA grants, but that expanded quickly once we got started.  And we started hiring new faculty as well.  So I remember we hired, and I don't remember the exact timeframe, so this was all within a, you know, three or four year period, a young man by the name of Greg Selby (ph.) to, who was an engineer, Ph.D. in engineering.  He came in to help on the engineering side, and hired Warren Buck, Ph.D. in physics to help us to expand the physics because, you know, I was doing optics and things of that nature, and we need, he's a nuclear physicist so he wanted to expand that.  I don't know how much you know about the Newport News [Virginia] area.  But there is a, there's a laboratory there called the Jefferson Laboratory.
Speaker 2: Is this Jefferson Accelerator?
Speaker 1: Um-hum, there's an accelerator there.  Well, that was originally called CEBAF, C-E-B-A-F Continuous Electron Beam Accelerator Facility.  But in any way, when CEBAF was about to be built, there was a lot of involvement with our physics department because, you know, they obviously wanted partners and collaborators and things.  So we had brought on Warren Buck in the hope of taking advantage of that potential down the line because the facility had not been built as of then.  And Warren was very instrumental in helping us, bringing up the nuclear physics side.  Warren went on to become the chancellor at University of Washington, Bothell, one, I forget which one of the campuses.  But in any case, and then we hired, we, we--with CEBAF, we, when CEBAF was a little further along the line, we signed an agreement with them whereby we would be able to hire faculty that was shared between the lab and the university.  So we had four line items in which we would pay half the salary, and CEBAF, which is now J-Lab, would pay the other half of the salary.  So, we've got some really good people there including a young African American physicist by the name of Keith Baker who's now at Yale [University in New Haven, Connecticut].  So all of those gentleman, and we went on as well to hire several other people on the optics side of the house.  We hired Calvin Lowe.  Calvin went on to become the president at Bowie State [University in Bowie, Maryland], okay.  So, you know, we all worked on developing this Ph.D. program together there.  And then I, I don't know, was promoted to associate professor and then to full professor.  I don't remember the timeframe in there, but I think I became full professor maybe '88 [1988], '87 [1987], somewhere in that timeframe.
Story_ID: 21951
Speaker 1: Okay, we left at 1988.  You become a full professor.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, in that timeframe, I became a full professor, and then, and, you know, very much involved in getting the Ph.D. program approved.  Not only do you have to establish a strong research component, you also have to have state approval.  We were a private school, but the, Hampton [University, in Hampton, Virginia] was chartered, you know, to offer degrees at the master's level.  And if you want to change that, if you wanna start offering degrees at the Ph.D. level, you actually had to go back through the state approval.  So, since physics would have been the first Ph.D. program, we went through the whole process of going back to the state, through the State Council of Higher Education in Virginia in order to get all those.  But I mean it was just a lot of bureaucracy and a lot of work.
Speaker 1: So was physics the first Ph.D. program offered at Hampton?
Speaker 2: Yes, it was, um-hum, yes.  And so that's why we had to all the, after you get three approved, then being a private university, you didn't have to go back to SHARE (unclear), but the first one was the one that required the most work.  In any case, in that timeframe, we had, we had gotten all the approvals, some--one other thing I need to mention.  [Dr. William R. Harvey] Bill Harvey [President of Hampton University] said, you can't do it until you raise a million dollars.  So, you know, we were able to raise a million, just primarily through our research efforts, and so we went forward from there.
Speaker 1: And what kind of research did you do to raise that million dollars?
Speaker 2: Well, well, my personal research was, again, along the lines of optics and laser studies and that sort of thing.  And my work was primarily with, with NASA [National Aeronautics and Space Administration].  We had lots of colleagues who worked there with us.  I didn't mention people like Quan Sue Haun (ph.) and Don Whitney.  Those were, you know, people who were in the department before I got there.  It was just a two-man department at that time.  But, you know, we, by '88 [1988], we had about a dozen faculty members and were, and clearly growing at that point in time.  I, let's see I was promoted, I think I was given one of the university chairs, G. Robert Cotton Distinguished Professorship in that time.
Speaker 1: About what time?
Speaker 2: That was around '88 [1988] timeframe.  I can't (unclear) exactly--
Speaker 1: It's called the what chair?
Speaker 2: The G. Robert Cotton, he was a donor to the school, Distinguished Professorship.  Again, I could look at my vitae to give you the exact year, but that was roughly the timeframe.  And, and we, we moved into a new building that we had built for physics and engineering.  So one of the, one of the efforts, you know, as a part of all this, was that we were developing or raising funds to get a building.  And again, this is things that were being driven primarily, at the level of the president.  I was, you know, as a faculty member, assisting and instrumental 'cause you have to explain to somebody why you want a physics building or why you want an engineering building, you know, and what are you gonna do with it.  But Bill Harvey was the, you know, the real driver behind raising the actual money.  So we, it was a good collaborative effort in my opinion.  So we moved into a new physics building.  It was the Olin Engineering Building, but physics was a part of it because, as you recall, I was chairman of both physics and engineering.  So it was the deal that we worked there.  So we continued the development of that program.  In 1990, I was asked to be the dean of the graduate school and the assistant vice president for research.  And I wasn't all that interested in being a, doing more administrative work, but it was a very good position to be in, in order for us to finalize the approval for the Ph.D. program.  So being the dean of the graduate school would have, you know, gave me the, put me in a position to make sure that happened, 'cause I had invested so much of my life in it at that point.  I certainly wanted to make sure it happened.  So, and then we continued to grow physics, and I don't remember what year the program was formerly approved, but somewhere in, around '92 [1992].  And obviously, it was several years after then that the first student graduated, but somewhere around '92 [1992].  And then once I got into administration, I sort of got pushed up and up into more and more administration.  And in '92 [1992], I became the vice president for research and dean of the graduate school.  It sounds like the same title, but you just flip the two things around.  So, that means I took on a new job and kept all the old ones, that translates into.  So I became vice president for research and dean of the graduate school.  And then in 1994, 1995, '94 [1994], I guess it was, I became the executive vice president and provost.  And then in 1995, I left to come to Howard [University in Washington, District of Columbia].
Speaker 1: Now, I take it that you don't really, you didn't really want these administrative roles, but they--
Speaker 2: Well, they weren't, I mean personally, they weren't my personal objectives.  You know, my personal objective was to do physics and be a research scientist and teach and be a researcher 'cause that's what I wanted.  So, so I would never say I didn't want to do what I did.  I would say that if, you know, if you were to say, Job A, Job B, equal pay, which one do you want?  I'd take the one that said research and teaching.  But, you have to do what's necessary to get to where you want to get and the goal then was to get the Ph.D. programs up and running and to get research going and, and so I, I continued to be, to take the opportunities as they came along.
Speaker 1: So you felt an obligation to do these to--
Speaker 2: I think I certainly felt an obligation, yes, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, to make sure that this graduate program was established.
Speaker 2: Yeah, and also an obligation to the university in general.  I mean, you know, like my personal obligation was the physics, but certainly I felt a strong obligation to Bill Harvey and to the university to do what was best for the university.  And I, I always say, Bill Harvey, look, you know, if someone pays my salary, I'll do what they tell me to do.  If I don't wanna do what they tell me to do, then I'll stop taking a salary from them.  That's the bottom line.  I can always go somewhere else to work.  That was always my, my opinion about things.  So, yeah, so I, it wasn't, it wasn't the path I had laid out for myself, and I realized, I woke up and realized, wow, the only next step is to be a university president, and I definitely don't wanna do that (laughter).  So I need to get back into the research side.  So I had an opportunity to come to Howard to serve as a physics department chairman, but more importantly to me, to be able to, to do research, develop a research program.
Speaker 1: Dr. Harvey's been there a long time.  You'd probably be waiting a long time to become president if that was your objective.
Speaker 2: Well, it, well, no.  You know, that's a good point.  But one of the things that Dr. Harvey is known for is for people who work him to go on to become presidents at other universities.  And I, I would dare say that when I worked for him, probably everybody who was on the council at that time, has gone on to become either a president or a--president of a university or, you know, president of a bank 'cause the treasurer went on to become president of a bank.  But just about everyone else on that council have gone on to be president.  So, so he had, he--and this is probably just beginning 'cause I think when I became provost, maybe one person who had worked for him had gone on to be president.  And then a lot of people, just people expected, you know.  Lots of my vice presidents, people who worked for me, even faculty members like Warren Buck was a faculty member who worked for me, went on to become a college president.  So I wouldn't have, I don't think I would have been waiting to become president at Hampton 'cause as you say (laughter) that would have been a long wait.  And I was smart enough to realize that even at that time.  He's well, he was well entrenched there, and he is well entrenched there now in the sense that, you know, he, he pulls the strings, right, yeah.
Story_ID: 21952
Speaker 1: Okay, so, now, so were you actually, were you seeking another spot or how did the Howard [University in Washington, District of Columbia] position--
Speaker 2: Well, you know, as I said, you know, I really didn't wanna be continuing to go up in administration.  So Arthur Thorpe, again, came to me and said, look, you know, we need a chairman.  This is an opportunity.  Would you apply for it?  And I said, yes, I'll apply for it, you know, as long as it means I can get back to doing research because I really couldn't do research and be vice president.  It's just, just impossible to do that.  So I said, yes, as long as I can get back to doing research, it's something that I would consider.  So I put an application in, and they made me an offer.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you came over to Howard [University] in '95 [1995]?
Speaker 2: Ninety five [1995].
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: So I was at Hampton for seventeen years, and I was chairman and administrator there, and then I was, been at Howard, this is my seventeenth year at Howard.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, what have been--what have the years at Howard been like?  Have you engaged basically in research?
Speaker 2: Yeah, well, I served as department chairman for, for twelve years here.  Being a chairman is very different from being a vice president.  I wanna say that first of all.  That's like being a, just a regular part of the faculty, right.  So, I spent a good fraction of my time developing research programs.  My, my personal research has been focused around the, the laboratory in Beltsville, Maryland.  Dr. Walter Lowe had done a lot, he spent a lot of time at (unclear) developing the facility out there--this is a facility that the university owned since the early '90s [1990s], I mean the early '70s [1970s].  And it was not a lot going on out there.  Walter went out there and sort of renovated everything and got the lab back up and running for a project that he was doing in accelerator physics, synchrotron radiation with the Argonne Lab.  So he spent a lot of time and effort and money and got the place back up and running.  When Walter's project completed, he was building an accelerator that was gonna be moved to Chicago [Illinois].  So when it would move to Chicago, his activities at Beltsville were essentially completed.  We started phasing in at about the time he was phasing out with the understanding of developing some laser physics activities.  So we started by developing what's called a LIDAR [Light Detection and Ranging] facility.  And that was primarily an effort on my part and Dr. Thorpe's part.
Speaker 1: Now, what was that?  What was LIDAR--
Speaker 2: LIDAR is a technique where you use laser and you shine the laser into the atmosphere, and you study the light that is backscattered from the atmosphere, you know the laser light interact with particles and the molecules in the air.  And some of the lights backscattered so you can detect it with a telescope.  And you analyze the light that comes back into the telescope, and by analyzing the light that you collect, you are able to say what is in the atmosphere, and we were focusing on water vapor, although you can measure a lot of things.  We were focusing on how much water vapor is in the atmosphere for us and how rapidly that water vapor concentration changed as a function of time and how that water vapor concentration changed as a function of altitude.  So that's what we're using LIDAR for.  So it had to do with efforts to do atmospheric studies.  So I played a major role in developing--.
Speaker 1: And how do you spell the, that again--
Speaker 2: L-I-D-A-R.  It's an acronym.  It stands for light detection and ranging.
Speaker 1: Okay, light detection and ranging.  Okay.  So you've been, so this was established out at Beltsville.
Speaker 2: Um-hum, I started that in maybe '97 [1997], and, you know, maybe phasing over time.  And as, in addition to that, the physics department was very much involved, the physics department here at Howard was very much involved in developing an interdisciplinary Ph.D. program in atmospheric science.  So physics, chemistry and mechanical engineering were all involved in developing this interdisciplinary Ph.D. program in atmospheric science.  So my work was one of the research components of that interdisciplinary job.  We hired Dr. Alvert--Everett, I'm sorry, I'm getting a little tired, Everett Joseph here in physics, and Dr. Gregory Jenkins here in physics to work with that effort, Dr. Vernon Morris in chemistry and I think Dr. Sonya Smith, all of these were people involved in developing that effort.  She was in mechanical engineering.  So, so my part was a research component within that overall picture, and I was developing that at Beltsville.  Beltsville, since then, from an atmospheric physics standpoint, has grown extensively.  We now have a full array of measurement capabilities out there with respect to atmospheric measurements.  And we're using this data to go into models for, primarily for climatology, looking at climate change.
Story_ID: 21953
Speaker 1: Okay, so do we have black students here at Howard [University in Washington, District of Columbia] who are working on, specializing in atmospheric studies on the (unclear).
Speaker 2: Howard, Howard produces more blacks in atmospheric science in the last, I wanna say ten years, round number, than all other universities combined.  So we're producing like 50 percent of those people who are coming out.  So, and that's primarily the work of [Dr. Everett] Joseph and [Dr. Vernon] Morris.  They're the ones who are producing most of the students.  So we are responsible for a significant fraction of the African American, and minorities because we also have Hispanic students involved in the program.  So we are producing, we're making a significant impact on the number of minority students who are getting advanced degrees in the atmospheric sciences.
Speaker 1: Now, who are those professors again that you named.  Just give me their full names.
Speaker 2: Yeah, Vernon Morris in chemistry and--
Speaker 1: And how do you spell his--
Speaker 2: V-E-R-N-O-N, first name, last name is Morris, M-O-R-R-I-S.  And Everett, it's E-V-E-R-E-T-T-E, Joseph, J-O-S-E-P-H in physics.  Those are the two I think who are the driving forces of our producing most of the students.  I'd also want to mention, since I'm giving you the names, Gregory Jenkins in physics.  Greg has an excellent reputation.  He was a tenured faculty member at Penn State, was a student of Warren Washington.  So he brought a lot of credentials to us.  He's also very instrumental in producing students in that program.  And one of the other original faculty members involved was Dr. Sonya Smith.  She's focusing more on mechanical engineering these days, being that she's the chair of the department over there.
Story_ID: 21954
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, now, well, here we sit in 2012.  We've just had the warmest weather on record.  And people are, you know--and [United States] Congress is still debating on whether or not global warming is true or not.  What do our people need to know about the atmosphere and what does Howard [University in Washington, District of Columbia] discovering?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, like all science, again, we're not, we're not saying the answer is A.  We're contributing in very small ways to large efforts.  I think that the predominance of evidence today says that the atmosphere is warming up, and I think that the predominance of evidence today--all people don't agree with this, but I think the predominance of evidence today says that human activity is impacting that.  Now, the climate, you know you can't measure something for one day or one year or two years and even ten years and say climate is changing.  You really have to develop really long-term studies, and you have to develop extremely sophisticated models to be able to say, you know, what happens now is gonna impact what happens fifty years down the line.  So some of the experiments that we're working on, actually have like fifty-year life spans, you know, projecting that in order to get the correct answer, the best answer, you've got to take data for the next fifty years.  And so, so Dr. [Everett] Joseph and his group working with these computer models that help to predict these changes, based on data that we can provide today, and, you know, historical data obviously, but you try to make the best measurements of the data you can provide today.  And then Dr. [Vernon] Morris is involved in chemical phenomena going on in the atmosphere.  So, and I'm involved in the optical things, the physical things, dynamics.  So all the data that we get gets incorporated into these computer models, and essentially, you know, what our contribution is, is that hopefully, we improve the predictability of the model in a small way.  And I think that's what we really strive to.  Can you improve, make the model predict a little bit better.  And it doesn't have to predict everything a little better, you know, just some area.
Speaker 1: Okay, so your goal is to improve the predictability of changes in the atmosphere?
Speaker 2: Right, um-hum, yeah, the, actually improve the model's ability to predict the changes, right, um-hum.
Speaker 1: All right.  Okay.
Speaker 2: And some of that falls back into weather as well.  You know, weather is a much shorter term effect, but if you can--they go hand-in-hand.  You have to be able to predict the weather in order to be able to predict the climate, etc.
Story_ID: 21955
Speaker 1: So, you've here [at Howard University in Washington, District of Columbia] now for seventeen years.
Speaker 2: Yes, sir.
Speaker 1: And, now, do we have a Ph.D. program at Howard?
Speaker 2: Yes, we do.  Howard was the first HBCU [Historically Black Colleges and Universities] to do a Ph.D. in physics.  It started back in, I think it was approved in '58 [1958], and I think the first degree was awarded in probably '61 [1961].  And Dr. [Arthur] Thorpe, who I mentioned several times, was the second person to get a Ph.D. in physics from Howard University.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That program, again, I mentioned Herman Branson's name.  That program was started primarily due to the efforts of Herman Branson.
Speaker 1: Okay, I just wanted to make sure we get that.
Speaker 2: And then this program in atmospheric science is interdisciplinary between several departments, but the degree is actually in atmospheric science.  But we have lots of physics people working with students who get Ph.D.s in atmospheric science.
Story_ID: 21956
Speaker 1: Okay, when you look back at your research in, basically, optical physics, what would you consider to be your most exciting thing that you've been able to detect or come up with?
Speaker 2: The most exciting thing is producing students.  That's always number one, but, but from a science standpoint, we have developed some techniques, improved some techniques from a measuring standpoint that I think are making a small impact in the measuring community.  We have developed some calibration techniques that we think are really important and are being looked at by NASA [National Aeronautics and Space Administration].  And, in fact, one of my graduate students now is working on a technology transfer effort to take the technology that we developed in our lab for measurement capability--it has to do with the calibration, and transferring that to a LIDAR [Light Detection and Ranging] system that belongs to NASA.
Speaker 1: Okay, you discussed some of your students already and what they're doing.  Do you think that, are there any--is the school involved in local high schools in terms of trying to recruit high school students into physics?
Speaker 2: Yes, and we, you know, we have several outreach activities, particularly through some of our grants.  We have a, what we call a URC, a university research center, funded by NASA, and that's primarily focused on the activities that we do at Beltsville [Maryland].  And we have an outreach component in there.  We also have a, a NOAA [National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration] Center, NOAA Center in atmospheric science.  And that plays a significant role in the work that's being done at Beltsville as well.  And there are outreach activities that come out of both of those ending up in Beltsville.  And just out of completeness, Dr. [Everett] Joseph is the director for the NASA Center and Dr. [Vernon] Morris is the director for the NOAA Center.  I think that those guys and myself, Dr. DeMose, Dr. Jenkins, we're all involved in both centers as investigators at some level or the other, but they are the two principals [principal investigators].
Story_ID: 21957
Speaker 1: Okay, so do you have a dream for where the program will go?
Speaker 2: Here at Howard [University in Washington, District of Columbia] in atmospheric science.  Well, you know, you want to continue to grow.  That's for certain.  From a leadership standpoint, I'm, in all honesty, you know, I have taken a back step to Morris and Joseph.  I think they're gonna be providing the leadership in the future as to where the program actually goes.  But I think all of us are in agreement that we want to see it continue to be strong.  The reputation of producing, you know, the largest number of minority students in the country, we certainly want to keep that reputation and expand on that reputation.  From my research standpoint, I want us to develop a world-class LIDAR facility that can serve as a test bed for new technologies in LIDAR measurement and LIDAR capabilities.  That's my goal for my lab.  So I, I would say that's probably the short answer to your question.
Story_ID: 21958
Speaker 1: Okay, when we look back on everything you've done to this point, what today would you consider to be your legacy?
Speaker 2: Legacy (chuckle).  I would hope it would have to do with developing the graduate program at Hampton [University in Hampton, Virginia], the Ph.D. program at Hampton and expanding the graduate offerings through the HUPAS [Howard University Program in Atmospheric Sciences] program, the HUPAS, that's the atmospheric science program here at Howard University in Washington, District of Columbia], my ability to contribute to, I think in a major way, to both of those efforts.  I, hopefully, that'll be my legacy.  I'm gonna continue to write papers as long as I can and, hopefully, some of those papers will be known for the significance of the work.  Most of that's, you know, my graduate students are beginning to get most of the credit for that today as opposed to twenty years ago when I was doing it myself.
Speaker 1: Now, when you were doing heavy administration, did you kind of fill in the anxiety about not being in touch with the research part?
Speaker 2: Oh, very much so.  I really wanted to do research, right.  I really wanted, you know, and I, I also, I made an effort.  You know, I would come in--this was back at Hampton.  I would come in every Saturday and work in my lab, but it was just, it was just too challenging because, you know, as a provost, your Saturdays, you were tied up with a hundred other things as well.  It wasn't like you have a Saturday or a Sunday free.  So, yes, I was very anxious about getting back into the research.  I was very much disappointed that I didn't have the opportunity to continue to expand and grow my research.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, again, if you look back at your life and what you've done, is there any major thing that you would go back and change or do differently if you could, if you could go back and change it?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I can probably honestly say, no.  You know, even being provost, I would say, I still think I, it was certainly the right decision at that time and going into administration.  But, nah, I wouldn't change anything.  I can't complain about my career in any way, stretch or form.
Story_ID: 21959
Speaker 1: Okay, we always ask this question.  What are some of your hopes and concerns for the African American community today?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, I've always looked at this from a perspective of a physics, physics education, numbers dropping off, we think, as opposed to going up in physics.  It's, the physics community in general, the number of Ph.D.s are beginning to grow.  But it's still a lot of work for us to get more African Americans into it.  So my biggest concern is for, is to get as many African Americans as we can to go as far as you possibly can in education.  And I know, you know, today that's not the most popular thing today (unclear) today.  And you go and be an entrepreneur and you become a billionaire and start some company and you hire 5,000 people.  And it's nothing wrong with those things.  But my personal goal would be to say to a student, get an education, go as far as you can in school.  And then contribute to the body of knowledge in your field.  I think that that's so important, and if you can sit back and say, I did something that contributed to the knowledge in physics or I did something that contributed to the knowledge in my chosen science, to me, that's it.  I'm not saying there's anything wrong with anything else.  But I feel strongly that you wanna pursue knowledge.
Story_ID: 21960
Speaker 1: Okay, now, tell us about your family.  You have children, right?
Speaker 2: I have, I have two daughters.  My oldest daughter lives in Newport News, Virginia, and she is a veterinarian assistant, works with a local vet company, been doing that for, good grief, since she was sixteen years old or so.  And my youngest daughter is, works at Virginia Commonwealth University [in Richmond, Virginia].  She's with the, with the Office of the Vice President for Research.  She's a, a research analyst, I think is her title, grants writer.  She assists other faculty members in getting, in getting grants through the Office of Research.  So she's an interface to the faculty for that.  She has a faculty position there in that job.  And she's also working on a Ph.D. there as well.  My wife is retired.  She was a social worker for many years.  She worked in child protection agencies, and she worked in foster care.  She is volunteering now and doing work at a hospice.  So, and we both spend a lot of time volunteering, doing things at Francis Emma, Inc., which is the foundation of the corporation that's still running the schools, which are now closed.  But she, my wife and I are big volunteers for working with them.
Speaker 1: And that's for St. Francis and St. Emma.
Speaker 2: Right, it's the, the schools have been closed for, you know, since the '70s [1970s], but the property is still there, and it's still owned by the Sisters of Blessed Sacraments so we volunteer for a lot of the community efforts that they try to do.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, you still live in rural Virginia?
Speaker 2: I still live in, in Powhatan [Virginia].  That's, I have a home there.  You know, I come up here.  I try to be up here three days a week.  Sometimes I'm up here four days a week and occasionally, I'm up here five days a week.  But my goal is to, you know, come up on Mondays and be home by Friday.  That's always my goal.  So I go home, and, you know, my wife is there.  And we have, we have a place up here, but never call it home.  It's where you stay when you're in Washington [District of Columbia].  That's what it is.  It's out near my lab in Beltsville [Maryland].  So it's convenient for me.  So, I don't come to the main campus so much now as, when I was chairman, I obviously came here every day.  But now, I only come to the main campus maybe two days a week.  And the rest of the time I'm in the area, I'm up at, at the Beltsville Lab.
Speaker 1: Okay,--
Speaker 2: But, but the home that I have there is on the same property, I told you about Louisa Stewart Venable, when she bought the land, built the house on that same property.  So.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, did your father [James Venable], did he live to see you get your Ph.D. in physics?
Speaker 2: Um-hum, I got my PhD in '74 [1974].  My father died in '95 [1995], so, yes, um-hm.
Speaker 1: So, was he proud of you?
Speaker 2: Yep, very much so, very much so.  He was a strong believer in people getting an education, and, yes, yeah.
Speaker 1: Your mother [Viola Bell]--
Speaker 2: As I was of him, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 21961
Speaker 1: And you mentioned like your, it's interesting that you are able to--and not everybody's able to do this, able to chart a lineage basically in physics.  You know, this taught this one and this one taught Branson and Branson taught [Arthur] Thorpe and then, you know, and then comes you.  And do you feel, does--I think I asked you earlier, just kind of off the cuff, do you feel special being a physicist, this being probably one of the toughest of the sciences that's perceived by the community at large, in an area on Howard's [Howard University in Washington, District of Columbia] campus that's called 'Death Valley' by the students?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.  You know, I, I'm very proud of being a physicist.  Let me just say a little bit about the lineage.  When I was an undergraduate student back in the '60s [1960s], I had the privilege of writing a history of the physics department at Virginia State [University in Petersburg, Virginia], and that's what really got me thinking about that from day one, and I've, you know, continued to look at that.  That's how I got the, the Hunter, the Branson, the Thorpe, you know, type connection.  So, yes, I don't think that, you know, I, I'm proud of being a physicist.  It takes a lot of hard work to be physicist, but I don't think it takes a special person.  I think you have to be good in math, and you have to be not afraid of hard work, and you really have to be willing to work very hard.  But I think that most people who take a good high school math class, if they decided they wanted to be a physicist, they could probably do it if they were willing to put the work into it.  If you can do math, you can do physics.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And, you know, if you get the right foundation and you're serious about it, and you want to do it, you can do math.  Just take the right course in the ninth grade and the tenth grade or the fifth grade or the sixth grade or something and just keep building on it.  Then you can do it.  Absolutely, you can do it.
Speaker 1: Now, is there anything I haven't mentioned that we need to talk about before I ask my last question?
Speaker 2: No, you know, I've enjoyed having the opportunity to talk to you.  You certainly are very skilled at keeping people relaxed, and I don't feel threatened or pressured in any way.  So I think you--maybe someday, someone will have the opportunity to interview you about all these other people you've been interview, you know.  That's a history maker as well, right?
Speaker 1: Maybe (laughter)--[siren in background]
Speaker 2: No, sir, I don't have anything else to say.
Story_ID: 21962
Speaker 1: Okay, the last question is, sir, how would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: As an educator and a researcher.  That's it I wanna be known as he was an educator and he was a researcher, yep.
Speaker 1: All right, that's been good enough.  Thank you very much.
Speaker 2: Thank you, I really appreciate it.
