Story_ID: 655465
Speaker 1: All right.  My name is Larry Crowe, I'm interviewer today with The HistoryMakers; our videographer is Matthew Hickey.  Sir, could you please state your full name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: William Nivens Whitley: W-I-L-L-I-A-M, N-I-V-E-N-S, W-H-I-T-L-E-Y [HistoryMaker William Whitley].
Speaker 1: All right and what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: April 29, 1934; Rochester, New York.
Speaker 1: And what is your occupation and title?
Speaker 2: I'm an architect principal.
Speaker 1: Okay and what is today's date?
Speaker 2: February 14th I assume.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  It's the twelfth I believe.
Speaker 2: Twelfth?  (Laughter) Okay, February 12, 2014 (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Twenty fourteen. Right, okay and where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: You're in my home.
Speaker 1: Okay, in, in Cleveland, right?
Speaker 2: In Cleveland, Ohio.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 655466
Speaker 1: Before we go into depth, there are five lightweight questions we always ask as kind of a warm up and--
Speaker 2: Okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) they only require a short answer.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: First one is, do you have a favorite food?
Speaker 2: Yes, I like catfish.
Speaker 1: Okay, do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: Yes, earth tones--browns, reds, yellows, oranges.
Speaker 1: Okay, do you have a favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Summertime.
Speaker 1: Okay.  A favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: It varies, but right now California.
Speaker 1: Okay, and the last one is, do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: (Pause) Not really.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 655467
Speaker 1: Now, I'm gonna ask about your family history.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: I'm gonna ask about your mother's side of the family and your father's [Moses Whitley] side, but separately you know; and then we'll put 'em together.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: So can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: Beatrice Nivens Whitley: B-E-A-T-R-I-C-E.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: N-I-V-E-N-S.
Speaker 1: And Whitley, the same as yours, right?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: And what is her date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: Monroe, North Carolina; about 1902.
Speaker 1: Okay, now what can you tell us about your mother's side of the family?  How far back can you trace them; and what were they doing significant in history?
Speaker 2: I can--my family goes back by story more or less that I can follow.  In fact, Emeline [Emeline Brewer], Emeline was the--my mother's granddaughter--grandmother.  My mother's grandmother, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, so is sh- and now is that the one--there's a story about her I believe I've heard, that (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, yes, she was the child of the--really the master at the time.
Speaker 1: Now, was his name--his name wasn't Nivens though, right?
Speaker 2: No, his name was--let me see what--I'll give you his name is.
Speaker 1: Was he a Brewer?
Speaker 2: No, no.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: We started off--Watts [ph.].
Speaker 1: Watts, okay.  Now, there, there's--from what I understand, there's an interesting story about him, he?
Speaker 2: Well he had, he had, this more or less was his child, Emeline, this, everything starts more or less from Emeline.  Emeline was the child of the master at that time; and then from that it spread off to twelve different groups.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Our cousins, more or less.
Speaker 1: Now, this goes all the way back to the Civil War, right?
Speaker 2: Goes back to the Civil War.
Speaker 1: And what your brother [HistoryMaker James Whitley] had said previously was that your--her father, this Mr. Watts had, was a northern sympathizer who lived in the South, yeah?
Speaker 2: Yes, because that's the reason that he was able to--what he did is, he was able to distribute land to his children, and that was against the law; but it happened at the Civil War, at a time when the Civil War, or the Yankees decided that they were first slee- freeing the slaves and they took the word or the contract that the, that the owner of the land left so that slaves ended up owning land.
Speaker 1: Okay, so now this, your--Emeline's descendants from what I understand became quite well off?
Speaker 2: Well not well off, but they, they were able to educate their children, let's put it that way.  They had land, and with that they were able to farm and to educate their children.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So any stories from that side about what life was like and how they first got an education?
Speaker 2: Well, I go back to my, my mother's and her cousins, I start from there.  First, education was very important portion of their life and they made, had make sure at least the girls--all the girls had to get educated, and that's a college education.  So, it started at that point with the Brewers, all of their children got educated.  Either they were teachers or they were lawyers.
Story_ID: 655468
Speaker 1: Now there's a, there's a family history at Fisk [Fisk University, Nashville, Tennessee], right?  On your mother's side?
Speaker 2: Yeah, we all--they all went to Fisk.  I sent my children to Fisk--my daughter [Kym Whitley] went to Fisk anyway.  My sisters [Gloria Whitley Fleming, Joyce Whitley and Janice Whitley Carlstedt] went to Fisk, I had three sisters that graduated from Fisk.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: My father [Moses Whitley] graduated from Fisk.  They tried to send me to Fisk but they didn't have football down there (laughter) so I didn't go.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So, now at--now, your--did your mother [Beatrice Nivens Whitley] talk about you know what her aspirations were when she was growing up?
Speaker 2: Always, always; and there was quite a competition between the cousins, and not, you know, not as such, but you would hear, "Oh, So and So is doing this, and So and So is doing that."  Well, that meant hey I gotta do this and I have to do that so, there was a competition between the cousins and they all did fairly well.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, well what did your mother wanna be when she went to school?
Speaker 2: My mother more or less she took, she came out in business.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now did she have a specific business she wanted to open, or?
Speaker 2: No, no that didn't--no she never did that.
Speaker 1: Okay, well I thought she--well, I'm thinking, she might've had a dream even though she didn't do it, but did she?
Speaker 2: Well, no it's--well, her dream, actually when it came down to it--people talk about my daughter, how did she get in, in Hollywood?  It started with my mother, my mother thought--well, she was a, she was interested in music, so she was interested in stage and things like that, radio.  She got into radio and, and that was her, her interest--theater.
Speaker 1: Okay, and your, your mother was interested in theater herself?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: My daughter--I mean my sister followed her too.  My, my, my sister showed, showed some talent in music so they sent her to--well, Fisk and she majored in music.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: She got her master's in music at Northwestern [Northwestern University, Evanston, Illinois].
Speaker 1: Now, did your mother have any musical talent?
Speaker 2: The piano, she played the piano.
Speaker 1: And we had a note on our--
Speaker 2: And she could sing, but you know.
Speaker 1: --okay--we had a note on our outline that she was an actress at some point?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: She, she didn't do that?
Speaker 2: No, no.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: She knew a lot of actors though, people who would come to Rochester [New York]--singers, and she, she was involved with that but she never was.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  So, she grew up in Monroe, North Carolina.
Speaker 2: Monroe.  Um-hm.
Speaker 1: All right and so, well let me go to your f- now, oh, what did her parents do for a living?
Speaker 2: He [William Nivens] was considered middle class, that's because he worked on the trains.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: He worked in the mailroom of a train, let's just put it that way.
Speaker 1: Okay, so he worked in the mailroom of a train which is--in those days (unclear) benefits (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That was big, big--(laughter) that was big.
Speaker 1: So, did it enable his children to get free train rides, too?
Speaker 2: No, I never heard about that (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well it often did you know.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah, (unclear) you could get some kind of--
Speaker 2: I would imagine they could.
Speaker 1: Yeah, so, okay, and her, her mother [Effie Brewer Nivens] was a housewife?
Speaker 2: Housewife.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: All right.
Story_ID: 655469
Speaker 1: Let me go to your father's side of the family.  Can you give us your, your father's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: Moses James Whitley: M-O-S-E-S [Moses Whitley].
Speaker 1: And what is his date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: Eighteen ninety-eight [1898] in Marked Tree, Arkansas.
Speaker 1: And that's M-A-R-K [sic.]--?
Speaker 2: T-R-E-E.  Marked Tree (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) All right Marked Tree----
Speaker 2: Marked Tree.
Speaker 1: --Arkansas.  And it's not too far from Memphis [Tennessee], right?
Speaker 2: Right across the Mississippi [Mississippi River].
Speaker 1: Okay, all right so what can you tell us about the ancestors on your father's side?
Speaker 2: They all worked around the church.  My grandmother's [Elizah Whitley] people were church people.  Well, they followed the church; and my grandmother's mother came to Rochest- went to Rochester, New York following the minister, and my father was born I guess in Rochester [sic.].
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, so your father though he was born in Marked Tree, he moved with his family to Rochester?
Speaker 2: Well, he moved after he went to college.  He went to Fisk University [Nashville, Tennessee].
Speaker 1: Oh, after he went to Fisk, okay.
Speaker 2: He went to Fisk, met my mother [Beatrice Nivens Whitley] and married; and they followed their moth- my father's mother to Rochester.
Speaker 1: Okay, so now what was your father studying at Fisk?
Speaker 2: Chemistry.
Speaker 1: All right, and did he in fact become a chemist?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right; and so did he have any stories of growing up that he shared with you, 'cause he's he, grew up in cotton country?
Speaker 2: Yeah, cotton country, I had never heard any stories but I found out you know when I went down there to visit where he actually lived you know.  I assume that's where, where he came up because he li--that's where he lived and that was cotton country--as far as you could see, cotton.
Story_ID: 655470
Speaker 1: Is there a story about how your parents [Beatrice Nivens Whitley and Moses Whitley] met and fell in love?
Speaker 2: Well, I heard stories about Fisk [Fisk University, Nashville, Tennessee].  Fisk had, they had--this is how they more or less they all, all Fiskites met.  There was a fellow on the campus that kept the men out of the girls dorm.  They called him Will Shoot, and he would shoot.  You know he walks around with a gun (laughter) protecting the girls.
Speaker 1: Okay, and somehow your father was able to--?
Speaker 2: To evade that (laughter).
Speaker 1: I see, I see.
Story_ID: 655471
Speaker 1: Tell me, when you think about their, their personalities, their dispositions, their, their talents, what they look like, what they talk like, what they walk like--who do you think you take after the most?
Speaker 2: Well, you know I was surprised as I got older, I didn't know I looked like my father [Moses Whitley] until I started getting these (gesture).  Said you know who that is?  That's my father--I look, I look a lot like my father, but my characteristics are like my mother [Beatrice Nivens Whitley].
Speaker 1: Okay, your disposition and such?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay and what distinguishes the two, you know?
Speaker 2: Well, one's quiet and one, one--my mother, you know she just takes over, she just, she's very articulate and she's, she just takes over more or less when she gets in a crowd.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.
Speaker 2: She's very capable there.
Speaker 1: All right, and now, what did your mother study in school [Fisk University, Nashville, Tennessee]?
Speaker 2: Business.
Speaker 1: Oh, that's right you told me that (simultaneous)
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Because she came out of the--
Speaker 1: She came out as a business major.
Speaker 2: Yeah, business major.
Speaker 1: Okay, and she never had a dream job where she wanted to start a business?
Speaker 2: Well, in later life since my sisters, my sisters [Gloria Whitley Fleming, Joyce Whitley and Janice Whitley Carlstedt] all went to college and they're you know and they're all in college--we had five kids in college at the same time.  My mother said well, she started working and she started working for Internal Revenue [Internal Revenue Service].
Speaker 1: Okay, all right (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) She utilized--she could type, she could do all those kind of skills.
Story_ID: 655472
Speaker 1: Tell me about your brothers and sisters.  Can you start with the oldest and, and name everybody?
Speaker 2: My, my--Gloria [Gloria Whitley Fleming] is the oldest sister, she's about five or six older than I am, or it'd be six years.  She's a music major--she could always sing, she could always play the piano.  So, she was very talented in that area.  Coming up she was the--she would take my mother's [Beatrice Nivens Whitley] place when you know when they would go on visits and et cetera--she was the babysitter, and she more or less protected us you know.  She'd be--I've seen my sister in fights (laughter) protecting us you know so.
Speaker 1: Really what?
Speaker 2: With boys.
Speaker 1: Is there a story around you can tell us about that?
Speaker 2: She could, she could, she was--in (unclear) Ohio boy if anybody messed with me she, she would jump into the fight with no problem.  So, that's, that sister.  My other--Joyce [Joyce Whitley] is the next one.  She'd spend all of her time in the library reading.  So, of course she, she was very good in school.  You know she just, she went just fly through school and got a bunch of master's [degree]--working on her Ph.D. at the University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois] there.  She went to the University of Chicago in their planning department, got a degree in that and was working on Ph.D., but they closed that department down so that never happened, but she was very, she could handle that very easily.  Then I had--of course my brother and more or less his life mirrored mine, more or less; and I have a younger sister that was very smart too, she--
Speaker 1: Now, we haven't made a point in this interview here that you have a twin brother?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Right, and you're both architects, you're partners in a firm [Whitley/Whitley Architects and Planners LLC].
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: And what's your twin brother's name?
Speaker 2: James--James Moses Whitley [History Makes James Whitley], took my father's name [Moses Whitley].
Speaker 1: Which one was born first?
Speaker 2: James.
Speaker 1: Okay, so he's your--?
Speaker 2: I'm the baby (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay, so that's your older brother (laughter)?
Speaker 2: That's my older brother, five minutes.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  All right.  I just wanted to establish that.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: You know are you two--what kind of twins are you, fraternal or identical (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Fraternal.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you do look a lot alike.
Speaker 2: You know look alike, enough to, enough to you know--we've taken classes for each other, enough to get by (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: All right so, so you and your brother come after Joyce?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And then?
Speaker 2: After, Jan- after Joyce, that's right.
Speaker 1: Right, okay.
Speaker 2: And then Janice [Janice Whitley Carlstedt]; so that's five, five of us.
Speaker 1: Okay and Janice is J-A-N-I-C-E (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I-C-E.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right now, she was a musician too, right from what I understand?
Speaker 2: No, she ma- majored in college in journalism.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: She graduated--she started at Fisk [Fisk University, Nashville, Tennessee].  They gave her a scholarship when we were in high school [John Adams High School, Cleveland, Ohio].  She went from tenth grade to high school--I mean to college, jumped over us; and she got her--she went to Fisk but only stayed down there two years, then she transferred to Ohio University [Athens, Ohio] and got her journalism degree, came out.
Story_ID: 655473
Speaker 1: Two of your sisters used to live in Sweden?  Or, one still lives there, and?
Speaker 2: Well, my--the musician, Gloria [Gloria Whitley Fleming] played the piano and--you're familiar with Karamu theater [Karamu House, Cleveland, Ohio]?  She was a lot--she was into the theater.
Speaker 1: Oh, so she was in Karamu, that's the famous theater there?
Speaker 2: Yeah, Karamu, oh, boy she, she did very well there and of course she ran around with actors and actresses; and she met--oh, she went to, she went to Russia in 'Porgy and Bess' [George Gershwin]; and she met a fellow from New York [New York], John Fleming that sings, he's an opera singer and, and married him.
Speaker 1: Now, was she in the company that included [HistoryMaker] Anne Brown who played Bess, 'cause I know she's in Sweden too now or something or living in Scandinavia?
Speaker 2: If she's still there.  Oh, she went there--she could've been.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  Okay.
Speaker 2: 'Cause I went over and visited them one year and they were on the stage and John was on his legs you know.
Speaker 1: The knee?
Speaker 2: Porgy--he was on his knees singing his song (laughter) when I walked into the theater.  So, and he found that--well, they went to Sweden because they could, they could make a living there and they couldn't make a living in opera here in this country, so that's where they stayed--their children were born there.
Speaker 1: Yeah, Anne Brown was a--in the first cast of 'Porgy and Bess' and she, she was living--
Speaker 2: She's probably--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: And, and she's not a young lady--what, how old is she now?
Speaker 1: Anne Brown may have passed, she's--
Speaker 2: She would be ninety [years old].
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Okay, so they were there together, they had to be there together.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  So I didn't think to ask that question when I was interviewing your brother, but that's--yeah, Anne Brown.  We interviewed her--we actually sent a crew over to Scandinavia to interview her (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) To talk to her?  Okay.
Speaker 1: And, so--
Speaker 2: And then my younger sister went over to visit her one year, and met a young man and they, they married and she stayed there.  She's still there, in fact I'm going on a boat ride with her this, this summer.  Going to the Caribbean, I've asked her to be my mate for that trip.  Now that--I'm single, now so I'll hook up with my sister and take her with me.
Speaker 1: Yeah, your wife [Kaysonia Whitley] recently passed, right?
Speaker 2: That's right, so.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right, so okay so these are all the siblings--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --Gloria, Joyce [Joyce Whitley], your brother James [HistoryMaker James Whitley] and Janice [Janice Whitley Carlstedt]--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --right?  And, so that was the household growing up--
Speaker 2: That's right (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) your mother [Beatrice Nivens Whitley], and father [Moses Whitley] and your siblings?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Story_ID: 655474
Speaker 1: Do you have a first memory?
Speaker 2: Of?
Speaker 1: Of anything--the first thing that you remember?
Speaker 2: Well in Rochester [New York] I remember, I remember standing out with a fence--went around our yard and standing there at the fence watching all the kids going to school because the school [Nathaniel Rochester School No. 3; Nathaniel Rochester Community School No. 3, Rochester, New York] was just up the street; and just wishing--one, one of these days I'm gonna get to go to school.  So, I had to be maybe four years old.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So I remember that.
Story_ID: 655475
Speaker 1: So you, your first school was in Rochester [New York], right?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Do you, do you remember the name of it?
Speaker 2: No. 3 School [Nathaniel Rochester School No. 3; Nathaniel Rochester Community School No. 3].
Speaker 1: Okay.  No. 3 School in Rochester, and was this a mixed school or was it all-black school or what?
Speaker 2: Well, I lived in a community that was basically a mixed community but primarily white community.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  And was there a name for your neighborhood?
Speaker 2: There probably was, but I wasn't aware of it.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: I can give you the streets.
Speaker 1: So what were you interested in school?
Speaker 2: In elementary school?  I found out I was talented as an athlete quick.  You know in dodgeball, I'd get out of the way of the do- the ball better than most kids.
Speaker 1: Okay, now did you like any particular subject matter in elementary school better than others?
Speaker 2: Elementary school, I don't even recall, some--they were all the same.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I was just going through school.
Speaker 1: 'Cause you were just there in Rochester a year right when you started school (unclear)?
Speaker 2: Right, I was there for you know about a year, that's about it.
Speaker 1: Yeah, so this is--
Speaker 2: Then we came to Youngstown [Ohio].
Speaker 1: Right, so born in '34 [1934] so this was about 19--?
Speaker 2: We left there in 19--early 1941.
Speaker 1: Forty-one [1941]?
Speaker 2: Nineteen forty- 1941, yeah.
Speaker 1: So this is the beginning of World War II [WWII].
Speaker 2: Just before World War--because I remember the war and we were living in Warren, Ohio.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: When it, it came over the radio that the Japanese have attacked Pearl Harbor [Naval Station Pearl Harbor, Hawaii], I remember that.
Speaker 1: All right, so okay now how did your father [Moses Whitley] come to move to Warren?
Speaker 2: Well, my father primarily--in Rochester he was in--he was a chemist and he worked chemically, he worked with chemicals.   But for--he got a better job offer working for the government and he came to the Ravenna Arsenal plant [Ravenna Army Ammunition Plant; Camp Ravenna Joint Military Training Center], Ravenna, Ohio; and we lived first in Youngstown and then we moved over to Warren, Ohio permanently.
Speaker 1: Okay, so he was doing something as a chemist for the government, is that?
Speaker 2: No, what happened--when he, when he, when he started working for the government, they put him into inspection, he was more of an inspector.
Speaker 1: Okay, so that was in Youngstown and Warren before the war?
Speaker 2: Before the war and then during the war.
Speaker 1: So, he was still an inspector during the war?
Speaker 2: I think in early--in the end almost to the time that he retired, he was an inspector, more or less.
Speaker 1: Okay, and he worked--now at this particular time he was--during the war he worked at the Ravenna Arsenal?
Speaker 2: That's right; then he came to Cleveland [Ohio] and he was working in some agency that was really on Case Western Reserve's campus [Case Institute of Technology; Case Western Reserve University, Cleveland, Ohio], but it was still that same sort of things--making sure manufacturers met a certain standard.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So, what, now we always ask this question: what were some of the--when you consider both places you grew up at, Rochester and Warren, what were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up?
Speaker 2: Rochester was--you know sights and sounds were in my mind were wonderful.  It's--everything was wonderful.  Sights and sounds that I remember when I went over to my [paternal] grandmother's [Elizah Whitley] house, they lived on the other side of town, and they were not so wonderful.  You could--the train you'd hear, the train would go by because it was very close.  The condition of the houses in that area were not that good, and I noticed it at that time.  When I came to Warren, I had great friends.  I was in an integrated community, but primarily a white community but I had a black neighbor across the street that had the telephone.  Everybody didn't have a telephone; and another one down the street; and one right behind me that ended up being good friends of mine.  But Warren was very nice place to--for my you know, elementary school experience [at Roosevelt Elementary School, Warren, Ohio].  It was very nice.
Story_ID: 655476
Speaker 1: Well I was asking you about the sights, the sounds and the smells of Warren, Ohio, and--did you have any (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) You know--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --I mentioned Warren, you know that was, it was a lovely place to grow up, but I started to notice the differences in Warren in life.  There are certain places I found out I couldn't go, like the swimming pool--I couldn't go with my friends.  I, I learned real quick that I'd go to parties and I was more or less--I knew not to play spin the bottle.  I took myself out of that type of arrangement.  When I started going to the movie, they--in Warren, Ohio they, you had to sit in certain places.  So, it was the first time that I started noticing those type of--
Speaker 1: So--
Speaker 2: --differences.
Speaker 1: So to be specific if you were African American, you'd have to sit where?
Speaker 2: In Warren it was in the front because they didn't have a, they didn't have a second tier.
Speaker 1: So, they didn't have a balcony so they made you sit in the front?
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: Close to the screen where most people didn't want to sit?
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Right, and you learned not to play spin the bottle when you were in an integrated environment (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) (Shakes head) Because you know I was in.  You know I--we were in elementary [Roosevelt Elementary School, Warren, Ohio]--girls, boys, it didn't, didn't matter, but you know I--nobody told me not to play.  I knew myself to avoid it you know.
Speaker 1: So.
Speaker 2: With excuses, "Oh, I don't play this game," even though I'm you know, kids are playing right there, and that kind of thing.
Speaker 1: So, you had a social sense that that was not gonna be (unclear).
Speaker 2: It was not gonna be acceptable.
Story_ID: 655477
Speaker 1: So what was the racial makeup of your grade school [Roosevelt Elementary School] in Warren [Ohio]?
Speaker 2: We were the only two black, blacks in the class.
Speaker 1: Okay, so, so you and your brother [HistoryMaker James Whitley], right?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: And--
Speaker 2: My sister [Janice Whitley Carlstedt] was in the lower, lower class.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  So now most people, most of us don't have the privilege of growing up with a twin brother.  So, what was it like having a twin?
Speaker 2: Oh, you had a partner, you had a buddy.  You had your buddy all, all the time.  I could play, you know that's what it was all about during that time, playing.  We came, we came through during the World War [World War II, WWII]--world years so we played war, a whole lot of it, a lot of it.  People could hear us coming down the street, bam, bam, bam, bam--that kind of stuff, played a lot, but he was always there.  I didn't have to go search for anybody.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: He was always agreeable--let's go play you know, liked the same games I liked.
Speaker 1: Now, do you all have a similar personality?
Speaker 2: Um-hm, very much, very much, very much.
Speaker 1: Okay, so that kind of helps if you want to play and the other guy wants to.
Speaker 2: He wants to play too.  He wasn't like my sister, my sister's in the library reading (laughter) and I didn't, I didn't want to go to the library and read.  I did have that problem.
Story_ID: 655478
Speaker 1: So in sch- what was the name of your school in Warren [Ohio]?
Speaker 2: Roosevelt Elementary School.
Speaker 1: Okay, Roosevelt Ele--did you have a favorite subject in school?
Speaker 2: Favorite?  'Course, I took lot of, I mean I wouldn't call it favorite, but I took a lot of math.  It was more I took it because I assumed I was going to be in some kind of science field and my mother [Beatrice Nivens Whitley] encouraged it.
Speaker 1: Okay, your father [Moses Whitley] was a trained chemist?
Speaker 2: He's a chemist, so those are the courses you take, you know so, no problem.  Found out quick that I didn't like chemistry.  I took chemistry.  I did very well in chemistry with, as far as grades were concerned, but I couldn't stand that, the lab, just that smell with acids just got to me.  I said this--no, I don't think I'd like to go into this field (laughter).  I thought I was supposed to be a natural, no, (laughter) I wasn't.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, you, now you have artistic ability too?
Speaker 2: Yes, I do.  That turned out quick, just like my football, I mean my athletic skills--early.  People thought I could draw, and I could, better than the other kids.
Speaker 1: Okay, there's a sculpture in the case right next to us and I (unclear) (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, that's what--I did that when I was fourteen.  I said let me just knock this out.
Speaker 1: Yeah, it's well done, I mean it looks, it looks--
Speaker 2: Yeah, so.
Speaker 1: Yeah, so did you spend a lot of time drawing at home or?
Speaker 2: My mother sent me over to the art, Cleveland art museum [Cleveland Museum of Art, Cleveland, Ohio] all the time on Saturdays and then we started all those kinds of things and I didn't particularly want to go, but why not, I could do it; so when I went over there it was enjoyable.
Speaker 1: Okay, so they had classes for youth over there?
Speaker 2: I beg your pardon?
Speaker 1: Did they have youth classes on Saturday?
Speaker 2: Yes, on Saturdays they'd have youth--come on in, somebody would be teaching you and--on a big piece of sculpture or something, teaching you how to sketch et cetera.  It worked, worked out well because it helped me when I got to, to college [Kent State University, Kent, Ohio] because in architecture you have to be able to articulate with a pencil what you're trying to do; and I was better than most, let's just put it that way.
Speaker 1: So, now would you describe your upbringing as culturally rich I mean I know your sisters are (unclear) (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, my mother tried to make that a--you know that's what she did.  My, my sister [Gloria Whitley Fleming] was in opera, my mother was interested in that so, we got a lot of it, got a lot of it.  My father you know (gesture) (laughter)--it was all my mother's side she pushed that so, but she's a Brewer.  See there's a difference, she's a Brewer, that's where the Brewers, that's where they're coming from education, et cetera, so that's what was passed on to me.
Speaker 1: Okay was, was your father was the first person in his family to go to college [Fisk University, Nashville, Tennessee], right?
Speaker 2: Very first for a long time, let's just put it that way, for a long time.  I don't know how he did it, looking at--
Speaker 1: Yeah, your brother was saying that too, that he's amazed that your father was able to--
Speaker 2: Impossible, it was you know, it's impossible.  You know from the cotton fields of Arkansas--how do you do that?
Story_ID: 655479
Speaker 1: Was church important when you were growing up?
Speaker 2: For my mother [Beatrice Nivens Whitley], not, not for me, let's put it that way.  I didn't you know, I didn't enjoy it that much but it was always--she was you know they were deacons et cetera.
Speaker 1: Now, was she--what denomination was your mother?
Speaker 2: Baptist.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what was the name of her church?
Speaker 2: Antioch Baptist Church [Cleveland, Ohio].
Speaker 1: I'm sorry, what?
Speaker 2: Antioch.
Speaker 1: Antioch, okay, all right; and did your father [Moses Whitley] go to church?
Speaker 2: Yeah, he was a deacon also.  What happened is my--when I came to Cleveland [Ohio], the people that I was told to meet, or at least my father was told to meet was Wade Hampton [Wade Hampton McKinney] and they went to col- they were at Fisk [Fisk University, Nashville, Tennessee] together.  So, their classmates were here in Cleveland, and he married a girl from Fisk, and that's who, my mother was hooked with his wife, so they were great friends.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So, you didn't really, you didn't get into church like that.  What about your brother [HistoryMaker James Whitley], did?
Speaker 2: No (unclear), it was just you know--we went, but it was not (laughter).  First, I wasn't made to go every week, so if I could get out of it, I got out of it.
Story_ID: 655480
Speaker 1: Now, did you go to a middle school or a junior high school?
Speaker 2: When I came to Cleveland [Ohio] I was in the seventh grade, and we went to--we lived at 79th [Street] and Cedar [Avenue] if you know it, that, that's just--now it's in the ghetto, but at that time the ghetto started right--the ghetto ended there; and the next two streets were all your lawyers and your doctors lived.  The next--we're on 79th, 80th [Street], 81st [Street], 82nd [Street] were the middle class black people.
Speaker 1: Okay, so black professionals.
Speaker 2: Lived on the next two streets until another neighborhood opened up, Glenville in Cleveland.  They called that the Gold Coast; and everybody moved from that street, (gesture) out, out there, out to Glenville.
Story_ID: 655481
Speaker 1: When did you ever, I mean was there a time when you were a youth, did you think of becoming an architect?
Speaker 2: Oh, well, you know architecture was--I didn't think about becoming an architect but I found out what I liked.  When I lived in Warren, Ohio we used to make huts, and we used to go out in the woods and chop down little trees about that big around and we could--that was our timber, laid the floor out and we made the walls out of that.  Made the roof out like that, come inside take mud and smooth and make your plaster inside.  We were, we built a hut; then we got to the point, we said now, let's not--let's make a village, not just a hut, a village.  My mother [Beatrice Nivens Whitley] had given us a--at the time it was Army goods and it was a little, a little hatchet that the soldiers had.  It came with the--you went to the Army Navy store and got you a little hatchet and you could take, you could take a tree down with one good hatch--hack at it.  So, I was in architecture then, I got a feel for it and I enjoyed it; and then we used to go play in houses that were being built, and we'd get run off, but you know there was a little sense there.  But what turned on us on was I went to a movie ['Tycoon'] with John Wayne and he was an engineer, civil engineer.  He was a civil engineer down in Brazil and you know at the end he got the girl, right?  He built these bridges and things like that but at the end he won the girl.  We said this looks kind of nice, maybe I'll be a civil engineer.  So, I started thinking about being a civil engineer first; then I went to another movie, I gotta come up with his name, but he was an architect.
Speaker 1: This is Gary Cooper, right?
Speaker 2: Gary Cooper was sitting on top of the building, the wind was blowing through him, his--and he blew up a few of the buildings that he didn't like that people didn't build it the way he was supposed to build it.  I said that's it's I'm gonna be an architect; and that was it, from then forward (makes sound), that was it.
Speaker 1: Yeah, that's 'The Fountainhead.'
Speaker 2: 'Fountainhead,' 'Fountainhead.'
Speaker 1: Yeah, based on the novel ['The Fountainhead'] by Ayn Rand.
Speaker 2: That's it, 'Fountainhead' did it; saw that and that was--there was no turning back then.  Started off in the tenth grade and said hey, they asked me what I wanted to do, I told 'em.  They brought in an architect he told me, said, "Hey you, let me tell you, you unh-uh, you two, you two forget it."
Speaker 1: Now this is career day, right?  When--
Speaker 2: Career day.
Speaker 1: --when--
Speaker 2: But they had broken us up: people that wanna be architects go here, people that wanna be doctors go there, pe- you know et cetera; dentists go over here, talk to these people.
Speaker 1: So this is, now you and your brother [HistoryMaker James Whitley] often go, you've done it for three years I think, go to the public schools here.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: In this area and encourage kids to become architects, right?
Speaker 2: That's right.  That's right
Speaker 1: So, here's when flash back to your youth.
Speaker 2: Yeah, they were doing that but they were turning me, turning me around instead of turning me forward--trying to turn me around I don't know, but they actually they felt they were doing me a favor, they thought they were doing me--"Hey, don't go there, you're gonna have a problem."
Speaker 1: They knew I guess (laughter).
Speaker 2: They knew I was gonna have a problem; and I had a problem.
Speaker 1: Okay, so, these are the times, the times have changed.
Speaker 2: Yeah, times have changed but you know, you know the world had to change.
Speaker 1: Right, right.  So, so you're in the seventh grade when this happens, right?
Speaker 2: Seventh grade.
Speaker 1: Seventh grade, you're twelve years old I guess?
Speaker 2: No, when I got the speech I was in just the tenth grade, so I was about fifteen.
Story_ID: 655482
Speaker 1: Now meanwhile, you and your brother [HistoryMaker James Whitley] are athletes, right (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes.
Speaker 1: Well known in the school, right?
Speaker 2: Yes, I started to in junior high--I, I settled in elementary school [Roosevelt Elementary School, Warren, Ohio] because you know when I was in elementary school, this is dodgeball.  The coach of the elementary s- team started giving me favorites and bringing me to things and giving me badges so I could go out and you know control traffic and things like that.  I was getting benefits from the coach, but he was encouraging me to be on his team and eventually I played--we only played about three games on the, on the elementary school level but it was enough.  So when I got to junior high school people were looking for me, hey.  So, I went, I got on the team real quick, junior high school, but then I left and came to Cleveland [Ohio]. I did the same thing, did very well in junior high school and then went to high school [John Adams High School, Cleveland, Ohio], and did very well there.
Speaker 1: Okay, so when you moved--so, you didn't finish high school in Warren [Ohio]?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: We--seventh grade I left.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I left Warren in seventh grade.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Came to Cleveland.
Speaker 1: And moved to Cleveland, and now what school did you attend in Cleveland?
Speaker 2: Rawlings Junior High School in the middle of the ghetto, and my mother [Beatrice Nivens Whitley] couldn't get me out of there soon enough.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, what was the problem there at Rawlings?
Speaker 2: Discipline.
Speaker 1: Not enough, or?
Speaker 2: Poor discipline, just you know, just rowdy, noisy, nobody's reading, nobody's looking--I mean it, it was horrible.  She wanted me outta there, you know I had no problem with it but she didn't like that.  So we went to, she shifted us over to Alexander Hamilton [Alexander Hamilton Junior High School, Cleveland, Ohio].
Speaker 1: Okay, that's another middle school then?
Speaker 2: Another middle school on the other side of town.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I got on a bus to go over there.
Speaker 1: All right, so how did you like that, did you like it better?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, a lot better, a lot better.
Speaker 1: And did you play like formalized football (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Basketball, yes, formalized basketball.
Speaker 1: Oh, ba- basketball, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 655483
Speaker 1: So I did very well there [Alexander Hamilton Junior High School, Cleveland, Ohio]; and then went on to high school and then they were looking for me when I got there, so.
Speaker 2: So, this is John Adams High School [Cleveland, Ohio], right?
Speaker 1: John, I went to John Adams but, but in the meantime my parents [Beatrice Nivens Whitley and Moses Whitley] had moved to--remember that neighborhood I told you just opened up?  It was called the--I don't know what's the name of it.  I'll come back to that one, but we moved over to the Glenville area [Cleveland, Ohio], it was called the Gold Coast; and we went, we moved over there and we got caught 'cause we stayed at John Adams.  I kept going to John Adams, and what they did they caught us that we didn't live in that district so they more or less kicked us out.  But we had, I had, James [HistoryMaker James Whitley] and I both had been taking German and they were shifting us into another school district that primarily was a Jewish community that did not speak German, and couldn't, they didn't teach German in that school.   So, they said it's all right for us to stay at John Adams.
Speaker 2: Okay, well that's, that's, okay it's a different explanation that your brother gave, but that's a--that one he didn't try to even explain it, but yeah, that's.
Speaker 1: That was a long time ago (laughter).
Speaker 2: Yeah, he thought it had something to do with the coach you know, wanting you all to stay (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Oh, well that was a part of--see, that was the rationale.  What I gave you was the rationale.  How that rationale was worked out, was worked out through the coach.  The coach decided that it was impossible for you to go because of your--the classes that you were taking.
Speaker 2: Okay, so you're there between '51 [1951] and '54 [1954] I guess?
Speaker 1: I graduated in '53 [1953].
Speaker 2: In '53 [1953], okay in '53 [1953].
Speaker 1: Fifty [1950] to '53 [1953].
Speaker 2: Fifty [1950] to '53 [1953].  So, now you and your brother played football, played half--both played half back--
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: --right? For the team and you were pretty good from what I understand?
Speaker 1: Oh, pretty good.  In other words, yeah pretty good because that's how I got to college.  You know the coach of the Collinwood team liked what he saw over there at John Adams, he, he moved on from Collinwood High School [Cleveland, Ohio] to Kent State University [Kent, Ohio] as a coach; and he came back and got us from John Adams so you know, he looked at other guys and he took us.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: He took about five of us out of John Adams.  He took five players.
Speaker 2: Now, Adams had a decent football team, right?
Speaker 1: That, at that time. We didn't win a championship now, we, we were like one game away from the championship.  We lost to Cathedral Latin [Cathedral Latin School, Cleveland, Ohio], but, but we were a good team, let's put it that way.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Not the best, but good team.
Speaker 2: All right, now were--and the team was mixed, right?  You had black people playing?
Speaker 1: Yes, yes, yes.
Speaker 2: Your brother was saying that the fullback who played with you all was actually better than you all and, but--
Speaker 1: He was, let me tell you, this guy could run the 100 [100-yard dash], well you know those times may not sound so--he could run the 100 in 10 [seconds] flat and that, that was pretty good in high school.  I could run it in 10.2.  So, he could--he's faster than I was.  His legs were bigger than ours, but he had a bad attitude, wouldn't come to practice, say something back to the coach; so when people would ask about certain players on the team, he was always eliminated.  You didn't even, you know, they talked about us (laughter) but they didn't talked about him.  So, they took us.  We went down to Kent--that was it.
Story_ID: 655484
Speaker 1: In high school [John Adams High School, Cleveland, Ohio] now you, you took the college prep course, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah--
Speaker 1: And (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) all the way through.
Speaker 1: --despite discouragement from the architect?
Speaker 2: Well, I knew I was going to college, you know I just knew so you know I had said I was going to be an architect, but I was, I was really taking courses because I said I may change my mind.  I was trying to be open to any number of things as I experienced things, I may change my mind.
Speaker 1: Okay, now you mentioned the structures you and your brother [HistoryMaker James Whitley] would make and play when you were in elementary school [Roosevelt Elementary School, Warren, Ohio].
Speaker 2: The what?
Speaker 1: The structures you would make the, with the (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh yeah.
Speaker 1: --with the saplings and mud and that sort of thing?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, yeah, we did that.
Speaker 1: So, did you get a chance to really build anything in high school or design anything?
Speaker 2: No, no, no.
Speaker 1: Any projects?
Speaker 2: No, no.
Speaker 1: Did they have any kind of?
Speaker 2: No, they did not have that type of program.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So, we just took the straight, pre- pre college course.
Speaker 1: Okay, did you take drafting in high school?
Speaker 2: We took one course in junior high school.  In seventh grade I took one drafting course so I didn't know what that was, but it was just straight lines and drawing boxes, but you know hey, it wasn't bad.  Just like I--what was interesting I found through my education you know, I took some courses of how to you know, how to use a saw, how to use a planer--they had some courses like that, and now they're even letting girls do it.  It's good training you know for one course.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 655485
Speaker 1: So when you started at Kent State [Kent State University, Kent, Ohio] you knew you were gonna major in architecture?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah when I went there you know, that's one of--I could, there were a number of school--I got scholarships to a number of schools but they didn't even have architecture.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So, going to Kent that was one of the reasons that I went there.
Speaker 1: All right, now had you been at Kent State before?
Speaker 2: No, never been in my life.  When I first went down to visit the campus that was the first trip, I was impressed.
Speaker 1: And it's, it's like just forty-five minutes from?
Speaker 2: From here.
Speaker 1: From Cleveland [Ohio]; and you know they had the first African American college professor in the Ohio system?
Speaker 2: That's right, that's right.
Speaker 1: You know, Oscar.
Speaker 2: Saffold--what's his name Oscar or--?
Speaker 1: Ritchie.
Speaker 2: Ritchie, Ritchie.  I know an Oscar Saffold here in town (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay, yeah, but Oscar Ritchie [Oscar W. Ritchie] taught sociology.
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: But, so what was it, was Kent considered a more, the most liberal school in Ohio, in-state schools (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, no, no I didn't, I wasn't even looking for that.  I was really looking for the best football team that I could get because--I'm still mad at my coach.  See he told me, he promised me that I was going to Notre Dame [University of Notre Dame, South Bend, Indiana] (laughter), he said, "Now you play a good season, I'm gonna get you to Notre Dame, or Ohio State [The Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio]."  I didn't get either one of 'em so I'm still mad at him (laughter), but other than that Kent turned out to be good for me.
Story_ID: 655486
Speaker 1: So you and your bro- did you and your brother [HistoryMaker James Whitley] both start on the, on the football team?
Speaker 2: Yes, yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay.
Speaker 2: He was a left half back, I was right half back.
Speaker 1: Okay, and that's, those are days when you played a T formation, right?
Speaker 2: T, T formation, and a lot of sweeps, a lot of simple passes, but it was an interesting game.
Speaker 1: Yeah, in those days the running game was more prom- more important than the passing game (unclear).
Speaker 2: You know he couldn't, they couldn't throw ten yards, you know (laughter).  If you went further than ten yards you were not--it was not gonna be complete.
Speaker 1: Okay, so now you were around here in Cleveland [Ohio].  I think we were talking about this when I came in the door.  As a youth, you were here when the Cleveland Browns were started, right?
Speaker 2: That's right.  I'm gonna mention one thing about high school.  You know our quarterback was Gerald King.  You know who Gerald King is?  Don King's brother.
Speaker 1: Okay, no, I did not know that.
Speaker 2: Yeah, Don King--oh, there's a story about him boy.  And, he, he got a scholarship with me to Kent [Kent State University, Kent, Ohio]; so, so we went to Kent together too.
Speaker 1: So, what's the story?
Speaker 2: Then he went to the Browns, he played on the Browns team.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So what's the story about him you were going to tell?
Speaker 2: I don't--(unclear) he was a lover and I don't want to get into it (laughter).
Speaker 1: He was a lover, okay.
Speaker 2: He was a lover. His, his brother was in town yesterday.
Speaker 1: Right, I saw him.
Speaker 2: Did you see him on TV?
Speaker 1: I saw him on Channel 19 [WOIO-TV, Shaker Heights, Ohio].
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: Right with [HistoryMaker] Harry Boomer.
Speaker 2: That's right, that's right, he died earlier you know or--(laughter) he's a lover, he died maybe about thirty-four years old, thirty-five years old, so but he went away happy.
Speaker 1: So, Gerald King was a quarterback on the high school team; so your whole backfield was black--
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: --at Adams [John Adams High School, Cleveland, Ohio]?
Speaker 2: That is right, that was unusual at that time, unusual and we all more or less for that one--except for that one guy went to Kent; and we had Luke Owens, he played for the pros on that team.
Speaker 1: What did Owens play?
Speaker 2: Right tackle.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: He played for Cardinals [Chicago Cardinals; Arizona Cardinals] and the Baltimore Colts [Indianapolis Colts].  I got drafted by the Baltimore Colts.
Speaker 1: I didn't know, I didn't know that.  That is--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Did your brother get drafted too?
Speaker 2: No, he didn't get drafted.
Speaker 1: Now, did you all when you played football, was there ever like--I mean did the right half back bet more plays that the left or what I mean, was it?  Was there ever concern about who's getting the ball the most?
Speaker 2: No, they spread that up pretty evenly, but I kind of excelled on the--you know that ten yard pass?  They would throw it to me and it was like a sweep, but I'd be out there already when I got--you know so it was very effective, effective pass.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  So, you kind of catch a flare pass and then--
Speaker 2: Flare pass and then you know--so that was an effective play.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you were--yeah, Baltimore Colts, yeah they went on to become NFL [National Football League] champions in--
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: --in fifty--well, in fact they--when they drafted you then they were the champions, right?
Speaker 2: I was sitting on the field with them--remember that game--because they played here in Cleveland [Ohio] because Cleveland [Cleveland Browns] beat them that year.  They won even though the Baltimore Colts went on to be the champs, but Cleveland beat them that year, but I was sitting on the field with them.  They, they had invited us down there, Luke and myself; and we were sitting on the field with them.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But they offered me seven thousand dollars a year or something like that, and I said I can do better than that in architecture.  Then I was dreaming, I thought I could do better (laughter).
Story_ID: 655487
Speaker 1: Kind of give us a description since we're in Cleveland [Ohio], and talking about the Browns [Cleveland Browns] from those days, did you know Jim Brown?  'Cause I think he started in '57 [1957] (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I, listen, I knew Jim Brown enough to say hey, you know but I didn't know Jim Brown, let's just put it that way, no.
Speaker 1: Okay, did you--were the Browns players accessible to the, the other?
Speaker 2: Yeah, his buddies I knew more so than I knew him.  There was Arnold Pinkney--you remember Arnold Pinkney--I mean John Wooten [HistoryMaker John B. Wooten]?
Speaker 1: Right, John Wooten.  Right.
Speaker 2: John Wooten married Arnold Pinkney's wife's sister; and I ran with Arnold Pinkney so, I got to know Wooten more so than I knew Jim Brown, but I knew everything that Jim Brown was doing, let's just put it that way.
Speaker 1: Well, Wooten was very close to Jim Brown, I know that.
Speaker 2: He was very close to Jim Brown, that's right so I know what's going on.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  He was the guard that would pull out there for Jim Brown to (unclear).
Speaker 2: That's right.  That's right.
Speaker 1: And John Wooten, now, he was part of the Black Economic--?
Speaker 2: Union [Black Economic Union of Ohio].
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Very good organization, just before their time.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: We did a number of buildings for them.
Speaker 1: I wondered if there was a business connection with them.
Speaker 2: Yeah, they went on to, to manage subsidized housing and produced subsidized housing, let's just put it that way.
Speaker 1: So it was Jim Brown; Bobby Mitchell; Wooten.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Kareem Abdul-Jabbar was in it at one time; Ali [Muhammad Ali]; Walter Beach.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Curtis McClinton who played with the Chiefs [Kansas City Chiefs].
Speaker 2: Yeah, but I didn't deal with those guys.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I dealt with the Cleveland--Jim Brown's head of staff here; and they were actually the head of the management group, and they started producing houses.  I went out to San Diego [California] and did a project out to San Diego, didn't make any money but I surely, I took it for the airplane trips (laughter) you know, for BEU.
Speaker 1: I think Walter Beach was very important here in Cleveland I recall, but I don't (unclear).
Speaker 2: Okay, Leon Hogg, you ever heard of that name?  Leon Hogg was the one I dealt with.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, Leon Hogg so that worked out well.
Speaker 1: Leon Hall [sic.] you said?
Speaker 2: Hogg.
Speaker 1: Hogg?  H-O-G-G?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right so that's later on down the line--
Speaker 2: That's right (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) when you get started.
Story_ID: 655488
Speaker 1: Kent State [Kent State University, Kent, Ohio], now who was--did, was there any member of the architecture faculty that was a mentor to you?
Speaker 2: Yes, oh man, the professor--I mean the head of the school.  He was an ex-football player out of Pitt [University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania], so he took a kind of a liking to us.
Speaker 1: What was his name, do you remember?
Speaker 2: I'm trying to come up with a name.
Speaker 1: I know it's an Italian name.
Speaker 2: Morabito [ph.].
Speaker 1: Okay, Morabito, right.
Speaker 2: Morabito; and you know when it came right down to it, I didn't know how good he was until we graduated and he got us our--called us in and got us the first job, he placed us, let's just put it that way.  I didn't have to go out and for it, he placed us and then he placed us in an excellent firm, right outside of Columbus [Ohio]--Newark, Ohio.
Speaker 1: Yeah in Newark, right.  Let's go back to--I want to stay at Kent for a minute.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Just ask you about some of your other--was the work difficult at Kent State?
Speaker 2: Not for, not for me, because it took artistic skills, at least at Kent.  It took artistic skills and that, that wasn't that hard for me.  A lot--I know a lot of other friends of mine had difficulty in doing that and then you know, your grade suffers because it's what it looks like.  If you can't do it you know it's--nowadays, we have computers that will do that for you, but no, those, the days you had to produce it yourself.
Speaker 1: Okay, so even if you understood it, if you couldn't make it look right.
Speaker 2: Yeah, it was tough, it was tough, it was tough.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: You know it's just trying to be a singer and you can't sing, you know (laughter), no matter what--it's just hey, that's how it was.
Speaker 1: So architecture in those days was not for everybody?
Speaker 2: No, no, no.
Speaker 1: So, it was?
Speaker 2: A lot of people loved it but, you know they passed but they didn't do well, let's just put it that way.
Speaker 1: Okay, now you also joined Kappa Alpha Psi [Kappa Alpha Psi Fraternity], right?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: And how did that come--was there a chapter on campus?
Speaker 2: No, we brought it, we went to Akron [Ohio] and brought the Kappas on, on, on the yard, let's put it that way.
Speaker 1: So was this a grad chapter in Akron?
Speaker 2: That, that took us over yes; and we, we--I'll tell you what, we went over pretty easy with these guys 'cause they wanted to get us on campus so, they gave us a few things to do but it wasn't that rough.
Speaker 1: Now, your brother says it was a Dr. Sharp [E.T. Sharp]?
Speaker 2: Yeah, Dr. Sharp in Akron is the one that was the head of that.  He unfortunately had a son, maybe fifteen years ago, that came to Kent and joined the Kappas and got killed; you know they were hazing him and fell off the curb and hit his head, killed him.  Yeah, Dr. Sharp was a good man.
Speaker 1: That sounds unfortunate.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Yeah, so, were you a part of any other organization on campus?
Speaker 2: Let's see, I was involved in a number of organizations that I don't recall, nothing memorable, let's just put it that way.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: 'Cause we had architect's chapter, AIA, junior AIA chapter, and a number of things like that.
Speaker 1: Okay, that's the American Institute of Architects (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Architects, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, AIA--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --and, okay.
Story_ID: 655489
Speaker 1: So as you approached your senior year--now did you, did you meet your wife at Kent State [Kent State University, Kent, Ohio] or?
Speaker 2: Yes, first day on campus for her.  I, I started like a--I graduated high school [John Adams High School, Cleveland, Ohio] in February; and I started Kent in April, I guess.  So I was a freshman, but when September came around I was an upper freshman, so I was big time, and she came on campus.  So, I met her then and that was it.  That was the only person in--I only had one girlfriend that was it (laughter), quick.
Speaker 1: Okay, and you all were married for how long?
Speaker 2: Fifty-four years.
Speaker 1: Now, that's something.
Speaker 2: Yeah, we had a pretty good run, pretty good run.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, and what was your wife's name?
Speaker 2: Kaysonia [Kaysonia Whitley].
Speaker 1: Kaysonia.
Speaker 2: K-A-Y-S-O-N-I-A, you know and she's from North Carolina, so that's why we hooked.  My folks [Beatrice Nivens Whitley and Moses Whitley] are from North Carolina.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, when you were heading towards your senior year--now, you weren't married when you graduated, were you, had you (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, I got married after I graduated.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 655490
Speaker 1: When you were, you were at the verge of graduation with, did you get any special honors at Kent [Kent State University, Kent, Ohio]?
Speaker 2: Well, I was commissioned as a second lieutenant in the United States Air Force.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you took ROTC [Reserve Officers' Training Corps]?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: No other specific honors, no.
Speaker 1: Okay, but you made good grades in architecture, but you weren't an honor student?
Speaker 2: No, no.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what about football?  You said the coach drafted you, were you considered--now, this is the Mid-American Conference?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I made Mid-America, all- all- what you call it, whatever--the first one when I was a sophomore and never again.
Speaker 1: Okay, and so the Colts, the Baltimore Colts [Indianapolis Colts] offered you seven thousand dollars (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Seven thousand dollars a year.
Speaker 1: Now this is in 1957?
Speaker 2: Fifty-seven [1957].
Speaker 1: Yeah.  Now, that's, that was a decent annual salary?
Speaker 2: Well, that was the salary that, that I--when I went into the Air Force that's what they paid me in the Air Force.  So--
Speaker 1: Okay, so it wasn't a lot of money but it was (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) it was you know, it was comfortable but that was it.  Not that I would, you know, unh-uh.  Then of course I said I'm gonna be an architect, you know architects are millionaires you know (laughter) I have to get going.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you and your brother [HistoryMaker James Whitley] graduate at the same time?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And did--so you all were stationed in Lackland Air Force Base in Texas [Bexar County, Texas] first, right?
Speaker 2: We went to Lackland for about ten days--thirty days, maybe thirty days.  That's just an indoctrination; then I went to Waco, Texas for navigator training.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Then came out of that, went to Tampa, Florida (unclear) (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now, there's a story about, about your navigation training that your brother told, I don't know if you remember but they said they didn't like you in navigation school because you were--?
Speaker 2: I was too slick for 'em, they thought--they called me Slick just because I knew geometry.  That was ridiculous.  You know the first thing you learn and this is the simplest navigation in the world.  You sit in the window, you look out and you see a little town, you look at your map.  You say that's this little town but you have to be able to look out there and say how many miles is it from this to this.  Well, I took a protractor, I put a, a straw on it, taped it to the protractor; and then I could click it over you know the--had the angles on the protractor, I get, have it vertical go like that, I'd have my angle.  I look at the altimeter, I'd have my height; do my little trig [trigonometry], I have my distance.  They didn't like that at all.  What?  Well, I did that and several things, you know, several, that was just one of the things that--but I'd just been educated, you use your, your education.  They didn't like it at all (laughter).
Speaker 1: They wanted you to just guesstimate it, right?
Speaker 2: They wanted you to guess, well, I wanted precision, and I wanted precision predicated on, on--you were graded on precision.  If you say three miles and it's four or two, your grade is lower.  So, I went, let's get this perfect (gesture).  They didn't like that.
Speaker 1: So you got it every time, right?
Speaker 2: Perfect (laughter) perfect.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, so, navigation training--so is that the role you served in the Air Force, navigator?
Speaker 2: Yes.  Navigator, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So, you were a navigator for what kind of vessels, bombers or I mean (unclear)?
Speaker 2: Bombers, well no, for--we were in the SAC.  Our job was to refuel, refuel B-47s.  So, we'd have to go out, find them, and refuel 'em and come back.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, so you--so SAC is the?
Speaker 2: Strategic Air Command.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: There was a, you know they're on their way.  When we refuel them, you know where they're going?  At the time, we're going straight to Russia [Soviet Union; Russia].  We practiced hitting Russia you know.  I mean that was it, the Cold War.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: B-47s [Boeing B-47 Stratojet].
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  So you were in the Air Force, how long?
Speaker 2: I was in the Air Force what ended up kind of neat for me, I was in the Air Force some two years.  They gave us--I signed up for three years but they gave us the opportunity, they said--first, they wanted me to sign up for indefinite and I wouldn't ref- sign up for indefinite so they said--so, the, the government cut back and I got the opportunity, I got out in two years.
Speaker 1: Okay, now your brother though he served an additional year?
Speaker 2: Yeah, but he was over--well, he, he served his full three years because he was over in England at the time and they kept him, but they gave me the option, I had the option of signing up for five years or two years.  Let's call it two years, so I took the two years and of course I wanted to get back to architecture, you know.  I wanted to get going (gesture) (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 655491
Speaker 1: So you had already--I skipped over it, but you had already had an experience working in Newark, Ohio (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, yes, I knew what this was all about.
Speaker 1: --for-
Speaker 2: It's fun, a whole lot of fun.
Speaker 1: --yeah, so you worked for a firm in Newark?
Speaker 2: Baker and Associates [Joseph Baker and Associates; JBA Architects].
Speaker 1: Yeah.  Over the summer, right?  Before you went to [the U.S. Air Force]?
Speaker 2: Before I went and that was it.
Speaker 1: All right so, now what was--what difference did you notice between actually working as an architect, and--now, now you had an internship before too with Robert Madison [HistoryMaker Robert P. Madison], right?
Speaker 2: Yeah but that was like, but that was on, that intern- well, that--when you say intern, maybe week, two weeks.  It was not--you know enough to get a feel, but not a real feel.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: When I went to Baker that was a real, that was a real feel because they said, "Do it."  And it was, I learned real quick you know, I couldn't do the simplest of things you know.  If he said garage I'd--hey, hey (laughter) you know, so you have to learn, you know there's--you have to, you have to, to learn architecture you have to be in an architect's office to learn it.  It's not--what you learn in school is not what--you know they do a whole lot more in an architect's office to complete those documents.
Speaker 1: Okay, so it's a big difference between?
Speaker 2: Big difference, big difference, but they prepare you, you're ready but you know you can't do it.
Speaker 1: Okay, before we go further I didn't ask you to--talk about Robert Madison, now he's an African American architect?
Speaker 2: Yes, he was very helpful.  Well, I'll tell you the truth, I was hooked up to Bob because my mother [Beatrice Nivens Whitley] and his mother [Nettie Brown Madison] worked together at Internal Revenue [Internal Revenue Service], and so she was always talking about her son and we, my mother's always talking about her sons [Whitley and HistoryMaker James Whitley], and so we were almost forced together in that kind of a sense.  I always knew what Bob was doing and I guess he heard what I--we were doing, but, so but I didn't know him, let's put it--I didn't know him; and so one of our courses [at Kent State University, Kent, Ohio] was to--you had to go to an architect's office and get some assistance from an architect, maybe sit there a day, for a short period of time and bring that back to school.  When we looked around I didn't know an architect other than Bob, I didn't--I said hey, you know what I'm saying.  In fact, it was impossible for me to get that as far as I was concerned.  It was impossible, so but I found other guys that weren't black who were having the same problem, so I took at least one of them with us and we went over to Bob's office, and he helped us, and he did what he was supposed to do and we had a great time; and thought, and I got to know him and a few of the people in his office you know and that was, that was very nice, it was very nice.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay now he's how many years older than you?
Speaker 2: Probably fifteen--no, fourteen, fifteen.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right so he's a generation ahead of you?
Speaker 2: Yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah.  Okay, and he went on to build the Cleveland Browns Stadium [Cleveland Municipal Stadium; FirstEnergy Stadium, Cleveland, Ohio]--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --and some other big projects and (unclear)?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.  Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Story_ID: 655492
Speaker 1: So when you get out of the [U.S.] Air Force, what did you do, what did you?
Speaker 2: I went and started working with a church architect here, a guy who did churches.  I still really didn't know architecture you know at that time I didn't; and they were doing little churches there.  That was the time that the cities were exploding.  People were moving out of Cleveland [Ohio] ju- and they were, they were settling in all the suburbs.  You know everybody--had a turnpike [Ohio Turnpike], you didn't have to stay in Cleveland anymore.  So, Cleveland left and went to the suburbs; and when they went to the suburbs they had to take their church with them and they built new churches.  So, a lot of churches were being built at the time, and I went to a firm that was building those churches.  So, I learned a lot, and just knocking out churches.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right so, now is this the same time--was this flight from Cleveland, did it correspond to the desegregation of housing in the city?
Speaker 2: Yeah, that's when all that, all that--the getting out you know, (unclear), just exploded.  Everybody left town and they went to the suburbs.  When they were in the suburbs that was fabulous opportunity for architects, but not for black architects.  So, so, but that's--I was working for a firm that took advantage of that and that worked out well.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, so what was the name of that firm?
Speaker 2: Damon, Worley and Samuels [Damon, Worley, Samuels and Associates, Cleveland, Ohio].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And he was into religion, you know he, he believed it.  Let's just put it that way, that's the reason he hired me.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay so his was more than just a job.  He was like trying to really build these churches because he was--?
Speaker 2: (Gesture).
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: That's what he was trying to do and that's what he did.
Speaker 1: Okay, so, now did you have a dream at that time of founding your own architect- (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Always.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: In the Air Force I knew I was getting out of here just to set up my office.  Period.  I thought it was you know, like a doctor's office; you know, you get, you graduate, you're ready.  You can just walk out, you're ready to go.  Nope, it doesn't work that way.
Speaker 1: Okay, so, now what steps did you take to (unclear)?
Speaker 2: Well, I had to get trained and that was it.  First Damon, Worley and Samuels, stayed there for about three years.  Learned everything--I, I felt confidence.  Now I know.  Three years you know.  I went down to the state, took the state board of educa- state architect's test and passed that and so I was certified.  So, I was capable of setting up an office.
Speaker 1: Okay so well was it hard to pass the state board?
Speaker 2: Very difficult.
Speaker 1: How much study did it take, I mean, or?
Speaker 2: Well, you know I had to go down there twice.  It wasn't like you know you go right down there and bam right through it.  You take it, they send you what you did and you go down there and you make up what you missed.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  Now at the--now, this is while your brother [HistoryMaker James Whitley] was still in England?
Speaker 2: Yeah, he's still in England.
Speaker 1: Okay, now how soon was it that you decide--did you wait for your brother to get back before you decided to start?
Speaker 2: No, I went on and when I got registered I left Damon, Worley and Samuels and then I joined one of the largest firms in Cleveland [Ohio] and that--it was Dalton and Dalton [Dalton, Dalton, Little and Newport].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I learned what they're doing--I saw what they were doing, let's just put it that way.
Speaker 1: Did any of it seem really difficult to do?
Speaker 2: Well, architecture is difficult, and it's difficult; and you, you and there's a lot of pieces that you--you know you can be good here and not good here so you gotta get all the pieces.  Once you put all the pieces together, then you're ready to go; but until you get all those pieces together, you're not.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 655493
Speaker 1: I would think that a black architect in 1962, '63 [1963] would probably--one of the biggest concerns was how to get a contract?
Speaker 2: Well when we jumped out that was--what do you mean, that's still the biggest thing.  What are you s- (laughter), the biggest thing, well, we were always trying--we started off with churches.  That ended up being--James [HistoryMaker James Whitley] got out [of the U.S. Air Force] and he--I was pretty fixed.  I was with the largest firm [Dalton and Dalton; Dalton, Dalton, Little and Newport] in Cleveland [Ohio] and you know I was pretty settled, I was comfortable, let's just put it that way.  He jumped out there and he, he jumped around then decided hey he's gonna open up the office, and did it.  And the first thing you're trying to get is to get some work and you know, what kind of work?  There was no work for black people because black people do not build new suburbs and they don't build office buildings and they don't--well, a lot of things they don't build.  So, if you're trying to get your work there, your, your chance of getting work is gonna be remote.  So, he talked to the minister, a block away from my mother's [Beatrice Nivens Whitley] house and he had a sign up that he's going--"Future church [Advent Evangelical Lutheran Church, Cleveland, Ohio]."  So, he walked out, I talked to him, "How about me helping you?"  Well, they hired him, you know first just to talk and before you know it, they, they got funded and that was the turning--he booked his first church, and that was it.  Then he started running around the state, he went down to Dayt-.  Did he tell you he was down there?  Did he give you the name of the minister down there?  He went to, he went to every city.  Went down to Dayton [Ohio], he was running everywhere trying to get churches, and that you know kind of that's slow, but that was the way he started.  So, I was comfortable, I stayed right where I was for a while; then my sister [Joyce Whitley] joined him.  And what happened that was when Johnson [President Lyndon Baines Johnson] came out and started talking about, well he started subsidizing housing, he came out with the subsidized housing project; and James talked to a lady that knew nothing other than she wanted to improve her community and they talked, they talked and he put some things on paper.  He put in an application and he got funded.  Boy, this is, this is new here.  They also started making I guess right after Nixon [President Richard Milhous Nixon] went out, they started making it possible, all the planning in the city had to get, had to get city or local community approval--that meant black approval.  What that opened up was, my sister was a planner, she came and joined the firm [Whitley and Whitley, Architects and Planners; Whitley/Whitley Architects and Planners LLC]; we started doing planning for these communities all over the country.  First, there were very few planners, black planners and we went to Chicago [Illinois].  They were so glad--that hey, so we did the, The Woodlawn Organization's planning work; and I--and in the planning work they talk about what are the needs of the community, new housing et cetera, elderly housing so and so and so of course we're right there, we said, "Oh, yes let us do a little sketch for you," (laughter) and that's how that project was born.  People wanna know, how come you from Cleveland are doing projects here in Chicago?  Well, that's how.  And you know.  Well, we did that all over.  Huh?
Speaker 1: With Reverend Brazier [HistoryMaker Bishop Arthur Brazier] and--
Speaker 2: Reverend Brazier, he took us--
Speaker 1: --Leon Finney [HistoryMaker Reverend Dr. Leon D. Finney, Jr.].
Speaker 2: Leon Finney--what's Leon doing?
Speaker 1: He's still--well he's--
Speaker 2: He's in the meat business or something there for a while?
Speaker 1: He's got a lot of businesses--
Speaker 2: Does he?
Speaker 1: --and things going on.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Leon he was a good man, Leon Finney.
Speaker 1: Right, so.
Speaker 2: How about [HistoryMaker] Allison Davis?
Speaker 1: Allison, yeah, he's, he's, he's doing well.
Speaker 2: Okay, Allison Davis was the lawyer--that was, that was a good group.  That was a good group.
Story_ID: 655494
Speaker 1: You know, and then of course, then all of a sudden political things change.  Hatcher [HistoryMaker Richard Hatcher] goes in in Gary [Indiana]; Stokes [Carl Stokes] goes in in Cleveland [Ohio].
Speaker 2: This is 1967, right.
Speaker 1: In 1967, all of a sudden--we knew the guy that, a friend of Stokes, not that we knew Stokes, we knew a friend of Stokes.  We look up, first real major job we got was a recreation center for, for the City of Cleveland.
Speaker 2: Now, this is the John F. Kennedy?
Speaker 1: Recreation Center [John F. Kennedy Recreation Center, Cleveland, Ohio]; and out of that we got national awards.
Speaker 2: Now this is significant.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: Because, I mean what's--well, first of all let's just talk about the election of Carl Stokes--having a black mayor--?
Speaker 1: It made all the difference in the world.  It made all the difference in the world.
Speaker 2: 'Cause--
Speaker 1: I'll tell you one thing.  It made a difference like this.  The, the mayor before him [Ralph S. Locher] I wouldn't have even went down there and talked to him, not even--don't even try.  It's not even--wasn't--why waste the time?  It's just mentally, just mentally it changed our mental outlook on what you could do and what you can't do; so that made a heck of a difference.  And when we said if we can do that, let's go to Gary.  We went to Gary, they--we, we got all their planning.
Speaker 2: So, did you ever--at this stage in your career, did you think that--did you ever have, entertain the idea that you didn't know as much as these white architects knew or?
Speaker 1: No, I knew I--first, when I was in Kent [Kent State University, Kent, Ohio], I was better than everybody.  So, first I understood what--the base, I was better than they were.  Now, once I got out I learned--I could learn what they, they were teaching, but how to get the work was impossible.  I didn't get better then, no.  One of my buddies you know, and then the guys that came out with me Dorksey [ph.]--well, he was a, he, he was Jewish.  Jewish--a Jewish group controlled all the shopping centers and in one swoop, he got all of them.  You know when they started expanding to, to the suburbs?
Speaker 2: To build the malls and (unclear)?
Speaker 1: To build their malls, and guess who was going out with them?  Dorskey, he was a classmate of mine, just that simple and boom.  And then I go, I went to Las Vegas [Nevada], he's out there too.  I mean everywhere; and then he became--and he's an absolute expert on what he does you know, absolute expert.  So, it was like that on a lot of things.  You had to know somebody; and if you don't know anybody, you're not getting any work.
Story_ID: 655495
Speaker 1: All right, yeah I--off camera I was just saying that--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --people often say that Harold Washington in Chicago [Illinois] as the first black mayor made the process fair, and you had a reaction to that?
Speaker 2: Well, it's impossible, making it fair doesn't mean anything.  President of the United States, who's that, Johnson [President Lyndon Baines Johnson], he made it fair, put it in the law.  I went down to the Navy department [U.S. Department of the Navy] in, in where is Hampton [sic. Arlington, Virginia]?  Hampton, Vir-?
Speaker 1: Yeah, Virginia.  Yeah.
Speaker 2: Virginia--Hampton, Virginia.  I walk in there and the guy says, "Hey?"  I said, "I'm, here's my application.  I wanna participate on these [U.S.] Navy jobs."  They were building like crazy, I'm talking billions of dollars they're spending.  I just want a little piece.  Well, you know you're in Virginia now, and we got rules.  You know the laws says you gotta do this, you gotta do that. (Unclear) no, no, don't worry about those rules.  We got rules, you gotta go down and talk to So and So and then the AIA [American Institute of Architects] in the state has to say you're all right, and this is--you're blocked.  There are too many people with a rule, there're too many people below that rule that control.  So, you're not gonna, you know just by putting a rule, they had the law.  At that time, it was mandatory.  Nope, unh-huh the gates did not open up because the rules were changed.  No; and that's true federal, state, everywhere.  Every time I go--I can go anywhere and ask for a job.  James [Whitley's brother, HistoryMaker James Whitley] may have told you about I had a buddy that was head of--classmate, got him through calculus.  His final grade was dependent on, (whispers) "What's number three?"  Helped him through calculus, he passed the course.  They made him--he went on to be head of Kent State's [Kent State University, Kent Ohio] architectural--the school, the university, he was a university architect that controlled--he could say that he has developed millions of work for the campus.  He went from there to Marriott hotels [Marriott International, Inc.] all over the world.  I call him up and say, "Hey, you're doing all these hotels, how about giving me one?"  Never happened, never happened, but after it was all said and done he called me.  He said, "Hey, let me tell you the truth.  I couldn't."  And it wasn't a matter of you can't do the work, he said that, "These guys around here, they would question my judgment."  That's what he told me, he said, "Man they would que-," I would be out of here just based on judgment, so that's true everywhere.  It's not, and then the guy didn't even want to do it.  The law can say, "Do it."  (Makes sounds) That's what you--you're fighting.  That's a head wind that you're fighting and it's a reality.
Speaker 1: Yeah, and that's a lot to go against.
Speaker 2: That's a lot to go against you know.  Everybody is--"Hey, how will I look when I do this," you know (laughter)?
Story_ID: 655496
Speaker 1: Carl Stokes, elected in 1967--
Speaker 2: Yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) as the first black mayor of a major metropolitan city; and he was in a position to go on and do it, right?
Speaker 2: That's what he did.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And let me tell you on that one, if you want a funny story there, at that time, we, we had set--just set up the office.  There were about--but there were three other white other architects in our building.  And we got together and said, "Look, let's get together and, and--," now, we're gonna be a big firm.  It was Morris,  DeWalt, Cullen [ph.]; Whitley and Whitley [Whitley and Whitley, Architects and Planners; Whitley/Whitley Architects and Planners LLC], five architects.  Let's go down to the mayor and ask him for some work and, and--now, now we're not just one, we're big firm.  We go down there, and this friend of mine was sitting, sitting there that asked us to come down.  Well, no, first, this is number one.  This friend of mine that is a friend of, I mean that was a friend of Stokes, I didn't know Stokes.  This is a friend of mine that knows Stokes, but he was a head of the building department for the City of Cleveland [Ohio].  He said "Come on down, let's talk."  Well, we go back to our group of five and say, "Hey, the city's asked us to come down."  But none of the five could, could trust us going down by ourselves.  So, they show up and all five of us went.  You know you couldn't talk--"Hey, no, no, no; we have to all go."  So, we get down there and we talk to this guy and he says, "Hey, who are these guys?  You don't need them."  That was it basically, he told them right then their position: "You, you're getting this job, not them."  And that was the truth.  Of course, that five broke up very quickly after that little organization; and that, from that point forward, we didn't need them for anything because what we were talking about is image.  So, people don't fail you on, on just the way--judgment.  You understand?  So, we thought we'd build that, let's get--build that up so we, we won't have that problem, unh-uh.  But after that we've had no problem.
Story_ID: 655497
Speaker 1: Yeah, your brother [HistoryMaker James Whitley]--the way you all worked, your brother basically was the face of the other group most of the time, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: And, and, and you did the actual (unclear) (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, production and stuff like that.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  So, did you ever switch roles?
Speaker 2: No, unh-uh.
Speaker 1: And your sister [Joyce Whitley] got involved in (unclear)?
Speaker 2: She did the planning, and she took after my mother [Beatrice Nivens Whitley], she's very articulate, very--she, she could go in there and sell anything.  I mean it was, it's really salesmanship, being able to sell people what they need and.
Speaker 1: Yeah, architecture is, is highly dependent on sales acumen, right?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: No?
Speaker 2: On politics, who you know; it has nothing to do with sales ability, unh-uh, unh-uh.  That's what I thought, I said hey, you know this is--no, you can practice all you want, unh-uh.  They call for the vote and hey, you got nine people sitting around the table, who wins?
Speaker 1: So, you mean--so if your brother comes, no matter how suave he is or how friendly he is?
Speaker 2: It has nothing to do with it.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Nothing to do--I'm just let you know that, it's just simple, and that's for anybody. I'm just saying for anybody, I'm not just talking about black people.  I'm talking about for anybody in this business you have to know somebody.
Speaker 1: So that really puts the African American architect at--
Speaker 2: Out.
Speaker 1: So you have to have somebody on the inside?
Speaker 2: You have to; and but what things--what we say is a changing world, what has happened is before you had nobody sitting at the conference table.  Now, you'll have--the president might even be a head of the table.  I mean things have changed so much now, you know.  We see--I see black people everywhere.
Speaker 1: Yeah, but it's--but the situation, I know your brother was saying the situation is in many ways worse even though you have more black power present at the table.
Speaker 2: This is what they don't understand.  They don't understand that that's how--they don't understand that's how it works, and people are running games on them.  They're sitting there, president of the board, and with no power.  The power is on the guy that organizes below them that gets three other people--it's just that simple.  You think you're--you know president and normally the president rules, that's the power in most boards; and he only has to infu- influence the, the majority.  He doesn't have to get every vote, but he has his boys that he, he (makes sound) (gestures)--that's who he gets, that's what it is.  Now, you got black people in those roles, they don't understand that.  In fact, they run away from it, they run away from that--the use of power, let's just put it--the use of power; they're not used to it and they run away from that and it's--you know.
Story_ID: 655498
Speaker 1: Power is a scary concept to some people.
Speaker 2: Scary concept, and I'm saying that's what it's all about in this business--well in all businesses, it's all about power.  If you don't have it--you know, the Stokes, you can get Stokes now.  And Stokes got in there, used his power.  Now, we have, we have politicians in there right now in Cleveland [Ohio] today, I won't name any names, 'cause he's afraid to use his power.  He believes using his power is being nice, you know, he's the mayor.
Speaker 1: That kind of takes the power away from?
Speaker 2: He's (unclear) he's nice and he's gonna get the votes because you have to get the votes on both side of town, you know.  Black people aren't even ware- aware of the power, they don't--you know they're not aware of what makes things go.  So, when he backs off of using the power, he's being nice to the other side, and the other side understands that.  They say, "Oh, he's not bad."  (Laughter) "He's not bad, he's all right," and he can get and he can--he stills get black votes and he can get the other side votes too.  So, that's the way he's playing it.
Speaker 1: So, the other side doesn't have to worry about anything changing because he's?
Speaker 2: That's what's going on; and I, I see that in a whole lot of cities.  You, when you get into that position, you know--and women are the worst.
Speaker 1: As politicians in those situations?
Speaker 2: As a politician they're the worst because they haven't, that's not part of their--power is not where they're coming from.  It's all about power.
Speaker 1: Would it be correct to say that power is about organized people and, and money, resources?
Speaker 2: That's what it's all about, that's what it's all about.  If you, if you can do that and do that well--and I'm all the way down to the library board, the smallest library board.  I'm--you know (gesture), if you have use it.  If you don't have it, hey, be satisfied.  You're not gonna win.
Speaker 1: Okay, so, well Carl Stokes was in a position to--
Speaker 2: Use it.
Speaker 1: --give.
Speaker 2: And, and he, he got, he got ridiculous.  You know he, he took it a little, as a real shrewd politician he wouldn't have taken it as far as he took it.  He took it as far because, "You can't touch me.  I have the votes and it's just that simple: you can't touch me" (laughter).  He was not interested in the other side.  Now, when you have to get the other side too, now the next mayor that came in won because he was willing to share, you know.  That's you know, good politicians share (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) This is (unclear), you're talking about the next?
Speaker 2: You're supposed to get your piece, that's really what it is, and I'm only talking about getting your piece if you're--you know, don't try to get it all if you, you know, just get your piece.
Speaker 1: So, the next one you were talking about is the next African American mayor--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --Michael White?
Speaker 2: Yeah, Michael White, he, you know.
Speaker 1: He's like some, what, some twenty years later?
Speaker 2: Yeah, twenty-seven years you know, but he got--the only reason he got in is because he said, "I'm--," you know, hey.  [HistoryMaker] George Forbes would've been mayor.  Forbes would've been mayor but he--the other side knew what that meant.  He's taking it all, and he was (laughter).  They said, "Oh, no, oh no."
Story_ID: 655499
Speaker 1: So, anyway back to 1970--I mean '67 [1967], or the late si- well, when Carl Stokes was able to get that contract for the John F. Kennedy Recreation Center [Cleveland, Ohio] for (unclear).
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So, you were able to demonstrate what you could do?
Speaker 2: That was it: I got it, did it.  You know when you do it, they say hey, nothing.  'Cause I'll tell you what stops everybody.  "Have you ever done--," the first question, "have you ever done this before?"  You're through, you're through.  There is one other thing I wanna mention before that may be interesting.  You know, I, I--between the time when I was working for Dalton and Dalton [Dalton, Dalton, Little and Newport, Cleveland, Ohio], get--preparing myself just before I came with James [Whitley's brother, HistoryMaker James Whitley].  They had a contract in Africa, and I went to the Sudan.  I lived in the Sudan for two years.  I did sixteen schools over there, so man, we--beautiful life, fun, whole lot of fun.  Learned the language, learned the, you know customs, you know.
Speaker 1: Now, this is in the '50s [1950s]?
Speaker 2: This is sixty--I went over there in '67 [1967].
Speaker 1: Sixty-seven [1967], okay this is in-
Speaker 2: No, wait a minute, I went over there in '65 [1965].
Speaker 1: Sixty-five [1965], okay.
Speaker 2: 'Cause I came back in '67 [1967]; and then the following year, joined James.  When I was over there I just, there was, I lived in Khartoum [Sudan], had twelve, twelve servants.  I mean I was living the, the life of Riley over there.  Got the opportunity to, traveling all the way over r- all over East Africa.  I went from Dar es Salaam [Tanzania] all the way down to Rhodesia [Zimbabwe], and got to understand what that was all about, plus I was taking my family with me so that made it very nice; and when I came back after that period I went to Europe, stayed there for thirty days because you know we got evacuated out of there.  I mean just--remember the war broke out?  You see back in '67 [1967] there was a war between the Arabs and Israel.
Speaker 1: Oh, the '67 [1967] war, right.
Speaker 2: That's right I was there and I was coming out of--I was coming out of Africa, and they said you cannot fly over any of these Arab countries.  So, I had to do all kind of maneuvering just to get to Greece.
Speaker 1: That's the Six-Day War.
Speaker 2: The Six-Day War you know, so and I, we got evacuated out of the Sudan because our life was in danger.  All Americans had to go, so they gave us four hours' notice and you know; and then they shipped everything.  They'd go in your house and ship--just pack and shipped it.  We were gone--shipped it.  I get it back, big cart comes up to your house and there's all your stuff, you know.  So, so that was an interesting, interesting part of my life, and then when I got there of course, my sisters [Gloria Whitley Fleming, Joyce Whitley and Janice Whitley Carlstedt] were living in Sweden so I got to meet them and, and hook up with their children.  So, that turned out to be a very nice experience (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) This is really exciting stuff, now this is--had you dreamt of these kind of travels when you were in architectural school [at Kent State University, Kent, Ohio], or did you?
Speaker 2: Well, that's what they did in the movies (laughter).  Yeah, in fact, in fact--have you ever been to Brazil?  Man, I--we got a bonus one year, just (unclear) us, so we took a trip to Brazil.  I took my kids [Kym Whitley, Kyle Whitley and Scott Whitley] and everything down to Brazil.  That was the best place I've ever been, and I've been to a lot of places, 'cause I've been to Victoria--when I was over there I went to Victoria Falls [Zambia], places that people--nobody goes to Victoria Falls.  You read about that every once and a while, but that there in Rhodesia, Zambezi River.  But Brazil is a very exciting place and it's not that expensive to get there; and I recommend that if you can go somewhere, go on down to Brazil.  Man, that's fabulous place, fabulous place.  Get to see some scenes out there that you can't believe, some pretty people too (laughter) (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay.  All right.
Story_ID: 655500
Speaker 1: Back to this John Kennedy recreation center [John F. Kennedy Recreation Center, Cleveland, Ohio].
Speaker 2: Yeah, go ahead.
Speaker 1: And you get this opportunity because there's a black mayor; and so, so what you've been able to do here is remarkable because you all won what the Oscar [Academy Award] of architecture for this design, right?
Speaker 2: And guess what happened when we won that award?  University of San Diego [San Diego, California] sent us a letter: "Come on out to San Diego [California], we are building a third world college, we want you to be the designer."  Bam!  We jumped on--we prepared for it, we got a few experts and we jumped in on the airplane and went on out there.  Gave a presentation--"You are our man."  The next day they had a riot on campus.  It was unbelievable, unbelievable; and they were rioting over--some kids were--something ridiculous like--what were they talking about, that they had--people were driving around in Mercedes [Mercedes Benz], rich people were driving around in Mercedes and these kids, these poor kids were not able to do that; and that's what the riot was about, something stupid like that.  I mean it was the most ridiculous thing.
Speaker 1: This is San Diego State or?
Speaker 2: University of San Diego.
Speaker 1: University of San Diego, okay.
Speaker 2: And university said, "Well, we're not building your college."  At, in the end: "We're not building that coll-," unbelievable, unbelievable.
Speaker 1: Okay, so it didn't work but--
Speaker 2: It didn't work out.
Speaker 1: --back to the--now, what is the award called that's the Oscar?
Speaker 2: Progressive Architecture Award.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: At the time annually they give it every year, and all the architects send their projects in and they make a selection.  We, we won it twice.  We won that; and then we won the planning one for a downtown stadium.  Progressive--planning for the, that stadium and what we're gonna do with the community, the streets et cetera around that.
Speaker 1: Around the?
Speaker 2: Gateway, Gateway stadium [Gateway Sports and Entertainment Complex, Cleveland, Ohio].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It was for the Gateway stadium--sent that in and it won, so hey, two of 'em.  So, and let me tell you, to get that prize is like--in Cleveland [Ohio] there has been one other guy that has won it, was Don Hisaka [Donald M. Hisaka], but it's a rare, it's a rare win for Cleveland.
Speaker 1: Yeah, your brother [HistoryMaker James Whitley] was telling us how rare that is.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: He said someone told him there, he said, "Well the next couple of years I guess I'll be back," said, "No, you're not coming back."
Speaker 2: You're not coming back, no, it's a tough one, but we went back, even after this guy said, "You won't be back."  We went back and won it so, it's not, it's not--but you know awards don't give you jobs.  I'll just tell you that.  See, awards do not give you jobs--that just supports you when you're getting a job.  Power gets you a job; and, and awards make it possible that they don't look like idiots--judgment--they haven't made bad judgments, that's about all.
Story_ID: 655501
Speaker 1: Another issue that comes up when we interview black architects is the importance of not having any flaws in your work because you, if you have something wrong with--I mean it's you, I mean it's your?
Speaker 2: Yes, but that, see I take that as--that's standard, that's not, you know it's--that puts more--it's not that hard, let's just put it that way.  That makes it, well that makes, ooh, well this is (makes sound)--it's not that hard.
Speaker 1: But does it stifle creativity on some level, 'cause I know somebody like say Frank Gehry, if he builds a building and say it leaks somewhere you know what I mean?
Speaker 2: He's not worried about it, I'm just telling you that's why I say it's not--he's not worried about it because I wouldn't build a building like that.  Just put it--if you put a skylight in the roof, it's gonna leak.  You put it all over your roof, it's gonna leak more.
Speaker 1: There's no, no foolproof way to do something (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) There's no foolproof--it's gonna leak, at least that's been my experience.  It's gonna leak.  So, you know he can take risk, I wouldn't take that kind of risk because it doesn't matter with Gehry you know what I mean.  It leaks, but look how wonderful it is you know what I'm saying?  It leaks, but it's just wonderful.
Speaker 1: Helmut Jahn's--
Speaker 2: Huh?
Speaker 1: Helmut Jahn's State of Illinois building [State of Illinois Center; James R. Thompson Center] in Chicago [Illinois]--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --had a problem with the air conditioning--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --and it started to heat up like a terrarium you know, and, but you know that, it made the papers, but Helmut Jahn is still considered to be--
Speaker 2: Yeah, that' not gonna kill him, it's not gonna kill him.  I'll tell you one thing, we did the fashion museum at Kent [Kent State University Museum, Kent, Ohio] and that was a very rare--that was one of the highest points of Kent State's architect- at least to hear them talk about it. We got the job.  Guess how we got the job?
Speaker 1: How?
Speaker 2: President of the board was a black guy living down the street from me, a physician's surgeon; and he said he wrote a letter, "Give this to--," it's just that simple and it was done.  He just did it through sheer power and he didn't--he just took risk because he put it, even put it on paper.  He just took risk and, and he was willing to--people couldn't even believe it 'cause we were not listed.  I mean public things they were raising money.  They said the architect was the university architect.  They didn't even put our name on it.  They're raising money, they talk about the architecture of the, and the university architect is doing the talking.
Speaker 1: So, just a suggestion that African American architect is doing something is enough to kill a?
Speaker 2: Kill a donation, they may know what they're talking about, but, but I know we got the job, let's just put it that way.  I know how it was done.  It was not done on Progressive Architecture Awards.
Story_ID: 655502
Speaker 1: Do you have a particular style that you're known for as an architect?  You know everybody knows of Frank Lloyd Wright (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, we don't have a, we don't have a particular style 'cause we vary our style depending on--our strength has, really has been able to listen and understand what the client wants; and that was developed basically through TWO [The Woodlawn Organization, Chicago, Illinois].  See, the big thing out there, nobody listened.  People were crying, we want this, we want that--nobody listened.  When we came in and said, "Hey, we're gonna listen," and we took it into consideration.  They told us you know--what's the name of that public housing project, high rise with--"We don't want that."
Speaker 1: Robert Taylor [Robert Taylor Homes, Chicago, Illinois] and (unclear)?
Speaker 2: What do they have over at TWO?
Speaker 1: Yeah, they--low rise building.
Speaker 2: (Unclear) they got low rise and high rise, low rise and high rise; and the issue was you have to listen to understand what they're saying.  They were saying they don't want it for families.  We said we're gonna give it to you for old people.  You have a need--we surveyed the community.  How many old people--how are you gonna house these people?  We can put these old people here; and we can put the young people here, and it works.  Now, they have their community, it works.  TWO, that's where the Blackstone Rangers used to be, you remember them?
Speaker 1: Right, that's right.
Speaker 2: Yeah, it used to be, that was a tough group.  So that determines your architecture really, listening.  We did Chinatown in Washington, D.C. where, where--oh, what is that center that's down there, big center.  We planned that one--(pause) hm, on 7th Street.
Story_ID: 655503
Speaker 1: So, now you've done a lot of schools, I know.  You did like eight schools on the east side of Cleveland [East Cleveland City School District], right?  Eight?
Speaker 2: Yeah, we've done, yeah we did eight schools, but we did like eight schools for the City of Cleveland [Ohio] et cetera prior to that before--but we did this all in one bunch.  We did that, was an interesting project.  Did it all in one, you know one bunch.  We were hired one time and just did all ten buildings.
Speaker 1: Were all the schools different or done according to the interest of a community or were they, did you (unclear) (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) The problem--n- it's not the problem.  The issue was that the--you had to take into account what the, the community wants, but you have even bigger needs.  The state established their standards that you have, that really determines the base of your design and then everything else is add-ons.  We can accommodate that but it's an add on, 'cause all these schools in the State of Ohio more or less have the same thing in it, put it that way.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, there were structural requirements for every school?
Speaker 2: That's right.  Lights, how many lights in the room, what kind of carpet you're going to put on the floor; you could put--paint the walls, now you can pick the color, you know what I mean, something like that, but that's about it.
Speaker 1: It has to be a certain standard of quality?
Speaker 2: That's right, that's what they establish, so.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: We follow that.
Story_ID: 655504
Speaker 1: Another Chicago [Illinois] project, I think was Reverend Rawls' church, right?  I mean you did his--
Speaker 2: Apartment building (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) his apartment building next to?
Speaker 2: Not the church [Christ Tabernacle Missionary Baptist Church, Chicago, Illinois], I didn't do the church.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: It was before my time I assume (laughter).  Yeah, Rawls [Lou Rawls].
Speaker 1: I think so, but the schools had to, have to follow strict guidelines from the city (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Strict rules, yes, adhere to those guidelines and they're strict, let me tell you.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: No Gehry [Frank Gehry] there.
Speaker 1: Any room for innovation in the school [East Cleveland City School District]?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes, every school was room for innovation, but within the rules.
Speaker 1: Well, what--give me an example of innovation in a school that you would do?
Speaker 2: Well, actually a building has to be so big.  They give you the area that it must be but that doesn't say that I can't make it in a court--make it a court and make this a lovely court that I've taken the building around, so I can do things like that.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Then, then there's code you know, you--(unclear) these, Cleveland [Ohio] job.  We did a wonderful stair tower--it's glass on the outside, and then we had a wonderful view to the back.  When you come up the stair or you come up the elevator you look this way, you're looking at downtown Cleveland.  We can look at downtown--we had a perfect view of downtown Cleveland.  You turn around and look at this, we have a beautiful park behind us that we can see, trees and everything.  But the code says that has to be a two hour wall.  The stair has to be a two hour wall.  You can't put glass in a two hour wall, so we have the design, but you have to open the door.  As you go out you can see the wonderful view to the park, but it would have been lovely to come up in there, it's this way and you turn around and there it is that way; so code is gonna, is gonna control a lot of things too.  Handicap requirements, you know rules, you can--it modifies things, let's just put it that way.  But that doesn't--all buildings have codes and rules, but still the innovation is alive and well.
Story_ID: 655505
Speaker 1: Is there any project--or, what's the project that you were the most excited about?
Speaker 2: (Pause) Most excited?  I would say these schools [in the East Cleveland City School District], I was very excited about just doing--first, it was--no, you know what I was excited about?  The convocation center, it's called the Wolstein Center here in Cleveland [Ohio]--it's a basketball court for Cleveland State University.  That was exciting because it was the largest project up to that point, it was like 50 million [dollars], and that was the largest project up to that point that we had done and it worked out well, it worked out well; and just being able to handle that, built, built on time and you know no lawsuits.  It didn't fall down, it didn't do--and it's there today, beautiful, beautiful.
Speaker 1: Is there any structure that's the--was the most problematic one?
Speaker 2: Problems?  Well, there's problems to a certain, we call it the change orders and we, that's what--we have a process for taking care of problems, and it's called change orders and we anticipate problems on every job that we--put extra 5 percent of the money aside to take care of those kind of problems.  At the end of the day there are not problems because that money was not used up for problems you know so, no.  You know we've never exceeded that, that gap that we have set aside to accommodate anticipated problems.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 655506
Speaker 1: When you're building something, do you have to consider--is the, I know every state and the federal government too has a percent for art requirement, and (unclear) (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That's not on all problems, like we did that for the transportation systems--they set aside money for art.  The school system [East Cleveland City School District] does not set aside money art like that.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But the transpor- that's basically the only place we've had that opportunity to add art to our type of project.
Speaker 1: And so does that have to be integrated into the design or art project if it's a sculpture or (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) You have to anticipate--normally, you anticipate where that piece of art is gonna be, architecturally and the artist has the freedom of doing what he feels is right on his piece of work so that's--he, he has the freedom and we have the freedom, but we set it up.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.
Speaker 2: And we talk to each other, but we set it up.
Story_ID: 655507
Speaker 1: What are your relationships with the, the building and trades people?  Do--?
Speaker 2: No- not--I know who the best builders are in town [Cleveland, Ohio], and our relationship comes from working with them; and the ones that we work with and enjoyed working with are the ones that we have the good relationships with and we anticipate and look forward to seeing them again.  I can't really name one that has been bad that I wouldn't like to see again.  We even run into that type of--but that would really end up being the result of the pro- of the project.  If the project went bad, if something went bad in the project, of course, I'd have a bad thing in my mouth for that particular contract, but I haven't--we, we've never run into that.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  So, I guess I've asked--well, I've asked you about the favorite projects and?
Speaker 2: One impressed me though.  You remember Crane?  Is Crane--you remember Crane in Chicago [Illinois]?
Speaker 1: The?
Speaker 2: Crane Construction Company [Crane Construction Company LLC]?  He had lawyers working for him and his project manager and let me tell you, the way they documented things it was beautiful to see, beautiful the way he, he ran his office.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: He's the only one that I've seen that works like that.
Speaker 1: So, the documentation important to make sure that?
Speaker 2: You know, it's, it's just a good process--everything is written down.
Speaker 1: So, do you employ counsel yourself to advise you on contracts and?
Speaker 2: No, I don't because most of our contracts are standard.  I use--as the American Institute of Architects modifies a standard architect's contract every year predicated on the law suits that they have, they've across the country, that they've come across and where the architect has to protect, be protected.  So, that's our counsel, and I use that in most cases.  When it comes to the State of Ohio, they have their own.  You have no option to modify it.
Story_ID: 655508
Speaker 1: How many people do you normally employ?
Speaker 2: Well the most we've employed is nineteen; now, I would say that our average, ten to twelve.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Right now we have seven.
Speaker 1: And how many--what, what are the essential roles in your office [Whitley/Whitley Architects and Planners LLC, Cleveland, Ohio]?
Speaker 2: Well, there's the management staff and then there's the production staff and there's the design staff and then there's the observation staff.
Speaker 1: Okay, now what does the observation staff do?
Speaker 2: He looks at the job as it's being constructed.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you have to have someone really like monitor the (unclear)?
Speaker 2: Yeah, but that's--what it ends up is anybody in the office we can take--they're all flexible enough to take on that role.  You just grab one and send 'em out there, but normally we assign people to certain jobs and he follows it all the way through.
Speaker 1: So, they, they, they make sure that everything is (unclear) (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Follow the contract documents.
Story_ID: 655509
Speaker 1: Has Whitley and Whitley [Whitley/Whitley Architects and Planners LLC, Cleveland, Ohio] you know reached out to high school students and college students to bring 'em in for internships and that sort of thing?
Speaker 2: We do--we were doing that on a regular basis when we're really busy.  No question about it we, we've done that--we've, we, we normally--not high school, we don't bring high school students into the office to work, we bring in college students; and, and we're good on people that are just out of school.  Those are even better, we take 'em straight out of Kent State.  We took our--one of our big batch of kids right, right out of Kent State University [Kent, Ohio].  When we were doing Central State University [Wilberforce, Ohio], boy, we had a whole bunch of Kent Staters on their project and it worked out real well.
Speaker 1: Okay, I think you were stating earlier that it's a big difference doing a project at Central State than trying to do one at Ohio State [The Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio]?
Speaker 2: No, it's the same, the process is the same you know doing Ohio State or Central State or Kent State or Cleveland State [Cleveland State University, Cleveland, Ohio]--the building is the same you know, it's just what you're doing.  Why would you assume that there is a difference between one building and another?
Speaker 1: Well, you, you said it, or your brother [HistoryMaker James Whitley] said it (unclear).
Speaker 2: What's that?
Speaker 1: That there was a difference in terms of getting a contract to do--
Speaker 2: Oh, getting a--wait, wait, wait that's different (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) That's (unclear) okay.
Speaker 2: I said doing it, I didn't say getting (laughter) I didn't say getting.  Well, but I can lump all that together.  It's power in all cases; and the difference is when you go to Ohio State--see that power I'm not familiar with.  See, if you don't know anybody, you know that's difficult, that's difficult.  We went all the way down to the--is that the Ohio River?  Bevo Francis, you remember him?  He was a basketball player down at one of those schools down--we went down to that college [Rio Grande College; University of Rio Grande, Rio Grande, Ohio] to get, get a job and we gave this beautiful presentation (laughter).  We looked over, we didn't know anybody and we made a beautiful presentation (laughter); jumped back in the car, we drove down there and then drove all the way back to Cleveland [Ohio] and talked about ourselves for doing that.  It was stupid to go down there trying to--if you don't know, you, you know.  You're not gonna make it on presentation.
Speaker 1: Now that's something, so they te- so that's true for all architects you were saying earlier?
Speaker 2: That's true for everything I'm not, I'm talking about if you're doing tiddlywinks.  How does--how do you get someone from the federal government?  Are there people controlling that (mumbles)?
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: General Motors [General Motors Company] has to compete.
Speaker 1: Right, right, that's true.
Story_ID: 655510
Speaker 1: When you look back on everything you've done to this point, is there any major thing that you would do differently if you could change something?
Speaker 2: Change?  The change wouldn't be on our side, the change would be me encouraging the boards to function differently, that would be--or to educate them on how best to look out for their interests.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And if I could, if I could sell that, I would be, I'd be better off over in that area.
Story_ID: 655511
Speaker 1: Whitley and Whitley [Whitley/Whitley Architects and Planners LLC] is listed in 'African American Architects In Current Practice' [Jack Travis].
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Is this--how useful is this publication to Whitley and Whitley?
Speaker 2: Well, anytime you can put your name out you know, it's useful.  I, what I like about it, its value is for the next generation.  As far as I'm concerned, the people coming along, if they can look down and see people that have done certain things, they can say, "Hey, I can do that," or they can make those kind of choices.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  So what advice would you give a young African American architectural student today, I mean what--about, you know the profession?
Speaker 2: I encourage 'em all to come on in, especially those that have the basic skills to do this work, 'cause you have to love it number one, and you normally love it because you like doing, if you like to draw and sketch and design, you'll love it.  Come on in.  If you don't, all right, maybe you'd better take medicine or something like that--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --law, you know.
Story_ID: 655512
Speaker 1: Do you participate in the National Organization of Minority Architects?
Speaker 2: I did for years, for at least twenty some years, but I haven't been connected at all; NOMA, that, it was organized in Chicago [Illinois] as I recall.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: I have a picture of all the black people in, in NOMA and it's about this big.  That day was--they had a big outing there in Washington, D.C. one year, but it's, it was--that picture is on my office wall right now in my son's [Scott Whitley] office wall, but it's nice, nice.
Speaker 1: Now is architecture a field where you get to know the other black architects in the field, I mean you know?
Speaker 2: Not really, not really.  Socially, no, no.  Even locally socially I--you Bob Madison [HistoryMaker Robert P. Madison], I'm in the fraternity, another--Boule, if you've ever heard Sigma Psi Phi [Sigma Pi Phi Fraternity] with Bob.  So, I see Bob every Thursday.  So, you see a few of 'em, but I--the younger fellows coming along, I don't, I don't know.  I know, but I don't run with.
Story_ID: 655513
Speaker 1: There must be something--I mean I've often thought of architecture as a job where you actually--I mean what you build like lives long after you.
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, long after you're gone it'll be here, no question about it.
Speaker 1: It must be a tremendous feeling to you know see something erected that you've (unclear)?
Speaker 2: Yeah, it is, I get--it is a great feeling to look at it--there it is; and what's amazing about it is you know we start off with a concept, and what amazes you at the end of the job, you look at it--you look at the concept and you look at the job, there it is.  That con- you know when we put it down in a schema, design, you look at that building, it's exactly what you put, you know.  It just took a process, a two year process to get it there, but it does.
Speaker 1: Now, do you have a favorite material that you use in?
Speaker 2: No, no.
Speaker 1: (Unclear).
Speaker 2: You know I may say--I wouldn't put it as favorite.  There're a lot of materials that you use that are you know like concrete block, you use it only because it's just a basic element concrete you use as a basic element.  Brick you use as a bas- you know I mean brick even, any number of--there, there are changes in the material selection, it's getting changed lately because of cost.  We're going into the--call it stucco, we call it EIFS [exterior insulation finishing system], but it's stucco.  You ever start seeking these stucco looks in Chicago [Illinois] more so than you ever--that's coming because of costs.  I went to Germany, Berlin it's amazing.  You go to Berlin it's, it's a German product, but in Berlin you look at all the buildings that were blown up, they went back up with EIFS or stucco that looks like stone but isn't stone.
Speaker 1: It's an exterior--
Speaker 2: It's a plaster, it's a plaster.
Speaker 1: --yeah.  Okay, but it's used in exteriors, right?  Of buildings?
Speaker 2: That's right it's on the exterior, so.
Speaker 1: I think like South Shore Bank [ShoreBank] in Chicago has--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --that as an exterior.
Speaker 2: So, costs are starting to change things you know; and we pick, you pick the materials that are available.  That's really what it is, and that's more or less given to you.
Story_ID: 655514
Speaker 1: What are some of your hopes and concerns for the African American community in Cleveland [Ohio] and in the United States?
Speaker 2: I think--when I start talking about power, I think they ought to organize, not only for, not only for--understand the use of power and organize in their best interest; and that would not only help me, it would help everybody.  Everybody has the same problem.
Speaker 1: And that's power?
Speaker 2: The use of power.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you're implying we have it, we're just not using it?
Speaker 2: That's exactly what I'm saying--you have it and every year it gets bigger and bigger but it's still not being utilized.  Well, let's just put it that way.
Speaker 1: Do you have a suggestion or any ideas about how we can better handle?
Speaker 2: Well, it takes, I think it takes leadership.  All this you know, you're not going to change anything.  It takes leaders to get out there and lead.  The people are not gonna just go on their own.  I look back on Carl Stokes.  He told me he wanted to be mayor.  I looked at him and said, "You crazy."  In Cleveland?  He said, "Hey, I wanna be mayor and tell you why I wanna be mayor."  And then he started telling us all things you're not getting, "Because I'm not mayor," you know.  (Unclear) says, "Oh, that's, that's different, that's different."  That's--I heard him then, so.  That's what we need some leaders that can pick up the gauntlet.
Story_ID: 655515
Speaker 1: Did you know Carl Stokes well?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: No.  I know his brother pretty well, Lou [HistoryMaker Louis Stokes].  I got to know Lou a whole lot better than Carl, but I knew Carl's buddy.  So, I didn't have to go any further to tell you the truth.  I didn't have to go any further.  I was one of his best friends.  I knew him very well.
Speaker 1: Do you have any reflections on his--I mean 'cause he was in office like one term, right, is it one?
Speaker 2: Maybe, two--maybe two, maybe two.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And he was fabulous, he was fabulous and I'm not even talking about what he did for, for me.  What he understood as power and he used it, and I'm saying across the board.  Who he hired, he had everybody, I mean every post, he had people in those positions and you know getting in a position you have to learn--just like architects.  You can't learn architecture standing on the sideline--you have to get in there and do it.  So, he started putting people in positions that you know, the next--when he left, they're in positions because they knew how to do it.  So, and architecture is exactly like it, you cannot learn this business, or any business, sitting on the sidelines, you have to get a shot.  We call that you know, you have to get a shot.
Speaker 1: (Background noise) Okay so he en- he exercised the kind of leadership you think that we need--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --across the board today?
Speaker 2: Yes, he, he was good.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, he was good.
Story_ID: 655516
Speaker 1: Tell us a little bit about your family.  Now you've got a daughter who's a TV star and?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I have a daughter that's a--well, my family- I have, I have a son that's a construction manager [Scott Whitley], I have a son that's an architect [Kyle Whitley] and I have a daughter that's a movie star now, or whatever you wanna call her; and that's my group.  So, she, she's doing very well now.  She has her own show on Oprah's channel [Oprah Winfrey Network].
Speaker 1: That's?
Speaker 2: 'Raising Whitley' it's called 'Raising Whitley,' in which she did a couple of years ago, two years ago, in fact I was out in California with my wife [Kaysonia Whitley] and she said that she had gotten notification from the hospital that a baby was waiting for her.  She said, "Wha- a baby?"  A girl that she had been tutoring put her name down as she was giving the child up and was--(laughter) gave her as the person she wanted it, the baby to go to.  So, we talked about it and we said, "Hey, why don't you go down and take that baby?"  My sis- my wife, I mean my daughter is in her forties now, I said, "Hey, she's not married, go get that baby."  And she went down there and got her; and she just--the best thing ever happened to her.  So, she took that to Oprah [Oprah Winfrey] and told her what she was doing, Oprah said, "Hey, bring her to me."  So, they--she went back to her house and they started fooling around and came up with a show, and that's it.  'Raising Whitley' and they're talking about the boy.  The boy's name is Joshua [Joshua Whitley], movie's--the show's about raising Joshua, but it's really about raising Kym [Kym Whitley] because the show's all about Kym to tell you the truth; and, and her interaction with the boy and other things.  So, it ends up being a very interesting show, it's funny.  It's really funny--'cause she's a comedian now.  She is a comedian, so.
Speaker 1: Now was she part of Karamu House [Cleveland, Ohio] when she was growing up?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: No, okay.
Speaker 2: She just graduated from Fisk [Fisk University, Nashville, Tennessee] and came home and told us that she's going to Hollywood, just like that.  "What?"  (Laughter) That was it and went out there and did it, but she had been talking to my sister.  My sister wrote, has written plays for Karamu.
Speaker 1: And this is Gloria [Gloria Whitley Fleming]?
Speaker 2: Joyce [Joyce Whitley].
Speaker 1: Joyce, okay.
Speaker 2: Joyce; and she wrote a play and put it on and got all New York actors to come down and put the show on, it worked out very well.  No, she went to The Cleveland Foundation [Cleveland, Ohio] and they funded it.  They said because she, she was--Brown University [Providence, Rhode Island], she went to Brown University.  Brown University gave her a grant to go to school for six months and do something, anything that you want to do, and she said, "I'm gonna go and I'm gonna write a play and--," and do certain things, but they bought it and so she went up to Brown and with their director who's teaching theatrical arts up there worked out a play and she came home, wrote it and put it on, went to Cleveland Foundation and got a grant to get ac- actors and actresses to come down from New York and put it on at Karamu.  It was interesting, very interesting, it worked out very well.  She loved it.  She was on--my sister it's just too bad she died, but it's too bad she's not alive now because she'd be out in California I'll tell you right now with Kym, because Kym took it from her. That's why she went straight to Hollywood, she wasn't listening to me--she would've been an architect (unclear), I had her all lined up and she has more talent than my br- my sons (laughter), and but she said, "Nope, I'm going straight to Hollywood."  But she, she's very happy out there, it's working out very well for her.
Story_ID: 655517
Speaker 1: So your, the grandchildren are the children that your daughter's [Kym Whitley] raising?  Do you have any other grandchildren?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah now my--my son, the youngest son [Kyle Whitley], the architect, he has, he has two children.  He has a boy that's about seven, and a girl that's maybe eleven.  So, they're coming along and his wife is a physician and she's--they live out in Twinsburg [Ohio].  So, you know he's, he's settled; and my other son [Scott Whitley] is not married, he's in Washington, D.C.  He's a construction manager.  He's working for that firm that you were talking about from Tennessee.  What's its name?
Speaker 1: Mc- McKissacks, yeah.
Speaker 2: McKissack.
Speaker 1: McKissack and McKissack.  Oh, watch out you got the mic [microphone] in your hand.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I'm trying to hook it on.  So, that's my family.  James [HistoryMaker James Whitley] has a son [Kent Whitley].  We're bringing 'em all in the field, that's for sure.
Story_ID: 655518
Speaker 1: All right now, we always ask this question too (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Go ahead.
Speaker 1: When you look back on everything you've done to this point again, what today would you consider to be your legacy (background noise) (laughter)?
Speaker 2: My legacy?
Speaker 1: Let's pause a second--let this thing ring out (laughter).  You get more time now because of this phone.
Speaker 2: Legacy.
Speaker 1: Persistent.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.
Speaker 2: What's my legacy?  Hm.  I think I have a simple legacy that I've come through life trying to do the best I can.  I, I loved what I did and I tried to pass it on to the next generation, not only in my children [Kym Whitley, Kyle Whitley and Scott Whitley]--first in my children, but in other people that are trying to, to walk along this path; and education has been really the base of the Brewer group.  You know they got a little money because they had some land that other people didn't have and they educated their children predicated on that gift, and I'm trying to pass it on; and that's what I'm, I'm passing that onto my children, and I hope that they, they'll do the same thing.
Story_ID: 655519
Speaker 1: Now is there anything I haven't asked you or that we need to talk about before I ask my last question?
Speaker 2: (Pause) Well, I'll just, you know I re- just remember my wife [Kaysonia Whitley] said, "Don't leave me out" (laughter) "don't leave me out."  I wanna mention my wife, I w- met a wonderful young girl at Kent State University [Kent, Ohio], married her right out of school.  She's from North Carolina, she's from over in the mountain areas of Lenore, North Carolina, and we--the Brewers came out of more or less Charlotte, North Carolina; and we didn't meet until we got to college, but obviously, there was a link--that link when we met.  We went forward and were able to produce three young children [Kym Whitley, Kyle Whitley and Scott Whitley] that will, we hope that will go forward and do something in this world that's worthy of, of the Brewer name.
Story_ID: 655520
Speaker 1: The last question is similar to legacy, in fact it's almost the same, but it's a little different (unclear) (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Sir, how would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: (Pause) Hm.  I think the way that I'm gonna be remembered is the way it is, the way it is--just the way that I've lived.  He's a nice guy, he's a, he's a fellow that tried to do things right, follow rules and leave something so that the world will be a better place.  When he leaves and my children [Kym Whitley, Kyle Whitley and Scott Whitley] leave, and then my children's children leave are gonna be better--the world's gonna be a better place.
Speaker 1: Okay, well thank you very much.
Speaker 2: Thank you.
Story_ID: 655521
Speaker 1: This is a Kappa [Kappa Alpha Psi Fraternity] party in 2002--and that's [HistoryMaker] William Whitley on the left; Stella Whitley [ph.] in the middle; [HistoryMaker] James Whitley.
Speaker 2: You got it?
Speaker 1: That's a nice camera.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  There we go, next one.
Speaker 1: That's almost self explanatory.
Speaker 2: This is the Cleveland Plain Dealer [The Plain Dealer] morning edition after my family won the family of--Urban League [Urban League of Greater Cleveland, Cleveland, Ohio] family of the year, 19--that was--do you see a year on there?
Speaker 1: Should be on the (unclear), it'll be in there somewhere.
Speaker 2: Okay.  This is a picture of me in the Sudan in 1967.  That's--starting at the left that's my cook, that's my wife, my youngest so- my oldest son, my youngest son, my mother's behind my youngest son.  My cook, my father and this is the Delahn [ph.], he takes care of the lawn, on the right.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Go ahead.
Speaker 2: This is a picture of my father, he's off to the left.  He was working for the Ravenna Arsenal plant [Ravenna Army Ammunition Plant; Camp Ravenna Joint Military Training Center] in Ravenna, Ohio in 1941.
Speaker 1: So, is this him here?
Speaker 2: No, he's on the left.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Right there.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  You can go ahead.
Speaker 1: This is a picture of--this is a political party, and that's the lieutenant governor--
Speaker 2: Of Ohio.
Speaker 1: --of Ohio [Dick Celeste].
Speaker 2: And that's you?
Speaker 1: That's me, William Whitley.
Speaker 2: This is a shot--cover of a book that was, or a little booklet that was made when I was in ROTC [Reserve Officers' Training Corps] in my senior at Kent State University [Kent, Ohio] for a summer program.
Speaker 1: Okay, this your artwork?
Speaker 2: That's my artwork for that particular shot.
Speaker 1: This is my [maternal] grandmother [Effie Brewer Nivens], I would say--of her death in 19--I would say that was about 1942, Monroe, North Carolina.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: This is the Carter family on my father's side that fol- that went to Rochester, New York.  This is one of their basic pictures.
Speaker 2: That's your grandmother and?
Speaker 1: That's my, that's my grandmother's parents [Emeline Brewer and William Brewer].
Speaker 2: Oh, okay.
Speaker 1: This is, this is a shot that we took in summer camp when I was in ROTC.
Speaker 2: Nineteen fifty-six [1956]?
Speaker 1: Nineteen fifty--say 1952.
Speaker 2: It's '56 [1956] on the back but (laughter).
Speaker 1: They made a mistake 'cause I graduate- 1956, wait minute, let's see, could I?  Unh-uh that--I was in summer camp.
Speaker 2: This is a picture of me in my uniform--flight uniform and my dress uniform, 1960.
Speaker 1: This picture's--my mother's in the middle and those two girls on the left and the right are her sisters.  The oldest one is on the right and the baby is on the left.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  What are their names?
Speaker 1: That's Beatrice, is my mother; Bert [Bertha Nivens] is on the right; and Blanche [Blanche Nivens] is on the left.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: Wait a minute, who am I gonna say--that's me or my brother?  Who, what?
Speaker 2: It's your brother but he looks just like (unclear) (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay.  This, this is Bill Whitley going around in--it's a night game with the University of Akron [Akron, Ohio]--Kent State going against the University of Akron, 1955.
Speaker 2: This is Whitley, right?
Speaker 1: Whitley.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah, that's it (laughter), that's Whitley.
Speaker 2: Whitley scores five touchdowns (laughter)?
Speaker 1: This is--I also was a hurdler, William Whitley was a hurdler and this is just a shot in, in competition as we (unclear) come over the final hurdle.
Speaker 2: This is my mother and Lou Stokes [HistoryMaker Louis Stokes], Congressman Lou Stokes on the eve of my mother receiving her award for family of the year.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) This is William Whitley going through the line on a game with Bowling Green university [Bowling Green State University, Bowling Green, Ohio].  That's the line (laughter).
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Put their uniform (unclear).
Speaker 1: Yeah, you wouldn't know.
Speaker 2: Yeah, right.
Speaker 1: This is a nice shot.  This a picture in my office [Whitley/Whitley Architects and Planners LLC, Cleveland, Ohio] looking down on the principals and my children and my so- my fa- my brother's children.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.  From left to right?
Speaker 1: Sta- left to right is James Whitley and his son, Kent [Kent Whitley], to his right. Next is William Whitley, to the right of that is William Whitley and his two sons below him--Kyle Whitley upper; and lower is Scott Whitley.
Speaker 2: This is when we were doing--that's Kyle Whitley, we were doing an observation or supervision of that construction of the Cleveland Stadium [Cleveland Municipal Stadium; FirstEnergy Stadium, Cleveland, Ohio] in 19--1999.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.  This is a game against--this is another game against Bowling Green, and I'm over to the right.  That's not me carrying the ball, that's me over to the right that is watching the play (laughter).
Speaker 1: That's, that's my two sisters, Janice Whitley and, and Joyce Whitley.  Her na- Janice to the life, her name now is Janice Carlstedt [Janice Whitley Carlstedt] but that's just in 19--I don't know, 1988.
Speaker 2: This is, this is a picture at the family reunion and you see my, all my cousins.
Speaker 1: This is where it all started, this is Emeline Watts Brewer [Emeline Brewer].
Speaker 2: This is, this is my wife's grandmother.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Do you know her name?
Speaker 2: No.  What was her name?  No.
Speaker 1: That's my wife, Kaysonia.
Speaker 2: That's my son on the left, Scott Whitley; and on the right, is Kent Whitley, James' son.
Speaker 1: Is he named after Clark Kent or, or Kent State?
Speaker 2: Kent State.
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: This is, this is a shot of my family when we went to Sweden to visit--on our way back from Africa.
Speaker 1: Okay, you wanna name 'em, or?
Speaker 2: Oh, on the right is Kyle Whitley; my wife Kaysonia Whitley; Christopher [ph.] who lives in Sweden now and his family; and to the left of him is Scott as a baby 'cause they're really young at the time; and Yamaka [ph.] is in the middle; and my daughter to the left is Kym Whitley.
Speaker 1: This is a picture of me and my sister Gloria Fleming Whitley that--or Gloria Whitley Fleming I guess--that I took on a cruise just about two years ago.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  March 26, 2012.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.  That's my wife Kaysonia at six years old, Lenore, North Carolina.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: That's my mother, Beatrice Nevins Whitley.  You want a date on that?  That's about 1930.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: This is my wife and--at, at about two years old; and her mother Catherine [ph.].
Speaker 1: This my mother's grand- (laughter) my, my wife's grandmother.  Did I say this one before?  My wife's grandmother, or (unclear).  I think she is, the other one may have been a great-grandmother.
Speaker 2: This is William Whitley and I was a Kappa--just became a Kappa, 1954.
Speaker 1: This is my father, Moses James Whitley [Moses Whitley], taken about 1978.
