Story_ID: 28589
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe, I'm interviewer with The HistoryMakers and our videographer is Matthew Hickey.  Sir can you please state your full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: Okay.  It's Samuel Perkins Williamson that's S-A-M-U-E-L, P-E-R-K-I-N-S, W-I-L-L-I-A-M-S-O-N.
Speaker 1: Alright and so what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: My date of birth is March 5, 1949 and I was born in Somerville, Fayette County, Tennessee.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And so what is your occupation and title?
Speaker 2: I am a atmospheric scientist.  My title is Federal Coordinator for Meteorological Services and Supporting Research.
Speaker 1: Okay.  What is today's date?
Speaker 2: Today's date is May 22, 19--correction 2013, Wednesday.
Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: At the present time, we are located at my workplace that is at 8455 Colesville Road, Silver Spring, Maryland.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And this is the office of the--(simultaneous) (unclear).
Speaker 2: This is the office of the Federal Coordinator for Meteorology.
Speaker 1: Alright.
Story_ID: 28590
Speaker 1: Now, before we get in to depth, there are five light weight questions we ask as sort of a warm up and they will require a short answer.  The first one is do you have a favorite food?
Speaker 2: Yes, seafood.
Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: Yes, blue.
Speaker 1: Alright.  What is your favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: My favorite time of the year is spring time.
Speaker 1: Okay.  What is your favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: My favorite vacation destination is Charleston, South Carolina.
Speaker 1: Okay.  The last one is can you give us your favorite phrase or quotation?
Speaker 2: Be the best that you can be.
Speaker 1: Okay, alright.
Story_ID: 28591
Speaker 1: So I'm going to ask you about your family history.  I'm going to ask about your mother's side of the family and your father's side.  We'll start with your mother's side.  Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: Okay.  My mother's full name is Izoula Smith Williamson.
Speaker 1: Okay.  What is her date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: Her date of birth and place is May 11, 1924 and she was born in Somerville, Fayette County, Tennessee.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now what can you tell us about your mother's side of the family?  How far back can you trace them, are there any stories about emancipation or reconstruction or any of that?  What are the family's stories?
Speaker 2: Well, I can't go back to the emancipation but I do know that my mother's grandfather, his name was Sam Williams and he moved to the Fayette County area from Mississippi.  I don't know what part of Mississippi but he came from Mississippi in the late 1800s.
Speaker 1: Now this is during the reconstruction era.
Speaker 2: Yea, it was during that timeframe as we were nearing in the end.  He--his--on her grandmother's side; she actually was from Fayette County, Somerville, Tennessee.  They were very spiritual people.  My great grandfather on my mom's side actually passed away in 1929.  My mother at the time was about five years old and she remembers a little bit about him but not a whole lot.  My great grandfather, Sam and my great grandmother was named Hattie, Hattie Williams and she and he had about ten kids and so she had quite a few children to raise at the time that he passed.  Her oldest daughter was my mom's mom, my grandmother.  Her name was Piney Williams and she was born around 1908 and she passed away in 1970.  And again, she was married to my great grandfather, correction my grandfather's name was Grandersen Smith and Grandersen basically farmed, initially but he enjoyed driving cars, he ultimately became a chauffeur for these different families over the years.  And so he made a living off of chauffeuring different families in that time frame.
Speaker 1: Now these are well to do white people?
Speaker 2: Well to do white people, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So but they were very spiritual people, very good people, good natured people.  The only one surviving daughter of Sam and Hattie is Adelaide Mosby (ph.) she lives in Memphis [Tennessee] now and she is about ninety two.  She and my mother were very close; they were only three years apart in age.  They kind of grew up as sisters so she is the last surviving offspring of Sam and Hattie Williams.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So she is your aunt, okay.
Speaker 2: Great aunt.
Speaker 1: She is your great aunt.
Speaker 2: Great aunt.
Speaker 1: Right.
Story_ID: 28592
Speaker 1: Did your mother [Izoula Smith Williamson] talk about what it was like growing up in Somerville, Fayette County [Tennessee] area when she was--?
Speaker 2: No, not a whole lot because they were farmers, they would sharecrop.  And once she went to school at the same elementary school that I started, Grade Spring Elementary School.  My dad [Julius Williamson, Jr.] also went there and she went to high school, Fayette County Training School where I also attended but she did not finish, didn't graduate she left at the eleventh grade but later she obtained her GED [General Educational Development] and she was very happy that she did.  So not a whole lot that she said except during that timeframe blacks were limited in terms of what they could do, you know.  She had a job ultimately in Memphis [Tennessee] and she was doing some domestic work for well to do whites at that timeframe.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Alright.  Now did your mother have any special talents or gifts that you remember?
Speaker 2: Well my mother, she was a family woman.  All she ever wanted in life was to have four kids and so her goal was fulfilled.  But she didn't go work in public jobs until I was actually about the seventh grade at the time.  She cooked, she was a steward at my elementary school, Jefferson Elementary School and then later she left there and she--once she got into the workforce, worked at this factory.  It was a clothing factory in Somerville as well as one in Whiteville [Tennessee] and then once she--once I finished high school she continued to work.  By the time I finished college, she actually started work at this state sort of like a correction facility right near our home that was built called Wyler's Development Center.  She was a steward, she actually cooked and actually moved up to become like the chef at that school.  So she retired from the state in 1989 and as I said, in 2012 on February 6th she passed away.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 28593
Speaker 1: Well, let's go to your father's side of the family.  Then we will put them together.  Can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us.
Speaker 2: My father's full name is Julius Williamson, Jr.  That is J-U-L-I-U-S, W-I-L-L-I-A-M-S-O-N, Jr.
Speaker 1: And what is his date of birth?
Speaker 2: His date of birth officially, was February 18, 1924.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So they were the same age, basically.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Was he born--?
Speaker 2: He was born in Somerville, Fayette County, Tennessee.
Speaker 1: Okay.  What can you tell us about your father's side of the family?  How far back can you trace them, what they were doing?
Speaker 2: Well, I can actually go back to my ancestry.  My great great grandfather's name was Horace Williamson (ph. splg.).  That was my dad's grandfather.  Horace Williamson was born as a slave but his paternal father was a slave owner.  What I found out in my research just last year, the slave owner General Benjamin Williamson (ph. splg.) and the property that he owned happened to be right across the highway from where my family home is today.  And there was a reason now why my great grandfather really wanted to come back there and buy that land because it was right across the street from where he once stayed.  He wasn't used as a traditional slave, I guess because his dad was the slave owner; he was a water boy.  My great aunt--my dad's aunt--my dad's father's sister always told us about that he was a water boy.  He didn't really have to work as hard as some of the other slaves.  So he did a lot of the domestic you know, in the home.  But Horace married Emily Thompson (ph. splg.).  Emily Thompson was a free slave; her parents were named--the mother was named Susan Thompson but originally they had migrated to the area from Ohio where they were free slaves by way of North Carolina.  Because North Carolina and Tennessee, at one time, was one long state so it was really, for the record, it was North Carolina but it was actually Tennessee in terms of where they actually came from
Speaker 1: So they actually moved from Ohio to Tennessee?
Speaker 2: Yes, at that time frame as free slaves.  Because during that timeframe my grandmother Emily Thompson was born around 1849 and my grandfather Horace was born in 1944, so they actually had their first child in 1872 and my grandfather, Julius Williamson, Sr., he was born in 1886.  My dad's mother was named Maryann [ph.] Mary Shivers; she was born in 1890 and she was from Fayette County [Tennessee] but it was not Somerville, it was Mason, Tennessee is where she is from.  They were all connected; District Five is what it was called.  My dad's mother's parents were named Dempsey and Lizzy Shivers and Lizzy Shivers' father was named John and his mother was named Martha Williams.  They actually relocated from Virginia to Fayette County and they were actually free slaves at that time frame as well.  And John Williams was kind of an interesting character.  I mean he basically, as part of the land that he owned, used part of it for entertaining.  At that timeframe it wasn't like as blacks you could actually go to movie theaters and things like that, so you created your own entertainment.  So he converted part of that land to a race horse track where they used to run race horses as part of the entertainment.  Some of the horses had jockeys and other ones would run themselves around the tracks.  They also had picnics but when you think about it, the Negro league baseball league actually played a lot of their games on the property of John Williams, you know.  So it was sort of like an amusement park for the most part that John Williams had set up that allowed blacks to go there for entertainment particularly during the spring and summer.  They had in that timeframe picnics and stuff where they actually had music, bands that were there.
Story_ID: 28594
Speaker 1: I've read--I was reading a couple of years ago about a man who was a veterinarian and was self trained in Shelbyville, Tennessee who had a race track too, this is Dr. William Key (ph. splg.).  Do you know about him?
Speaker 2: Yes, I heard a little bit about him.
Speaker 1: Right, about the smartest horse in the world.
Speaker 2: The smartest horse in the world, absolutely.
Speaker 1: Is Shelbyville close to--?
Speaker 2: Yes.  Actually Shelbyville is near east Tennessee.  My grandfather or I should say Horace and Emily, my great grandparents, were when they bought the property where I grew up at, they bought it in 1897.  It was the first property that they actually owned.  They basically were considered to be rich because they had land; we had over 200 acres of land that they bought.  And they bought this land from a white man named Levy Kenny (ph. splg.).  Levy Kenny was a Northerner and when the civil war was won by the north because he moved south--relocated south and he bought the land.  So when he and his family wanted to relocate back north, he would not sale the land to any whites he would only sale to the blacks and so he sold it to my great grandparents.  That's where their offspring--actually all were not born there but they resided there on the land.  My great grandparents had divided up the land so that it could be sharecroppers where they actually had sharecroppers and worked part of the land because then you didn't have the farm equipment and machinery as you have today.  You had mules and plows and bale and so each of the sharecroppers had about twenty five acres that they actually farmed.  My dad was the last of the eighteen children.  My grandfather, Julius [Williamson] Sr. and Maryann Shivers had eighteen children; they had three sets of twins but only five of the children actually lived to become adults; there were three girls and two boys.  My dad's [Julius Williamson, Jr.] brother was a twin, he had a twin sister.  When I looked up the 1930 census, she was alive then.  His name was Aaron Oscar (ph. splg.) but they called him AO and his sister's name was Arleen and then he had an older sister that lived--was named after my great grandmother, Emily Williamson, her name was Emily as well.  And then there was a daughter named Lucy and then there was one that was name Eleanor Williamson (ph. splg.).  Then my uncle and then my dad, my dad was like the baby; it's like my great grandparents, because of their knowledge and wanted to see success from their offspring, it's like she picked my dad--you know, you pass the torch and so she passed the torch to him when he was a boy.  The only picture that we could find of my dad with my great grandmother, you know, I have a copy and it's kind of not a very good picture but it's of the two of them in the picture together and that's the only picture of her that we found with him when he was a little boy, probably about maybe six years of age at that timeframe.
Story_ID: 28595
Speaker 1: And so, he [Williamson's father, Julius Williamson, Jr.] was picked to do good; he was well known in the community, well respected, he promoted education, he was a family man, he always wanted--he was very spiritual, he was a deacon in the church where he actually grew up at.  He became a deacon on the deacon board in 1950 and served fifty-four years on the deacon board where he retired in 2004.  He passed the torch to my brother, whose name is Julius Williamson III.  He also was chairman.  I had already left, you know, I had my own career and so forth.  So, but he was the one the community looked up to, my dad was well known and very respected.  When people wanted things they came to him, if blacks wanted to borrow money from the bank his word was good enough, you know, up to a certain amount.  So he helped people and he believed in helping people and I remember when I was a child, my dad had a lot of clothes and stuff that he had gotten, he was giving things away and my mom [Izoula Smith Williamson] said, "Let me look at it first before you give away everything."  So that's just the way he was.  I will tell you one other story, he drove a school bus and then there was a young man who every morning, you know, it was cold in the winter time and he would get on the bus with no coat.  My day said, "Where's your coat?"  He said he left it; there was some excuse he gave every day.  As it turns out he didn't have a coat and so about the third day because it was so cold, the kid gets on the bus, my dad had gone to a store and bought a brand new coat and gave it to him.  So I happened to meet this young man as he is now an adult and he was telling me about this story about what kind of heart my dad had.  He just wanted to help people, he felt that he was in a position; it wasn't like we were out there sharecropping and have to worry about being evicted off our land because we had our own (unclear).  So I think a lot of my drive came from my father, my mom was just loving, she just cared, she did everything, you know, for her children but my dad was the primary provider.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Now did your dad get a chance to finish school?
Speaker 1: No he did not, my dad had about a fifth grade education.  When he went into the [U.S.] Army, then of course as part of the schooling that he got in the Army, then once he came off of active duty in 1946 the VA had what you called the GI school, means that there was money that where you could go to the school and you could learn a trade.  I think he really wanted to do his in farming.  He had ideas about of becoming a large farmer; he wanted to become a big farmer, you know, a black farmer.  And so he learned a lot about how to manage business and so forth.  So when you add up his technical training he received once he came off active duty, I would say it probably equated to a GED equivalent to high school.
Speaker 2: So he went to school on the GI bill?
Speaker 1: They called it GI school at the time but it was really the GI bill (unclear).
Speaker 2: So is the GI school to help people in agriculture--?
Speaker 1: Agriculture, development but also there were other skills too.  If you wanted to become plumbers, they were technicians.  The Booker T. Washington era for what he promoted was technical training, you know, become technicians.
Speaker 2: Industrial (unclear).
Speaker 1: Industrial (unclear)--.
Story_ID: 28596
Speaker 1: So he [Williamson's father, Julius Williamson, Jr.] did that and he was on his way to become a very large farmer because then we had the land that he had to farm that we owned plus he rented out some land, bought some tractors, and really wanted to become big.  So he and this other black farmer kind of teamed up together but then he decided after a period of time that, you know, unless you start reaching getting a lot of hired help it is a lot of hard work for just a couple of people.  He was driving tractors and stuff himself and so then he decided to venture from that.  Then as I said, he drove a school bus and then he decided to open up a business.  He had a grocery store, in fact, he had a couple of grocery stores and he also had, at that timeframe they called them cafes, a restaurant in the town of Somerville [Tennessee] where he operated for many years.  So he did that--once I got old enough where I could drive tractors and do the farm work, I did the farm work and he did other things like run the businesses and he also at the time took a position with the state in Arlington, Tennessee and he did that for several years until he got age fifty five and he decided he wanted to do something else
Speaker 2: Now what did he do for the state?
Speaker 1: He was basically--he was a maintenance operator controlling the heat and the boiler room, is what they called it at that timeframe.
Speaker 2: Now this was in --?
Speaker 1: This was in Arlington, Tennessee.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Is that close by.
Speaker 1: That's very close by.  That's between Somerville and Memphis [Tennessee].
Speaker 2: Okay.  You say about fifteen miles away.
Speaker 1: It's about twenty miles from us, yeah.  So he was doing that at the same timeframe he, you know, had his business.  So he worked at night from midnight until seven in the morning so a lot--he had plenty of time to sleep on the job.  They had a certain time that they had to check certain things, other than that he didn't--there was nothing for him to do.  There were two of them there were operating so each could take turns at sleeping.  But he did the job that he was asked to do but like I said he ran his business and his business was successful.  So he did that--.
Speaker 2: Would you say he was kind of politically connected because he was able--he did a job as a school bus driver and he, you know, deal with business and he seemed to have respect of the bank--(simultaneous) (unclear).
Speaker 1: He was respected by banks and all that stuff at the timeframe.
Speaker 2: Did he have--in this state job that's probably like something that you get by knowing somebody in the state government, I would guess?
Speaker 1: Well that you have to apply.  I'm not sure who he knew there but he applied and he was qualified and he got the job.  So he--he was a entrepreneur he did many things.  He was the first black to start a lawn service.  I mean he had a big operation; he had about five or six lawnmowers that he was running, he had three or four people working for him, you know.  So he did business all over the county with that service.  He also teamed up with this automobile dealership and he actually sold cars, so what he would do is go pick up a car, drive it, put a for sale sign on it and once someone wanted to buy the car he would take them to the dealer and they would buy the car from him.  Then he would get another one and he would get a percentage from that.  But he still had his business.  So he always found those things to do, he was very respected by his peers but also by young people because young people saw him as someone that they could look up to.  His word was good and his name was important to him, he did not want his name to be drug down in the mud, he wanted to always be--carry a high standard.
Story_ID: 28597
Speaker 1: Now, is there a story about how your parents [Izoula Smith Williamson and Julius Williamson, Jr.] got together?
Speaker 2: Well, from what they told me, they went to the same elementary school, Glade Spring Elementary School [Somerville, Tennessee].  It was like she was someone that he liked, you know, then.  But she was not his first wife, he actually--because as you got older--she moved on and went to high school and he didn't.  So because like I said his formal education was probably like fifth or sixth grade.  Whereas, she went on to high school and also became--finished three years and so you kind of move away and he met someone else and they got married.  They had a daughter together and at the same timeframe when he joined the [U.S.] Army in 1943, my dad had a daughter and actually while he was in the Army he and his first wife divorced and so he always had this, I guess, this crush even though he married her first.  So he went looking for my mom and so eventually, they hooked up and my mom--he was still in the Army.  He, in fact, had served already in Europe and gotten assigned to a base in Cheyenne, Wyoming.  So he--cause while he was home he had connected back with mom, he sent for her and so they got married on March 31, 1946.
Speaker 1: Now this is all like long distance, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  He was actually married to the first wife; I think they had a daughter together.  I think it was a thing where she may have been pregnant before they got married.  It was one of those things that just didn't work out but he married her because he was in the Army and he felt it was the right thing to do.  So they just--while he was in the Army, maybe a year or so while he was in the Army, they divorced.  And so he was coming home on furloughs and he was seeing my mom, you know, so then they, like I said, they got married, he sent for her and they got married and the rest is history.
Story_ID: 28598
Speaker 1: From that union [Williamson's parents' marriage] came four kids.  My sister Jerline Williamson was born on September 14, 1947.  My dad [Julius Williamson, Jr.] was released from active duty in the Army in October 31, 1946.  And then the following year my sister was born, Jerline.
Speaker 2: Okay, not 1946.
Speaker 1: Then I was born on March 5, 1949, my sister and I are eighteen months apart, and then on April 4, 1951 my sister Pearlie Mae was born and then it was awhile before my brother [Julius Williamson III] came.  So my brother was born February 18, 1956.
Speaker 2: And his name is?
Speaker 1: His name is Julius Williamson III.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: So we are seven years apart.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Story_ID: 28599
Speaker 1: Now when you consider your parents' [Izoula Smith Williamson and Julius Williamson, Jr.] personalities, disposition, sense of humor, how they walk, talk what they look like, you know, their talents, who do you take after the most?
Speaker 2: Well I think I have a combination of both.  I think the drive, most people say that I look more like my mom but I think I look more like my dad as I have gotten older.  Of the four of us, I'm the only one who has his eyes, his nose, basically has his forehead, his head in terms of--the difference is he was of lighter complexion where my mother was darker complexion so I think my complexion is in between.  I think what I got from my mom is the sensitivity for people.  She was very sensitive about how, you know, she may have treated people, not to say that he wasn't but this was the side I saw of her when I was small.  We were just a--as a mother--you're around mother more than father because father is out trying to make a living and provide for family so times he was out, we were there.  So a lot of the nurturing, teaching, schooling; my mother was very smart, she was very bright in terms of her academics and her analytical skills and capabilities.  My dad had a lot of what I call street experience.  He just had--he knew how to survive, how to work things in order to accomplish things he wanted to do.  So it's that know how, that drive, I think is what I got from him.  But I think the education side really came from my mother, like I said, she was extremely bright.  If she had gone on to school, I could see her easily having been a school teacher or maybe some other trade that she would have done.
Story_ID: 28600
Speaker 1: Did she [Williamson's mother, Izoula Smith Williamson] ever talk about wishing she had finished school?
Speaker 2: She was always kind of quiet about things usually, but she wanted to finish school.  And when she got her GED [General Educational Development], she didn't get her GED until she was actually working for this correctional center [Wyler's Development Center, Tennessee] for the state some years later.  It was probably in the early, I would say in the early '80s [1980s] right around 1980 when she actually got her GED.  I remember we were talking on the phone, and we didn't even know that she was going to school to train in order to complete her GED.  I was very close to my mom, most people say that normally the daughters are more close but I was the one that was very close to her.  So when there were things, she would talk to me, if there were things that women talk she didn't discuss with me but just, you know, reaching out.  I was the one that they both--not to say distrusted my other sister but they knew that I would handle their business the way they wanted it to be handled.
Speaker 1: They confided in you.
Speaker 2: They confided in me and I was there--I handled everything including what they or how they wanted their funeral arrangements to be handled.  All of that I knew and I shared that with my siblings, they didn't know that because they never discussed that with them.  Not that they didn't treat us differently; that was a part that I was trained in.  Because when I was ten years old, there were certain things in business cause I was running the farm that I handled, and so I was just that person that they reached out to for those things.
Speaker 1: Okay.  That happens in most families.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  There is somebody in there that they reach out to.  My brother [Julius Williamson III] was not one, my father [Julius Jackson, Jr.] really wanted to handle his money situation.  With me, I controlled his bank accounts; I did the same thing with mom.  He knew that whenever he wanted to go and check on his bank accounts, he knew how much money he thought he was supposed to have and it was always there.  He knew I wasn't spending it. (laugh)
Story_ID: 28601
Speaker 1: He [Williamson's father, Julius Williamson, Jr.] wasn't afraid, he wasn't a man who was afraid and I guess one of the things that I really appreciated from my dad, I shared with you during the Civil Rights Movement when he lost his job--.
Speaker 2: Before we do that, let's kind of keep it in chronological--I want you to talk about his experience in World War II first then we will get back to the civil rights, these are both great stories.  Talk about what he did in the war.
Speaker 1: Well what he did in the war, he was quartermaster corps. His job along with many other soldiers--black soldiers--was to get the supplies to the front line.  He was there in the theater at the time the U.S. was preparing for D-Day, leading up to D-Day, getting those supplies there and General [Dwight] Eisenhower was in command.  And--so he wasn't a driver of the trucks he was riding guard, so he post guard on the truck and if they came under fire then he was obviously--he and one other person.  One night because they drove the trucks at night when they carried the supplies up the front lines so that they wouldn't be obviously spotted--.
Speaker 2: So you are saying he started out of Belgium, right?
Speaker 1: He is in Belgium, right.
Speaker 2: Okay.  The outfit became known as--the history is--(simultaneous) (unclear).
Speaker 1: As the Red Ball Express.  They are the renowned Red Ball Express and they have a stamp, a U.S. postal stamp that came out in 1993 in their honor. It's only a matter of time when there will be a congressional gold medal that will be presented on behalf of the Red Ball Express team, all of them who served during that timeframe.
Speaker 2: And just for the sake of history the Red Ball Express was a quartermaster unit like--in fact, black soldiers were funneled in the quartermaster corp. basically to keep them from being on the front line supposedly because of racism but--(simultaneous) (unclear).
Speaker 1: Well they could volunteer, dad said that if they were to volunteer to go to the front line, he said many of them did but he wasn't volunteering to go to the front line.  My dad learned to become a sharp shooter.  He was a sharp shooter which is partly why they had him posting guard on the trucks instead of driving the trucks.  He could probably pick a gnat out of the sky, he was that good in terms of his ability to fire those weapons and he understood those weapons.
Speaker 2: Did he have that skill before he got in the [U.S.] Army?
Speaker 1: He probably did because growing up on the farm they learned to hunt.  They were hunting ducks, rabbits, he had experience in.  So during that time in the war he said they came under fire, a bomb was dropped so that interrupted the line so he jumped out of the truck because everybody had to bail out so when he jumped out he jumped down on in a dug out that was a deep hole but unbeknownst to him when he jumped down there was a big snake that was there.  So he sort of like was running from one end of the frying pan to the other when he jumped down there.  But anyway he killed the snake, he was not fearful, you know.  He was not a person who was fearful maybe from his experiences growing up in particular during the time he was in the war.  So the war in Europe was successful, he was part of--we won the war and they got everything there fine and they recognized for their bravery and what they did.  But then he was on the way--he said they were on the ship on their way to the Pacific theater they were going to leave one war and go right to another one but then they learned en route that they had won the war in the Pacific as well.  So they didn't need to serve [Douglas] MacArthur.  MacArthur was commanding the Pacific theater.  So that was very positive.  I must tell you that my daddy's skills came in handy.  Later on in life, he was driving--we had, as I said we were farming, we had rented some land from some other folks and he had gone over to check on something and he was on his way back home and when he got to this bridge there was this bobcat that was on the bridge.  So he--at that timeframe you could carry shotguns with you, he had his in his window so he pulled it out and took aim and took him out.  So he took him out and brought the bobcat home and showed it to us.  There was a man who lived--who was a World War I veteran who lived down the highway from where we lived and he was accustomed to taking the fur and all of that off, skinning them as they called it.  And then my dad took the fur to Memphis [Tennessee] and sold the fur to Sears.  Sears and Roebuck [store] bought the fur from the bobcat at that timeframe.  Because the fur coats were things that folks were really buying during that timeframe.  So he was a sharpshooter, he just wasn't afraid.  I think his fear probably came with older age, when he couldn't hear as well.
Story_ID: 28602
Speaker 1: For ten years when my parents [Izoula Smith Williamson and Julius Williamson, Jr.] were married, the latter part of it, my mother was in a nursing home.  She was there for nursing care, and so everyday he went to the nursing home, he didn't miss a beat.  Now there were times when he may have been ill himself but he drove.  We let him drive his vehicle until he was about eighty-five [years old].  Only at that timeframe we told him, look I think it's time to stop because it got to the point where his hearing was so bad he would just start driving slow.  Sometime your equilibrium gets thrown off and he was just driving slow and the police pulled him over and said is there a problem, and he said yeah, there was a problem with the truck.  So the policeman said take that truck home and don't drive it again until you get it fixed and then he said he would do that.  From that point forward once we found out I said that's it and I started making other arrangements.  The last year of their marriage they both were in the nursing home together, he had gotten sick and had collapsed because he had been out in the hot sun so he was there and they both shared the same room together.  But then they would be sick off and on while they were together.  Then she passed first and he knew she was gone he had no need to be here, he was ready to go, not that he said that, we knew he did not want to be here because she was everything to him.  He wanted to be there for her, he was taking care of her and it was just how he felt.  Once he knew she was gone then he was ready to go home and be there with her.  And he did, he got sick and hospitalized and then they told us to bring him to hospice and we did and a week later he was gone.
Story_ID: 28603
Speaker 1: Now there is another story about the Civil Rights Movement.  Now this story would have gone down--the major events would have gone down while you were a child, right?  You were born in '49 [1949].
Speaker 2: I was born in '49 [1949].
Speaker 1: I don't know when this story started.
Speaker 2: Around '57 [1957], 1957.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Tell us what happened.
Speaker 2: What happened is and the end results of this story ultimately led the landmark civil rights passage of the Voters Rights Act in 1965.  What happened during the '40s [1940s].  There was a black man and a white man in the town.  They both had a altercation together.  The end results were the white man went to the sheriff and the sheriff deputized about twenty other deputies and then they went to the man's house--.
Speaker 1: Wait a minute, before you--you may as well tell it right and tell all of it.
Speaker 2: What happened was they actually had an altercation about a black woman and from what I found, I learned this only within the last five years what actually happened.  When I did some research, my wife and I did, and we found that this is what happened.  This was in a newspaper out of Jackson, Tennessee that carried the article about what happened which is why they had the altercation.
Speaker 1: Now was the woman related to the black man in any way?
Speaker 2: I don't think she was related to the black man.
Speaker 1: She was a girlfriend?
Speaker 2: She was a girlfriend.
Speaker 1: But not a wife?
Speaker 2: Not a wife.  They had--the white man had a wife and the black man, of course, had a wife and so I guess he was so enraged, the white man had decided he was going to show him that who has the might and the power and who was going to ultimately win this woman.  And so they went to his house at night and they were going to order him out, go in and take him out, I guess they were going to take him out into the woods and hang him.  So he was able to get out, he and his wife and then they got into a fire fight.  When they fired on him they fired back and he hit one of the white men and kind of--.
Speaker 1: With a shotgun?
Speaker 2: With a shotgun, blew his brains out basically.  So when that happened they backed off and said they wanted to leave him alone.  So he got away, the black man got away.  He was a Masonic and his Masonic brothers talked him into buying a train ticket to St. Louis [Missouri] and this is in the early '40s [1940s] and this is an actual account.  And so during the late '50s [1950s] there he was at a baseball game in St. Louis, the St. Louis Cardinals and a black man from Somerville [Tennessee] saw him there and came back to Somerville and reported to the sheriff and they gave him $100.00 for squealing (laugh).  So they sent out a warrant for his arrest and they brought him back to Somerville to face a trial.
Story_ID: 28604
Speaker 1: Now the man who was killed, son ultimately became one of the deputy sheriffs as part of the police department and he was not a very kind man. When it came to blacks, he had no tolerance at all and he would use his blackjack in a moment because he was angry because his dad was killed by a black man and he was going to get revenge in some way.  So when they brought him back to stand trial, the jury was an all white jury so blacks start asking why is there an all black jury when you have other blacks who could serve on a jury and they said because no blacks are registered to vote.  And then they said okay where do we sign up and they said oh no, over my dead body will you be signing up to register to vote.  So at that timeframe there were a couple of other black men who were in good standing in the county actually drove to D.C. [Washington, District of Columbia] to the justice department and got an injunction ultimately.  The movement started in the trenches where they pull people together and then they figure it out within the trenches what they were going to do.  As I recall my dad telling me he wanted to know what was going on and so he actually attended some of the rallies to see what they were doing not that he actually participated in the rallies but he actually went to the churches during that timeframe.  So they got one and ultimately they brought in a civil rights lawyer from Nashville, Avon Williams (ph. splg.).  Avon Williams basically--.
Speaker 2: Is that A-V-O-N?
Speaker 1: A-V-O-N.  Avon Williams basically filed a class action suit because the end results was if you register to vote so what the whites did in the county they said well we are going to fix them.  They were going to hit them economically.  If you had a job or if you were teaching school, in my dad's [Julius Williamson, Jr.] case driving a school bus, they lost their job because they registered to vote.  And that was very hard because at the time they thought if they hurt in the pocketbook then that would be a way of really smacking your hand for having done something that you shouldn't have done.  But it didn't stop my father, because he always had things, if one thing didn't work out, he already told me as I was growing up, "Always have more than one iron in the fire."  Because you never know what might happen to the main one that you think you are dependent on, and I took his advice.  So in the end, blacks were evicted off the farm of whites who were sharecropping they started tent city.  Tent city is where they were housed, they had two blacks, one was named Shepardtoes (ph.) and John McFarren (ph.).  They basically allowed those tents to be erected and Ernest Withers, he was a photographer.  He had some accurate accounts of what actually took place.
Speaker 2: Ernest Withers her was the famous photographer--
Speaker 1: He was a world renowned photographer.
Speaker 2: You know we have interviewed him in his studio, he had a studio.
Speaker 1: Still has it now, it's a gallery now, his daughter basically is a trustee and she runs the gallery.
Speaker 2: I think he took photos for the 'Tri-State Defender'.
Speaker 1: For the 'Tri-State Defender', he took photos-so the end results is that the blacks were able to vote not only in Fayette County [Tennessee], but surrounding counties, like Haywood County, Tipton County [Tennessee] but then that movement spread voter's rights registration drive started all down South.  So that became the movement and the freedom riders from the North basically carried folks South to help people get to the polls so they could register to vote.  They did face some opposition but they had to get police protection, the did, so they were (unclear). So [Martin Luther] King played a very important role in the South.  But King did not come to Fayette County, he sent Lieutenant Jesse Jackson and Andrew Young came to Tennessee.  I found a picture from Ernest Withers of Andrew Young; I don't have a picture of Jesse Jackson during that timeframe.  But Andrew Young I do have a picture of.
Speaker 2: Early on that would have been Andrew Young because only later would Jesse appear.  As a matter of fact, I don't know, he may have come back as something else because he would have been a student in--.
Speaker 1: Right he was a student at North Carolina A&T [State University, Greensboro, North Carolina].
Speaker 2: --(unclear) Andy Young came down (unclear) there were other people that he--(simultaneous) (unclear).
Speaker 1: There were others that he had that were part of--there were other lieutenants, I should say, of King.  So all that ultimately lead to the landmark Voters Right Act that took place in the civil rights legislation in 1965.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Thank you for that story. That's a good story.
Story_ID: 28605
Speaker 1: Do you have a earliest childhood memory?
Speaker 2: Yes.  What happened to me I think early on in life, I was probably about maybe five possibly six [years old].  I recall one day me and my sisters [Jerline and Pearlie Williamson] were out playing in the yard, a storm cloud came over, it was very black and my dad [Julius Williamson, Jr.] told us you all should go into the house.  Later he came in, he said look I'm concerned there may be a tornado embedded in the clouds.  My brother [Julius Williamson III] was not born then, this was around 1954, '55 [1955] timeframe and so he told my mother [Izoula Smith Williamson] he said, well look, why don't you just get the children and get into the truck and I will drive the truck alongside the embankment so that if there is a funnel cloud, it would blow over.  So my mother decided she wouldn't go, she said, no I want to stay here.  And we were living in the old family home that was once owned by my great grandparents and who was once owned by the white folks a couple that sold it to them.  It was a plantation style type home, you know, but it was old sitting upon a cinder blocks.  So we all stayed there, we didn't go and the storm was so strong and the wind was so powerful it felt like the house was going to come up off the blocks.  And so, as a result it didn't impact us but it sure frightened us all because it was so powerful.  The next morning we learned that an elderly couple about three miles north of our home was hit by, people say then maybe a tornado or could have been a very strong wind.  But it destroyed their home; it lifted them up and dropped them in the hog pen.  They were both killed and when they were found they were both lying on the mattress in the hog pen, you know, with the hogs.  The hogs didn't bother the corpses but that's where they ended up.  So when I saw that and knowing what we had experienced, it's sort of like something came over me as a child that what could we have done about that.  Why is it that these people had to die and didn't know that this storm was going to impact them because they were elders and went to bed.
Story_ID: 28606
Speaker 1: Okay, so you would have been about four years old [when Williamson experiences a tornado that killed an elderly couple who lived in his neighborhood in Somerville, Tennessee]?
Speaker 2: I was probably around five [years old] but that was something that stayed with me all while I was growing up.  I did know that I was always good in mathematics in school and, in fact, I was one who stood out among my classmates when it came to mathematics.  Didn't really know as I went along in life what I was going to do with all of this.  I think that what happened then, my faith for my journey was commissioned.  I got a commission to go do something but didn't know I had received a commission from the man up above at the time.  All I know is that my course was to be a good student, to do math and so forth.
Speaker 1: So you look back on this incident and your mathematical skills were bound to come together at some point.
Speaker 2: Were bound to come together at some point.  So throughout high school again, I was a math whiz, everybody looked to me.  I participated in math contests, you know, and kind of did well.
Story_ID: 28607
Speaker 1: What were some of the sights and sounds and smells growing up?
Speaker 2: The sights and sounds of growing up was good.  We had a great upbringing.  My parents [Izoula Smith Williamson and Julius Williamson, Sr.] had high moral standards, they believed in making sure that not only that we were educated, but we were also in church, in Sunday school.  So the foundation for life started then.
Speaker 1: What was the name of your church?
Speaker 2: The name of the church was Pulliam Chapel Missionary Baptist.
Speaker 1: PU, I'm sorry.
Speaker 2: P-U-L-L-I-A-M Chapel Missionary Baptist Church.  And that's the church that my dad grew up in.  He ultimately served, as I said, fifty-four years on the deacon board and fifteen years as chairman.  So he and my mother went to their childhood churches where they grew up at.  Her church was named Travelers Rest Missionary Baptist Church.
Speaker 1: These were both missionary Baptist churches and they are in the same area too.
Speaker 2: Same area.  The difference was that on the first and third Sundays, we went to my mother's church.  On the second and fourth Sundays we went to my dad's church.  We went to Sunday school at my dad's church and then went to services at my mom's church.  So we grew up in that kind of environment.  We were taught to be honest people, to love our neighbors as ourselves and be kind to others, to do unto others.  I think it was a mission of public service that really got engrained in me very early on.  I always wanted to be like my dad, I wanted to be in the military.  So I got to do both because from high school to college I went into ROTC [Reserve Officers' Training Corps] and got to wear the uniform and got a commission with the [U.S.] Air Force and served on active duty for six years.
Story_ID: 28608
Speaker 1: What was the name of your grade school?
Speaker 2: The grade school that I started was Glade Spring Elementary that's G-L-A-D-E- Spring Elementary School [Somerville, Tennessee].
Speaker 1: Sounds very refreshing.
Speaker 2: I went to school there for three years.
Speaker 1: Is there a story behind that name, Glade Spring?
Speaker 2: It could very well be but I haven't found it yet.
Speaker 1: So you were there for six years?
Speaker 2: No, I was there for three years.
Speaker 1: Oh three years, okay.  Now this was--you said it was like a two room school?
Speaker 2: It was a two room school.  The first grade--we also used the church because they were right next to each other.  The church had at that timeframe what you would call kindergarten today was called pre-primer then; like priming you for first grade.
Speaker 1: Now this was at Pulliam Chapel [Missionary Baptist Church]?
Speaker 2: Right, Pulliam Chapel and Glade Spring are sitting right next to each other on the same property.  So the people who owned the land for the school also owned the land for the church as well.  So now, it's only now that the church will ultimately own the land.  Because they borrowed a lot of money more money than the owner would be willing to pay in the event if they foreclose on the loan for any reason.  So pre-primer kindergarten was in the church, first grade was in the church, I'm sorry, second grade was in the church.  And then third grade and fourth grade were in the first room in the school and then fifth grade, sixth grade, I'm sorry, third, fourth and fifth were in the first room.  Sixth, seventh, and eighth was in the second room.  So you had two teachers, you had a principal, so the principal that taught the sixth, seventh and eighth grade, his name was Willie Givhan, that's G-I-V-H-A-N.
Speaker 1: There are some Givhans in Chicago [Illinois] (unclear).
Speaker 2: And then the teacher that taught the third, fourth and fifth, her name was Forestine Trice (ph.) that was my teacher.  And so by the time I was ready to go to fourth grade, they then had built a consolidated school called Jefferson Elementary School.  So in 1951 when they did an assessment of the number of schools at that time for colored, there were sixty-seven two room type schools throughout the county.  So then they started consolidating a lot of these two room schools into a more centralized school and that was Jefferson Elementary School.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So this was new?
Speaker 2: This was new.  So, at that timeframe I started going to Jefferson Elementary when I was in the fourth grade.  So fourth, fifth, sixth, seventh and eighth grade was at Jefferson Elementary School.
Speaker 1: So this was in 1964.
Speaker 2: No that was in--see I started school in '55 [1955] so that was around 1958.  So 1958 I went to Jefferson because my dad [Julius Williamson, Sr.]  was driving a school bus then.  The county had just given him a brand new school bus a 1957 Chevy and so we rode his bus.
Story_ID: 28609
Speaker 1: Did you have a favorite teacher at Glade Spring [Elementary School, Somerville, Tenenssee] first, you had one teacher--.
Speaker 2: I had--I think my favorite teacher was Ms. Trice [ph.], you know.  The first, second grade teacher that I had, my oldest sister [Jerline Williamson] was her favorite so I guess you can't have two favorites from the same family.  She could do no wrong for her.  So when I went to Jefferson then I--my teachers included Ms. Elizabeth Gray (pg. splg.) and then I had Curtis Maher (ph. splg.) and Harry T. Coleman (ph. splg.).  Harry T. Coleman was the principal and he actually taught math and I was his favorite student.  He was so proud of me because every problem he would put on the board or he would ask me to work on I could do it.  One day this was when I was probably in the seventh grade, they had a visitor from the state to come in and he told him I good I was and says, why don't you give him a problem to work on, this was a white man and he figured I wasn't going to do it.  So he put it up there and I went through it and accomplished it.  The only thing he could say was he is pretty good isn't he.  And so that was--I was in my destiny I guess you could say during that timeframe.  But the experience was still in my heart that could there have been something that could have been done to save those people's lives.  It's like that picture that was in the newspaper was still in my mind today as very vivid as it was then as it is now.  There are two elderly people who didn't get a warning and they died as a result of a bad storm that we believed at that timeframe was a tornado.  Because the homes back then weren't built as brick, you know, reinforced, they were just wood homes so it could have been just a wind storm that just blew them away, in either case they still died as a result but it was a very strong wind.  And so, in terms of sport, I did play basketball but I was always the one who was on the other end of the bench.  I wasn't anywhere close to being one of the starters and Curtis Maher was our coach and he also taught math there as well.
Speaker 1: Now, did Curtis Maher have a son?
Speaker 2: No he did not have any children; he was fresh out of college from Tennessee State [University, Nashville, Tennessee].  His first job was teaching mathematics at Jefferson Elementary School [Somerville, Tennessee].
Speaker 1: So he was a young man.
Speaker 2: He was young at the time.  He liked me as well.  I was his favorite and he tells people that today.  Harry T. Coleman is deceased; Curtis Maher now is in his seventies now.
Speaker 1: Is he in the--?
Speaker 2: In the county.  He retired in Fayette County school--from Memphis [Tennessee] school system, he taught in the high school math and he taught also in Memphis.  So he had--his home was from Somerville.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 28610
Speaker 1: And so, then I went on to high school and then was in ninth grade. Mathematics was my forte.
Speaker 2: What is the name of the high school?
Speaker 1: The high school was Fayette County Training School [Tennessee].  It was founded in 1912 for colored pupils.
Speaker 2: Often the black schools have the name training schools.  Do you have any idea why?
Speaker 1: That was the name they gave all of them at the time.  For us they were--they weren't looking at us as preparing to go off to college; they were looking at us to be trained to do industrial work, you know.  That's why agriculture was so important, that's why trade was so important.  They had trade courses--auto mechanics, those programs were very prevalent during my high school.
Speaker 2: Okay.  So you played basketball in high school?
Speaker 1: No.  I wasn't good enough to play any more than what I did and the only way that I would get called in was they were sure they were going to lose and so they would call me up by long distance and say it's time for you to go in when we had five minutes left and we had lost the game.  So my job, just to have fun, you know--played.  Basketball is my favorite sport now I like it, I watch professional basketball.
Speaker 2: Okay.  I know you said you did a lot of work on the farm.  Did farm work interfere with your school?
Speaker 1: No.  Then the way that they had the school year--during the--they gave time off for you to gather your crops.  So there was school during part of the summer time and you would be off like in September and October so that you could gather your crops if you farm.  So that's kind of the way they worked it, it wasn't a consecutive 180 days as most schools were at that time frame early on but then they changed it so that during the summer time that you would be off, whatever you got done, you got done.  But that happened like when I was probably seventh or eighth grade when they changed the period when you were actually attending school.
Story_ID: 28611
Speaker 1: So what level of math did you have at Fayette County Training School [Summerville, Tennessee]?
Speaker 2: Well at Fayette County Training School there was algebra, algebra 1, algebra 2, which was getting into advanced algebra.  There was trigonometry, there was calculus that I took, there was analytical geometry so calculus at that timeframe was the highest order of math that I had.
Speaker 1: Now that's good because a lot of schools in the North didn't have calculus.  African American schools didn't have calculus.  Who was your math teacher?
Speaker 2: We had Curtis Maher then moved from the elementary to the high school here and taught there.  He didn't teach me until later on.  Alma Wainwright, Alma Pruitt at the time was my math teacher and then I had a gentleman by the name of Dentey Cole, was one of my math teachers, then there was one of them--two of them I can't recall their names.
Speaker 1: Dentey Cole?
Speaker 2: Dentey Cole.
Speaker 1: That's a high level of instruction.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Alma Pruitt was the one who taught the calculus and she was very, very good.  In fact, when we did our 45th high school class reunion last April, she was our master of ceremony for our dinner but she was actually our--there was only a handful of the teachers who were still living.  But she was very young at the time; she is probably in her mid-seventies now along with Curtis Maher, he's in his mid-seventies.
Speaker 1: Now I even heard stories from people we interviewed that schools were not supposed to teach calculus to black students.
Speaker 2: No they weren't.  And so there were very, very few of us that were there, you know, in that calculus.  I was voted most likely to succeed from my class when we did our 40th class reunion, they recognized me having been the one who did succeed as I was voted to succeed.  And that was a very good honor to receive that from them.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, how many students graduated with you?
Speaker 2: We had 194 in our class of '67 [1967] and there was about 200 in all but six of them kind of got left behind.  The unfortunate thing for those six that got left behind they let them go through everything and then they didn't pass so some of them just fell off by the wayside.  They didn't continue on, they just left, you know.  During that timeframe the Vietnam War was waging and some of them got drafted into the [U.S.] Army and just didn't go back to school.
Speaker 1: You graduated in 1967?
Speaker 2: May 18, 1967.
Speaker 1: When you were on the verge of graduation, I take it--did you graduate number one?
Speaker 2: I was like number two.
Speaker 1: Who was number one?
Speaker 2: Elizabeth Ware was number one, not because she was a math whiz, there were other courses that students took that were certainly important but they were not of interest to me as math was.  But I was the mathematics king in high school.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.
Story_ID: 28612
Speaker 1: Now what kind of college counseling did you have, or did you have any?
Speaker 2: We had counselors.  Ms. Aura Toes (ph. splg.) was our counselor and, you know, she was very helpful.  Most of the students that graduated from the training school [Fayette County Training School, Summerville, Tennessee] either went to Lane College [Jackson, Tennessee] or they went to Tennessee State [University, Nashville, Tennessee] which is where I ultimately went to.
Speaker 1: Okay.  But now did she counsel you to try and go to school right away?  And why didn't you go to Lane or Tennessee State.
Speaker 2: Oh I did, yeah.  But I said most of the students, but when I finished up in '67 [1967] in August 1967 I was at Tennessee State.  At the timeframe the war was waging so if you didn't go to school, going to college to try to get a student deferment you were going to get drafted, you were going to go in the [U.S.] Army or volunteer to go into the [U.S.] Air Force and go straight to Vietnam.  But I always had an interest in college, I wanted to go to college, I was prepared to go to college.  So then I went to Tennessee State it was in the fall.
Speaker 1: Did you go on a scholarship?
Speaker 2: Yes I did.  At the timeframe, scholarships were mostly what you would call education grants.  We had a gentleman who worked as a special assistant to the president at Tennessee State, Davis who actually came to our area and met with a lot of our parents.  What he was doing, he was selling insurance and if you bought insurance from him he was guaranteeing you a four year scholarship at Tennessee State.  We didn't find out until we actually got to school that the man had already been fired and that his word, he didn't have any authority to give out any scholarships.  But the fact that he held a high level position, they didn't want to have embarrassment on the school so all of us which was at that timeframe was about twenty-five of us who had claimed were recipients of four year scholarships, they made good for all of us.  Educational opportunity grants, work study so there was money available for us to go to school.
Speaker 1: Okay.  I have never heard a story like this before.
Speaker 2: It was a pretty weird thing that he was offering--we thought that when my father [Julius Williamson, Sr.] bought some insurance he thought it was just a handful of us who were actually getting scholarships.  When they announced it when we walked across the stage to get our diploma that's when it was announced how many students got four year scholarships.  I'm saying some of these folks didn't have the academic skills to even almost finish high school let alone getting a four year scholarship.  But we didn't find out that was a gimmick until we actually got to the school.  But like I said, they made good.  My actual scholarships came in my junior year.  The [U.S.] Air Force--I went to the Air Force ROTC [Reserve Officers' Training Corps] and because of my work I received a Air Force ROTC scholarship.
Speaker 1: Now how much did the Tennessee State scholarship actually cover?
Speaker 2: It covered everything except--because part of it was work study so what you didn't--but it didn't cover the education opportunity grant.  The money that you worked through work study was used to pay the rest of it and that could have included your books that you had to pay for, things like that.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 28613
Speaker 1: So you joined the U.S. Air Force ROTC [Reserve Officers' Training Corps]--.
Speaker 2: So I went into the ROTC in my freshman year [at Tennessee State University, Nashville, Tennessee] and then in my junior year I went into the advance corp. and then this is where I knew that once I completed school, once you are in advance corp. you are going to go in the Air Force because you are already training now to become an officer in the Air Force in the advance corp.  And so as I said I received an Air Force scholarship for those two years plus I still received my educational opportunity grants and I had some work study as well so without having to work too hard, I got money, you know, from the Air Force and through the educational opportunity grant plus the Air Force at that timeframe paid--we got a stipend of $100 a month, you know, from the Air Force in the advance corp.
Story_ID: 28614
Speaker 1: So my wife and I were married then--.
Speaker 2: Now how did you meet your wife?
Speaker 1: In school, Tennessee State [University, Nashville, Tennessee].
Speaker 2: What's her name?
Speaker 1: Her name is Brenda Joyce, the former Brenda Joyce Lee of Nashville.
Speaker 2: Okay.  You got married in what year?
Speaker 1: We got married in 1970.
Story_ID: 28615
Speaker 1: While at Tennessee State [University, Nashville, Tennessee]--now Nashville was hot with civil rights activity in the years preceding you coming, but I don't know what was going on--.
Speaker 2: Well it was very hot while I was there because in the spring of 1968 is when [Dr. Martin Luther] King was assassinated.  There was a lot of anger, you know, many of the blacks basically took that anger to the street.  So any passerby who was driving through the campus that were white, they start throwing bricks at them and breaking people's windshield and stuff like that.  And I'm not sure who was injured, but in the meantime they brought in the metro police came in and they also had activated the national guard as well.  So they basically surrounded our campus and I recall one evening because things--in order to quiet things down they actually came in on campus and went through every dormitory and searched for weapons.  Some of the students had weapons particularly the older guys who had served in the military first and then come to school.  They actually had weapons, not that many at that timeframe; there weren't that many weapons.
Speaker 1: Now people are talking about our second amendment right to have a weapon, you know, some of the very people probably who were searching the dorms there at Tennessee State.  But, so did they actually take the guns that the people had?
Speaker 2: Well, what they did they came in, broke--instead of opening the doors they broke the glass out of our doors.  They tried to destroy the building, the dormitory.  They didn't have to do all that.  Some of the policemen that they used were black, you know, they came in with as much venom against some of the black students as some of the white were.  So they went on every floor, and I recall when they came into my room searching, I had two roommates at the time and one of them had served in the [U.S.] Army, he was a veteran and he was an older gentlemen and the other one was my age because we had started together.  They came in and started searching and I was in [U.S. Air Force] ROTC [Reserve Officers' Training Corps] in the color guard so I had a dummy 45 [handgun] in my drawer.  So they opened the drawer and they said whose weapon is this and I couldn't get the words out because I was so nervous, bah bah I was stumbling his mind, he said what is this, where did you get this from.  So he opens it up and he finds, this is a white policeman and he looks at it and he says oh this is a dummy.  I said I am in ROTC.  So the veteran who was in there, he was older and he was more settled said, look he told you he was in ROTC and then blah, blah, blah and so he kind of stood up for us and then after that he left.  Some of the guys who had weapons got smart because they had the fluorescent lights where you could put stuff on top and the police never looked on top of the fluorescent light.  So they stuck the weapons on top and my roommate didn't have any weapons, the only weapon in there was a dummy.  So they didn't find any weapons, you know, and I recall when my roommate was peeking out the window before they came in; they shot the windows out, yeah it was war, they were out to hurt people or kill people.
Story_ID: 28616
Speaker 1: This is a campus [Tennessee State University, Nashville, Tennessee; April, 1968, the evening of Dr. Martin Luther King's assassination] situation, a horrible situation you are talking about.  The police were actually raiding a dorm and kicking in and destroying property.
Speaker 2: They were destroying property, shooting bullet holes in the walls in the exterior of the building.
Speaker 1: Were there students shooting at cops?
Speaker 2: There were some students who had weapons and there was only a very small number maybe three or four that were firing back which really angered them which drew the force to come in and start doing their thing.  They were determined to find those weapons, who ever owned them.  And so--but then finally I was able to call my parents [Julius Williamson, Jr. and Izoula Smith Williamson] around two o'clock in the morning because they had heard about it, it was on the news and they were worried to death.  And so I told my parents what was going on and told them I was okay.  The next morning, you know, when daylight came is when we had a chance to really go outside and just see how much damage they had done.  But they went to every room, searched every room and they were determined to find weapons, to my knowledge they didn't find any because the guys were smart they put their weapons at the top of the fluorescent lights and they never were able to secure them.  So we got past that experience and that was really a very frightening experience that we all went through.
Speaker 1: You were a freshman at this point, right?
Speaker 2: I was a freshman.
Speaker 1: That was in April--?
Speaker 2: That was in April getting to go into my sophomore year, again nineteen years old.  I had just turned nineteen.  It was really like being in war cause my roommate said that's what--what we experienced was like being in war because he experienced that when he was in Vietnam in terms of being fired upon.  They could have actually--when you are peeking out the window to see what's going on, they fired those shots and knocked the windows out someone could have been shot; could have been killed they didn't care they were just out to do harm.  But the black policeman the students ragged him, they called him Uncle Toms and, oh God, they were just so angry that they wanted to jump on the students too so they would call him Uncle Tom and all that kind of stuff.  So we got past that, that was a real horrific experience but it prepared us for life, I mean there were things--a lot more things equal to it or just as worse as that happened then.  But not knowing that you would actually go through it.  The experience we had and the movement in my hometown, we weren't out there.  My father would not let us go out there and participate; he told us he didn't want us out there.  But there were a lot of other kids out there who got beat up and all this kind of stuff.  He said no, he didn't want that, we didn't have to go out there and do that.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 28617
Speaker 1: So you know, college [Tennessee State University, Nashville, Tennessee] was great, I found my sweetheart, we married as I said.  Our son was born in college, Keith Ramone [Williamson] my last year and he now is forty-two years old and he works for Bank of America.  I don't have any grandkids yet.  He was married, divorced, I think about to be married again.  We had our daughter in '72 [1972] when I was at North Carolina State [University, Raleigh, North Carolina], she is a scientist.  She is an infectious disease researcher, biological science, Center for Disease Control [CDC], Atlanta [Georgia].  She spent a lot of time in school, not married but she is enjoying her life.  She and her mom get to do a lot of things together now; while I am working my wife is retired three years ago so they just travel places.  Whether I am with them or not (laugh); so they make their plans on things that they want to do, you know, it's a couple of trips at least in a year when my daughter has time then they go.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Story_ID: 28618
Speaker 1: In terms of the instructors at Tennessee State [University, Nashville, Tennessee] were there any special mentors or instructors--?
Speaker 2: Yeah, there were the Gassaway (ph. splg.) sisters.  Sadie Gassaway was the chair of the math department.  Pearlie Gassaway was one of the math teachers, she taught algebra.  And then there was one of the other professors I had who taught analytical geometry and differential equations was a gentleman by the name of Dr. Peter Lee (ph. splg.).  He was Chinese born and he was very good.  In fact, I did my thesis project under him in analytical geometry is what I wanted to do it in to make sure I had my analytical skills in order.  I had very good professors in, you know, algebra, not algebra but calculus 2 and 3.  But those are the ones--Dr. King was a retired--he was in the marine corp.  He went to school, got his Ph.D. in education but actually got his bachelor's and master's [degrees] in mathematics and that's what he taught.  I ran into him about ten years ago at a gas station in Nashville, I stopped and there he was so we had a chance to chat.  Dr. Peter Lee once he left Tennessee State and joined the Census Bureau here in D.C. [Washington, District of Columbia] and actually lived out in my area in Germantown here in D.C. and I ran into him about twenty-five years ago, I happened to run into him at the post office so we had a chance to chat.  He actually opened up a Chinese restaurant after he retired but I'm not sure if he is still living here or not but I have not seen him in the last ten years.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 28619
Speaker 1: Now did you join a fraternity or anything [at Tennessee State University, Nashville, Tennessee]?
Speaker 2: Did not join a fraternity I went through [U.S. Air Force] ROTC [reserve Officers' Training Corps], Honor Society, and that was the way that I wanted to go because of my upbringing, the discipline kind of approach.  But the Air Force was the best thing for me that I could have done.  I got the education now, you know, I have benefits and I am a retired colonel from the D.C. [District of Columbia] Air National Guard in 2001.  Once I turned age sixty, my benefits started so I have the same benefits as any other retired military individual.
Speaker 1: I have to ask you about the Tennessee State track team was world famous.  I think you had a football player on campus--(simultaneous) (unclear).
Speaker 2: Yes.  Well we had [Ed] "Too Tall" Jones was there when I was there and also Joe Gilliam was there.
Story_ID: 28620
Speaker 1: Jefferson Street Joe [Joseph] Gilliam.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Joe was much better than we know him to be.  If he were coming out today, like you got an RG3 [Robert Griffin III] that everybody cowtails to here in D.C. [Washington, District of Columbia], he was much better.  Joe Gilliam was really, really a great quarterback.  He got drafted into the NFL [National Football League], Pittsburgh Steelers [Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania] is basically--Pittsburgh was not kind to him.  They wooed him, even though he was winning games and after five games that they won they pulled him out and put in Terry Bradshaw.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  I think both of the Terrys, Hanratty and Bradshaw got hurt and they brought in Joe Gilliam and won five games in a row.
Speaker 2: Yeah he won and they wouldn't continue with Joe Gilliam he was just that good in terms of a back.  And Joe never was able to recover after that he started dabbling in drugs.  In that timeframe they didn't have programs to help the players, you know, and what they were going through.  Plus it was very discriminatory in Pittsburgh during that era and the fans just did not want him as starting quarterback.  They did not want a black quarterback as a starting quarterback.  So, you know, ultimately because he got in trouble, they ultimately cut Joe.  Joe at one time was homeless and at the age of forty-nine he passed away.  He tried to rebound, recovery didn't--since we are speaking of him, Joe had a sister that was also going to school there at the same time that I was, very attractive woman, young lady at the time, whatever was going on in their household, she went up to the sixth floor in the dormitory and opened the window and jumped out, killed herself.  People say that their father was just so strict, in terms of--but that was a very hurtful experience to hear about that what happened during the timeframe.
Speaker 1: Two tragic stories.
Story_ID: 28621
Speaker 1: [Ed] "Too Tall" Jones, like I said, we lived in the same dormitory [Tennessee State University, Nashville, Tennessee].  He was a--Claude Humphrey had already graduated when I started there in '67 [1967].  Ted McClain played basketball, he was the star guard on our men's basketball team and he ultimately got drafted into the ABA [American Basketball Association] and then when he retired, I think he retired from the Philadelphia 76ers [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania].  He actually played with Dr. J [Julius Erving] and also Ed Dorsey [ph.] played with him, I think he got picked up at that timeframe whatever the Carolina team was but he was in the ABA, I don't think he ever played in the NBA [National Basketball Association].  Lloyd Neal was there during my time as well.  Lloyd Neal played for the actual Washington Bullets and then he went elsewhere.  So there were a number of players that--Wyoming Titus [ph.] was ahead of me, Wilma Rudolph was ahead of me in terms of their time there at Tennessee State.
Story_ID: 28622
Speaker 1: So when you graduated from Tennessee State [University, Nashville, Tennessee] in '72 [1972]?
Speaker 2: In '71 [1971].
Speaker 1: '71 [1971] you went into the [U.S.] Air Force.
Speaker 2: Right, and then I got commissioned to go on active duty in the Air Force.
Speaker 1: So you are a second lieutenant?
Speaker 2: A second lieutenant.  My first assignment was North Carolina State [University, Raleigh, North Carolina], that's when I went into meteorology.  I started in '72 [1972] and finished up at the end of '73 [1973].
Speaker 1: Okay.  So had you always dreamed of studying meteorology?
Speaker 2: Well, how meteorology came was I had the math, I had physics, I took that at Tennessee State and then I was in [U.S. Air Force] ROTC [reserve Officers' Training Corps].  We had a Air Force officer to come from the air weather service like in my junior year when I was in the ROTC and I decided whatever this cloud of faith was, said that's the direction we want you to go.  Now, I had already--I was qualified as a pilot, pilot qualified, when I went to field training, which was four weeks, I just didn't like the experience that I had in flying the jets.  They took us up on T-33s, I had a bad oxygen mask, couldn't breathe, they had to take me down.  So we landed and--so I basically decided that or maybe the man above decided that that wasn't for me.  And so I asked to go into meteorology then and they said how about navigator and I said I don't really want to fly at all and they said you might lose your scholarship.  I said well that would be a chance I would have to take because I already had the educational opportunity grant anyway.  So they asked for it and I knew that when I got commissioned I was going to North Carolina State and I had already been selected to go into that program in meteorology.
Story_ID: 28623
Speaker 1: Meteorology is very challenging.  I was the only African American that was in my group.  A lot of the other students had had other courses that I didn't have, like in thermodynamics, but we did okay.  I came out of there, I finished up and unknowing to me, not only my peers that were in class with me, what was planned for me was bigger than anything for any of them that came out.  In fact, people had already come through meteorology long before me.  What was planned for me was bigger than what they were able to achieve that's how Doppler radar came into play
Speaker 2: One of your major mentors there was a Dr. [Walter] Saucier?
Speaker 1: Yeah, he was like the department chair.  My mentor in the program was a gentleman by the name of Allen Weber.  Allen Weber was very supportive and where I needed help on something he was there to help me.  And the other one there was--name was Dr. Jerry Watson (ph. splg.).  Jerry Watson was very helpful as well and as I said in the pre-meeting here, one of Dr. Saucier's first Ph.D. students was also working in the Research Triangle for the [U.S.] Army.  He actually was an adjunct professor there so he filled in for Saucier in his class which was a lab class and that's how I got to know him then.  So he was very helpful during that timeframe when he was part of it.  Saucier, if I was going to make it, I had to get it on my own.  There was nothing he was going to do for me if I made it, I made it, if I didn't make it, I didn't make it.  But he wasn't going to do anything to reach out to help.
Speaker 2: Tell us something about his background.
Speaker 1: Dr. Saucier had a very rich background.  He and another officer in the [U.S.] Air Force named Crick (ph. splg.) and Saucier.  They actually provided forecast in support of D-Day with General [Dwight] Eisenhower.  Saucier didn't have his Ph.D. then but once he left the Air Force he went to the University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois] and got his Ph.D. out of University of Chicago.  But he was known in his career of setting up meteorology programs at different schools.  So not only did he help to embellish a program in Chicago he went on to set up a program at Texas A&M [University, College Station, Texas], he set up a program at University of Oklahoma and they have a real thriving program there now and he also set up a program in North Carolina State [University].  So he was basically a trailblazer in trying to establish meteorology in more of the major institutions.  And Dr. Allen Weber was with him at the University of Oklahoma so when he left the University of Oklahoma to go to North Carolina State to set up the program, Weber came with him.  But he was very helpful.  To this day--I have not seen Dr. Weber since school but we talk to each other, we exchange e-mails and we just have been missing each other.  He attends American Meteorology Society meetings.  There were times he was there and I just didn't catch up with him so hopefully we will connect.  But he was very helpful, a great mentor for me and a gentleman who I really have the highest regard and respect for.  He was determined that I was going to succeed, you know, as a meteorologist and one of the things that we had while I was there, we had what you call forecast contest.  And this forecast contest--all of the members of my class, we all had to come up with a forecast over a period of time and then they look at how well you did over that timeframe and many of your predictions.  All you had to look at were these maps and there was nothing you could look at on TV because they didn't have that at that timeframe.  And I won the contest, I knew then after I won that contest that I was in the right field.  What it said to me was that there may have been some white students that may have a higher average than I at the time but I knew that I could make predictions, I would be good at doing this.
Story_ID: 28624
Speaker 1: So then, at that timeframe while we were in North Carolina [State University. Raleigh, North Carolina], in fact, one of things that I would never forget is that when I received my orders to go on active duty, I had to report to Seymour Johnson Air Force Base in Goldsboro, North Carolina which means I drive to Raleigh which is where I was going to school at and I would have to drive to the base in order to process in because I was on active duty then.  So we drove through this town, I was alone at the time, called Smithville, North Carolina and I had never seen this before in my life.  As I entered into the city limits of Smithville, North Carolina it had a big, huge welcome sign that says, 'Welcome to the Home of the Ku Klux Klan'.  That frightened me big time but I had bought myself a new car, a 1972 Nova, because I had taught school there in the elementary school for about four months before I actually received the orders.  We drove on through--I drove very slow because it was very frightening the fact I am driving through a town that says welcome to the home of the Ku Klux Klan, anybody could have been a member of the Klan (laughter).  So I drove on and ultimately got through and out of the city and made my way to the base.  So then I checked in got my room, processed in the next day and everything.  I finished up early, it was supposed to be two days so then I had left my family back home because it was like just before Christmas, so I decided I was just going to go back home because there was nothing I could really do and really finding a place to live in Raleigh because during the holiday timeframe.  So I went back and spent Christmas at home because I was living with my parents [Julius Williamson, Sr. and Izoula Smith Williamson] while I was teaching school.  The day after Christmas the wife and I and my son Keith we all headed back out and then that was my journey to go out on my own from that point forward.  So then we drove back and ultimately got back into Raleigh and I got a hotel room and we stayed there and then we started looking for a place to live.  So the next day once I returned, I had to take my wife to Seymour Johnson so she could process in and get her ID card so I really didn't tell her about the sign that said welcome to the ku klux klan when we drove up and she saw that sign it frightened her to death that there is ku klux klan here.  My wife is very fair, my wife is very fair complexioned and at the time when she was younger you would think that she was white, her complexion.  The only thing that she could think of was people are going to think that I'm driving to Smithville, North Carolina with a white woman (laughter) during that timeframe, which was funny.  Anyway we went through, we made it through, she got processed in and we drove back to the hotel room and then we start looking for a place to stay.  So I called these places because I figured we were going to be here a little over a year maybe we do not need to go and buy anything but maybe just find a place where we can minimize the expenses, save some money.  So we call this trailer park the lady answered the phone and she said oh yeah we have a trailer home, it's a $110.00 a month.  We had called a couple of other places so then I called why do we may consider this trailer and go take a look at it.  So I called back again and the woman says, oh I forgot to ask you when I had you on the phone, are you all colored?  I said no we're African American, we're black--and so she said well, she was going through this hemming and hawing.  She says well the people who own the trailer park said they don't want no colored folks in there.  We will rent out trailers to anybody but because we are in a park where we have--so we, no we couldn't, you know.  Thank goodness for President [Richard] Nixon the fair housing law was put into effect in 1972.  So what I had to do was go back down to the base and report that I had made contact with this trailer park and the lady didn't want to rent to us.  So the Air Force all they wanted me to do at the time was give them the information and they took care of the rest.  And so this is a story that I won't forget, they took care of them and we made money without even making money (laughter).  Because the Air Force then got involved and they ended up having to pay us money for not allowing us to live there and then we get this phone call from them, like in June, they found us through the Air Force apologizing about the fact of what happened that the people did.  We put that experience behind us.  But then we called this one place and the people were so friendly and we said what is going on here so we went.  It was a apartment complex, it was a husband and wife and they were white and they were absolutely immaculate and I said this is a place for us to be.  It turns out that there were about five or six other officers that were in my group living there.  And all of us had wives and they had kids during that year, you know.  A couple of them had boys and we had a daughter, Yulanda [Williamson] in 1972.  So it was a real eye opening experience coming from Tennessee State in 1968 going to North Carolina and I said I did not want to be down South when I was in the Air Force.  I said I want to go North, maybe we would have a better shot at in who we come in contact with.
Story_ID: 28625
Speaker 1: So when I filled out my dream sheet of where I wanted to go once I finished school, I said give me anywhere I can get up North.  When I got my orders it said that I was going to Charleston Air Force Base in South Carolina.  I said how can--it can't get any worse than that.  The best thing that could have ever happen to me was going to North Carolina State [University, Raleigh, North Carolina] and going to Charleston [South Carolina].  Because that was my biggest ground there; so when I got there, you know, there was a white officer that was running the place.  There were four other officers including myself, I was the lowest on the totem pole and the commander was great.  All of the rest of the folks hated him, I was the only African American officer there and so he just basically embraced me, taught me things, how to run things so I ended up becoming commander sooner than I would have because of him, in terms of what I learned from him.  With my general that came in at the time, I couldn't do any wrong.  I recall when President [Jimmy] Carter flew into Charleston there was an event downtown and he basically flew into the base, the general met him along with the mayor of Raleigh [North Carolina] who is the mayor today down there, came and then they were escorted they came into the base and so President Carter--my general said Mr. President this is my chief weather man.  President says what's the weather going to be?  Here I am telling him what is going to happen and low and behold the event--right over the event, cause in Charleston you get ice thunderstorms, and the mayor said to me, why did you have to be right?  It rained nowhere else but right over the event so they had to lift these umbrellas over the president to keep him dry.  I'm sure the president said, I wonder why I had to ask him that.  But the fact is that I was right and they had the umbrellas right there for him.  To this day, the mayor of Charleston who is now in his last term, he is in his eighties now, and I are very personal friends.  We know each other extremely well and he said, Sam we always talk about that story in terms of what happened during that era.  It was perfect, that gave me my start and I haven't looked back since.
Story_ID: 28626
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, North Carolina State [University, Raleigh, North Carolina] you got your master's degree, what was that 1970?  No, bachelor's degree in North Carolina State in meteorology--.
Speaker 2: It was a B.S. as I said, everything to complete the master's [degree] was done except for the thesis.
Speaker 1: But you didn't go after a master's degree from--.
Speaker 2: From Webster University [St. Louis, Missouri].
Speaker 1: Webster University that's through correspondence in the [U.S.] Air Force?
Speaker 2: No it was actually an extension program that was set up on the [U.S. Air Force] base [Charleston Air Force Base].  Before then I actually was asked to teach mathematics and physics at a local training technical college in Charleston [South Carolina].  I did that for a year and then I went into a master's program.  I was going to do it in mathematics at The Citadel [The Military College of South Carolina, Charleston, South Carolina] but then this program seemed to be much more convenient and I said I'm going to need management anyway as I go along the way so I started it and applied and got it so I finished it up in a year.
Story_ID: 28627
Speaker 1: Now that same year you got your master's [degree in management, Webster University's extension program at the U.S. Air Force Base in Charleston, South Carolina] it says here the Joint Doppler Operational Project [JDOP] was formed at the [National Oceanic and Atmospheric Association (NOAA)] National Severe Storm Laboratory [Norman, Oklahoma], right?
Speaker 2: Right.  I was still on active duty then, I wasn't even worried about that project until I actually completed my tour in '77 [1977].  So I joined the National Weather Service in August of 1977 and then at that timeframe I wasn't involved in radar just then what I was working on was the automated field operation services technology that the agency was acquiring.  At that timeframe we were transitioning away from just teletype systems and facsimile systems where paper was the way that we--we had so many tearing and filing of data and all these maps and stuff; none of that stuff was automated to the point you had to do a lot of hand analysis and stuff.  So that system allowed us to better serve the public through more automation so I worked on that program.  I did actually the training program for it and I left the program in 1978.  In 1978 I moved over at that timeframe to the headquarters of NOAA where I got involved in the--it was a international project that dealt with foreign nations like Saudi Arabia, Kuwait and also Iran and the goal was to help them upgrade their meteorological structures, equipment and so forth and I did that for about two years.  So the office that I was in basically is where we got started on the Doppler okay, radar; the work in Norman, Oklahoma at the National Severe Storms Laboratory.  What they did they kind of proved that from a operational experiment that through the use of Doppler technology it would be the way that we should go in the future when it comes to new radar systems.  So, myself and another individual, he of course had the lead at the time and I became the principal planner, the person who planned everything, I wasn't the director at the time.  And so he and I went and set up the office and I was principal planner which I was the number two, I was the deputy to the program.  All of the planning, the requirements, and priorities all was in my bailiwick to do; I essentially ran the organization.
Speaker 1: And the name of the organization is the--?
Speaker 2: The NEXRAD [Next Generation Weather Radar] Joint System Program.  I stood that up, I'm the one who planned it, stood it, made it happen and executed it, you know once it was stood up.  So the program manager at the time, he stayed two years and then he left and then they brought in another program manager from NASA [National Aeronautics and Space Administration] but again I was the principal planner in terms of design, and development of the system.  And in 1987, I then became the director at that timeframe.
Story_ID: 28628
Speaker 1: I want to go back and ask you about Richard Hellgren and another man named Colonel [William] Barney?
Speaker 2: Barney, William S. Barney, okay.  Dick Hellgren is my mentor.  Even as we speak today, we talk every week--he is long retired, he is eighty years old.  But he did, after my year in working on this new automation field operation services project he is the one that actually brought me over to NOAA [National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration] headquarters to work for Bill Barney.  And so Hellgren basically--when I met with him he basically said I want to know if there is something else I needed in order for me--but he said no you got what you need, he said we are going to work with you and became my mentor from that day forward and that was like in 1978.  And so we would meet regularly, he guided me on what I needed to do in order to advance in the system along with Bill Barney.  Bill Barney is now deceased; he passed away in 1999 or something like that, maybe in 2000.  He and his wife succumbed in a fire that started at his home.  So when I set up the office, Dick Hellgren wanted me to be the deputy.  I was at the [NOAA] headquarters then and he brought me back into the [National] Weather Service.
Story_ID: 28629
Speaker 1: So this is in '79 [1979]?
Speaker 2: '79 [1979] is when I really got transferred back, set up everything, made me deputy.
Speaker 1: Of the National Weather Service.
Speaker 2: No he made me deputy of the NEXRAD [Next Generation Weather Radar] Joint System Program.  This is a Doppler weather radar project.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So what we did during those first phases of the program we had to come up with the design to requirements, we had to validate the system so it would work.  So where the pay off came for what the system ultimately would be would be in the next phase.  That's when I was in as the director.  So the actual delivering of what the product is when you saw that picture on the wall in there, that system, that was my system that we actually deployed, it was the first one.
Speaker 1: Now this is the tower?
Speaker 2: What you see is the tower but there are three parts to the system that you didn't see.  The other parts is the computers, you know, that pulls the data from the tower, from the radar tower.
Speaker 1: The tower, just to be descriptive, looks like a water tower.
Speaker 2: Right, with a globe on top and the radar with antennas but also had a computer that drives the antenna, kicks out the signals, receives the return back from the clouds and all of that data is processed through a computer processing system.
Speaker 1: Now this may sound simple but can you explain how radar works?
Speaker 2: Okay in this case here how it works is when the radar transmits a signal; you have to have a transmitter that transmits that signal through an antenna.  That signal basically bounces off of water vapor molecules.  In other words there are molecules within the atmosphere there are also like dust particles, there are bees.  There are particles that are in the atmosphere that the signal bounces off on so that signal bounces the transmitter, and you have a transmitter that transmits the signal and then you have what you call a receiver that receives the return from the signal.  What that return gives you is information on how fast these bees are traveling, you know, that the signal has bounced off.  That helps you determine what the wind speed is of the air flow.  The signal doesn't see the air, you don't see the air you see these particles like dust like bees, like birds that are flying within it.  Once that returns, it then takes it and processes.  One is that it--from the water vapor molecules it processes what we call reflectivity data.  That looks at the amount of potential rainfall that possibly could take place from this cloud that you received a return on.  Then you have what you call the velocity information, that is the wind speed that is the direction of the particles they are traveling toward.  What that is, is the Doppler data and you need both the reflectivity and information on the velocity of that particle that really come together as part of the receiver.  Then the computer basically has a signal processor that processes the signals which mean we design the signal processor when you look at the design development of the radar.  Then you get basically three types of data from that signal process.  You actually get what you call what I described is reflectivity which looks at the amount of precip and from that precip data you measure the intensity of what's going on within that cloud.  The second thing you get is the velocity information.  That talks about the speed and direction of the particles that you are measuring.  And then the third piece gets into spectrum width that looks at the amount of what you call turbulence.  How these wind directions are shifting as a result of the signal process of having processed the data.  And then from those three sets of data it goes into this processing system and then it generates product.  It generates based upon algorithms that have been designed to receive those three types of data.  And then the last part of it covers the display system.  It's actually now--when you are looking at TV and you see what they are talking about this red area; this red area is what they call shear.  It's where the possibility now of tornadoes spawning from that part of the cloud, in terms of how it is measured.  But it is a very sophisticated system and all of that is part of design of the system to take those measurements that we are looking at.  That's kind of how we look at it and so when you think about a siren when you think about an emergency vehicle that's approaching you and then once it passes you what happens is that you have data going in this direction and you have data that's going in that direction and in between is where the shear takes place of where you would possibly see what you call the measure of cyclonic circulation that actually produces the funnel cloud when you are measuring tornado outbreaks.  But that's kind of how it works.  It's very complex, a very complex system.  A lot goes into the design of each component in order for you to get the kind of measurements that you need in order to warn the American people.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But that's what I did that was part of my work to design the thing, then we used the contractors to help us develop the software to execute the design.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 28630
Speaker 1: Were you able to develop any patent on anything?
Speaker 2: No because we worked for the government there was no patent but I got credit for the work that was done.  That comes in the form of well it comes basically in three ways.  You get what you call performance awards where you get money, the agency recognizes your contribution and those bonuses could range anywhere from $7,000 to maybe $25,000.  So I was rewarded for my work through bonuses.  And then you get what you call organizational awards or you may get departmental awards and these are non monetary awards.  These would come in the form of bronze medals, silver medals or even gold medals.  I did receive for the management of the project a bronze medal for organizational excellence award.  And then the other way you get it is through, which is really the cream of the crop in recognition is through the presidential rank award.  That is the highest award as a civil service, senior executive can receive.  The senior executive service corp. is made up of about 7,000 executives in government and that includes--some are what you call presidential appointees and you have career service executives.  So that's only 7,000 so each year only about 3 percent of that number actually gets recognized as a presidential--those awards ultimately get approved by the president once you get nominated.  So I received the presidential rank award in 2010.  It's a combination of other things in your career, but I was the first African American in this agency [National Weather Service] that ever received a presidential ranking award, no other African American ever received one than me.
Speaker 1: Okay.  You were saying the agency woefully short of African American, right?
Speaker 2: We are very short.  In fact, I was the first executive in '88 [1988] and I have been essentially the senior African American since that timeframe.  We have others to come but they don't stay long.  They kind of go by way of attrition or it just don't work out.
Story_ID: 28631
Speaker 1: Now you retired from the [U.S.] Air Force was it in '70 [1970]?
Speaker 2: I retired in -I served on active duty for six years from '71 [1971] to '77 [1977] and then I joined the D.C. [District of Columbia] Air National Guard so I have a total of thirty years, twenty-four years in D.C. Air National Guard and six years on active duty.  And so when I retired, I retired with the rank of colonel, full colonel in 2001, September 1, 2001.  Just ten days prior to 9/11 I retired, which was my mandatory retirement.  And then once I--that was age fifty-two and then once I hit age sixty I became eligible for my regular retirement which is my benefits which I draw pension for.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 28632
Speaker 1: Now this is exciting--Doppler radar--I remember when they started announcing on television--.
Speaker 2: Yes.  There are getting data from my radar.  Some of the TV stations actually own radars like here locally channel 7 has a couple of radars that they own.  But the official information when it comes to warnings that are issued regarding impending hazards actually come from my radar, you know, that I did.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And so you share the information electronically--(simultaneous) (unclear)?
Speaker 2: Well the information goes out.  Once warnings are issued it goes out to the emergency management system, TV station picks it up and then they will come on line, you will see a red alert that shows the National Weather Service has issued a severe thunderstorm warning for these areas of this county.  That means now--you might also see National Weather Service has issued a tornado warning for this county.  That means the radar has actually picked up a meso-cyclonic circulation.  That means that what the radar is looking at could very well be a tornado in its pre-stage before it actually spuns to the ground or it's spunning to the ground because at that point and time the warning goes out.
Speaker 1: Yes and now-(simultaneous) (unclear).
Speaker 2: It goes out NOAA [National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration] Weather Radio and so forth.  What this radar system has done to our warning capability.  It is the backbone, without it even though we have satellites that are looking downward; this is looking outward and upward.  Without it, when it comes to saving lives, we wouldn't be saving the number of lives that we are saving.  Look at the example of what had just transpired in Oklahoma and Moore, Oklahoma.  My radar system picked it up, picked up the signals, the measurements all that was picked up from the radar.  The good thing is that as part of the work that I did in design development of the NEXRAD [Next Generation Weather Radar] radar, the 88D, we also from that did a derivative radar which is called the Terminal Doppler [Weather] Radar [TWDR].  This radar system is used exclusively by the FAA [Federal Aviation Administration] air traffic control system and what they are concerned about, and you recall over the last twenty-five years there has been a lot of talk about turbulence and wind shear.  Wind shear, down burst, micro burst are causing airplanes to crash while they are coming in on approach or during takeoff.
Speaker 1: I think there was a crash at Chicago's O'Hare Airport [Chicago, Illinois] in '79 [1979] or 80 [1980] caused by a wind shear.  What is a wind shear?
Speaker 2: A wind shear is a rapid change in wind direction and speed.  So generally the airplane performs when you have a head wind, when you have a rapid change in one direction and speed by order of six knots per thousand feet with the atmosphere and if you get a tail wind that could cause you to--instead of trying to keep the plane stabilized it could push you down which really causes a crash.  If it become too extreme which means that you may be getting like 12 knots per thousand feet which means it's very extreme now in terms of--like the case when the Delta airline went down in Dallas/Fort Worth [Texas] they were in and out near a thunderstorm, very severe thunderstorm.  And they experienced that rapid change in wind direction and speed so it forced the plane to come down.   They were in it and they couldn't come out of it, they didn't have enough draft so that they could pull the plane back up.  The wind was so strong it drove the plane down to the ground even though you had max speed it still drove it down.
Speaker 1: Let me see if I can understand this correctly.  I'm thinking that if the wind behind the plane is too strong that will drive it down.  Because you won't have enough resistance to--(simultaneous) (unclear).
Speaker 2: It drives it down.  You won't enough resistance to lift it.  So that's where it becomes impossible now to stabilize the airplane.  So this radar in Moore was one of the ones delivered off my program because that radar was used because of the scan rate.  What the antenna has done is its scanning--you get so many scans within so many seconds, okay or minutes and you get a faster update rate.  That means you can see what's going on now within the storm.  So that radar actually performed very well as well out there.  So we have the benefit of leveraging all of our radar capabilities that we have available that is detected.  I am also working now toward what the next generation radar might look like and that deals with phase array technology which is newer and you get more update than what my radar actually provides in terms of elevation scans.
Story_ID: 28633
Speaker 1: How does that [phase array] radar work?
Speaker 2: It works somewhat similar except the scanning is continuous whereas the one I developed and designed you get so many tilts.  You get nine elevations in six minutes which means the radar tilts.  And so you are collecting that data from that scan it tilts again, you collect that data from that scan you get nine elevations in six minutes.  Whereas in the phased array radar its contiguous which means that you're scanning all the time.  Instead of looking at nine tilts you are looking at contiguous scan.
Speaker 1: It's like the difference between a movie and looking at a strobe or something.
Speaker 2: Right, continuously.  And so now you are getting faster updates on the data and the data is processed faster so you're going to know what's going on.  So instead of like in mine, you know that you can see when the measure of cyclones has start its early development, but you may not see how it's growing because you are going through these different tilts.  By the time you get to this tilt it may have already would have gotten there.  In the case of phase array you see it growing throughout its maturity.  As the system matures and becomes a full blown tornado as we define it to be.  That's technology that the military has used and is using, same as with the Doppler radar that I did--lead; it was military technology but it wasn't experimented in a weather environment.  We didn't demonstrate that it could be used successfully in detecting weather.  And the same as with phase array if phase array is used on what we call spy wand programs on Navy ships, when these incoming missiles are coming in to hit the ships well the radar picks it up then they can release another missile that can knock that incoming missile out of the sky.  But in the case of phase array we are looking at a capability that sees a airplane because an airplane would be like a missile growing through the sky and then also you would be able to see what's changing in the weather at the same time.  So you would be able to get a three dimensional look at what's going on within the air space, you know, all the time for both weather and airplanes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 28634
Speaker 1: I want to ask you about a few cases sort of-I know a tornado was your inspiration back when you were little.  I heard on the news yesterday, while of course I don't know how accurate this is that the people in Oklahoma only had about sixteen minutes to prepare.
Speaker 2: Let's look at it this way, before my radar came into play there was zero lead time.  When we knew about a tornado having spun and touched the ground it's because somebody has seen it like the police.  They would call in and say a tornado is on the ground at this coordinate then your warning will go out, well it's too late then because it already happening.  With my radar, depending on the size and magnitude of the storm, in some cases we may be able to get forty-five minutes of lead time.  Now what this sixteen minute lead time could mean also is from the time the warning is issued to when that warning gets to where it needs to go to it maybe at that point when they receive it they start counting it then.  When the TV station--but that doesn't mean that's when it was observed and the warning was actually issued.  But the goal is that what we are trying to is that once a warning is issued it goes out immediately but sixteen minutes is a lot of time depending upon where you are and the situation that you are in considering there was no lead time before with the old radar system.  Now the other thing that's happening like in the case that happened in Moore, Oklahoma, it's not so much that they didn't get the warning; they got the warning of what is happening, it's the infrastructure.  The building codes needs to be redesigned so that they can handle a stronger wind limitation.  Those buildings were not strong enough to sustain a 200 mile per hour wind and then, of course, the last thing I will say is that we need to start looking at some sort of a shelter that we build within these infrastructure that the students or whoever it might be could go underneath the ground and not just be above ground and then when you have a 200 mile wind it comes in and levels everything in sight and that's what happened so people died as a result of that.
Story_ID: 28635
Speaker 1: I remember a tornado hitting Xenia [Ohio] in '74 [1974] that's one of the (unclear) of that time and blew away significant portions of Central State University [Wilberforce, Ohio].  In a case like that I don't think we--it was calm--I was twenty miles away and everything was beautiful.
Speaker 2: Keep in mind that when a funnel cloud spawns you have micro scale of circulation and funnels that come out and so the area that it impacts is much smaller but the force of the wind that's associated with it is mighty but as the storm moves along it's a smaller narrower area that's impacted.  In other words in still of a half of mile wide you may only be talking about an eighth of a mile wide so only what's in their path is going to be destroyed depends on the speed of it.  In the case of what happened in Moore [Oklahoma] the storm--the funnel was on the order or magnitude of a half a mile wide.  So you think about that wide spread coming at you so everything that's in its path is going to clean it up.  Now in the case of Xenia, and I remember that too, there was really no warning that it's going to happen.  I was in the air force then, we were concerned about our military bases there.  Wright-Patterson Air Base was one of the ones we were concerned about back in that timeframe.  But once again they got a warning out the military did because once they saw it observed on this radar but it wasn't like they gave the base a lot of lead time in terms of preparing for it.  The citizens got very little lead time.  Unfortunately people died, property was damaged or destroyed and it became very mighty.  So now what we are going to have to look at now is three things as we go forward.  When it comes to the technology and when technology is able to help us to detect I think that one, we have made a lot of great strides, a lot of progress compared to where we once were.  I think we stand to make even greater progress in the era of phase array radar.  I think phase array radar which I am engaged in now is going to give us or position us to gain more lead time.  So instead of sixteen minutes you heard what the media said, you may be talking about twenty-five minutes, okay so more lead time the more it helps.  If the area that's being impacted and you know it's coming and if the people are able to go somewhere to a bunker or a shelter to get away from the direct path of where the storm is actually affecting them then yeah their lives can be spared, perhaps.  But it's hard to run away because you don't know exactly what this thing might do as it goes along the way.  You might run yourself right into the path of the thing where you think you are getting away from.  But getting into a bunker, getting into a shelter where you are protecting yourself from harm's way perhaps might be the best solution.  In 1999, for example, when we had the break out in Oklahoma then some of the homes they had built what they called these concrete reinforced rooms, they did not have basements because of the water table.  Concrete reinforced rooms those folks survived because everything around that concrete reinforced room was destroyed except for that; so the people who were in that, you know, survived.  So either you are going to have something like that where you can survive because of the concrete reinforced room or you are going to have some sort of a underground shelter like in a lower basement where you can be protected.  But not just in a open basement, you know, it might be getting into a corner because if you had a storm to move and impact that home it may destroy the home but if it is a wooden floor it could lift the floor up and if you are in it and sitting out in the middle of it, it could suck you right up in there as well.  But if you are in the corner tucked away and particularly if you are in a garage situation where you have a car garage and you know the car garage is here because those were built with dirt and then you put a concrete slab on it when you drive in maybe if you are in that corner tucked away and if it does lift up that floor possibly you could be fine; you could survive it, that is one example.  Other ones would be people need to build shelters outdoors underneath the ground.  They can go in just like they used to do when we were growing up and you were watching TV and they said storm is coming over you, you go get into the cellar, you know, open up the cellar and go get into the cellar and you protect yourself.  We are going to have to think about infrastructures and how can we best protect people.  Because people could be anywhere driving along so what do you do so I think that needs to be worked on.
Story_ID: 28636
Speaker 1: The second thing I think that we are going to have to work on is once the warning goes out that those who are going to receive this warning they need to better understand what it is that they are receiving because everybody don't see it the same way in terms of what you are getting.  Some people may be illiterate and it has to be simply enough that they know that once they get this they need to take some action in order to prepare to get themselves out of harm's way.  So I think that is the second point.  The first point is technology, we want to continue to build on technology and two is that when the message goes out that everybody understands it and then as I said three which I used as a second first, is that we are going to have to look at infrastructure.  Sitting on this floor here, the fifteenth floor is not the place to be if I know I've got a EF4 [scale] storm that's going to be approaching because obviously it's going to wipe us right out; destroy the building and the building ends up in Timbuktu somewhere.  But getting down lower where there is something to protect you is where we want to try to take that.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Story_ID: 28637
Speaker 1: Except for a few cases it seems that United States is lucky in terms of not being site of huge earthquakes, typhoons or hurricanes or that sort of thing.
Speaker 2: We had a earthquake here the year before last.  I had a meeting in my office and all of a sudden I'm sitting there and the building does this here.  Wait a minute what's going on here, we are on the fifteen floor.  And then it happened again I said, that's it hang up and told the people let's get down these stairs as quick as we can get down there.  Because you don't want to be up here when a earthquake is taking place and you don't want to be close to the building when all the siding starts to collapse from the building then you are going to get injured or killed that way.  So it's a lot more education that we got to do to inform the users, the customers, the public, the people about what do they do--what steps or action do you take; now as a result of this important work.  So I think that what we did is that, one is that we started with a capability that can at least now give you lead time in a positive versus lead time in a negative.  Where I think this radar--what I did would come up short is if you have a small scale storm like what went through Raleigh, North Carolina a couple of years ago, that was a small scale storm generally it picks them up but you may not get as much lead time because of the micro scale.  The software from our radar that's out there now was designed for more meso scale, larger scale storms like what took place in Oklahoma.
Speaker 1: Just briefly, why is it that the United States is the--I think they say that ninety five percent of tornadoes in the world take place in the United States?
Speaker 2: Well it's mainly because of the orographic effects of the United States.  We have more different types of weather than anybody does across the globe.  The way that our United States from the terrain standpoint is made, first of all you have the continental divide where you have the mountainous region so what has to happen, when the storms come in to the Pacific they be all wound up coming in and the Pacific gets impacted but then as the systems move across they get slowed down because of the orographic effects of the mountains they slow them down so then once they get beyond the mountains then they are going to speed up again.  So, in other words, it's like--the way air is, it's like a fluid, okay and if you would pour a bucket of water into some rocks it's going to slow it down in terms of where it's trying to get. Then it will regroup.  Once it regroups on the other--wherever the end of that is then it will come out on the other end in a way where it needs to regroup.  So what you have is the wind, when it hits those mountains you get these what you call micro circulation that keep doing this here but they slow down.  Then once it crosses over and it's like you get this down rush on the other side of the mountain then that combines itself now with the warm air that's coming off the Gulf [of Mexico] and collides with the colder air now you are in what you call a mix it layer.  This is where the severe storms actually--we're in that season because of where the jet stream is located it's mixing.  So you get this down rush of cold air colliding with this warm air and it mixes and it creates very severe strong storms.  That belt covers a fairly large area from Oklahoma, Texas, Kansas, Minnesota coming back down to Missouri and then it goes into the Ohio valley 'cause down South you still pick up Alabama and Mississippi.  They are still part--and Tennessee--a part of this mixing belt and then once it-then as the system comes across you are going to run into another set of mountains called the Appalachian Mountains.  That slows it down also and sometimes it can break them down too where it--then it needs time now, once it crosses over the mountain, to rejuvenate and so that's why when systems that are impacted in this area here they generally are south.  Yeah we have gotten some tornadoes that spawn for example here in the area, maybe in D.C. [Washington, District of Columbia] but they are more in the form of a down burst type of a situation that you have or what they call a straight line wind effect.  Whereas if it's in southern Maryland where they have had more time now to reintensify you might get storms like we have gotten storms--tornadoes to touch in La Plata [Maryland], for example.  But it is not to say you can't get one here, you have gotten them but it is not as intense as what you might get in La Plata.  So the reason being is because of how the orographic effect of the United States is and that's what's contributing to the different types of weather patterns that we get along with the positioning of the jet stream and where it is at the time.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 28638
Speaker 1: So how long have you been in the position that you are in today as a coordinator [Federal Coordinator for Meteorological Services and Supporting Research in the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA)]?
Speaker 2: I have been in this position as federal coordinator for fifteen years.  In my capacity, my focus is what can I do to help facilitate or improvements in services or in abilities.  We did the radar; the radar now we know is the backbone.  So now, what can we do now to take advantage of the data that may be coming from it that's going to allow us to provide a better forecast.  So we want to look at how can we improve our models, what goes into the models, how the data is assimilated in the models, ingested into the models and so we can get better predictions on what's going to happen.  I have many things that I have been able to make better since I've been here and I can give you some examples of those things and what they are.  Following the aftermath of 9/11 when we had the Trade Tower Centers to be essentially destroyed--we had a terrorist attack.  One of the things that we needed to look at was where do we stand when it comes to atmospheric transport dispersion models, what capabilities exist.  So what I did, I did a complete review of all of the dispersion models that existed in government or being used in government, there was like over 140-something models.  How in the world can you take that many models and try and make any sense out of using them if you have another terrorist attack like we had in 9/11?  What we did, we did narrow this modeling capability down to essentially five modeling systems that can be and should be used in the event if you have a national incident.  If we have another 9/11 situation we have a modeling system now within the [U.S.] Department of Energy [DOE] that we will use, okay.  And the end results from that is--what you are trying to do is understand what's going to happen to the plume, like when you saw the trade towers were imploded upon these gigantic plumes elevated up and got into the downwind effect.  Eventually whatever is in that plume is going to fall to the ground at some point.  And so what you are trying to do is understand what capability that you have available that can track that--monitor that and give you the prediction on where it is going to come down.  So that system can be used for different types of scenarios.  In the event if you had a train that derails in a urban environment that is approaching a major city and is carrying some chemicals or some toxins and it explodes you may--since that's isolated to a regional incident then we have a modeling system now that we run for that situation--If it's a case where you have--in a case of deep water where you had the oil spill in the Gulf [of Mexico] or in the case where you had the Exxon Valdez to break and you had a leak of the oil in Alaska in the gulf [Gulf of Alaska] then there is a modeling system you run for that called CAMEO [Computer-Aided Management of Emergency Operations] ALOHA [Areal Locations of Hazardous Atmospheres].  So we have narrowed down the five or in the case if when you have a radiological situation like what happened in Japan as a result of the tsunami that impacted those nuclear power plants.  Then there is a modeling system you run for that incident.  So what I have been able to do is to bring together this core capability for the nation that can be used by first responders or by decision makers, in this case of a terrorist attack, by the president, the information (unclear) of where the country is going to be impacted, that's one thing.  But there is a lot into that, we generate a report for that which, you know, I'm the author essentially of the report.  What I do in cases like that I give the direction--I drive where we are trying to get the end results, okay, as federal coordinator.
Story_ID: 28639
Speaker 1: The next thing I did in this job [Federal Coordinator for Meteorological Services and Supporting Research in the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA)], I think is very important here is you think about the number of people who are dying on the highways and byways we have about 7,000 people dying on the highways every year.  We have about a half million people that are being injured on the highway that are caused by weather.  You may have a pile-up caused by fog, or you may have a hundred car pile-ups because of smoke, or for haze or what have you.  You may have a pile-up because of frozen or liquid precipitation or even snow or what have you.  So what we've done here is we have what you call a national review of what our needs and priority are on where we should be focusing our attention on research and how--what do we do about the black ice problems on bridges.  What can we do now to better mitigate that issue so that when you're traveling on these bridges you don't start slipping and sliding and then create a accident that kills yourself or you run into somebody else and it kills them.  What can we do to mitigate the fog problems that we are experiencing that are causing these car pile-ups.  So what I have done is with this national needs assessment is that, we started a whole train of events of things that people can do.  One of the first things you hear when you turn the TV on in the morning time is that you get a weather report and you get a traffic report so what we are doing with that is we are sensitizing people that you are traveling to work and you want to know how the weather is going to impact your travel.  That's what I started, I started all that.  It got started on all the TV networks; the weather channel works hand in hand with me.  That's saving lives if you are more sensitized on what is going on.  Another important thing is if you are traveling on vacation we started a national number called 511, you know what 911 is when it comes to emergencies, you dial 511, have you ever dialed it before, you are going to get two things.  One is that you are going to get information about road construction or road maintenance so that you have a sense now of where traffic is going to be slow on that artery.  Second thing you are going to get is weather.  So if you want to know how the weather is impacting your travel on interstate 81 or 66 or 40 or any of the main arteries that you are going to be traveling throughout and in the country then that's what we are giving you now.  That's something that I started.  The goal is to save lives and it was never done before, this is the first time that this has ever been done when I started this.
Story_ID: 28640
Speaker 1: The next thing that I can kind of point out that I got done [as Federal Coordinator for Meteorological Services and Supporting Research in the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA)].  As a result of Hurricane Katrina [2005] what you had was a major storm that impacted the gulf [Gulf of Mexico] region.  The hurricane itself didn't cause problems initially for New Orleans [Louisiana]. What happened as the storm moved inland the backside of that storm when you start getting the wind coming on the levees, it caused the levees to collapse and then that's when the water was able to move in the low lying areas that caused and created the flooding problem, okay.  But it wasn't initially caused by the storm surge when the storm actually hit land fall.  Where it did cause many problems was in the Gulfport [Mississippi] area.  That area is where you got the brunt of the storm to hit, it's called the eye wall, you know, once that storm penetrated.  So what we are concerned are about five things regarding hurricanes.  I have a massive research program that's on the way now where we are going to improve our ability to be able to better detect the intensity of these hurricanes as they are approaching or nearing landfall.  Because what does that mean to you?  If you have a category three hurricane that you say is coming in that is going to determine whether you are going to evacuate or you are going to stay put. If the storm as it hits land fall now intensifies to a five and you are still sitting there having not evacuated then you are going to have a lot people losing their lives, possibly as a result.  So what we want to basically do is provide the best prediction on the intensification of these storms.  We also now have improved clearly where the storm track, where these storms now are penetrating on land fall.  Like for example, Hurricane Sandy that had moved in, our prediction that we made brought it right into the area where we expected it to take place.  The difference is that this tropical storm collided with a winter storm so now you have what you call a north/eastern storm where the two collided together which made it a much larger storm than we deal with which caused the storm search problem.  The third thing that we are focusing on now is storm surge.  We are looking at storm surge models.  It is important for the communities to better understand what the impact these storm surges can really have.  It can really disrupt all coastlines, you know, when it comes to tourist areas like the [New] Jersey shore, there is no shore, you know, it kind of wiped it all out.  So they have to rebuild all that just like they have in Galveston [Texas].  Galveston they have like a seventeen-foot levee that they built so when the storms move in to Galveston it is sort of like a stair step.  When the water hits, it go up a little bit and hits again and what it does is it slows down the surge.  So the surge now doesn't come in like a wild animal and hit an area and start tearing it apart.  Those are things that we are doing to improve our prediction, our services to the American people.  These are things that I started; these are things that I made happen that comes under my domain in terms of my work to do.  Also we have experiments that we are doing in the Atlantic as well as the Pacific on looking at these storms when they first develop what we call the cycle genesis of these storms as they are developing.  So looking for opportunities to better improve our prediction of where and when these storms are going to form and where these storms are going to go, okay.  That's another important thing.
Story_ID: 28641
Speaker 1: The next thing that I want to just highlight to you is what we have done [as Federal Coordinator for Meteorological Services and Supporting Research in the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA)] is--think about all these wildfires that we are experiencing out West from drought or from people actually setting them afire or some of them that may have been supposedly controlled but got out of hand.  One of the things that the western part of the country needs to get a better handle--of because you got all these different groups all of them want to be in charge and decide what should be done but nobody can come together and make it happen.  So the Western Governors' Association came to NOAA and asked NOAA specifically could I do a review of what our weather and climate needs are, do a national needs assessment.  It took me eighteen months to do the study, got it done and the recommendations that came out of that now has lead to a greater coordination and improvement in how information flows, how information is used when it comes to dealing with those wildfires, never been done before this is the first time this has ever been accomplished.
Story_ID: 28642
Speaker 1: Another important thing that I am dealing with [as Federal Coordinator for Meteorological Services and Supporting Research in the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA)] is we have as part of the solar system and what actually how the sun can really cause major problems when it comes to navigation systems, when it comes to power outages, when it comes to impacting delivered satellite systems like that (unclear) everything now is driven toward satellites, we got satellites up there for everything now, banking systems.  But the sun basically can release radioactive pulses that are so powerful that they--as they approach Earth it could create some major problems within our satellite system particularly if you don't have redundancy.  For example, you are driving along in your car and your navigation system went out.  You first go, what is wrong with this system, what happened here?  It doesn't mean that there is a malfunction with your system or that it means you got a bad part, it could very well be that the satellite now has been interrupted because of space weather.  So I have partnerships with eight different federal agencies with NOAA, the [U.S.] Air Force, NASA [National Aeronautics and Space Administration], National Science Foundation [NSF], where we brought all these different agencies, USGS [U.S. Geological Survey] who play a very important in either observing the sun and looking at the potential impacts here to come up with a better plan, strategy now for better predicting when these outburst are going to take place on the sun and how it can impact.  This is very important.  I'm going to be hosting a conference on June 4th, we just got confirmation.  One is that Congressman Palazzo from Mississippi is going to part of my opening key note.  I just got word yesterday that NASA administrator [Charles] Bolden [also a HistoryMaker] is going to come over and speak and then my boss the undersecretary here at NOAA is going to be speaking.  So the idea of this is when it comes to continuing to emphasize public outreach and these forums now I'm able to command anywhere from 250 to 300 different stake holders that are actually showing up at these things.  So when Sam Williamson does things like this relevant to the community, people respond now.  It's not like I have to beg people to do--when Sam Williamson's name is out there that he's doing this, people react to it.  So the goal here is to continue to save lives, mitigate property losses and damages and so on.
Story_ID: 28643
Speaker 1: Matter of fact what does the future look like? Are you getting close to retirement [from Williamson's position as Federal Coordinator for Meteorological Services and Supporting Research in the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA)]?
Speaker 2: Well I've been at the age where I can retire but there are things where I am involved in that my leadership was needed in order to move forward.  Public service is what it's about with me now; I'm doing things to help people.  In terms of my goals in life and what I was commissioned to do and one was to I think, was to help find a way that we can get more time and enhance our warning system when it comes to people, you know, being affected by these hazardous storms and I've seen that so now it's a matter of building up on them.  I think about when I was a child coming up and going through school preparing myself for what this future is going to be and to see the results--to get results where I can help people--where I am helping people particularly in the radar.  But all the things that I have touched have helped people.  I was essentially asked to help our state when this administration first came in to play.  I had a lot of close ties with President [Bill] Clinton and his team of Rodney Slater, who was transportation secretary [U.S. Secretary of Transportation], I know them well.  And Clinton's point was tell Sam to hang in there, I need him to stay here for awhile.  I'm looking around and saying when is it my time to go?  I stayed but I'm at a point now where we put a number of things in place now that were not there before that hopefully others can pick up the ball and run with it.  It was not to say that I was supposed to solve everything but I knew I had a mission to do some things.  And what I was able to do was more so and bigger than what many people were able to do in the field.  Not that I thought I was going to be there to get through all of this stuff because like I say--it was between me and the man up above when I was there and I have been on this journey.  I've been the first African American to hit the executive level.  No one has been able to bring home a contribution as I have been able to deliver and all the things that I have touched.  So I'm kind of at that point now, we will see what happens this year before the year end, the wife has always retired now and she is looking for me to spend some time with her like we did before we got married.  The fun of walking across the parks, holding hands all those things that we enjoyed, of course, we have had a great run of it in marriage.  Since we have been together we have raised two lovely kids, not an ounce of issue with neither one of them so we can't complain from that aspect of things.  So we will just see how things pan out, I have started phase array radar, I know I won't be here long enough to see it come into fruition as I did with the NEXRAD [Next Generation Weather Radar] radar when I started it and to get that there.  So we will see.  I have-I've been very successful doing White House studies--the Congress now has used--Congress has specifically written legislation earmarking my office to do certain things for them.  We generate reports, we get very positive feedback from them.  I have helped with the last three years to bring in almost a half billion dollars in resources for the agencies to support the satellite systems that we are trying to get in place, particularly in monitoring the sun and potential impact that can be created as a result of these outbursts that take place off of the sun.  So that is some very important work.
Story_ID: 28644
Speaker 1: My work has been acknowledged, you know, we have been involved in different task forces that I have been part of and gotten results on those.  The reports that need to go public back to the Congress and the White House as I already have released those reports.  So to see some of the things you're working on actually somebody do something with them is extremely important.  A lot of times people do things and you don't know what the outcome is going to be, it gets put on a shelf.  Nothing that I have done in this career has been just put on a shelf where nobody listens, nobody looks at it.  I set up the only--I set up the Earth Systems Scientist program at Clark Atlanta University [Atlanta, Georgia].  When Ron Brown [former United States Secretary of Commerce] was here the one thing he wanted to do was to set up an infrastructure that's going to reach out and bring in more minorities in atmospheric science so he wanted to do it at a historical black college.  Well, I was over at National Science Foundation [NSF] at the time and so he said hey let's get Sam to see if he can help us put this together.  So I did that for him, he announced that and, in fact, it was really the only thing different that he was able to do during his short timeframe as Secretary of Commerce.  I knew him well; my barber was his barber, so occasionally I would show up at times when he did.  I knew his son, his daughter-in-law and information I wanted to get to him, we could do that through them instead of me trying to get on his calendar, you know, as the Secretary of Commerce then I have to let everybody and the layers know that I am going to have a meeting so that's not something you do or how it works that way.  He was pleased and in terms of what we got done there.  We still have an issue in the system when it comes to getting more minorities there.  My hope was that in this administration that we would began to see more of that.  I think we saw a lot when I was coming up in the system there was opportunities there, I think, in each of the administrations.  Believe it or not in [President Ronald] Reagan's administration is where I saw myself coming up because I think what they were looking for back at the time was that they wanted to get minorities who were capable people they did not want minorities up just to say they put somebody on the job.  Because I moved up very fast, you know.  I moved up into the executive ranks very fast and have been there longer than anybody in the agency now.  Twenty-five years in the senior executive service--there is not anybody else in NOAA that you can have them raise their hand and say they have been in the senior executive service as long as I have or been there longer, twenty-five years; not only as an African American but anybody period.  I think when Dick [Richard] Hellgren first brought me in as a mentor he probably himself didn't think that I would be there long.  So even now I'm the person he always calls, he likes to know what is going on.  So we are going to have to work on that.  The minorities, you know,--I have brought a lot of folks along, I had five minorities that I brought along myself and got promoted up.  Two of them are already, you know, out as a result of this year.  We got two that are engineers that I brought along that are still here right across the street, a black male and a female.  And I had a Hispanic; I have helped females as well.  Females were not at the forefront, I was at the forefront, you know, when a change came.  Now females have benefitted a lot more on affirmative action that I would think other minorities have.  But the goal would be if we can get those who benefitted to look back and say hey look wait a minute there are other folks here we need to help here and bring along.  That hasn't been the case, you know, where they have been willing to do that.  So it's going to be challenging to see how that issue gets fixed.  I can't fix it now; I mean I have done a lot to help people bringing them along.  Only if I was going to be here another twenty more years maybe yes.  But I do think you come to a point where you deserve to have some time where you can say this was what I was able to get done be and then be thankful for that in some other form other than to keep pushing and pushing to try to make things happen.
Speaker 2: Okay.  That was quite a legacy.
Speaker 1: Is there any major thing you would do differently if you could go back and change it?
Speaker 2: In terms of what we did to get the radar, no.  Because that was just part of the commission, you know, that I was to do.  I can't change something that I was destined to do.  I think I would try to do more of--but there is only so much you can do at the time for one mind and one body to get done.  To look at the issue that we are dealing with right now is how do we integrate the social science research results into our messages that we are providing to the public on what this means to them.  And then--what more can we do in order to better protect--we are doing a lot, I started a whole lot of those things but there is a lot more to do there in terms of trying to work on it.  So I think in terms of--but you also have to be in a position to do something about it.  Because when I went--when I finished up the radar I went on a sabbatical to the National Science Foundation [NSF], I was there for two years but I went there to also help NSF on some issues that they were doing with but also do some other things that NOAA [National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration] wanted.  They were concerned about the workforce and so forth which means that I am away from the agency.  Then I went on Capitol Hill that was an experience where I get familiar with the inner workings of congress and how congress really works on behalf of the American people.  So again, I was focused there and then I came back into NOAA and I ran the office of systems development.  When it comes to new technology so here again that piece now linking that to the radar of how you better provide a message to the public.  I have not been able to do that.
Story_ID: 28645
Speaker 1: Then I went to Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] for a year.  Harvard was a very important experience because this is where the importance of having a dual career comes into play.  I didn't go to Harvard in the job as being a civil servant; I went to Harvard as a military officer.  The [U.S.] Air Force was going to move me up to the rank of general officer.
Speaker 2: This is the Kennedy School of Government.  This was in--(simultaneous) (unclear).
Speaker 1: This was in '96 [1966], '97 [1967] school year.  So it was a great opportunity, lot of exposure.  It helped me more on the civilian capacity because I got to know so many people.  The military, you know, I got promoted there where I was colonel but my mandatory separation was going to come in 2001 so essentially I had ran out of time in terms of trying to get to the next rank which was as general officer.  I was in line to get it but the person who was in the position had to move out.  So in the end when your time is up it's up.  Where I ended, I am happy with, what I was able to do with it, I am happy with it; in terms of the rank and what I was able to do.
Speaker 2: You retired as a, just for the record, you retired as a?
Speaker 1: I retired as a full colonel and like I said my benefits started when I hit age sixty.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: I have access to everything that a regular military officer or a military individual would have once they retire from twenty years of service. I had all those benefits.  My wife and I like right now when it comes to medical insurance, benefits, when it comes to prescription drugs that we need. We have a primary care and we put that through and we said let's put TRICARE through so I ended up paying nothing.  I don't pay anything, and I think the time that I spent on the weekends away from my family but I think it was worth it in the end, like my dad [Julius Williamson, Jr.] said you always have more than one iron in the fire.  Because he looked at himself and says hey this could happen to you, he probably couldn't believe it himself that somebody is going to say a person who had good standing drove a school bus and was going to pick up his bus and for a person to tell you that you can't have your bus.  Not because he was doing a bad job but because that's the way it was then, in terms of your rights and having your rights to do things.
Story_ID: 28646
Speaker 1: I do have concerns about the minorities and where minorities are going to come into play in having mentors.  I was blessed with having great mentors, [Richard] Hallgran, [Colonel] Bill Barney and those guys who respected me for who I was and what my ability was to do.  They were in the right places, they were part of the power and had control and I didn't and I knew if I was going to be able to survive in this system I was going to have to come in somewhere.  I think that they too didn't probably think that I would be able to get as much as I've done.  Particularly being an African American, I won't tell you that all was well then and I'm certainly not going to tell you that all is well now.  I think we are going to always have issues as long as people are people.  You can't--it's hard to deal with someone's emotions.  When people feel threatened, not that you are doing anything to people but if they feel threatened that their livelihood could be impacted because here is somebody over here and they are not able to do it and "I can lose my job because this person is doing this so well."  It does not mean that you have any interest in doing their job it's just by doing what it is that you are asked to do.  So a lot of that is happening, it's still happening in the system.
Speaker 2: So we are not in the post racial yet?
Speaker 1: I think we went through a time when folks were willing to help and it doesn't mean it's just a Democrat that's in power, you know.  I think as I said during the Republican time when they were in power I still came along.  Whether I'm dealing with a Democrat or Republican it's just who the people are.  And I had a great mentor again who worked for President [George H.W.] Bush, Bush One and he thought the world of me and really supported me in every fashion.  But I was a lone duck in terms--(simultaneous) (unclear).
Speaker 2: Was that [Richard] Hallgren?
Speaker 1: No, this is a fellow by the name of Greg Castle [ph.], he's deceased now.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Greg Castle and what position did he have?
Speaker 1: He was deputy undersecretary at NOAA [National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration] and he thought I could do no wrong.  This man put me in front of the secretary of commerce and the deputy secretary of commerce and how he would do it he would say if it's a information meeting, I don't need to have a cast of thousand folks following me to a meeting I want the guy who got the information that we are going to impart the information to.  I remember one time he called me up and he said hey Sam I need you to come down and meet me downtown because I want to go in and give the deputy secretary an update about what's going with NEXRAD [Next Generation Weather Radar].  I get downtown and we go in there and Secretary of Commerce (unclear) and he said, you know, he was the Westinghouse general manager who knew about radars and all that stuff.  He asked me to give him an update, and I gave it to him and when they finished up the meeting, I was the only person who looked like me sitting there in the meeting.  So when we finished up the meeting the deputy secretary pulled me back and he said hey look, you know, like giving me the hand shake and he said, you know what you are doing, you know what you are talking about and keep up the good work.  That was a good feeling that you got that kind of encouragement and to be able to get there.  But this is what this guy would do, and he wasn't bashful in putting me out in front when it comes to getting and connecting with the right people.  So I have had the pleasure of working with congressmen, senators just like these forums I'm doing, I had Congressman Fattah out of the Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] area to come to my hurricane conference and open that up for me, you know.  I have been invited down to the hill back in March this year.  And then I got Palazzo of Mississippi to the opening for me on June 4th (unclear).  It's a thing now where I have been in it long enough and your name, like my dad [Julius Williamson, Jr.] said your name is important and Sam Williamson's name is resonated people basically react to it, they reacted to it very positively.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Story_ID: 28647
Speaker 1: What are some your hopes and concerns for the African American community today?
Speaker 2: Well there are a lot of concerns I have for the African American community.  How it was different for me is that I had great mentorship along the way.  My parents [Julius Williamson, Sr. and Izoula Smith Williamson] first, my church, in terms of encouragement from the church both from a spiritual perspective and a moral perspective in terms of how to be a good human and live in this world.  I'm concerned about this state of where I've seen television has been great but television has been harmful to a lot of young people.  Because they watch these things and what they see they think they can emulate.  I'm concerned about the African American male, these young men who I think--it is disgusting they are walking around with their pants dropped down to their ankles, you know, in terms of how they are exposing themselves and that's catching on too--I've seen whites and others who're doing the same thing--Hispanic.  But do they really know what that means, you know, and how that was adopted from the prison system.
Speaker 1: It doesn't matter.
Speaker 2: That sends a very bad message that they are sending.  A lot of the young people are tattooing themselves and they are only going to get one body you are not going to get another one and you got all of these tattoos all over you and they are piercing their ears and have holes in their ear lobes that big, in terms of how people perceive you.  So if you are tattooed all over including your face and everything, who is going to look to you and talk to you when it comes to giving you an opportunity, in terms of--I think I came along I think the system decided that there was going to be a period of time that African Americans were going to be given a chance, okay.  Now this is why I think the historical black college was so important to me and others was that we still got the nurturing from the professors.  They wanted to see you do well if you were trying; they wanted to see you do what it is they thought you needed to do in order to do well.  You don't see as much of that (unclear) speaking which impacts how historical black universities because they are being impacted now; you are not getting the numbers.  You got more male African Americans in prison than you got in all of the institutions itself.  Now that's getting to be pretty ridiculous.  Sitting in prison is slavery all over again in terms of their ability, in terms of their right.  So I'm concerned about all of that.  I think--what can we do to--and I gave my high school alumni association a charge that we need to find those opportunities where we can help mentor more students, more young people.  I've got seven students right now that I am mentoring, three are African American, and four are white, two white females and two white males, you know that I brought along.  They see me as someone that they want help from, same as the African American people in terms of society.  So it's a good feeling when you have made it in society where people see you in a way where they want your help.  I think more of that is going to have to happen.  But I think by having this diversity in working with students they will see things differently when it comes to society as a whole.  It's about helping people regardless of who they might be.  So that's why I chose to do it and I have been doing this for the longest of time in terms of helping students through the American Meteorological Society.  I have a white young man in my hometown and his mother works at the bank, my parents banked there, she helped them all the time.  I told her about meteorology when her son was in sixth grade he is now a senior at the University of Oklahoma and he will be coming out and he is going to school to get his Ph.D.  He sends me e-mail, this is from my hometown where back during the late '50s [1950s] and early 60s [1960s] things were pretty darn bad.  You dare not to be seen talking to white women on anything.  When they see me they always give a hug, hey we thank you for what you are doing to help my son.  (unclear)  So getting back to the point, I think when you look at all these things that are happening in society one has to worry about the place and time.  Because I think if we don't change and do better we are going to lose grip which means the gains that we may have made, we say we made some gains and change.  Now there are a lot of young males who have gotten through all of that.  Whether they were with a single parent or whether they had both parents or whatever, they have gotten through that, they have gone to college and finished and that's great and wonderful.  But is that the group of folks that are out there who are capable young folks but will need someone to grab a hold of them and help pull them along so that they too can see the daylight.  Because this life goes by too fast, you know.  When you are starting out it may seem like it is a distance ahead of you of where you are trying to get to but I tell you, you get caught up into it and the next thing you know you wonder what happened to the time unless you can see some of the physical results of things that have happened.
Story_ID: 28648
Speaker 1: Now you told us about your family, your son [Keith Williamson] who is a banker and your daughter [Yulanda Williamson] who works for CDC [Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Atlanta, Georgia] and your wife.  Is there anything that you need to say or any subject we need to touch upon before I ask my last question?
Speaker 2: No I think I will just say that my wife played a very important in helping me raise the kids.  I spent a lot of time trying to provide too.  She worked as well but I did more to try and provide security for the family.  She had a career in government as well.  She achieved a lot she got to the GS14 branch level.  My daughter spent a lot of time in school.  She is doing very well in her research efforts.  My son, I just emphasized that, he kind of got into what I call a stall period because he wanted to go back down South and went to Nashville [Tennessee] and stayed thirteen years and he was in banking but he wasn't going anywhere.  He took a position in Dallas [Texas] three years ago working with Bank of America he just sent me a e-mail two months ago they made him a vice president already.  So I told him, you know, if there is something for you whatever it is for you, it's for you but it may not be where you think it should be maybe somewhere else.  He never thought he would be going to Dallas to live but that's where he is.  I never thought I would be coming to D.C. [Washington, District of Columbia] to live, I always thought I would be down South or I never thought I would be leaving active duty in the Air Force but that wasn't what was in the plan, that was only part of it.
Story_ID: 28649
Speaker 1: Alright our last is question is similar to legacy but a little different.  Sir, how would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: I would like to be remembered as someone who really cared about people and to have spent a life in a career helping people to save their lives, better them from the hazardous weather conditions that we are experiencing now.  I am the person that made these sorts of things happen for them.  It is not about me but for them the people.  I want to be seen by the generation to come that there were people of color that did make contributions to society and the history wasn't covered up as it has been in many cases in the past of what the accomplishments were, you know, how we achieved those accomplishments to better serve the nation as a whole or the people of the country as a whole.  I wanted to be seen as a great father, a family man who raised his children and they too went off in life in society and became good citizens as they are and doing good.  They both are in public service, son [Keith Williamson] is in banking and daughter [Yulanda Williamson] is in government.  If there are other opportunities where they could do better that's up to them but public service is not all bad because you are helping people in life.  I want to be seen as a leader, as I've done in my church.  I served for twenty-one years as chairman of our trustee board at our church.  Led a major expansion that we call our family life center; opportunity for senior citizens, continuing to help young people, adults where they can do many things there in terms of (unclear).  But I also am someone who is a proponent of education--that it's important that we make education a high priority in our lives; if we expect to be successful you cannot do it being illiterate.  Literacy is so important in advancing particularly science and research for the better of man and womankind in the nation and in the world.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well thank you very much.
Speaker 2: Thank you.
Story_ID: 28650
Speaker 1: This is a picture of Senator Kennedy and myself.  It was taken while I was at Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts], John F. Kennedy School of Government.  This was a celebration for Ron Brown [former U.S. Secretary of Commerce] and unfortunately his family wasn't able to make it because the weather was such a problem with strong winds.  So that's what that picture is, it's a celebration on Ron Brown's accomplishment.  This is the picture of the tower and radon for the NEXRAD [Next Generation Weather Radar] Doppler radar.  This tower and radon was erected in 1987 and the nomenclature was named in May of 1988 by me when I was director of the program.
Speaker 2: And where was that?
Speaker 1: This is a picture of myself and Congressman George Brown.  This picture was taken on the hill [Capitol Hill]; I was a senior science advisor to Mr. Brown.  He asked me to come and work with him for a year to help with a legislative agenda.  This picture was taken when the Democrats ended their reign in power. Then the Republicans took over but I still stayed and worked with the Republicans as well.  So that was a full year, from May of 1994 to May of 1995.
Speaker 2: Okay. Alright.
