Story_ID: 27730
Speaker 1: Alright.  My name is Larry Crowe.  I'm the interviewer today with The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Matthew Hickey.  Sir, could you please state your full name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: Sure.  My full name is Donnell Thaddeus Walton, D-O-N-N-E-L-L.  Thaddeus is T-H-A-D-D-E-U-S; Walton, W-A-L-T-O-N.
Speaker 1: And sir, is there a story behind that name?
Speaker 2: Interesting.  So, my middle is Thaddeus.  That was my maternal grandfather's name.  My mother picked out Donnell, and Walton was the guy that my mother was married to at the time I was conceived.  (laughter)
Speaker 1: Okay, alright.
Speaker 2: Three stories.
Speaker 1: And sir, what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: November 8, 1966 in Mount Clemons, Michigan; twenty-five miles northeast of Detroit [Michigan].
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what is your title and occupation?
Speaker 2: My title right now is Technology Director here at Corning, Incorporated.  And my occupation remains physicist.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what is today's date?
Speaker 2: Good question.  Today I think is July 11, 2013.
Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: Right now we're in the C Building at Corning, Incorporated [New York State], its former headquarters.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 27731
Speaker 1: Now before we go into depth, there are five lightweight questions we always ask as kind of a warm-up, and they only require a short answer.
Speaker 2: Alright.
Speaker 1: The first one is do you have a favorite food?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: A favorite color?
Speaker 2: Purple.
Speaker 1: Alright.  A favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Spring, summer.
Speaker 1: Okay.  A favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Sedona, Arizona.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And the last one is do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I guess my favorite--one of my favorites would be, "If I can't change the people I'm around, then I'll change the people I'm around."
Speaker 1: Okay.  (laughter).  Alright.
Story_ID: 27732
Speaker 1: Now, I'm going to ask about your family history.  I'm going to ask about your mother's side of the family and your father's side, separately, and then we'll put them together.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: So, can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: My mother's full name is Antoinett, A-N-T-O-I-N-E-T-T, Marie, M-A-R-I-E, Williams, W-I-L-L-I-A-M-S.
Speaker 1: Okay.  That's interesting--Antoinett Marie instead of Marie Antoinett, okay.  And what is her date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: My mother's date of birth is March 11, 1939.  And the place of birth would be Nashville, Tennessee.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, what do you know about the ancestors on your mother's side?  How far back can you trace them?
Speaker 2: Great question.  So, I can--I was raised by my mother's parents.  So, I, you know, know them well.  And recently I've met some more relatives on my mother's mother's side.  And so, I would say to my great-grandparents, maternal grandparents--and yeah, my maternal grandparents are as far back as I can go on my mother's side.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, are there are any stories about them or what they were doing?  Are these the Williamses?
Speaker 2: Yeah, my grandmother's maiden name was Thompson.  My grandfather is Williams.  I could tell you about them.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: About growing up in the house with them.
Speaker 1: Let's start with your grandmother then.
Speaker 2: Okay.  So--
Speaker 1: What's her name?
Speaker 2: Demalia, D-E-M-A-L-I-A.
Speaker 1: Williams?  It would be Thompson-Williams?
Speaker 2: Thompson-Williams, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Alright, tell us about her.
Speaker 2: Well, for all intents and purposes, she's my mom.  She raised me.  I spent a lot of time with her growing up.  I finally lost her when I was about thirteen years old.  She was, yeah, everything.  I mean, she raised me.  My grandmother probably had about a sixth or eighth--she had an eighth grade education.  But I guess eighth grade was different in her time than it was in mine.  She spent a lot of time to make sure that I read, to make sure that I wasn't--this was kind of her second time around as a parent.  She had had my mother and my uncle and they were both, I guess you would say ne'er-do-wells.  So, this was kind of her second chance.  So, she spent a lot of time making sure I could, you know, read early and, you know, very protective.  Come in when the street lights came on (laughter)--things I resented growing up, but I learned to appreciate later.
Speaker 1: Where did you grow up?
Speaker 2: I grew up in a small town, New Haven, Michigan.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Which, again, is about thirty miles northeast of Detroit [Michigan].
Speaker 1: Okay, New Haven, Michigan, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Alright.  Now, is there a story about how your grandmother got to New Haven, or why she went to New Haven?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Because my grandfather went.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It was, you know, the internal, you know, migration, right, when they'd come down and get the Southern workers and take them up to the factories.  So, there was a foundry in New Haven that made steel for the auto industry.  And they had buses.  They'd come down to Union, South Carolina where they were, and take them up with a promise of a better life and better wages.  He came up there for awhile, and a few months later, sent for her.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, she was, okay.  So, your mother was born in Nashville, but your grandmother, was she a South Carolinian?
Speaker 2: They moved to South Carolina probably just from, just for jobs or whatever.  That, those details, I don't know.  But they moved from South Carolina more recently to Michigan in about--
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what was your grandfather's name?
Speaker 2: Thad, T-H-A-D.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, he would have been Thaddeus Williams?
Speaker 2: Actually, just Thad.  I think they--
Speaker 1: Thad, okay.
Speaker 2: They extended it to Thaddeus for me.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 27733
Speaker 1: So your [maternal] grandmother [Demalia Thompson-Williams] was very important in your life then, in terms of--
Speaker 2: Absolutely, yeah.
Speaker 1: What was her personality like?
Speaker 2: A great sense of humor, loved my grandfather [Thad Williams].  It was one of those interesting things.  They had been--one of my fondest memories of them is our across the street neighbor taking them out on their 50th wedding anniversary.  So, that was kind of my romanticized version of, you know, relationships.  That's the only thing I knew, was those guys being together until my grandfather died in '77 [1977], and a big part of her died.  And then she held on a few years later.  Yeah, she's, yeah--a great sense of humor, a great cook.  She had the ability to take a pot out of--maybe she's tricked me somehow, but she had the ability to take a pan out of the oven with her bare hands.  I'm not sure how she did that.  I thought I'd be able to do that at one point.  I can't do it.  (laughter)
Speaker 1: No, I don't think any of us--
Speaker 2: I don't know if she was tricking me somehow.  I still haven't--Most of the things that I remember growing up, I can kind of go back and kind of retrospectively explain.  I can't explain that unless, you know, it was much cooler than it seemed to be.  Either that, or she had completely dead nerves in her hand. (laughter)
Story_ID: 27734
Speaker 1: Tell us something about your mother [Antoinett Marie Williams], and how you came to be raised by your [maternal] grandmother [Demalia Thompson-Williams].
Speaker 2: Ummm, okay.  Yeah, so my mother was a, you know, they say Papa was a rolling stone, Mama was a rolling stone.  She, yeah, she was, you know, kind of--she never really kind of matured or accepted the mother--the mother instinct never hit her, I guess.  So, she kind of dropped us off--which I really appreciate--but she dropped me off with her parents [Demalia Thompson-Williams and Thad Williams].  She had had--I have an older sister [Denise Brown], eleven years older than I.  So she had gone through--you know, as a teenager, she had my sister.  And a little bit later she had me.  But she never--both of us were raised by our grandparents.  We became closer when I became an adult.  And she became close with my children, before I lost her a few years ago.  So, not such a good mother, but she tried to be a very good grandmother, so--.
Speaker 1: What happened when your grandmother--well, I'll get into growing up, I guess.  But I just--so now did your mother go, did she finish school?
Speaker 2: She finished her GED [General Educational Development] the same year I finished college.  But yeah, she was--because she had a teen pregnancy, she stopped school and just kinda, you know, did her own thing.  You know, did a lot of traveling around the states and, you know.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, did you see her periodically when you were growing up?
Speaker 2: Yes.  Well, not periodically.  I'd see her--there was no, there's no fixed frequency.  But I would definitely see her now and then, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, alright.
Speaker 2: Sometimes she'd come back, she decides she wanted to be a mom, and that wouldn't last long.  And I'd go back with my grandparents, and that kind of thing.
Speaker 1: Now, did she, did she have any--anything that she was--any special talents or any kind of--
Speaker 2: She was beautiful.  And she was a, she sang.  She hung out with folks like--she had all these pictures with Dinah Washington [singer and pianist] and Brook Benton [singer and songwriter].  She used to sing backup, you know, sometime--the whole Detroit [Michigan] thing.  She'd get a chance when they'd come locally, and sing with those guys.  And I'd see and hear about those things, but I don't have firsthand knowledge of anything other than the pictures.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, she was in entertainment on some level?
Speaker 2: Yeah, on some level.
Speaker 1: And would sing backup and--
Speaker 2: That seemed to be her aspiration.
Speaker 1: Singing?  Okay.
Speaker 2: But in reality, I think she was more caught up in the entrapments of that lifestyle.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  Now, so she grew up--did she grow up in Michigan, herself?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah.  She grew up with my grandparents.
Story_ID: 27735
Speaker 1: Tell us what you know about your father.  Can you give us his full name and spell it?
Speaker 2: Sure.  His name is James Robert Lee; J-A-M-E-S, R-O-B-E-R-T, L-E-E.
Speaker 1: And what was his date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: He must have been born in New Haven, Michigan.  I don't know his date of birth.
Speaker 1: Was he older than your mother [Antoinett Marie Williams]?
Speaker 2: Slightly, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I think he would have been two or three years older than my mother.
Speaker 1: You mean 1942 or so, or--
Speaker 2: Oh, the other way, right?  He would have been--
Speaker 1: Oh, that's right.
Speaker 2: --in the '30s [1930s].
Speaker 1: Yeah, 1936, '37 [1937]?
Speaker 2: Yeah, maybe, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, alright.  Well, what do you know about his side of the family, the Lees?
Speaker 2: So, I knew the Lees a lot.  I didn't know that he was my father until I was a teenager.  But I grew up with the Lees.  All these folks turned out--well, my cousins and I didn't know that I have a sister [Kimlya Lee] who is--we're the same age on my father's side, obviously.  But yeah, they were, you know, he had a bunch of brothers.  Most of them were good athletes, one of whom played at Michigan State [University, East Lansing, Michigan].  He was a running back for Michigan State and went to the [San Francisco] 49ers [professional American football team], maybe?  Dwight, Dwight Lee.
Speaker 1: Dwight Lee, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  He maybe played for a year or so in the NFL [National Football League].
Speaker 1: I know some Lees from Michigan.  I'm tempted to ask you if you're related.  So--
Speaker 2: I couldn't answer the question.  Maybe.  (laughter)  You may know more Lees than I do.  The funny thing is I--my sister who's six months older than I am, she works here now.  We've become friends, and she actually has a good job here.  So--
Speaker 1: At Corning, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Alright.
Speaker 2: So it's funny how life works.
Speaker 1: Yeah, there are some Lees in Highland Park--doctors and others, you know, these are interesting people.
Story_ID: 27736
Speaker 1: So what did your father [James Robert Lee] do for a living? Or did he--
Speaker 2: He worked in the auto industry.  I think he worked for Chrysler, I want to say.
Speaker 1: Okay.  But you knew the family.  Did you know him, per se?
Speaker 2: So, I met him--ironically I met him when my [maternal] grandmother [Demalia Thompson-Williams] passed, on the steps of our house.  I was talking to my--but at that time I did not know he was my father.  I didn't know, I didn't find out until a few years later.  So, I knew him when I was, I'd say around 15, I think.
Speaker 1: Okay, so he was kind of--he was around the house and talking after your grandmother passed?
Speaker 2: That evening--yeah, yeah, it was very interesting--to me.  So I guess, I guess he knew, obviously, right?  But I didn't, so that was interesting.  I will never kind of forget that memory.  Great conversationalist.  Yeah, and my mother [Antoinett Marie Williams] told me a few years later, "Remember that guy you were talking to the night your grandmother passed?  That was your father."  I was like, okay, here we go.  So, and then I, after I lost my grandparents [Demalia Thompson-Williams and Thad Williams; maternal grandparents] I ended up moving to North Carolina to live with my grandfather's sister in Charlotte [North Carolina].  And I went to visit him.  I didn't want anything from him, just to tell him that I was leaving.  And that was one of the good conversations he and I had.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  So, it wasn't an ongoing--you didn't see him that much?
Speaker 2: Not much.  You know, I mean, when I moved to North Carolina, we were kind of in and out of touch or whatever.  And that's--and then when I came back to Michigan for school, I saw my sister [Kimlya Lee] more.  But I'd see him periodically.  I'd check in and say Hi.
Speaker 1: Is he still around?
Speaker 2: No, we lost him in '98 [1998].  We lost him in '98 [1998], a few months after my daughter was born.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  Now, did he have another family?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  So, he married my sister's mother.  And yeah, you know, they grew up--she grew up with him.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Story_ID: 27737
Speaker 1: Is there a story about how they met [Walton's parents, Antoinett Marie Williams and James Robert Lee]?  Did your mother ever talk about that?
Speaker 2: (laughter)  Well, I mean, yeah.  As far as I can piece it together, you know, (laughter) my father--he wasn't married to my sister's [Kimlya Lee] mom yet, but she was pregnant.  And then I guess (unclear) to her pregnancy, (unclear) my mom, so then she got pregnant.  So, nothing particularly romantic, just people being people, which is an important lesson I learned early--you know, parents are people before they're parents.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Story_ID: 27738
Speaker 1: Now when you think about, you know, all these people in your life I guess--you know, their dispositions, their personalities, sense of humor, what they look like even--who do you think you take after the most?
Speaker 2: I'd have to say the biggest influences in my life are probably my [maternal] grandparents [Demalia Thompson-Williams and Thad Williams].  They were my earliest and strongest influences.  They made sure that I had kind of a work ethic.  They put this, the fear in me to not end up like their children, right.  So, that was a huge motivation for me, not to end up like my uncle, who died in prison.  I didn't want to be like him.  So, I joked recently that I didn't know what I wanted to do growing up, but I knew what I didn't want to do, right.  So, I would think the biggest influence of my life were my grandparents.  But I mean, as I think about it, my father [James Robert Lee]--you know, when we met and had another conversation in the context of I'm your long lost son, you're my father--he told me one of the things that kind of framed the next fifteen years of my life, I'd say.  He told me one of the most inspirational things I've ever heard.  He told me that, you know, just as frankly as you and I are talking--he told me I was a mistake.  And as a fifteen-year-old, I processed that a lot of different ways, right.  But I spent a lot of time as I kind of moved into adulthood, proving to myself and everybody else that I wasn't, right.  That was hugely motivational.  So in a lot of ways, that was a big motivation for me.
Speaker 1: I guess to him, I guess, look at--I guess to him he felt you represent a big--a mistake that he made, but not necessarily that you were a mistake.
Speaker 2: Absolutely.  But as a fifteen-year-old--so I've gone through different evolutions of processing that, sure, right.  You know, and I felt like I didn't, you know--if that's the case, you know, I mean many children are "mistakes," right?  But I mean you have an obligation to--you know, that kind of thing.  So, that was the--what you just said was what I ultimately came to.  But you know, at fifteen, one of the first conversations one has with one's parent and they tell them that, you know, you process it differently.  Nobody's a mistake, and everything else.  And then when you get older and you have your own kids and your own family and your own bills to pay, you know, the perception of someone who doesn't even know you very well, doesn't, you know--that motivation kind of wears off.
Speaker 1: But how old was he when you were, when your mother was pregnant--because he had like two women pregnant at the same time?
Speaker 2: (laughter).  Yeah, he was a mess in the '60s [1960s].  He must have been right around thirty [years old], I'd say, not like a kid.
Speaker 1: He'd been around awhile, at least.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: And he hadn't already started a family or anything at that point?
Speaker 2: Well, history would say he did, because then he ended up marrying my sister's mom, yeah.  But I mean, but he had other--I have other sisters, too, it turns out.  So, he's quite a mess, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I met them at his funeral.  (laughter)  So, oh, another sister, Sharon.  She's older than Kim [Kimlya Lee] and I.  So, so, anyway--
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Story_ID: 27739
Speaker 1: So your siblings are--your main sibling is the one that's here [Corning, Inc., New York]?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  So, I semi-grew up with my sister [Denise Brown] on my mother's [Antoinett Marie Williams] side.  But again, she was eleven years older than I was, so she was much older than me.  She didn't have time for me.  But she was very--we were very close.  So, she had two--three daughters.  And we're very close now.  I lost her in '97 [1997].  But--
Speaker 1: What was her name?
Speaker 2: Denise.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Denise--well, she died Brown, B-R-O-W-N.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And she had daughters, and you're still in touch with them, right?
Speaker 2: Uh huh, yeah, my nieces, yeah.
Speaker 1: Alright.
Speaker 2: One's in Michigan and one's in Maryland.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 27740
Speaker 1: Now, do you have an earliest childhood memory?
Speaker 2: Earliest childhood memory?  I'd say a memory--and it's an interesting one.  And I'm hoping it's accurate.  But a memory that--I was watching TV and I was reading a paper.  And I went back to where my grandfather [Thad Williams; maternal grandfather] would drink his coffee in the morning.  And I must have been--I wasn't in school yet, so I must have been three or four [years old].  And I was reading this paper, and my grandfather asked my grandmother [Demalia Thompson-Williams; maternal grandmother], "Is he getting it right?"  And she said "Yeah," you know which is--and it doesn't--and I'm trying to make sense of that, because he wouldn't have taught me how to read, obviously.  I think it was from watching TV and just, you know, spending time by myself.  So that's one of my earliest memories, just kind of reading, and not really knowing why.  And I'm not sure how good it was.  It may just have been some--recognizing K-Mart [store], or some, you know, logos or something.  But being very interested in reading and, you know--And in as much a way as they could, my grandparents supporting me.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Story_ID: 27741
Speaker 1: Now, in New Haven [Michigan] where you grew up, can you kind of describe the neighborhood, and what it was like?
Speaker 2: So, yeah.  So, my neighborhood was New Haven Heights.  There were probably maybe three or four blocks.  You could run around the whole place.  Very, you know, very rural.  Everything was in walking distance.  A few guys that were all, you know, we were all friends just by the luck of living together, right.  Simple--played, you know, played in the summers and went to school, you know.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now was it a mixed neighborhood, or--
Speaker 2: No.  My neighborhood wasn't very mixed.  It was a black neighborhood.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I think there was one friend who, he was--his father was Indian, East Indian, and his mom was German.  But you know, that was it.  Everyone else was black.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Story_ID: 27742
Speaker 1: What were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up [in New Haven Heights, Michigan]?
Speaker 2: Oh, wow.  So, earlier on--so my [maternal] grandfather [Thad Williams] moved there [New Haven Heights] as a sub-division built up around it.  So we had several lots, and he actually had somewhat of a farm there, which is very interesting.  Because then there were kind of these pre--these prefab [prefabricated] homes kind of built up around this farm which is--So, we had a garden. So, that was dying as I was growing up.  So, we had chicks for a little while, little baby chicks.  And we had, we grew corn and beans, and I mean a garden. I learned how to drive on a tractor, which was very interesting, because there were no other tractors in this neighborhood.  They were all, you know, just the same house built over and over again.
Speaker 1: So did they start to move in on the land, the surrounding land?
Speaker 2: Not while we were there, because he had the lots, like on either side of his house.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And one was just grass, which I had to cut.  And the other one where this huge garden was--almost like a--and then after that it was just house, house, house, house, house, house, because he--So, it was almost like built up around this.  And but now, you know, things have obviously changed.  So, those are the earlier memories.  And then later we spent a lot more time in Detroit [Michigan].  So we spent a lot of time there.  So, I'd spend summers there with my older sister, my oldest sister [Denise Brown].  And then those summers--you know, as I got a little bit older I started just playing with crushed cans as bases to play kickball and baseball.  We were doing more organized things like boxing, and Police Athletic League boxing, and things like that.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, do you get a chance to be in the Cub Scouts or Boy Scouts?
Speaker 2: No, no.  The closest thing I got to that was the Police Athletic League boxing, where the police said, Hey, let's get these kids and, you know, so, to keep an eye on them and put them in the gym.  (laughter)
Speaker 1: Now, what side of Detroit did--
Speaker 2: The west side.  Well, west side.  (unclear) area kinda like, not close to--close to what used to be downtown.  But west side in Detroit.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, alright.  Any other sights and sounds and smells?
Speaker 2: I just remember, you know--young and how excited I'd be, you know, when we'd go to Detroit.  That was always fun.  And we'd go to the Hudson's [J.L. Hudson Company; departmental store] downtown.  And it's just a shock that none of that stuff is--it's such a distant memory now, right.
Story_ID: 27743
Speaker 1: You came along at the end of the glory of Detroit [Michigan].
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: Detroit, to other people in the Midwest, was like going to New York City.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: I mean when we, when I would go there as a kid, it was like a big deal.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah, it was.  I was seeing that taper off, right.  I mean, and they tried in the '70s [1970s] for the Renaissance Center, right, the rebirth, but they never really got it.  So, I was actually probably born in the heyday.  So, it was on a decline.  Don't blame it on me, but I think it was on the decline the whole time that I was growing up.  But it was still big, but it seemed like almost every summer thinking about it, it would be a little less.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  Motown [American record company founded by HistoryMaker, Berry Gordy, Jr. in 1959 in Detroit] was in its heyday the year you were born, I guess--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --in '66 [1966], '67 [1967], '68 [1968].
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: And then it started tailing off in the '70s [1970s].
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: I guess as you were coming of age, it was starting to--
Speaker 2: See, I just asked you not to blame me.
Speaker 1: It's not your fault.
Speaker 2: (laughter)  Of course, it isn't.
Speaker 1: At least--So, okay.  So, did you spend most every summer in Detroit?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, yeah, absolutely.  Yeah, yeah, yeah.  And then I almost moved there after I lost my grandmother [Demalia Thompson-Williams; maternal grandmother], to live with my sister [Denise Brown].  But it looked like it was a better opportunity to go to Charlotte [North Carolina] to live with my [maternal] great-aunt.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 27744
Speaker 1: Tell us about your first school now.  What was your, the name of your first school?
Speaker 2: My grade school was Frank Lemon Elementary, L-E-M-O-N, in New Haven, Michigan.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Was this an integrated school?
Speaker 2: Yeah, oh yeah.  Well, actually it was probably mostly white.  I think other than a few pockets of blacks, like the one I lived in, it was maybe 3 to 5 percent black at that time.
Speaker 1: Okay, alright.  Did you like school?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, yeah.  I always enjoyed school.  I can't think of a time I didn't like school.  You know, a lot of things in my life were kind of centered around school.  I mean, home life--I mean that was when I was--so there's a generation gap, right, with my [maternal] grandparents [Demalia Thompson-Williams and Thad Williams].  I loved them to death, but I mean my interaction and--grandparents don't want to hear what you have to say, you know.  I was listening to them.  So, being able to interact with people--peers--was always a big deal for me, whether it would be in classes or in sports, or whatever.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  Did you have a favorite subject in elementary school?
Speaker 2: I don't recall a favorite subject.  No, I think I--I don't even think I had a least favorite subject.  Probably, you know, probably back then I didn't like history.  But even that changed a lot, the older I got.  No, I don't think I had a favorite subject.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Story_ID: 27745
Speaker 1: Was church a big part of growing up?
Speaker 2: Yeah, church was a big part of growing up, in a lot of ways.  So, my [maternal] grandfather [Thad Williams], toward the end of his life he became a deacon in our Greater New Hope Missionary Baptist Church, there in New Haven [Michigan].  And every Sunday I'd be in church, absolutely.  And then when I moved with my [great-] aunt [maternal], she was a churchgoer.  So I was a churchgoer, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  Did you have any special roles in the church--the youth choir or usher, or any of that?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I think I, you know--youth usher, I was a--I'd lip sync on the youth choir, you know (laughter).  Not, not my talent.  As much as I love singing and dancing, I can't do either one of them.  But yeah, I guess my main--and then we'd go to the Bible School, and those things like that.  But you know, nothing--yeah, I can't--mostly that was another place you knew folks, at church.  But I don't remember that being that central, other than kind of obligatory.
Story_ID: 27746
Speaker 1: Okay, now what did you do for fun?  Did you have good TV stations, or did you--sports or--
Speaker 2: I remember back then they had three TV stations, right, in--well, actually four.  There was ABC, CBS, NBC.  And then we could, on a good day, we could get a Canadian channel, you know.  But mainly it was sports.  Sports and, you know, reading--and just playing.  But the older I got it was more and more sports, more football and track.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 27747
Speaker 1: So, what kind of books did you read, did you like?
Speaker 2: So, early on, I think mostly it was science-fiction stuff.  I liked to read the things that we were assigned, so I guess things that would be considered classics, like 'Catcher in the Rye' and 'Great Gatsby', and you know, of course, the Shakespeare stuff.  I think I appreciated it more reading it again, not having to read it.  Those were the things growing up.  I remember being, you know, reading about, you know, the 'Autobiography of Malcolm X', and just thinking, you know, that was just a huge deal.  And then every now and then I'd see some of those crazy things.  They must have been from my mother's [Antoinett Marie Williams] visits--some of these (laughter) absurd, you know, like 'Soul on Ice' and--not 'Soul on Ice', but some of these Donald Goines [African American writer of urban fiction] things.
Speaker 1: Oh yeah, yeah.
Speaker 2: (laughter).
Speaker 1: The Hollaway House Publications.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah.  'Whoreson' and crazy stuff like that.  But yeah, I just liked, I just enjoyed reading.  It was an escape and, you know, ideas, you know, get away from that small New Haven [Michigan] pocket.  And then I remember reading, you know, biographies like, you know, running track, and some athlete biographies like Jesse Owens [track and field athlete].  What a big deal he was.  And then some of the other takes, some of--his own book, 'Black Think', I believe.  I remember reading that.  So, I'm picking things out.  I spent a lot of time in the library, learning things--things that you do on YouTube now, I guess.  But I tried to long jump, so I'd go and get the Sports Illustrated books on long jumping and try to coach myself, and things like that.  So, it was just a way to expand my immediate surroundings.
Story_ID: 27748
Speaker 1: Now did you have like middle school, or junior high school?
Speaker 2: Yeah, we had middle school.
Speaker 1: You went to, I guess you were at Frank Lemon--
Speaker 2: Frank Lemon Elementary [New Haven, Michigan] until I think it must have been--
Speaker 1: Fifth grade?
Speaker 2: Fifth grade.  And then sixth, seventh, and eighth was middle school.  That was New Haven, New Haven Middle School.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And then New Haven High School, I went there for ninth and tenth grade.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And then Charlotte for eleventh through twelfth.
Speaker 1: Now, did you start running track in middle school?
Speaker 2: No, we didn't have sports--oh, not officially.  Our sports started where we were in high school.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Very different from where it was in Charlotte.  So, I started running track and playing football in ninth grade.
Speaker 1: Now, did you do the Police Athletic League in middle school, you were saying?
Speaker 2: Yeah, the boxing, absolutely.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 27749
Speaker 1: So, you were boxing I guess during the time [Muhammad] Ali was the heavyweight champ and was a big hero.  I mean--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Did you have a boxing hero?  Because there were a lot of good boxers in those days.
Speaker 2: So, of course, Joe Louis was a big deal in Detroit [Michigan].  But--and then we, you know, we liked [Thomas] Hearns, you know--
Speaker 1: Oh, the Hitman Hearns.
Speaker 2: I always liked--even though I wasn't that big then--but I always liked, preferred--a lot of people liked Sugar Ray Leonard and Sugar Ray Robinson, even.  But I always liked bigger guys.  I was always fascinated at how big Ali was.  Even though he fought bigger guys, he didn't look that big.  But Ali was 230 [pounds], and that's a pretty good sized guy.  But you--because he was so, you know, agile, people-- And he fought these bruisers, you never thought about that.  But definitely, I know it sounds cliche, but definitely Ali was head and shoulders above everyone, you know.
Speaker 1: Did you pattern your boxing after a style of any--
Speaker 2: No.  I tried to be as, you know--learn what they were teaching us.  I never, you know--and we, we saw a videotape.  It wasn't very good, but I think it was just--I wasn't trying to, but I think I was kind of a bruiser, right.  I mean, you know, and I also bruised, too.  (laughter)  But no, I didn't pattern after anyone.  I just basically tried to keep things together and keep fighting.  You know, but I'd love to see some of that footage to see if there were some patterns that emerged.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But I was really just trying to make sure that I was getting my combinations in and, you know, and minimize getting hit.
Speaker 1: Okay.  That's always a good idea.
Speaker 2: (laughter).  As it turns out.  And it also turns out that no matter how good you are, the other guy is doing the same thing.  So you know, you end up, you know--I think one of the funniest stories I've read recently, and it's a story that I actually should--I was reading a book by Ralph Ellison [African American novelist, literary critic, scholar and writer].  It was a book called 'Trading Twelves.'  He was going back and forth with Albert Murray [African American literary and jazz critic, novelist and biographer].  And he was saying one time as a youth he was in a fight.  And he was beating this guy up, beating this guy up.  And one of his friends pulled him off of him.  He said, "Okay, that's enough, Ralph."  And he said, okay.  And he took him away.  And the next day he saw the guy, and he--and Ralph was all beaten up.  And he saw the guy and he was running around playing like nothing happened.  And he was like, "What happened?  What's going on?  Why doesn't he look hurt?"  It turns out, Ralph was losing.  He was so concerned that he--you know, he was double counting his own punches; he didn't realize he was actually getting his butt whipped.  And I think about a lot of things like that.  "Yeah, I thought I won that."  But you go back and look at the tape.  And I was like, wow, he hit me four or five times more than--(laughter).  So it's funny how we revise things, revisionism.
Speaker 1: When you're in the thick of it, it's--
Speaker 2: Yeah, I thought I was giving as good as I was getting.  So--
Speaker 1: Ralph Ellison and Albert Murray.  So, okay.  So, you didn't read them until later, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  No, I don't even think that book came out until maybe a decade ago.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: But yeah, and I've definitely--I, so I went through a time when I was young that I read a lot.  I read early and I read a lot.  And then I--that definitely plateaued or probably dropped off.  Maybe--I don't know if I was bored with reading.  I think I started reading a lot more when I was in grad [graduate] school, since I've been here.
Speaker 1: You know, that's some, it seems like you were reading some deep things when you were younger.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 27750
Speaker 1: And you obviously were a good mathematician.  To become a physicist, you must have been a good mathematician.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I always liked math.  I mean, I didn't, it was interesting to me when people would say that they disliked math, because, you know, math kind of made sense to me.  I was very naive about a lot of things, like, you know, but things come into people at different rates.
Speaker 1: Now, were there certain teachers that were like mentors to you?
Speaker 2: Early on?
Speaker 1: At the elementary--yeah, and middle school level [Frank Lemon Elementary School and New Haven Middle School, New Haven, Michigan]?
Speaker 2: Ummm--
Speaker 1: Because I take it, I'm assuming that your grandparents [Demalia Thompson Williams and Thad Williams] weren't going to be able to help you much with--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --this higher math.  If you were on that track, then--
Speaker 2: Yeah.  So fortunately, I don't think I--I didn't need a lot of help in school, I mean you know, in classes.  I just put the time in, and I was fortunate enough to get good results, right.  But yeah, I never--you know, my grandparents could never help.  The only thing they could do was to make sure I was doing my homework, right.  "Do your homework," right, cleared my path from chores.  So, I said if I had this to do, they let me go do that.  And I didn't--I like to believe I didn't exploit that, you know.  I did what I had to do around the house.  But you're right, that's the extent of their help for me, is paving the way.  As far as mentors, not so much.  Not that early on.  Again, I think because we were such a minority there--and that school was not a very--New Haven was not a very, it was a very small school.  It didn't, it was pretty under-supported, I would say.  I remember moving to North Carolina and one of the--as I look back on life, one of my biggest--somebody that actually made a difference for me was my high school guidance counselor in my high school in Charlotte [North Carolina].  It was a black woman named Dorothy Floyd.  And she put me in for programs and--because college wasn't even on my--I wasn't even thinking about college.  I was thinking about going to North Carolina, graduating from high school, going back to Michigan to live with my sister [Denise Brown] so I can get a job.  But, you know, that was obviously not what--it just wasn't--I mean don't want to say role models, but it wasn't in my--
Speaker 1: Were you considered a top student at the grade school, middle school level?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I mean yeah, I've always made--I can't, I mean I don't remember any Bs in high school, or any grade.  But the funny thing was I was so out of touch, or detached, that every year I would open up that last envelope that said you were promoted.  And like the Academy Awards, I was just so excited that I, I made it.  I didn't know, because I mean, the only thing I knew was some of my friends weren't promoted.  I didn't make the connection that we weren't getting the same grades.  We never talked about grades, right?  So, you know, the people--all this--one of my good friends, he actually was a year older than me, but he ended up graduating a year after me.  He had been held behind twice.  So, that's what I saw.  So, I say, "Oh, you are promoted to the fifth grade.  Yes!"  I was, to me it was a celebration.  I just didn't know, but I never--I think about how absurd that was now, but I had no idea.
Story_ID: 27751
Speaker 1: So you were doing what you were supposed to do, because you were supposed to do it.
Speaker 2: And because I didn't want to be like my uncle. (laughter)  Yeah, I didn't want to be like my [maternal] uncle.  It turned out that my uncle and my mother [Antoinett Marie Williams] were decent students.  They just, you know, took some bad turns.  My uncle was--so I always assumed that I was a decent football player--I got it from--well, it must have been my father's [James Robert Lee] side.  But that night that I mentioned that we met for my grandmother's funeral, he actually told me that when he played football, the standout was actually my uncle.  My uncle was this big time--I had no idea.  So, I went back and found out that he had a full scholarship to go to, I want to say the University of Michigan [Ann Arbor, Michigan].  And he dropped out of high school the second semester of his senior year to go join the [U.S.] Air Force and got a dishonorable discharge for fighting, and also had a heart murmur.  So, and his life kind of spiraled from there.  And my mother, same thing, you know.  She had all these opportunities, and she got pregnant when she was fifteen, with my sister [Denise Brown].  So, those are the things that kind of inspired me.  Like, you know, that life's not very forgiving.  Don't make these huge mistakes, right.
Speaker 1: But their mistakes--it seems like they were made after high school, I mean, or--
Speaker 2: In high school.
Speaker 1: --as they got in their later teens?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And not while they were at the development level.  So, your--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Your [maternal] grandparents [Demalia Thompson Williams and Thad Williams] were doing the same kind of job with them, I guess, on some level that they did with you.
Speaker 2: Except for putting the fear of them in me, right.  They said, "Oh, don't be like your uncle."  I mean, from a very early age.  I was like, "Okay, I won't be like him."  You know, so yeah--so, that might have been the biggest motivation I had, was that I did not want to be like him.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 27752
Speaker 1: So, your [maternal] grandmother [Demalia Thompson Williams], she passes when you were in the eighth grade?
Speaker 2: Must--I was in the, I was in the--no, I was in the tenth grade.  It was the beginning of my tenth grade year.  So, I finished tenth grade there.
Speaker 1: So, you were like fifteen [years old]?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, alright.  I know you said you were about thirteen.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I did, that's right--
Speaker 1: It was like fifteen.
Speaker 2: Yeah, my [maternal] grandfather [Thad Williams] died when I was eleven [years old].  Well, I was going to be eleven.  I was ten.  And then she died when I was, yeah, fourteen going on fifteen, because I was--let me add it up.  So, yeah, I must have been fifteen, that's right.  In tenth grade, I was fifteen.
Speaker 1: That's two big hits during that period, because I guess your grandfather's death probably did affect the family economically, too?
Speaker 2: Oh, tremendously.  Yes, there were some state settlements, but yeah, we were already pretty, you know-- They had expended most of their resources on my, their kids.  So, I didn't grow up in abject poverty, but we grew up in pretty poor conditions.  They were both, neither of them were working.  You know, they both were pretty old and, you know, living off Social Security, you know.  So, we we were on welfare, you know, and Social Security for that.  So, yeah, so losing his Social Security--I mean she still got some part of it.  And I guess she got a little bit of some compensation or something.
Story_ID: 27753
Speaker 1: She [Walton's maternal grandmother, Demalia Thompson Williams] ended up buying me a computer when I was--from some settlement she had gotten after he [Walton's maternal grandfather, Thad Williams] had passed.  But yeah, but it--
Speaker 2: So this would be 19--, what?
Speaker 1: '81 [1981].
Speaker 2: '81 [1981]?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: I'm trying to think what kind of computer (laughter)--
Speaker 1: TRS-80 [Tandy Radio Shack].  Radio Shack, TRS-80.  Yeah, Tandy.  I remember, yeah, with a black and white screen and, horrible.  It had a Z-80 microprocessor.  You probably have more computing power definitely in your watch right now, than in that computer.
Speaker 2: You must have been excited, though, right?
Speaker 1: Oh, I was ecstatic.  That was the biggest deal I ever had.  And I tried to learn how to program.  BASIC was the language.  Gee, and that was another thing I'd go and get books on--a program that I want to--program a game or program stuff, or write a little code.  Absolutely, that was a big deal.  That was a big deal.
Story_ID: 27754
Speaker 1: Did you have buddies that were doing similar things, you know, around you?
Speaker 2: No.  I mean, some of my--so, and this is something that's kind of a, is a recurring theme in my life.  I always had like sets of friends, right.  So, I had this geographic set of friends--all my black friends right there that grew up together.  And nobody would--and fortunately, they didn't know I was doing it either, because it was in my house--
Speaker 1: You said it was fortunate that they didn't know that you were doing it--
Speaker 2: Oh, they would tease me to death, right.  I mean these are guys that I'm--because of these guys, I'm thinking that, you know, all year long I might fail.  You know, I didn't know any better, because I just knew that these guys were dropping off.  Well, what was special about me?  We didn't talk about grades.  And I knew then as it got later and we started doing tracking, they weren't in my classes anymore, right.  My classes then became, you know, all white, and me.  And then maybe we had some conversations about grades at that point.  But yeah, so, no, I was just, you know, a lot of solitude.  But I mean that wasn't something I thought was strange, right, being--having grandparents, they didn't have time to mess around me, so I spent a lot of time by myself.  It was fine.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you, you have a person--seemed like you had a personality as a child that's a lot like the other scientists.  You could spend time by yourself--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And use your curiosity to--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Did you see yourself at any point as being interested in science, or seeing yourself as a scientist?
Speaker 2: One thing I remember--you mentioned earlier about my favorite subject.  I remember kind of starting to gravitate as I got older toward science because of it's--there was an answer, right.  It wasn't like--it wasn't up for debate.  I mean, you know it's like--and I actually liked that underlying objective reality.  And a lot of things kind of attracted me to that.  So, yes.  Definitely, that kind of drew me to science.  I remember seeing something that I--basically I had written as early as sixth or seventh grade, where I said I wanted to be a nuclear physicist.  I think I'd gotten that term from some science fiction something I'd read.  I didn't know what it was.  And I didn't actually start really liking physics until I was exposed to it, until I failed it miserably in a summer program, the summer before my senior year in high school.  But yeah, I think that my curiosity and the things that I enjoyed--So, I think most kids like, or they're curious and they have scientific wonder, but somehow something distracts them, and they grow out of it.  I guess I just never grew out of it.
Story_ID: 27755
Speaker 1: Did you have any pets growing up?
Speaker 2: We had dogs, yeah.  We had dogs.  We always had dogs.  My [maternal] grandfather [Thad Williams] hunted, so we'd always have like these mutts.
Speaker 1: That just occurred to me, because you're kind of--you've got a lot of space.
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, yeah, we had dogs.  And as I said, at some point earlier on, we had chicks, too--little baby chicks.  But we had chickens--But we had dogs, so--
Speaker 1: You didn't have any other kind of livestock around there or anything, did you?
Speaker 2: No, no.  I think right before--oh, I mean when I was like an infant, I think they had some pigs and cows.   But yeah, I think they were too much.  As my grandfather got older, it was too much for him to handle.  So, just chickens, and then, you know, but we kept dogs until we lost my grandfather.  My grandmother [Demalia Thompson Williams], she--we didn't need any dogs when my grandmother was, when it was just my grandmother.  (laughter)  She wasn't a fan.
Story_ID: 27756
Speaker 1: So, in high school, did you have to work in high school at all?
Speaker 2: No, I didn't work.  There weren't a lot of job opportunities in New Haven [Michigan].  And then when I moved to [Charlotte] North Carolina, I'd gotten a job at a gas station.  But not during school, because sports prevented that.  And because of bussing in Charlotte, you know, if you play a sport, you didn't get home until dark.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Because where I lived, there were ten high schools in Charlotte.  And I must have gone to--if the one--if I didn't go to the one that was furthest from my house, it was second furthest, just because of the bussing, the zoning.  So, I got my first job at a gas station in the summer after my junior year.  And I had it for two or three weeks before I ended up, my counselor ended up putting me in a summer program.  And that program changed my life for multiple reasons.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  Well, let's, let me get you there to that point, and then make sure you tell us how your life was changed.  But I know in, I guess this was in 1982 your [maternal] grandmother [Demalia Thompson Williams] passed.  Is that it?
Speaker 2: So, I'm trying--'82 [1982], '83 [1983], '84 [1984]--Yeah, '81 [1981].
Speaker 1: '81 [1981].
Speaker 2: September, '81 [1981], yeah.  And in '82 [1982] is when I moved to [Charlotte] North Carolina.  So, '81 [1981].
Speaker 1: Where did you--I mean did you--had she been sick a long time?
Speaker 2: So, I was fourteen [years old].  I turned fifteen a little bit later.  Had she been sick a long time?  Yeah.  She--how did that happen?  I remember--and that was the time when I was at an age when you couldn't--I couldn't go--when she went to the hospital, I couldn't see her.  They wouldn't let kids see her, or whatever.  But they, she was presenting these symptoms that they never--and we didn't have the greatest health care.  Of course, I didn't know that then.  I didn't have anything to compare it to.  But she was, she was presenting some lesions in her mouth.  And they were attributing it to cancer.  And they kept taking the--they did at least twice--they were taking marrow samples from her.  And--
Speaker 1: You think she passed of some kind of cancer?
Speaker 2: It could have been.  But I never, I mean, I don't--there was--I never got any--if I--it was unclear, because they did it a couple of times, and neither time did anything present itself.  But I don't know, I don't know.  I know her health started to visually degenerate very soon after my [maternal] grandfather [Thad Williams] passed.
Speaker 1: Okay, so that would be like three or four years when she was going downhill.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So, who took care of you?  I mean, who was around the house, I mean?
Speaker 2: My oldest--my sister, my sister [Denise Brown].  She had her daughter at that time.  So it was, yeah, it was mainly the three of us.
Speaker 1: So, did you live with her?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: During that period, okay.  Alright, alright.  So then your grandmother passes, and in '82 [1982], you move to Charlotte?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And who did you move in with in Charlotte?
Speaker 2: My great aunt.
Speaker 1: Great aunt, okay.
Speaker 2: My grandfather's sister.
Speaker 1: Alright.  What's her name?
Speaker 2: Mary Williams.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 27757
Speaker 1: And what was the name of your high school there [Charlotte, North Carolina]?
Speaker 2: South Mecklenburg.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: After the county [Mecklenburg County, North Carolina].
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now was this like a, were they bussing then?  Is that what this was about?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.  So it was pretty far away.  Even though your senior year in Charlotte I guess you could choose your high school.  But I didn't have a car or anything, so I had to--. And by that time, I think I was pretty locked in.  I think I thought like a lot of the black folks who wanted to go to West Charlotte.  That's where black people went.  So, senior year, they go.  But I think maybe I wanted to do that, too.  But then for multiple reasons, I just stuck with South Meck [South Mecklinburg High School] for my last year.
Speaker 1: Was this your last year of school?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: When you moved there?
Speaker 2: No, no, eleventh grade.  But they would let you change schools in twelfth grade, if you wanted to.
Speaker 1: Okay, alright, alright, I got you.  Okay.  So, this is kind of--moving to Charlotte you say was a big, was important because of Miss Johnson, the counselor?
Speaker 2: [Dorothy] Floyd.
Speaker 1: Floyd?  Oh I'm sorry, Floyd.  Okay, Miss Floyd.  And you were continuing to get good grades, I take it?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And she surmised that meant that you should go to college?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.  And she's putting me in for these programs and making sure that I knew about scholarship opportunities, and opened a life to me I'd just never even considered.  You know I was--to me the goal was--everyone I knew, you know, the goal was to graduate from high school.  My mother [Antoinett Marie Williams] hadn't, my [maternal] uncle hadn't.  You know, my sister [Denise Brown] did, so I wanted to be like my sister, graduate from high school.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you're taking science courses.  You're taking higher math--
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, I was in college prep courses.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Because New Haven [Michigan] didn't have calculus, I was behind in math when I moved to North Carolina.  And I didn't know I was behind in math because obviously I wasn't behind in [New Haven].  So I ended up doubling in math in my senior year so I could take pre-calculus.  And then, yeah, so I took two maths that year.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, but you had calculus in high school?
Speaker 2: No, just pre-cal [pre-calculus].
Speaker 1: Just pre-cal, okay.
Speaker 2: Uh huh.
Speaker 1: Okay, pre-calculus, okay.  And you took physics?
Speaker 2: Senior year, yeah, I sure did.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And you had a story about the summer you didn't do too well in--
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: --in (unclear)--
Speaker 2: So, my--Miss [Dorothy] Floyd [guidance counselor at South Mecklenburg High School, Charlotte, North Carolina] put me, she applied, she filled out applications for me to attend a summer engineering program at MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts].  And I was, you know, wait-listed I'm sure, but a lot of those kids ended up going to better--different programs.  And so, I ended up getting on, getting chosen.  And I got a bus ride up to Cambridge and got completely blown away by everything.  Everything was hard.  Math was hard.  The physics was extremely hard.  Even the English was hard.  I'd never seen this before.  I never struggled in school, you know.  I mean I was completely unprepared.  And I'm not sure why.  And then I realized one of the most important things someone said to me was in the evaluation, student evaluation.  When I read my evaluation, one of the guys--because I just thought it was way beyond me.  I just couldn't do it, to make any sense.  And it turned out it was like Cs or whatever, but it was still a long ways from what I'd ever seen.  And I remember reading this evaluation and it was as--had a big impact on me as what I told you about what my father [James Robert Lee] said about being a mistake.  He said that, "Donnell, somewhere along the way accepted the impossibility of the situation."  And to me, I was like, what are you talking about?  I had a choice in whatever to accept?  I thought that it is impossible.  And processing that, and realizing--wait a minute.  I actually have a choice whether to accept something's impossible or not.  So, when I had physics--I mean, so basically I was sling-shot out of that program into my senior year.  And I came in in my senior year, just slashing.  I was like, I'm, you know, I'm not going to feel the way I felt in that program.  And I--you know, I had physics and, you know, I basically had a 100 average in most of my classes, because I was just putting so much time in--balancing football, balancing in the spring track--but spending all the time, whatever it took to do well in school.  So I was even more motivated then than I'd ever been.  And again, it wasn't that it was even for college.  Well, I think I wanted to go to MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts] and got in, and was actually going to go.  But then my [great] aunt took ill right before I graduated.  So, I ended up applying to North Carolina State [University, Raleigh, North Carolina], in case I had to stay in the state.  And she didn't get much better, so I end up staying at, going to North Carolina State.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you ended up going to North Carolina State?
Speaker 2: [nods head]
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 27758
Speaker 1: Now football, what did you play in football?
Speaker 2: Running back.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Early on linebacker and running back, and later I could choose, so I chose running back.
Speaker 1: Were you pretty good?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I was pretty good, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, it was fun.  When I moved to--so I was, you know, becoming quite a standout in the small town of New Haven [Michigan].  And when I moved to Charlotte [North Carolina], South Mecklenburg [High School] won the state championship the year before I got there, but most of the guys graduated.  The only guy that stuck around was, two things about him:  One, he ran the game winning kickoff return.  And two, he was the running back.  So, that's the only guy who had the job I wanted.  So, academics helped me get that job back, because he actually became ineligible for a time.  That gave me a chance, and I actually showed that I was pretty decent.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, alright.  So, did you get any football offers?
Speaker 2: I got some football offers, yeah, and track offers.  And so I ended up--and then--but I did not really focus on them because, again, I was going to MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts] and that wasn't--where there are no football or track offers.  And then I ended up going to NC [North Carolina] State [University, Raleigh, North Carolina], you know, on academic and track scholarship.
Story_ID: 27759
Speaker 1: So, MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts] made an impact on you, you know, even though you didn't do that well that summer [academic program while Walton was at South Mecklenburg High School, Charlotte, North Carolina], as well as you expected.  It did make a favorable impression on you, and you wanted to go back.
Speaker 2: Just like boxing.  I wanted to challenge the guy that beat me.  I want to come back, I want another chance.
Speaker 1: Was that program in any way associated with the Black Student Union [BSU] guys at MIT?
Speaker 2: So, I wouldn't be surprised if it was started by them.  But it was a MITE Program, Minority Introduction to Engineering [and Science; MITES], yeah, right.
Speaker 1: Because I know we've interviewed some of them, you know, over the years--people who had been at MIT at different times, like Wesley Harris [alsoa  HistoryMaker], and other people.  So I was wondering who was there that you remember, that--
Speaker 2: Our computer science teacher was Jim Taylor. But most of the teachers were--most of the instructors were graduate students who were either from MIT or Harvard [University, Cambridge].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I wish I could remember the name of the guy that wrote that evaluation.
Speaker 1: Yeah, well, I know all the ones we've interviewed are very dedicated to being mentors and bringing kids along.  So, you know, that's why I asked.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I would have to say--I mean again, I was clueless, right.  I was trying to keep my head above water.  But I'm certain that there had to be some--Because it was through their minority programming office, and I'm sure those things were all plugged in.  I'm trying to think who was the guy that was in charge of the program at the time.  I'm drawing a blank.
Story_ID: 27760
Speaker 1: Okay, North Carolina State University [Raleigh, North Carolina].  This is 1984?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, 1984.  This is a big--the year of "Run Jesse Run."  And you know, so what was North Carolina--was that the year North Carolina State [University] won the basketball--
Speaker 2: No, it was one or two years before, I think.  It was '82 [1982], maybe?
Speaker 1: Yeah, '82 [1982], or '83 [1983].  Yeah, I think you're right.  With Dereck Whittenburg [college basketball player] and all those guys, yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Alright.
Speaker 2: I don't know if you've seen it, but that--what was it--"30 for 30"--the thing they--the sports thing.  They did this special on that.  That was amazingly well done, very well done.  Yeah, yeah.  That was--so, I came there--similar to when I came to North Carolina--my high school [South Mecklenburg High School, Charlotte, North Carolina] was right off this huge championship.  So, people were very full of NC [North Carolina] State when I got there.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I wasn't a basketball fan, so I didn't really know that, until I got there.
Speaker 1: Alright.  So, what was North Carolina State like?  Was it a welcoming environment?  What was it like for African American students?
Speaker 2: Yeah, so there was a lot of--like you mentioned--we had several African American coordinators there, to make sure--So, I was an electrical engineering major at that time.  And we had an orientation only for, you know, a black freshman orientation, where you get to meet other, you know, people that would be your peers.  So, it was--they worked hard.  There were some key people there that worked hard to make it as welcoming as it could be.  So, you end up making some very lifelong friends.  [North Carolina] State [University] was a good place.  It was different.  It was big, but I felt prepared.  Again, you know, I didn't want to lose again like I had done a couple summers before--or the summer before.  So it turns out I was pretty well prepared, it turned out.  My high school in Charlotte was--you know, prepared me pretty well.  I made some really good friends in classes and on campus.
Speaker 1: Okay.  I mean--were you involved in other campus activities other than your science courses?
Speaker 2: As a freshman?  I was just running track, which was almost year round then.  And just doing, yeah, just doing courses, not much as a freshman then.  As a sophomore I ended up, you know, getting more involved in the Black Student Union, the Peer Mentor Program, becoming a mentor, pledging a fraternity, and stuff like that.  So--
Speaker 1: Okay.  What fraternity did you pledge?
Speaker 2: Omega.
Speaker 1: Okay, Omega Psi Phi, alright.  So, were there any key teachers or counselors at--
Speaker 2: Yeah, so we had a guy in engineering.  His name was Bobby Pettis.  He was a minority coordinator, and he was instrumental--I still talk with friends about him.
Speaker 1: Is that P-E-T-T-U-S, or--
Speaker 2: I-S.
Speaker 1: Okay, I-S.  Alright.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  He was, he had intimate relationships with the students.  He knew us well.  He kept them honest.  He, you know, made sure things--He did as much as he could to be almost like a family there, you know, in this huge environment.  So, yeah.  And then there was a woman--and then later I ended up adding physics as a major.  And then that's another college.  That's the College of Physical [and] Mathematical Sciences.  So, his counterpart there is Wandra Hill, same thing.  She's very--did as much as they could to make things welcoming and connect people.
Speaker 1: Wandra.  W-A-N-D-R-A?
Speaker 2: Uh huh.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, are either one of them still there?
Speaker 2: Wandra Hill may have retired.  And Mr. Pettis passed, I would say maybe in the--he must have passed in the eighties.  I think she retired since I've been here [Corning, Inc., New York State].  So the last five or ten years, she must have retired.
Story_ID: 27761
Speaker 1: You start off in electrical engineering, and then moved to physics [at North Carolina State University, Raleigh, North Carolina]?
Speaker 2: Uh huh.  Well, I kept both.  I added both.
Speaker 1: Okay, alright.  Any particular aspect of electrical engineering or physics that you focused on?
Speaker 2: Right.  Yeah, so, I started to gravitate to electricity and magnetism.  That was the thing that I liked the most.  I liked the--the image of math, I loved it.  It was math actually--being able to use math to describe the world was, that was a really good way to do it, it turned out.  Maxwell's equations are the governing equations of those phenomena.  And I thought that was just the coolest thing ever.  And the main thing you could do with them was design antennas.  And I said, okay I'm going to be an antenna designer.  But back then in the late '80s [1980s], the only place you could get a job as an antenna designer was for the military.  Things changed pretty quickly a few years later with cellular phones.  But it's all about timing.
Speaker 1: Right, right, right, right.  So, okay.  Did you graduate with any special honors or anything?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: You're getting out in what, '89 [1989]?
Speaker 2: '89 [1989].
Speaker 1: '89 [1989].
Speaker 2: Yeah.  And I graduated from both colleges summa cum laude.
Speaker 1: Okay, alright.
Story_ID: 27762
Speaker 1: Well, tell us about, I know you received the AT&T [Bell Laboratories] Fellowship, right?  Was this after your graduation [from North Carolina State University, Raleigh, North Carolina]?
Speaker 2: Yes, yeah, yeah, yeah.  So, AT&T had the Cooperative Research Fellowship Program, started back in the '70s [1970s].  And it was, it turned out that when people have traced through some of the impact it had, at one point it was like--I mean over 40 percent of the African American engineers with Ph.D.s had been funded by this program in the country.  It was just amazing, the impact that program had.  I was very honored and fortunate to have been connected to that legacy.
Speaker 1: Some of your mentors here--there, are sort of legendary now, I mean, I think.  Who were some of the people?
Speaker 2: Oh well, Earl Shaw was probably--he was huge.  Walter Lowe, Jim Gates.  I didn't meet--I met all these guys my--. So the good thing about the AT&T Fellowship, was that the first summer, you worked there.  And then Walter had Jim Gates who, well, I guess he just got a big presidential honor.  He's a professor at Maryland.  But he, because they were friends, he brought him up to talk to us and kind of think about grad [graduate] school, and things like that.  And it was great.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So this is, you know, this AT&T Fellowship takes you to Bell Labs, right?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: You're at the historic Bell Labs.  Now, I think is probably the last stages of the legendary part of Bell Labs.
Speaker 2: You would never know it, but that's exactly right, yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  So, tell us what Bell Labs was like, and why it is singularly different from a lot of other places that engineers and scientists work.
Speaker 2: Well, I mean it had almost an academic environment.  It had these huge resources, tremendous resources.  And it had people that were academics that didn't have to divide their time amongst committees and the things that academics have to do, have to teach or anything.  They could focus completely and solely on research.  It was an amazing environment, and it had the--it had the deep pockets from telecommunications.  AT&T was funding it.  So they had all the equipment they needed, and they could attract these geniuses and these hard working scientists, and all these Nobel Laureates.  Just an amazing place.  And they were all together.  They were all in there together.
Speaker 1: I know others have said it had a collegial kind of environment, where--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.  I mean, it was like a university but not--it wasn't a university.
Speaker 1: You could walk out in the hallway and meet somebody, some Nobel Laureate or--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --someone who invented some special item, and--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: --share with them.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  And we, and I--and that was my introduction to research.  I didn't do much research as an undergrad, because then I did work.  I mean, I worked at IBM every summer through INROADS, to help make ends meet, and it was a great experience.  But I couldn't afford research, because it didn't pay very well.  And so, this was my first research experience.  And it was just like you mentioned.  I mean you walk down--And so, "Oh yeah, you know that guy invented X, Y, Z."  I was like, "Invented, really?"  And you look it up, and you're like wow, that's--there he is.  So that was fascinating to be able to--just even just one summer I spent there, to be a part of that.
Story_ID: 27763
Speaker 1: Can you remember any specific things that you learned [at Bell Laboratories] that you, you know, just--of the many things?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  You know, so one of the things that I got blown away on, was Earl Shaw was building this free electron laser, this giant accelerator.  And I remember going into his lab.  So, I was doing some radiation hardening experiments.  We were doing, working on these switches, these big telecommunications switches.  And my job was to make sure that the switches could survive.  So if we had a nuclear holocaust, the president could still communicate with people.  So, I had these low radiation dosage Cobalt 60 sources.  And so, the Geiger counter will take, you know, very low radiation.  I remember going to visit Earl.  And we went through this serpentine hallway, cement hallways, to get to his accelerator.  And I couldn't hear him because something was [buzzing sound].  I said, "What is that?"  He said "That's my Geiger counter."  And I was like, "That's your?"  Because I was used to Geiger counters going one tick per minute.  I said, "That's your Geiger counter?"  And I got nervous.  And he said, "Yeah, I'm just trying to get the Nobel Prize before I get cancer."  (laughter)  So, but this guy was just, just fascinating.  I mean, he had a great sense of humor, brilliant--you know, brilliant mind.  And he had this equipment, you know, all this--That's what makes a difference in physics, is--especially experimental physics. Experimental physics is, you know--for the most part, all of the garage level experiments have been done.  You need--it's very resource intensive.  So, Bell Labs made the difference, because they had the resources to get the equipment that was needed to do these things.  So, my biggest, the biggest thing I learned there was just, you know, Earl's set up.  And he went to the white board and he explained, you know, these mathematical models of what he was doing, and you could actually see it right there.  And it was very, had a huge impact.
Speaker 1: Have you ever been to a place where you had that same feeling?
Speaker 2: So, believe it or not, this place is--now that Bell Labs is gone, this is probably as close as we can get to it.  I mean, so I--
Speaker 1: Here at Corning?
Speaker 2: Yeah, here at Corning.  We're getting, we're getting--this is as good as it--I mean it's--You know, I think, you know, Bell Labs still was--I mean Bell Labs, you know--Bell Labs--or Stanford [University, Palo Alto, California] bought a physics department from hiring a whole bunch of Bell Labs folks.  So when they got their Nobel Prizes--I think Stanford had maybe four or five Nobel prizes in physics in the '90s [1990s].  All that work had been done at Bell Labs before they got there.  So, they bought those guys.  So, that's gone.  But we do have some pretty heavy hitters here.  And we have that kind of collegiality and that kind of--it's growing here.
Speaker 1: So, Stanford was the New York Yankees of (laughter)--
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: --physics.
Speaker 2: Yeah, the money ball, yeah, that's right.  That's right, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, alright, alright.  Now, this is so you spent the summer there first before you started the actual fellowship?
Speaker 2: Well, yeah.  That was a part of the fellowship.  They, you know, you work there during the summer and then you go off to graduate school.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 27764
Speaker 1: You went off to graduate school at the University of Michigan [Ann Arbor, Michigan], right?  Or--
Speaker 2: No.  Well, that's true.  But I went off to graduate school from Bell Labs to the University of Pennsylvania [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] because I was, at that time I wanted to do bioengineering.  And that's where I thought I was going, to kind of take my love of engineering and my love of physics and make a difference on the world, you know, with health.  But then I, you know, realized that I missed physics.  So, I came back to physics at Penn, and then I kind of broadened my search.  I'm going back to physics.  Let me see where I can go to, really, you know, really--.  And as my real interests started to congeal, and I figured out what I really wanted to do, I ended up going to the University of Michigan.
Speaker 1: Okay, alright.  So, what inspired you to pursue bioengineering in the first place?
Speaker 2: Connecting my--my naive way of connecting my love and interest of science to making a difference, you know, to do something that would have an immediate impact.  That's what I thought I could, the way I thought I could do it.
Speaker 1: Okay.  There's so many people in science we've interviewed whose parents wanted them to be a doctor.  When they see the scientific talent they say, well, you ought to be a doctor.
Speaker 2: Sure.
Speaker 1: Did, were you pushed like that when you were younger?
Speaker 2: Again, I was more pushed away from stuff.  I think that, you know, it was a foregone conclusion--yeah, maybe this guy will be a doctor or a lawyer.  But there weren't very well-developed academic motivations for me, right.  Just, like I said, don't be like your uncle.  So, you know, and those things would pop up in conversations. "Oh yeah, maybe he'll be a doctor," because that was, that's the only thing that you're exposed to, right.  They had Dr.--you had Marcus Welby [medical drama; television program], and you had, you know, doctor shows.  You didn't have any science shows, other than, you know, 'Star Trek' [science fiction series].  But that was so far out in the future.  So, yeah, there was always those rumblings, but nothing really taking form, right.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: "Well, maybe he'll be a doctor."  You know, my optometrist, "Yeah, yeah, you should be an optometrist," that kind of stuff.  Like, "Okay, sure, you know."  But nothing real, other than passing conversation.
Speaker 1: Okay, alright.  So, you turned back to physics at Penn.  But did Michigan have more opportunity than--
Speaker 2: Yeah.  So, Michigan--so this is what happened.  How I ended up in Michigan was, I called Walter [Lowe; Bell Labs], because he was a mentor of mine.  And I know he went to Stanford [University, Palo Alto, California].  I wanted to go to Stanford.  I said, I'm going to Stanford.  And I think back on how coincidental this was.  I said, "Walter, you know, I want to talk to you about Stanford."
Speaker 1: And this is?
Speaker 2: Walter Lowe, one of the guys I met doing the Bell Labs thing.  And he was--yeah, I called him because he's one of the people I spoke to about this.  And it just so happened that he was collaborating on an experiment with a guy named Ray Clark, who had just started an applied physics program at Michigan.  He said, "Yeah, Stanford is good but, you know, you should talk to my friend Roy.  He's just starting this program up at Michigan."  And I said, "Hey, Michigan, I still have family there.  Sure, I'll talk to him."  And I talked to him and well, I ended up here.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  So, this is, this would be 1987?
Speaker 2: No, that--man, that's--now we're right in 1990.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I spent a year at Penn.  And so 1990, I ended up at University of Michigan.
Speaker 1: How long did the fellowship last at Bell Labs?  How many years did you go to Bell?
Speaker 2: I was, the fellowship lasted until 1995, I guess.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So this is a long, a pretty extensive--
Speaker 2: Yeah, it's supposed--yeah, it's supposed to get you through.
Speaker 1: Through, all the way through to your Ph.D. process?
Speaker 2: Yes, Ph.D. process.
Speaker 1: Okay, I didn't even realize that, yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah, it's a great program.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It's gone.  Well, it's very different now.
Speaker 1: So, you didn't have to worry about how you were going to pay for that, or anything?
Speaker 2: Yeah, and that's the great thing, right?
Speaker 1: You just choose the best program for your--
Speaker 2: Yeah.  And you got a stipend, yeah, that's right.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 27765
Speaker 1: Sir, tell us about your [Ph.D.] dissertation [at the University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan].
Speaker 2: So, my dissertation was part theory and part experimental.  The intent of it was to invent some nice lasers that were very compact and able to produce very energetic, very short pulses--to invent it, to create the theory, model it, and then go on to make--do the experiment, and realize it.  But it turns out that's really hard to do, when theory and experiment matches.  So, I ended up doing some theory on one thing, and some experiments on some related, but different things--all centered around lasers, compact lasers, optical fiber lasers.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And the title was 'Theoretical Experimental Investigation of Novel Fiber Lasers.'
Speaker 2: Yeah.  So we had, we were trying to look at very--let physics do the work so we would have very simplified compact geometries that would be very sophisticated in what they output.  So they would output femtosecond, you know, pulses that were only 10 to the minus 15 seconds long--very, very short pulses.  But they would only take like a piece of fiber a meter long to generate that.
Speaker 1: Okay.  What is the advantage of a short pulse laser?
Speaker 2: So, one thing.  Like, if I--the analogy I could make is think about photography, like stroboscopic photography.  If I can get something flashing quickly, I can take pictures of things that move quickly, like human body motion.  But if you had something that was moving that quickly, those kinds of pulses--you can look at very fast things, like atoms moving or very fast bio-molecules in the body moving, and you could understand very fast dynamics.  You could look at how--rhodopsin is one of the--a dye that could mimic how the retina detects light.  You can actually watch cells move on that time scale, and look at how light comes in the eye, and detect how it actually becomes a vision.
Speaker 1: So those lasers are used with high powered microscopes, and--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Spectroscopy and that sort of thing?
Speaker 2: Yeah, sure, sure.  And the cool thing about spectroscopy, because of the wave under the light, you can see space.  But with this time duration, you can actually watch things evolve, watch things move, watch atoms move around, watch molecules breathe in very, very fast time scales.  That's, those are some of the applications.  The other thing is because it's so short, it can be extremely intense.  And so that high intensity can be used to, you know, to do certain laser surgery, for example, and materials processing.
Speaker 1: So, you were trying to use new fibers to achieve the short pulses?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  And make very simple--so you can perhaps commercialize the technology, make it much simpler.  So get these complicated devices out, so you didn't need a Ph.D. to operate them.  You can actually make, you know, hardware, right.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: Practical.
Speaker 1: Alright.  So this is in 1996, I guess, that you--
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: --finished your Ph.D.
Story_ID: 27766
Speaker 1: And we were talking about Herbert Winful [also a HistoryMaker], Walter Lowe [physicist; Walton's mentor at Bell Laboratories], Earl Shaw [physicist; Walton's mentor at Bell Laboratories].  These are all men who were your mentors--
Speaker 2: Yeah--
Speaker 1: --during that era?
Speaker 2: Yeah, Winfold was my Ph.D. thesis advisor, and then I met those guys.
Speaker 1: Okay.  You were talking about Earl Shaw before, at Bell Labs, with the turntable laser.
Speaker 2: Yes.  So, the free electron laser.  Yeah, so I met Earl that summer of '90 [1990].  That's when I met Earl and Walter.  And then after I finished my Ph.D., Walter was instrumental in my being hired at Howard [University, Washington, District of Columbia] as a professor.  And I got an opportunity to work--to not just know them as mentors, but I got an opportunity to actually work with them, and we published a paper together.  It was Walter and Earl, some work we did together while I was at Howard, at Argonne National Labs [Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 1: Okay, alright.  So, was Walter at Howard already?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Walter left Bell Labs and he was at Howard.  I guess he got there like '92 [1992].  He said, "Hey, why don't you come to Howard?"  I said, "Okay."
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  So, alright.  So, oh, but the paper you say was published at Argonne?  So, you--
Speaker 2: The work was done at the Advanced Photon Source at Argonne, the big synchrotron that's there.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, that's outside of Chicago?
Speaker 2: Yes, yeah, right outside of the city of Chicago.  But Howard--or Walter, led a collaboration among Bell Labs, Howard and University of Michigan [Ann Arbor, Michigan] at the--where they built a beam line at this big user facility, and we did some experiments there.  And it was a nice thing, because it combined--.  So, the x-rays are produced from the synchroton.  They have a very short duration, too.  Not femtoseconds, they're picoseconds.  So we did the first measurements, direct measurements, of those electron beams, of those x-rays that came off the electron beams.
Speaker 1: The very first?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Most people just measure the electrons.  But we were able to measure the x-rays themselves.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: The light.
Speaker 1: So, this was the first time anybody had done that?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Alright.  That's the interesting thing about science.  You talk to people that do something for the first time.
Speaker 2: Right.  Well, that's the whole thing about every thesis.  There'd better be something for the first time.  No matter how insignificant it is, you can always say it's the first.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  But then again, you never know what the significance of something is going to be.
Speaker 2: Ultimately, yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: And vice versa, yeah.  I remember the guys that got the Nobel Prize for buckyballs.  They said "This is something that the significance is yet to be determined."  I was like, "Well, hell, that's everything."  So, I think they got the benefit of the doubt on that one.  But yeah, you're right, you're right.  At the time--.  But yeah, that's the idea of the whole Ph.D. thesis, is doing something new.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 27767
Speaker 1: Alright, now, what did you think of Howard [University, Washington, District of Columbia]?  Now you came to Howard, you didn't stay long.  So--
Speaker 2: Yeah, I was there three and a half years.  I enjoyed Howard.  It was an interesting struggle.  There were some really good people there.  It had, it wasn't without its administrative difficulties.  I enjoyed what I was able to start building there.  I didn't leave Howard because of Howard.  I left Howard, it was a good family decision.  My wife was, is also a Ph.D.  And she was finishing up a post-doc [postdoctoral research] at The Bureau of Standards, NIST, National Institute of Standards and Technology.  And it was a good time for--Corning presented an opportunity that was good for both of us.  So, it was a family decision.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So did she come to work at Corning, too?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, alright.  So she was at the Bureau of Standards in [Washington] D.C. [District of Columbia] while you were at Howard?
Speaker 2: Yeah, Gaithersburg [Maryland], yeah.
Speaker 1: So, were you in the physics department?
Speaker 2: I was, yeah.
Speaker 1: Alright.  So, who was there in the department with you?
Speaker 2: Walter Lowe; the department chair is Demetrius Venable [also a HistoryMaker], who I met a little bit before that, because I had met him when he was at Hampton [University, Hampton, Virginia].  He had been one of--the provost, or vice president at Hampton.  And he came to be a chair at Howard.  And he became a very close friend.  Let's see, who else was there?  Not just in physics, but there were a bunch of fairly new faculty that were there.  They're all chairs now.  Sonya Smith was a computational fluid dynamicist in the mechanical engineering department.  She's now the chair of mechanical engineering.  Vernon Morris [also a HistoryMaker] was an atmospheric chemist, and he's the interim chair of chemistry now.  Before I got there, there was a friend, Greg [Gregory] Jenkins [also a HistoryMaker].  He was a senior grad student at [University of] Michigan [Ann Arbor, Michigan] in atmospheric science when I was at Michigan.  Then he went off, I think he went to Penn State [University, State College, Pennsylvania].  And now he's at, he's back at Howard now.  Kimberly Jones is over in the civil engineering department.  So, we were kind of a nice peer group.  They'd been there a year or two before me.  All of us, you know, kind of get together and complain about how slow the old administrators are, you know.  And then we'd go and we'd become them, right.
Speaker 1: Oh, how was your time spent at Howard?  Did you have--between research and teaching, for instance, what was your balance?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  So it was 100 percent teaching, 100 percent research, and 100 percent service.  It was probably not, you know, you have to, I worked a lot of hours there.  Because I, you know--teaching demands, you know, you want to do a good job for the students.  But at the same time, since Howard is a research institution, you have to establish a research presence.  So, I was competing with my peers who are at real research institutions--the Ohio States [Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio] and MITs [Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts] and Caltechs [California Institute of Technology, Pasadena, California].  And at the same time, I'm teaching a lot more.  So, it was a challenge.  You have to spend a lot of time.  I worked a lot of weekends, a lot of late nights on Georgia Avenue.
Story_ID: 27768
Speaker 1: And by "real," real research institutions, you're really talking about the facilities and--
Speaker 2: Correct.  Kind of like what we were talking about with Bell Labs.  Yeah, you know, things that are, you know--and the research output and the research infrastructure.  I mean Howard [University, Washington, District of Columbia] constantly struggled with, I think, research infrastructure.  A lot of people talked about it.  But to really be able to do it takes a really big paradigmatic shift that hasn't occurred yet, to do physical science result.  I think Howard historically has done social science research, right.  Alain Locke [writer, philosopher, educator] and Ralph Bunche [political scientist, academic, and diplomat; received the 1950 Nobel Peace Prize for his late 1940s mediation in Palestine], and folks like that.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: But if you go back and read Ernest Everett Just's [pioneering African American biologist] biography when he was trying to be a biologist or, more specifically, a cytologist at Howard, his struggles back in the thirties and forties parallels scientists that's there today, the same kind of struggles.
Speaker 1: Now it seems--I mean, I was looking through your folder.  There's a couple of papers about history in your folder.  And you wrote a piece about Dr. [Martin Luther] King, I mean, and mentioned people like Bishop Turner.  I mean, so history, I mean you've kind of come full circle on history, right, in terms of?
Speaker 2: Because historians always mess us up, man.  So, I remember when--what's his name?  Well, these guys all got stories.  But what's his name--Henry Louis Gates [literary critic, educator, scholar, writer, and editor; also a HistoryMaker]--?  And what's the guy's name at Princeton [University, Princeton, New Jersey], now?
Speaker 1: Cornell West [American philosopher, academic, activist, author, public intellectual, and prominent member of the Democratic Socialists of America].
Speaker 2: Yeah, Cornell West.  These guys, when they had the African American Encarta.  And they completely overlooked scientific contributions.  I mean, the first black Ph.D. in the U.S. was in physics.  What about [Edward] Bouchet, you know?
Speaker 1: Bouchet, right.
Speaker 2: It didn't start with [W.E.B.] DuBois [sociologist, historian, civil rights activist, Pan-Africanist, author and editor].  You know, so you have to go back and kind of learn that stuff, and you have to talk to people about it.  We've been there from the beginning, right, so--. So, yes, so that was--that was kind of the aspect of those kind of (unclear) like "Hey, I Too Sing Black America," that kind of thing.
Story_ID: 27769
Speaker 1: So, at Howard [University, Washington, District of Columbia], what were the highlights of your Howard years?  Now, you were there from '96 [1996] to--
Speaker 2: '99 [1999].
Speaker 1: '99, [1999], okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I came here in December of 99' [1999].  The highlights of my Howard years were being able to build the lab that I was able to build, working with Walter [Lowe; physicist].  He was very interested in building a--his concept was a micro lab, to build a, kind of a national lab that would be centered at Howard to really build on this research infrastructure theme that we kind of discovered as physical science researchers.
Speaker 1: So, the kind of lab you built was a laser lab?
Speaker 2: Yeah, it was an extension of my thesis.  I was looking at novel lasers.  I got NSF [National Science Foundation] funding, the Young Investigator Award, to build that lab.  And it was literally building a lab.  I mean, they had to level the floors to be able to put the big heavy optical tables in there.  So, that was fun, being the ground up.  I was very proud of that lab, and the students I had an opportunity to work with.
Speaker 1: Now, there's a lot--I mean, there's, as you said, they had to level the--you mentioned they had to level the floor.  There's a, there are infrastructure challenges at all the historically black colleges [HBCs], especially the older ones in terms of old buildings, to be able to actually have the structural capacity to even have physical science, right?
Speaker 2: Correct, that's absolutely right.  Yeah, and then there's, and there are always--I mean, it takes a lot to do that.  And we get some grants but, you know, NSF or funding agencies, they're looking for leverage, right.  I mean does it--do you really want to take on that huge infrastructural challenges at these HBCUs [historically black colleges and universities], or do you give a lot less money to an established high momentum institution like MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts], and say okay, here's one hundred thousand dollars, keep going.  So, this guy could take one hundred thousand dollars and buy, you know, put it toward--get matching funds from MIT and get an electron microscope.  One hundred thousand dollars for me, I can, you know, level the floors and put in, you know--.  So, that was a constant struggle, too.  I mean but you take, you know, you take small steps.  So, and we were going in the right direction.  And there were people there that understood what it took to build that.  But it takes a lot.  Howard--you know, as much of a struggle, a labor of love that Howard was, it's still one of the best, as far as HBCUs.  It's probably the, hands down, it's the only one that has the entire, a full gamut of Ph.D. programs to offer.  I mean, there are several--Hampton [University, Hampton, Virginia] and FAMU [Florida Agricultural and Mechanical University, Tallahassee, Florida]--that have them in physics, but not in, you know, all the other disciplines.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So, Howard's been giving Ph.D.s for a long time.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And it's a good physics program at this point, right?
Speaker 2: You know, it's not without its challenges.  But as far as HBCUs are concerned, yes, it's among the best, I'd say.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Absolutely.
Story_ID: 27770
Speaker 1: Now, how did you, you know, come to Corning [Incorporated, Elmira, New York]?  I mean, did they recruit you, or did you inquire or respond to-
Speaker 2: So, yeah.  So, I was recruited.  My wife and I were--a funny, I think it's a funny story.  My wife and I were--they found my resume on a website back in '95 [1995], before we finished our Ph.D.  And they said, "Hey, would you like to come visit Corning?"  I said, "Yeah, I know Corning--working in fiber, sure."  So, we came--I told them I had a wife, and she was getting a Ph.D. in chemical engineering.  So, we both came up here.  We were flown up and interviewed.  And I remember the plane.  Back then, they flew--so you guys came through LaGuardia [airport, New York City].  But we have--twenty minutes from here, east of here, we have an airport.  Corning Elmira Regional Airport.  And at that time the runways were so short, they had propeller planes.  And they could fly you anywhere in the world, as long as it was Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] or Detroit [Michigan].  Those were the only two places.  So, when that propeller plane--I'd never been on a propeller plane.  When it was landing, it was like cornfield, cornfield, cornfield.  I thought we were done.  Then all of a sudden, the runway appeared.  So the whole time, in my head as I was interviewing, I was writing my reject letter, right.  So, we both got nice offers in '95 [1995].  And we said, thanks, you know, but we're not interested.  So, we didn't come here in '95 [1995].  So one year later when we graduated, we went to, you know, [Washington] D.C. [District of Columbia].  And then in another year, my wife graduated.  She came to D.C.  We're like, man, we love it here.  And then we had our kids.  And then we started thinking--man, this is kind of a fast paced place for infants.  And then Corning came back again.  I had gotten a small grant from Corning at that time.  And they were saying, "Hey, are you interested in coming to Corning?"  I was like, "No, not really."  And I was working on a couple of lasers, and Corning was very interested in telecommunications.  So, and then that's when my wife's post-doc [postdoctoral position; NIST (National Institute of Standards and Technology)] had expired.  And I said "Hey, I've got an idea.  These guys want us again.  Why don't you get an offer, and then you can take it to your boss, and say 'Hey, you guys need to match this.'"  And needless to say, they saw our offer, and they said, "Congratulations."  So she came to Corning.  And so, we came to Corning.  And so, it was my poor attempt at playing brinkmanship with NIST, that we ended up here.  But it's been a good ride.  Been able to do a lot of good science work, a lot of good commercial work.
Speaker 1: So, you started here [Corning Incorporated, Elmira, New York] as a research scientist, right?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I was working on fiber lasers.  Again, continuing my fiber amplifiers at that time, because that was the backbone of optical fibers for telecommunications.  Periodically, the signal gets weaker and needs to be amplified back up.  So, you can call across the ocean.  And then telecom was going like gangbusters until the early 2000s, and then it fell apart.  And then we got re-deployed on different things, those of us that weren't laid off, and was able to do some fiber laser work that was very fun and made an impact.
Story_ID: 27771
Speaker 1: Now, are you aware of something called, was it the Awareness Quality Improvement Team [at Corning, Incorporated, Elmira, New York]?
Speaker 2: At that time, the AQIT.  Yes, absolutely.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, tell us what that is, and what--
Speaker 2: Yeah.  So like it's, it was an African American, what we call affinity groups.  You know, it was, like what we were talking about earlier with the people at NC [North Carolina] State [University, Raleigh, North Carolina] who were trying to work to make it an inclusive environment.  AQIT was started to make it a more inclusive--or the awareness--was to, to increase awareness of the presence of non--you know, underrepresented groups, particularly African Americans at that time.  So, it was started, I guess, right around 198--, in the eighties.  I think I want to say it was like '84 [1984], '85 [1985].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And now, it's called the Black Technical Network.  It got re-branded, but still doing the same things--trying to make a better environment, a more inclusive environment for everyone, starting with African Americans.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  Now, so, so there was a community of African Americans here at--
Speaker 2: Small, it's grown.  But it was--so it was, yeah, but absolutely, yeah.  And it's a very--both inside the company and in the outside, external community. Most of us, since we all work for the same company, we all know each other.  Our kids are the same age.  So, actually, one of the ironies is that my wife and I moved here from Silver Spring, Maryland.  And our neighborhood here is more diverse than our neighborhood was in Silver Spring, you know.  I mean, not black.  We have about six black families--it's a small neighborhood, six black families; many Asian families; Indian, Chinese, Korean.  But whites may be, maybe 50 percent white.  So, it's pretty interesting.  But almost everyone in the neighborhood works for Corning.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, what would you say the percentage of black employees are?
Speaker 2: In the company, in the corporation?
Speaker 1: Uh huh.
Speaker 2: I'd put it at about maybe 7 percent.
Speaker 1: Okay, alright.  That would be--that makes sense on some level, because it wouldn't reflect the blacks at 11 percent of the population of the country.  But college graduates aside, those are, you know--technical people are much smaller.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: So, Corning may be doing better than--
Speaker 2: Yeah, it's one of those best kept secrets.  I think also--and of those 7 [percent]--most, the vast majority of us, I'd say somewhere around 80 percent of us are technical.  I mean science and engineering, you know.  And the other 20 [percent] is HR [human resources] and finance, but most of us are engineers.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  That's interesting.
Story_ID: 27772
Speaker 1: The major project that you worked on here [Corning, Incorporated, Elmira, New York] is Gorilla glass, right?
Speaker 2: Most recently, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And when did you start working on that?  Is that--
Speaker 2: 2008.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I was conscripted to come over--leave the lab and come work on the commercial aspects of marketing Gorilla glass.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, I don't want to leave anything else out.  Is there anything else significant before you got to that, that you want to talk about?
Speaker 2: So, I would say in the early--after the telecom bubble burst and we weren't pushing as hard on telecom, we had a lot of resources to make fiber.  And we got some government funding to make these extremely high powered fiber lasers.  And I led that project to make--to reconfigure our fiber making capability--to make, you know--we were only making milliwatt level, you know, 10 to minus 3 level power, to reconfigure that all the way up to a kilowatt level, 10 to the 3.  So, it was fun leading that, and we became a world leader in high-powered fiber lasers.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And so I was, it was great for me, because that was what I had trained for my whole research life.
Speaker 1: Now, what are high-powered fiber lasers used for?
Speaker 2: So, the intent for those--and the government was probably interested in them to make anti-missile weapons.  But of course, you know, Corning being non-military, we were also interested in like laser processing, you know--welding; cutting; metals; surgery; very high power.  So, kind of going back to the dream that I had earlier in grad [graduate] school--you know, doing good, you know, that kind of stuff, yeah.  So, material processing.  But we didn't pursue that.  But we did, you know, wrote a lot of good papers.  And, you know, made a name for Corning in that area.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 27773
Speaker 1: Now in terms of Gorilla glass, now this was, is it true that it was developed in 2005?  2004, 2005?
Speaker 2: So, it's interesting.  So, that's part of it.  So, it continues to be developed as we learn more about what happens when phones break.  And now the application space has expanded beyond phones, right, to tablets, which didn't even exist.  I mean, the current tablets.  I mean, there were tablet PCs, but you know, like these iPad [Apple, Inc.] type tablets, they didn't exist until 2010.  So now they, the needs, the mechanical need for glass on those is different.  The needs are different than they are for a phone.  So we're still understanding how these things break, and how to protect them.  So, we continue to develop it.  The precursor for Gorilla glass is something called Chemcor.  And that development was started back in the late '50s [1950s], early '60s [1960s], under a program called Project Muscle.
Speaker 1: Now, is this a product of Corning, as well?
Speaker 2: Chemcor?  Yeah, it was, but it was--ooh God, off-camera we were talking about how we were targeting windshields.  And it turns out that you don't want an indestructible windshield.
Speaker 1: Now, explain why? (laughter).
Speaker 2: (laughter).
Speaker 1: We had a, I thought it was an interesting discussion.
Speaker 2: You'd much rather have the windshield break than the person impacting it.  Right, right.  You want the energy to go into the windshield, not into the skeleton.  So, that's why.  So, we--
Speaker 1: It may be valuable for objects coming into the car, but not for--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --people.
Speaker 2: That's right, that's right.  That's exactly right.  Yeah, we have to think about that.  So, that's why.  You know, laminate glasses, like, as you mentioned--glass, plastic glass sandwiches, have been more popular.
Speaker 1: Now, is bullet-proof glass Chemcor glass?
Speaker 2: No, bullet-proof glass is actually similar to what you mentioned for windshields, it's just more layers.  It's glass, laminate glass.  Laminate, that slows down the bullet, right.  So you need thick glass, and then some plastic barrier, and then some more thick glass.
Speaker 1: It almost works like a bullet-proof vest.
Speaker 2: Exactly.
Speaker 1: It traps the--
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Dissipates that energy, yes.  That's exactly right.  So, yeah, Gorilla looked at that.  But Gorilla is really for getting the maximum protection you get when you have weight and thickness constraints, like for a phone or for something portable.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Because yeah, I know people who go through phones--three or four a year, dropping them and--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --running over them and everything else.  And so, it's, it's not just the glass that it was in, but a lot of the other parts.  But Gorilla glass was--well, tell us how Gorilla glass works.  What is it, anyway?
Speaker 2: Gorilla glass is--so chemical strengthening--so even windows, they're tempered.  So, glass is a brittle material.  And brittle materials are extremely strong under compression, but they're very weak under tension.  Like, cement, the same way.  If you push on cement, it's very strong.  But if you kind of pull on it, or stretch it somehow, it cracks instantly.  That's why you have reinforced, you know, cement.  Same thing with glass.  If you--and if you have a piece of glass--when I push down on it, the top of it is in compression, that's fine.  But this bottom part is in tension.  That's where your breaks are going to happen.  So, what you do for a window glass is you temper that.  So, you heat it up and cool it off very fast.  And so as it contracts from being cold, you build in some compression around the surface of the glass.  And so, you have to overcome that compression to get to the tension that it needs to break.  But you can do that with thick glass.  You can do that thermally.  But if you talk about thin glass--I mean, so you don't have window glass on your BlackBerrys [phone] and on your phones.  You only, you have glass that's no more than a millimeter.  And you can't get the kind of temperature grading across the millimeter that you need.  So you have to do, you have to put that compression in there chemically.  So, you do that by exchanging the ions in the surface for bigger ions.  So, you have small ions that are in there.  You put them in a bath with the big ions.  The big ions go in, they pop the smaller ones out.  So, now you have the entire surface of the glass under compression.  And again, when it falls or drops or you push on it, you have to overcome that compression to get to the tension that you need to break.  So the higher that compression is, the bigger drop it can take, or the more damage it could take before it breaks.
Speaker 1: I was surprised to know that salt was an ingredient in--
Speaker 2: It's not sodium chloride, it's not table salt.  It's just--salt is just, salt is just a chemical term for things that have--that are neutral, that are not an acid nor a base.  So that, the particular salt here is potassium nitrate.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That's the salt.  And that--but it is sodium in the glass.  And the potassium, it exchanges for the sodium.  And potassium is larger than sodium.  And that's what gives you that compression.  So, it's not, it's not Morton salt, it's potassium nitrate.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Story_ID: 27774
Speaker 1: So, you got involved with the production of, I mean, the--well how were you involved with Gorilla glass [at Corning, Incorporated, Elmira, New York]?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Because you're, you're still involved in lasers?
Speaker 2: No, no.  I haven't done lasers in a while.  I'm still, you know, kind of consulting--research.  But they took me out of lasers and said, look, we had one big--they had one big customer by 2007.  That was Apple [Incorporated].  They needed Gorilla glass, or they needed our glass.  Because remember, every phone that was out before the iPhone, was a flip phone, right.  And the iPhone was the first one that wanted to expose that glass, and have a whole--the whole thing was a screen.  So that seemed ridiculous, you know, if you think about a phone, and all the damage and hostile environments it goes through.  But Apple believed they could do it.  And Corning, was a big part of that.  So, when they brought me on board, they said "Okay, we have this new glass.  There's a market for it.  We believe it extends well beyond Apple.  Go figure it out."  You know, you go out, talk to customers, teach them how to integrate glass into--these people don't know anything about glass.  Because we're talking about laptops now, we're talking about these tablets that didn't exist before.  These things don't take glass.  They're used to working with plastics and metals and magnesium.  They don't know anything about glass and how it breaks, and how it needs to be protected.  So, I got a chance to work with engineers from all over the world, to teach them about glass and learn about their process and to work together to help grow this into a billion dollar industry.
Speaker 1: Okay, now this may seem like a silly question.  But did you welcome that kind of challenge as a--I mean--
Speaker 2: As a scientist, yeat.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: So initially, no.  Initially, I didn't know--you know, many scientists.  Or, at least I was very purist.  I liked the lab.  "Leave me alone, turn the lights out, let me go in here and say, 'Eureka!'"  But they didn't, you know, this is not the Ivy Tower.  I mean, that's not how--I mean this is not Harvard [University].  This is, this company is not a (unclear), we need to make money here.  So, they said that--so the guys that, they had seen me run the fiber laser thing.  And they saw that I was decent, you know.  I understood science, I could explain it, and I could explain it to people who weren't scientists.  So, I kept that project alive by interacting with non-scientists.  And they liked that.  They saw that could translate to customers.
Speaker 1: That's a rare gift.
Speaker 2: I think it's--
Speaker 1: It's not as common as all that, but--
Speaker 2: I think because people don't work at it, right?  I think people who are scientists tend to say okay, I'll go talk to scientists.  Because that's easy.  But I mean, but I think some of the most appreciated things are people that can make--like Bill Nye, the science guy.  And now, I'm sure you must have interviewed him by now, the astrophysicist?
Speaker 1: Neil deGrasse Tyson?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  People that can--I mean, he's, he hasn't talked about his research ever, right?  I mean, he's talking about how to make people understand.  He's going to re-do Carl Sagan's 'Cosmos'.  So, to be able to connect--and this kind of goes back to what you mentioned earlier, like talking about history--to be able to connect and say, "Hey, we've been here all along, and this is something that you may not appreciate."  I think those are extremely appreciated things, and we should do more of it.  And that's what I had at--so once I actually--to your question, Larry [Crowe, interviewer for The HistoryMakers], about was that welcome?  Initially, it wasn't.  And then I got a chance to do it and see, make these connections.  And all of a sudden--you know, you toil away in a lab, and you don't make a dime for the company, but I, you know, I answered two or three questions.  And now there's, you know, five million devices up that people are buying, that are based on that.  It's a different motivation, but you can get used to it.  It's actually fun.  I mean, so that part of my career is winding down.  Now, they have me doing something else.  But it was fun, because ultimately it was teaching, which is something I like doing.  It was teaching.
Story_ID: 27775
Speaker 1: So, did you have anything at all to do with the research that went into Gorilla Glass?
Speaker 2: So, I don't do glass research, but I influenced it by bringing the voice of the customer back and saying, "Okay, look, I know you guys want to do this."  Because there are a million things they can do with the glass.  But my work was to say no, these are things that are going to be relevant to the next generation of products, alright.  So, innovation is the combination of invention and the applicability to a market, right.  If you just invent, that's not innovation.  That's just going off and tinkering, or writing papers and re-writing them and reading them.  But if you can actually impact the market and answer a question that a lot of people want or need to pay for, that's where innovation comes in.  So, from that perspective, yeah.  But I have not--other than just working with folks, I've never actually melted glass and come up with a new composition.  But my work is to go back--A: to go out to customers and show them what the composition can do, and see how I can answer their questions.  And B: come back to our glass scientists and say this is what's needed for our next generation of products.  You know--and as we went to--from cell phones to tablets to laptops, to televisions to, you know, large screen, you know, interactive things for education.  And they all have different, you know, they need different glass properties.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, there are different glass properties for each--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So, if you had a large screen, I mean, I guess you'd have a thicker glass?
Speaker 2: It could be thicker, but I mean, it doesn't have to be thick.  So, for example, how many times have you dropped your cell phone?
Speaker 1: Numerous, innumerable times.
Speaker 2: How many times have you dropped your laptop?
Speaker 1: Not once.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  So, they have different requirements.  So why would you need glass on a laptop?  Now, they're starting to put touch-on laptops.  So they, but you don't want them thick, because thick translates to weight.  But how thick does it have to be?  And how protective does it have to be?  So, those are the kind of questions that we're answering to devise that particular glass for that market.  And it needs to be cost effective.
Speaker 1: Okay.  How much--say, I'm Apple.  I, you know, I put just regular glass in the phones, and you know.  Is that going to, I mean, how cost effective is it for me to get Gorilla glass? It's going to cost me more, right, to have Gorilla glass?
Speaker 2: Yeah, sure.  It certainly is--yeah, than just regular non-strengthened glass.  But I mean, but that's just the cost up front.  How much does is going to cost you on repairs and warranty and everything else, right?  I mean, you know, I can--if I needed a stent in my heart, plastic would be a lot cheaper than nitinol [nickel titanium], you know.  But I don't, hopefully I don't make that decision strictly based on (laughter) cost, you know.  It's the total cost of ownership.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, you know, so that cost is passed along to the consumers--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --but it's worth it because they don't have to--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --keep replacing these phones.
Speaker 2: Right, right, exactly.  Yeah, and then you can take a hit.  I mean, it won't, it's not, we haven't an unbreakable glass yet.  But it's less likely to break than that stuff.  Because we've had customers say that.  "Hey, we don't want, we can't afford Gorilla glass.  We want something like a monkey glass or something."  And then they go out and they buy these cheap glasses.  And they get these--how can you put a price on the negative publicity you get for people, you know, critics, saying the Brand X breaks if you sneeze on it.  You can't.  It's hard to come back from that, right.  So, that's, so it's that kind of insurance we provide.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 27776
Speaker 1: And there is some science around the way glass breaks.
Speaker 2: Oh, absolutely.
Speaker 1: The Gorilla glass--I was reading that Gorilla glass does not, is resistant to scratching, and it's that, it's the scratch or the nick in a piece of glass that--
Speaker 2: Yeah, that causes it to break.
Speaker 1: --causes the whole structure to--
Speaker 2: Yeah.  So, that's a brittle material.  So, the thing about--there are two things that glass needs, to break.  It needs a flaw, what you meant--like a scratch or a check or a chip.  And it needs that flaw, tip of that flaw, to be under tension.  It's almost like a piece of paper.  If I have a piece of paper and I rip it a little bit, there's a hole up there, it's not going to tear.  It's not until I actually start pulling at it, that it tears, right?  And also, if it's not torn to start with, it's harder to tear that paper.  Especially, like a phone book, imagine.  You have to have that tear already started, and then pull on that.  The same thing with glass.  You need to have that little check there, and then pull along that check.  You can't push it, that's the compression.  That won't break it.  It's like if you take an egg and you put it in your hand.  It's like, you know, the long way, you can't break it like that.  But just tap it a little bit with a fork, and it shatters.  That's tension, but this is compression.  Same thing about brittle.  So, that's the science of breaking, is tension--you need tension, and you need a little bit of defect.  You pull that defect open.
Story_ID: 27777
Speaker 1: So, in your job [at Corning, Incorporated, Elmira, New York] you actually travel internationally, explaining--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --what Gorilla glass can do.
Speaker 2: Either, either me--so, when I first started in 2008, it was me and another guy.  And now you know, we have built a team of about thirty-three engineers that work for me.  And so, they can do it.  But only seven of them are in the [United] States.  Most everything is designed in the States, but it's built in Asia.  So, most of these guys are in Taiwan, China, Korea, Japan and Europe.
Speaker 1: And they report to you?
Speaker 2: Uh huh.
Speaker 1: Okay, alright.  So, now during the late 2000s, I mean, you also had a couple of patents.  I guess it's for work that you did prior to working with Gorilla glass.
Speaker 2: Right, patents take a while.
Speaker 1: With the patents, yeah.  There's a 2007 patent for a silica-based rare earth doped core.  Do you know what I'm talking about? (laughter)
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: And so, explain what it is.
Speaker 2: So, that's, those are fiber laser patents.  We generated a huge--you know, we had to generate a patent portfolio to be able to transfer that.  Like, if the military wanted it, or Corning wanted to make devices based on it.  So we made a lot--wrote a lot of patents on those things.  But those were all the fiber laser stuff that we were working on.
Speaker 1: Okay, so, patents in 2007 and 2008.
Speaker 2: Uh huh.
Speaker 1: Those are patents that you did for Corning, basically?
Speaker 2: Absolutely.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And just so people understand this.  And we've asked other scientists about this, too.  When you work for a Corning or a Dow or DuPont or something, when you come with something that's patented, you don't get the money for it.  I mean, you know, you don't get paid...
Speaker 2: I get a salary, yeah.
Speaker 1: You get a salary.
Speaker 2: So, different companies do their dispensations differently.  But no, but I think that, well actually, that patent belongs to that company.  Because I mean, patents are expensive.  I mean, the filing and all the due diligence to get those things filed.  So, our lawyers cover that.  So, yeah.
Speaker 1: How much does it cost, say, to file a patent?
Speaker 2: I mean, Geez, that's a good--and the fact that I don't know that, kind of gives you an idea why they didn't pay me for it.  I don't even have to know that.  I just need to tell the lawyers what to do.  It's, it could be thousands of dollars to get.  And then it's something to actually keep it, you know, renewed.  And then we end up filing it not just in the U.S.  But if it's something that could be practiced in different markets like we automatically do with China, Taiwan, and all these different--where they would be manufactured, you have to file--so these could be tens of thousands of dollars, you know, over the life of a patent.
Speaker 1: Otherwise, somebody else could be--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --making it in another country--
Speaker 2: Absolutely.
Speaker 1: --and not have to--
Speaker 2: Yeah, we don't make anything.  We don't make a lot of things in the U.S. anymore, right.  So, you have to make sure you file that patent, and it gives you the protection in the markets where it's relevant.  So, yeah, it's not cheap.  So, they, you know, but Corning is--patents, I mean, that's one of the metrics that Corning kind of lives by, is how many patents it has a year.  So they, you know, we don't get like royalties or anything.  But they definitely--you know, that's a part of your compensation and part of the worth that you have in the company.  And annually we have some dinners, like the Academy Awards--and how many people--how many patents you got.  And you can rub elbows with your fellow, you know, licensees and stuff.  So, it's pretty nice.  But other, some other companies will give you some percentage and different things.  At Corning, we get a two-dollar bill.
Speaker 1: Okay.  (laughter)
Speaker 2: (laughter)  We get a two-dollar bill.  Because I guess [President Thomas] Jefferson was, he's on the two-dollar bill, and he was instrumental in the [U.S.] Patent [and Trademark] Office.
Speaker 1: Okay, alright.
Story_ID: 27778
Speaker 1: So, right now, Sony uses Gorilla glass for--
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.
Speaker 1: --televisions and computers, and--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.  So, yeah, I mean, we [Corning, Incorporated, Elmira, New York] have over thirty-three brands that use our glass.  So, it's almost every brand that you can think of, is using that glass.
Speaker 1: Now, you say you're like phasing away from Gorilla Glass.
Speaker 2: So, my job, so my job is to take changing.  So someone will replace me as the--so they wanted me when this stuff was like growing like crazy.  But, now that role is evolving into something more traditional.  You know, all the, I mean most of our customers, they've already, they already know the basics in those things.  And so, now their questions aren't as fundamental as they once were.  So, now I can--you don't need necessarily a scientist on that.  So, they're--I'm being re-deployed on something that kind of requires something more in line with my skill set, I guess.
Story_ID: 27779
Speaker 1: Just the last thing about Gorilla glass here.  What is native damage resistance?
Speaker 2: (laughter).
Speaker 1: I saw that, and I just had to ask you about it.
Speaker 2: Okay, I'm going to explain this to you.  And I want to make sure that you understand this.  So you're going to have to tell me that it makes sense, alright.  So, native damage is--so Gorilla glass, I told you that if you just take glass and you don't get it in that salt bath, the potassium nitrate bath, it will induce some damages.  That's that compression, right.  So, the way we think--and so, that compression you induce is what you can put on the glass.  Native damage resistance is making the glass--even before you dunk it in the salt and put the compression in, how resistant is the damage?  You can actually build some damages into the base glass.  And then that gets enhanced when you dunk in there.  And the way we do that is, I told you there are two things you need, to break glass.  You need a flaw, and tension.  So, what we have is the glass--it's harder to induce a flaw in the first place.  So, when you press down on it, it locally deforms as opposed to generate little cracks.  And those cracks, if you've generated those cracks, it can break under tension.  So, native damage resistance is actually building that into the glass even before--that's the native part--even before you dunk it into the tank to give it the compression that makes it better.  So, does that make sense?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Yeah, so native is just intrinsic damages.
Speaker 1: Okay, alright.
Speaker 2: Yeah, that's good.  You did your research, yeah, that's right.
Speaker 1: Well, they did it in Chicago [Illinois; The HistoryMakers' office], but I'll take credit, okay. (laughter)
Speaker 2: But a lot of people--that's, and that's one of the things that differentiate it.  And so what has happened is, in Gorilla we got, we caught our competitors on their heels.  Because they didn't know this was going to be a big market, so they didn't really worry about it too much.  And then when they actually saw the market, it was growing and had the potential to break a billion dollars.  Now, we've got a lot more competitors coming out there.  So, when you asked about was Gorilla glass developed in 2005, I would say it's continued--so, that development is Gorilla Glass 3 (unclear)--that was just announced earlier this year.  And the first device on the market that has Gorilla glass was the Samsung S4 [phone].  It's just coming out, so it's a brand new glass.  It has this intrinsic, or this native damage resistance.  So we have to do that to stay ahead, a step ahead, of our competitors.
Story_ID: 27780
Speaker 1: So, who is Corning's competition?
Speaker 2: Other glassmakers:  Asahi [Glass], Schott [Glass], NEG [Nippon Electric Glass Company]--
Speaker 1: Yeah, Schott Glass out of Germany, right.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, exactly.  Yeah, these are guys that make glass.  But to answer your question, who's our competition?   Those are the other glassmakers.  That's the question.  Our competition, our base competition is Corning.  And how's that?  It's like a--(laughter).
Speaker 1: So, Corning is the biggest glass player in--
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, yeah.  I mean, they're in different markets, you know.  Like LCD has been our biggest market, and we definitely, you know, run that.  I mean, well over--we have the majority of that.  But, like, plasma TV's that are being phased out, we didn't really have a play there, because there's nothing really special about the glass on a plasma screen.  It's basically window glass.  And as a commodity play, Corning doesn't play.  So, Corning is really a specialty glassmaker, you know.  We don't even make Corningware anymore.  We sold that name.  Borden--and now World Kitchen, makes that--back in the 90s [1990].
Speaker 1: That's disappointing.  (laughter)
Speaker 2: Where there's a Corningware shop--I don't know if you've passed it, but that used to be the main thing people talked about, "Oh, yeah, can you get me some of that French white?"  I said, "Yeah, but we don't make it anymore."  But that stuff, you can, you'd take it out of the oven and put it in the refrigerator, yeah.  That's, yeah, our pyroceramics.  Yeah, we sold all that.  It wasn't making the margins that Corning wanted to make.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Story_ID: 27781
Speaker 1: Now what are you phasing into now, in terms of your work [at Corning, Incorporated, Elmira, New York]?
Speaker 2: Right.  So, as the Gorilla Glass starts to mature, my work now is to move back towards--So, I've been in the commercial area now, working directly with customers.  Now, I'll work more closely--I'll go back towards science and research and development, and manage portfolio projects for some of our big customers and try to commercialize things more quickly.  We're trying to take--Gorilla was interesting, because it was good science and it hit a market need very quickly.  So, we're trying to see if we can continue to address those needs.  So, my job now is to see if I can help, you know--in going back to inventing, and fast-tracking things to products quickly.  So, I can see if I can translate what I've learned over the last five years, to speed up our development cycles.
Speaker 1: What proportion of resources would you say that Corning spends on research and development?
Speaker 2: We spend 10 percent--on our research development engineering, we have a target of 10 percent of sales, which is pretty big.  Most companies are low single digits.  You know, there are very few research, industrial research labs that still exist.  But 10 percent is what we always use, right around 10 percent.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 27782
Speaker 1: What advice would you have for young physicists or engineers on the way up about, you know, companies like Corning [Incorporated, Elmira, New York], and what should they be doing?
Speaker 2: Good question.  So for someone in school, or in industry, or in engineering or hard science, I would probably say three things.  One: go out and, you know--the most important thing is figure out what that company, how that company makes money.  Because that's how you'll make an impact.  And align that to what your interests are.  How do they make money?  It took--it sounds trivial, but it's not.  A lot of people get very frustrated because companies aren't interested in their, in them.  But that's just not--you're not working on something that this company could make money off of.  What--there are some fundamental things that Corning does to make money.  Like I said, we don't make dishes anymore, so the--. Two: I would say to--not just for industry, but for anything--you know, make sure that, you know--like you mentioned, you must know math.  Yeah, the math and all of that other stuff is important.  But make sure that you can communicate, communicate extremely well, whether it be written or oral.  Be a good communicator.  It's not the person that comes up with the idea that gets the credit, it's the person that--it's not the thought in my head that gets the credit, it's the person that put it in your head that gets the credit.  So, be able to translate things is important.  And three:  you know, welcome the fact that things are global.  Be able to--and that's been an advantage that I've had, is you know, I guess being a minority in the [United] States, doesn't bother me when I'm a minority anywhere else.  But a lot of my peers they don't--it doesn't bother me when I can't, you know, speak the language.  I can jump out in Shanghai [China] and get around just like I can in Chicago [Illinois].  You know, it doesn't--I'm not intimidated.  I can sense what alleys not to go down.  So, yeah, so welcome this global nature of the way businesses--this world is flat, Thomas Friedman [journalist, columnist, author] stuff, yeah.  Those would be the three things, I would say, professionally.  Know how your company makes money. Communicate, learn, and work hard at communicating and being able to convey your ideas.  And embrace global.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 27783
Speaker 1: Now, when you look back on everything you've done to this point, what would you consider to be your professional legacy at this point?  You're still a young man, but--
Speaker 2: Being resilient, I would say, and showing people that you don't have to get typecast.  And when I was, you know, at the top of my research game and not wanting to leave, and welcoming change--and then they said, "No, we want you to come over here."   And I kicked and screamed a little bit, and they ignored it.  Then I came over, and I did something else.  Now people, some people have forgotten that I was in research at one point.  They're like, "Oh yeah, that's right.  You were in research."  Because I came over here and I did what I needed to do, and now I'm going to go back over there and do what I need to do.  So, welcoming, embracing change, I think is one thing that I've shown that I'm able to do.  And always make time for people coming up behind me.  I always do that, you know.  I don't care who it is.  If they have the nerve to ask me for a one-on-one, and they want to talk to me about something, I'll do it.  But the downside is that they have to hear what I have to say to them.  So, they came and so, yeah.  Those would be the things, I'd say.  I mean, yeah, we can always look at that paper, that patent, or whatever.  But, you know, I think my legacy is just kind of showing that you don't, don't allow yourself to get typecast.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And in that same regard, looking back at everything you've done to this point, is there any major thing that you'd do differently if you could change something?
Speaker 2: I would have taken the advice that I--those three things that I just said.  I would have learned those earlier in life.  I would learned how to communicate better when I was younger.  I would have figured out to help Corning make some money earlier than 2008 after, you know--not taking me eight years.  And I would have welcomed global things earlier.  I would have taken those pieces of advice in my twenties instead of my forties.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Story_ID: 27784
Speaker 1: What are some of your hopes and concerns for the African-American community today?
Speaker 2: My hopes for the African American community is that we--almost everything that I see in the African American community that--the disparities--I can attribute it to one thing.  And that's this horrible, horrible, unbelievably horrible, wealth gap.  And I mean, you know, our wealth gap is just tremendous.  I think the average--Pew just did a study last year.  And I think the average white wealth--well, I mean like the, you know, net worth is at--Gee, what was it, like?  Like a hundred thousand.  And the average black is at like around two or three thousand.  Just--not income, but wealth.  It's just, you know, so somehow we need...  My biggest hope is that we can somehow close that.  And by close it, I don't mean whites drop.  (laughter).  I mean, we actually raise it up.  And there are a lot of things that contribute to that.  But, you know, but we continue to work.  And we've actually lost ground in the past few years, over the decade before, which is very disconcerting.  We were disproportionately impacted by the Recession.  But wealth--I mean, we don't know much about it.  I mean, wealth is generational.  That's the big thing, right.  So, other than the few stories we hear about, you know, these self-made millionaires--there aren't a lot of those, you know.  But wealth is the time value of money.  So, my biggest hope is that we can recognize and start chipping away at that huge disparity, that net worth disparity.  Because I mean, all these other things I think are peripheral to that, you know, these so-called ghetto issues, or these educational issues.  Everything, every one of these things boils back to--if you just don't have the resources, what can you do?
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 27785
Speaker 1: Well, tell us something about your family.  Now, you told us a little bit about your wife.  You met her--
Speaker 2: Yeah, we met in grad school at [University of] Michigan [Ann Arbor, Michigan].
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: So yeah, Robin, a chemical engineer.  We have a daughter Nia, fifteen years old, and a son Donnell, II.  I didn't name him, my wife named him.  He--
Speaker 1: Did you name your daughter?
Speaker 2: I did name my daughter, I did name my daughter, Nia, yeah.
Speaker 1: And that means?
Speaker 2: Purpose, yeah, that's right.  It means purpose.  And Donnell, yeah, I named him and--or, I did not name him.  My wife named him.  That's a big thing in her family.  Her brother has her dad's name.  But I didn't want him to have, you know, such big shoes to fill, you know.  But yeah, and they're both becoming pretty well-adjusted kids.  I'm very proud of them.  They're both athletic, and they're both forgetful.  You know, I have to go take them their shoes at lunchtime.  They are, you know, they have good hearts.  They try to--they're lazy.  They don't want to do any work around the house.  But we don't push them to do it, either, so it's our fault.  They like school.  They don't necessarily have any--and they're not afraid of science.  They, it's just as natural to them as anything else, which I appreciate.  So, they have that entire--and I try to expose them to as much as I can, so they can make some good decisions.  My wife and I try to expose them to as much as we can.  So, they'll go to--they've both been to Europe, more than I've been.  They've, they'll go to sports camps this summer, and they'll go to academic camps.  And so, we'll see what their decisions are.  Hopefully, they can, they'll have enough to make some good ones.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Story_ID: 27786
Speaker 1: Sir, how would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: I guess I would say I would just like to be remembered.  (laughter).  And not for something like, yeah, like, with ten words for some horrible accident.  I'd like to be remembered as somebody that actually cared, and cared about people.  I think that's more important than anything else.  That I actually, you know, cared about people and set up a model that people could say, "Yeah, you know, if he could make time to do this, then so can I."  That kind of thing, that will put people first.  That's how I'd like to be remembered.
Story_ID: 27787
Speaker 1: Is Corning [Incorporated, Elmira, New York] involved in any minority education programs or, you know--
Speaker 2: And that's a good question.
Speaker 1: --mentoring programs?
Speaker 2: Yeah, that's a great question.  Yeah, so, we, so you know asked about the AQIT [Awareness Quality Improvement Team].  And there's another organization that I led at one point, called the Society of Black Professionals, that's, it's Corning-wide, where the AQIT was just the science and technology community.  And we've definitely done--NSBE, or the National Society of Black Engineers, local chapters of that, and things of that nature.  Corning gives money annually to HBCU [historically black colleges and universities]--several HBCUs.  I think there's six HBCUs, and they've been recognized for that.  But one thing I'd like to work on, and I'd like to make some headway on, is doing something like that Bell Labs Fellowship Program that we had.  If I could direct Corning to do something like that--  Because again, I think that these things--not to sound so mercenary, but I, you know, it's hard to do things when you just don't have the resources to do them.  So, I'd like to make Corning and others realize that the--it's not a risk that you're taking, it's an investment that they're making.  So, yeah, there are some things that are being done here, but I think there's a lot more that can be done.  But we just have to have the vision to figure out what that could be.  Not just giving money but, you know, devoting time and realizing that this is something that needs to happen, for the country's sake.
