Story_ID: 14856
Speaker 1: Major funding for the following program was provided by AT&T Broadband, Exelon [Corporation], and Walgreens [Co.]. Additional funding was provided by Harris Bank and the 'Chicago Tribune'.
Story_ID: 14857
Speaker 1: She is one of the country's most celebrated vocal artists with more than fifty hit singles and twenty albums. She is known worldwide as the artist who bridged the gap. Her name is Dionne Warwick, and The HistoryMakers is proud to present 'An Evening With Dionne Warwick.' And now to our host, star of stage and screen, the legendary and talented Diahann Carroll.
Story_ID: 14858
Speaker 1: It is an honor for me to be here in the presence of the young woman that is being honored tonight. She's an incredible creature. I think we should all be very grateful that we lived in her time and we shared her brilliant artistry. There is only one. Ladies and gentlemen, the incomparable Dionne Warwick.
Speaker 2: (Singing) The moment I wake up, before I put on my makeup, I say a little prayer for you. While combing my hair now, and wonder what dress to wear, now, I say a little prayer for you. Forever, and ever you'll stay in my heart, and I will love you. Forever, and ever, we never will part, oh, how I'll love you. Together, together, that's how it must be to live without you, would only be heartbreak for me.
Speaker 1: Dionne Warwick!
Speaker 2: (Applause)
Story_ID: 14859
Speaker 1: Oh, look at all you pretty peoples.  Hi. Fine, how are you?
Speaker 2: I asked Dionne to wear a skirt this evening. I wanted us to show you our legs while we can. So even though she--thank you.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Thank you.
Speaker 1: You're welcome.
Speaker 2: Some of the best legs in the business belong to Ms. Warwick. I try to hold my own, you know. Dionne, it's lovely to be here with you.
Speaker 1: Thank you, darling.
Speaker 2: I would have died if you hadn't asked me to come to be here tonight.
Speaker 1: Well, we know we're not going to allow you to die, so.
Speaker 2: Thank you. So many people have asked since they learned about this evening how we met.
Speaker 1: Let me preface this by saying that Miss Carroll has been an inspiration and a mentor of mine for as long as I've been in the industry. And I always considered it a privilege to have been able to come into your dressing room and to speak to you on a one-on-one basis. I used to go to see people that were in a place that I wanted to be. And you were performing at the Persian Room at the Plaza Hotel in New York City [New York], and I remember vividly going there with my notebook. Now, I considered going to see people like Diahann and Lena Horne and Ella Fitzgerald my classes. And that's where I learned my craft. I sat in the back of the room, and I remember like it was yesterday. You moved in a certain place on your stage, and the spotlight came right to the table. And I was furiously writing notes. And I remember her saying, "Little girl, what are you doing?"  "Uh, uh, duh" was all I could think of saying.
Speaker 2: I am so honored to hear you remember this--,
Speaker 1: Absolutely
Speaker 2: --And share this with me because I'm just a few years older than you.
Speaker 1: (Laughs)
Story_ID: 14860
Speaker 1: I have watched you grow. I mean I literally saw you at the very beginning, and it's an honor to see what you've developed into, which is quite lovely. We're both easterners.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: You are from?
Speaker 2: East Orange, New Jersey.
Speaker 1: And I think most of us understand that the strength of you that we are privy to is mostly because you were raised in a very religious, strong family unit.
Speaker 2: Oh, absolutely.
Speaker 1: You need to have that in our profession.
Speaker 2: No doubt.
Speaker 1: And your mother, I have just learned, managed a gospel singing group called the Drinkard Singers?
Speaker 2: Drinkards, that's right. That's my family.
Speaker 1: Would you please tell me about your mother [Lee Drinkard] doing this?
Speaker 2: Of course. Well, I grew up in a gospel singing family, in the Drinkards, my aunts and uncles, my mother's brothers and sisters. And they were, and still are, very, very much involved in our church activities. They still sing at functions. So my background is gospel music. And my mom, being the eldest of her family, she basically was the manager of the group and made sure that they got to where they had to go and got paid and all that important stuff. And it was very instrumental in helping my sister [Dee Dee Warwick] and I form our own gospel group, The Gospelaires.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: And so coming from that type of a family--.
Speaker 1: And your dad? Your dad?
Speaker 2: My dad [Mancel Warrick], he promoted gospel records. And they both traveled with me in the very beginning of my career, as well. They took turns.
Speaker 1: I feel fortunate, and I do know that middle-class black families traveled with those little girls.
Speaker 2: Oh, yes, they did.
Speaker 1: To make sure everything is correct on the road.
Speaker 2: Always, yes.
Speaker 1: Yes, I'm very happy.
Speaker 2: "No, you can't do that. No, you will not go there. Yes, you will go there."
Speaker 1: That's right.
Speaker 2: Okay?
Speaker 1: Yes. And you know what? I love them for it.
Speaker 2: (Applause)
Story_ID: 14861
Speaker 1: And now, there was the New Hope Baptist Church.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: That was in Orange?
Speaker 2: No, that's in Newark, New Jersey.
Speaker 1: Newark.
Speaker 2: 106 Sussex Avenue, if you intend to come and visit us. We'd love to have you. It's my church. It's where I grew up in, basically. And I played for our choir there and was the head of our junior choir. So that's my home church.
Story_ID: 14862
Speaker 1: Where did you go to school?
Speaker 2: Went to school in East Orange, New Jersey. I went to Lincoln Grammar School, which is now the Dionne Warwick Institute [of Economics and Entrepreneurship].
Speaker 1: Oh, isn't that wonderful?
Speaker 2: Onto the Burnell Davey Junior High School, East Orange High School. And then, I went on to the Hartt College of Music [sic, The Hartt School, University of Hartford] in Hartford, Connecticut, where I have completed all of my studies. I have earned--earned--my doctorate in music education. Yeah.
Story_ID: 14863
Speaker 1: Let's take a minute to talk about your music.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: How did this all begin? How did it happen to you?
Speaker 2: You know, my mom's [Lee Drinkard's] group [The Drinkard Singers] were at the Apollo Theater [Harlem, New York] on a gospel show, and we happened to be at one of the shows listening to their music. And a man ran in frantically, I mean really frantic, "We need singers. We need singers."  And they wanted to take either my mother's group or the Davis Sisters, who happened to be on the show, the Imperials, who were also on the show. And of course, they couldn't leave the Apollo to go do some background work. So big mouth here said, "We can do it," not--never knowing what background was or anything of that nature. It was like what did I commit ourselves to doing? But as it turned out, it was a date at Savoy Records in Newark, New Jersey for the Sam the Man Taylor--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --And Nappy Brown. And that was our first experience of ooh-ing and ahh-ing and yay-yay-ing behind secular music.
Speaker 1: Are we allowed to ask you how old were you when this happened?
Speaker 2: Two and a half.  Yes.
Speaker 1: Here.
Speaker 2: Thank you, darling.
Speaker 1: You know, we only think of you in terms of music. What do you think--if music had not been a part of your life, what would--
Speaker 2: There's no way in the world.  I can't imagine life without music.
Speaker 1: Anything else? I know exactly what you mean.
Speaker 2: Could you ever imagine a world without music?
Speaker 1: No.  We'd all be basket cases.
Speaker 2: What would happen to us without music?
Speaker 1: Basket cases.  We need it. We need it more--
Speaker 2: Absolutely.
Speaker 1: --than we need psychiatrists.
Story_ID: 14864
Speaker 1: What kind of music did you enjoy when you were a youngster?
Speaker 2: Oh, Frankie Lymon and Teenagers, you know. I listened to B. B. King, Sarah Vaughan. Well, I grew up around Sarah Vaughan 'cause she went to school with my mother. So she was Aunt Sass. Dinah Washington, Nat King Cole, Perry Como, but my group was Frankie Lymon and the Teenagers.
Speaker 1: They got your heart.
Speaker 2: Oh, yes.
Speaker 1: At a young age.
Speaker 2: Absolutely.
Story_ID: 14865
Speaker 1: You formed your own singing group at one point.
Speaker 2: The Gospelaires.
Speaker 1: The Gospelaires was your group.  You did that. Weren't you young and--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --Very ambitious to do that?
Speaker 2: Always. You know me.
Speaker 1: Yes, I do.
Speaker 2: Well, it just seemed the natural thing to do, being that I was part of a gospel singing family, that we sang gospel all the time, that a group seemed a natural evolution.
Speaker 1: But did you record anything at that time?
Speaker 2: No, I didn't. We just did background work. We worked with some of--stellar stars of that time.
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: And those dollars helped put me through college. So it served its purpose. I did a lot of demonstration records for songwriters, because I was working out of the Brill Building [New York, New York]. And, of course, you know that's where all the songwriters were--
Speaker 1: That's right.
Speaker 2: --And all the publishers were.
Speaker 1: That's right.
Speaker 2: And one thing basically led to another. I did a demonstration record for the Shirelles that [Burt] Bacharach and [Hal] David had written, and Florence Greenberg, who owned and operated Scepter Records.
Speaker 1: Now, are you telling us that this is how you met Burt Bacharach and Hal David.  Bacharach and David.  And Florence?
Speaker 2: Yeah, because of a demonstration record.
Speaker 1: Really?
Speaker 2: I met Burt first. He had written a song with another songwriter, Bob Hilliard, for the Drifters he called, 'Mexican Divorce.'
Speaker 1: I'm sorry.
Speaker 2: Good song, though. It's a really good song.
Speaker 1: That's an inside joke. We're letting that one along.
Speaker 2: And after the session was completed, he asked if I'd be interested in doing more demonstration records of songs that he was writing with another songwriting partner, Hal David. And of course, I said, "Yes."  It was very lucrative for me. I had to pay 35 cents to get to New York on the 118.
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: That bus went to the Port Authority [of New York and New Jersey], and five blocks up the street, there it was. I continued to do background work and demonstration records of their songs. One of the songs, as I reiterated, was written for the Shirelles. And Florence Greenberg, she didn't want the song, but she wanted the singer. I was not going to really have any part of that based on the fact that first of all, my mother would have killed me. "You are going to school, and you're going to finish, and that's the end of that."
Speaker 1: That's right.
Speaker 2: So and that's exactly what I told them. And actually, my graduating gift was my first hit record.
Speaker 1: Really?
Speaker 2: Yep, 'Don't Make Me Over.'
Story_ID: 14866
Speaker 1: How many of you remember 'Don't Make Me Over?'  Your career really took off from that point, and it skyrocketed you. And I think we can take a look at it for just a moment.
Speaker 2: In 1963, Scepter Records released the first album for Marie Dionne Warrick. However, they spelled her name wrong, making the second R into a W.  But Dionne wasn't upset by the error and took to the name Warwick, which has since brought her worldwide fame and celebrity.
Speaker 1: (Singing) The moment I wake up, before I put on my makeup.
Speaker 2: Her collaboration with producers and songwriters Burt Bacharach and Hal David brought the trio unprecedented success. Her unique vocal style and timeless elegance merged perfectly with the duo's musical compositions and lyrics. Dubbed "The Artist that Bridged the Gap,"  Dionne Warwick graced the air waves of both R&B [rhythm and blues] and pop radio stations. Dionne could convey both vulnerability and strength in a single lyric, and the sophisticated interpretation of songs showed wisdom beyond her years. Bacharach and David marveled at the artist's versatility of range and style, and they created complex musical arrangements that only she could sing, and she sang them effortlessly.
Speaker 1: (Singing) If you see me walking down the street and I start to cry each time we meet, walk on by.
Speaker 2: Intent on her new career, Dionne embarked on a European tour. The legendary Marlene Dietrich introduced Dionne at her debut in Paris [France]. On each stop, Dionne won over audiences with early hits like 'Walk On By,' and 'Anyone Who Had a Heart.'
Speaker 1: (Singing) Anyone who ever loved could look at me and know that I love you. Anyone who ever dreamed--
Speaker 2: She was the first African-American female pop and R&B performer to achieve international fame and appear before the Queen of England [Queen Elizabeth II]. Her reputation as a major force in American music was squarely set, as well. Dionne quickly became America's top-selling female artist, and the life of this famed songstress would never be the same.
Speaker 1: (Applause)
Story_ID: 14867
Speaker 1: I'm curious; were you aware that you were the first crossover artist?
Speaker 2: No, not until somebody told me, you know. That sounded so dumb, didn't it?
Speaker 1: No, no.
Speaker 2: But no, I didn't really realize how many firsts that I have been a part of.
Speaker 1: Well, you don't think about it when you're doing it.
Speaker 2: No, you just do it.
Speaker 1: You think about the work.
Speaker 2: You know, you just go ahead and do it.
Speaker 1: And then, someone came over to you and said, "That's crossover music."
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And no one's ever done it before.
Speaker 2: No, that's right.
Speaker 1: I have to tell you, the first time I heard the sound of you, I was living in New York [New York] at the time. And several members of my family as well as some friends called, and they said, "Have you heard this young singer?"  I made it my business to get to the record store that day because of what they had to say, and I heard this sound. I couldn't digest it. It was so different. It was a part of my youth because I heard the gospel in it, but it had other things. And I believed the other things. The other things were pure and wonderful. And when I heard Burt [Bacharach] with you, Burt, who was becoming this extremely sophisticated musician reaching for other things, and you with the earth underneath your feet, I thought I was going to scream.
Speaker 2: Thank you.
Speaker 1: Oh, yes, darling. I just have to throw that in a little bit here.
Speaker 2: Thank you.
Speaker 1: That really is bridging a very important gap. We shared some of the same challenges in--
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.
Speaker 1: --Breaking the color barrier, those days. Were you ever accused of something that I've heard many times--
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.
Speaker 1: --Copping out, and--
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.
Speaker 1: --And not being black enough.
Speaker 2: You're not black enough, yeah.
Speaker 1: I love the "enough" part. I don't know what I--
Speaker 2: Definitely, yeah. And I usually say, "Well, I look in the mirror every day, and I know what I see."
Speaker 1: That's black.
Speaker 2: You know. I don't know what you're looking at.  I remember vividly when 'Alfie' came out, and there was a DJ [disc jockey] in New York, Rocky G. And I remember getting to that point, and I saw Rocky at the Apollo [Theater, Harlem, New York] one evening. And I asked him, I said, "Why aren't you playing my records?"  He said, "Well, you know, you're just too white for us."  I said, "I--excuse me?"  He said, "Well, you know, I mean you're just a little too much."  I said, "Oh, okay. Thank you."  And finally, 'Alfie' had started peaking and it became the number one record on his radio station. And I called him to say, "Hey, Rocky. Who's that white girl you're playing on your station?" So I guess I--
Speaker 1: Sometimes, you just have to help people over a certain little bridge, you know.
Speaker 2: I guess so.
Speaker 1: Broaden their thinking and move on.
Speaker 2: Exactly.
Story_ID: 14868
Speaker 1: There is a song that Burt [Bacharach] and Hal [David] wanted you to do, and you didn't want to do it. You really did not want to record this song. You want to take a look at this song?
Speaker 2: Do you know way to San Jose? I've been away so long, I may go wrong and lose my way. Do you know the way to San Jose? I'm going to back to find--
Speaker 1: In 1968, Dionne won her first Grammy Award for the Best Contemporary Female Vocal Performance for the gold-selling record, 'Do You Know the Way to San Jose?'--
Speaker 2: I've got lots of friends in San Jose. Oh, do you know the way to San Jose?
Speaker 1: --Making her the first African-American female artist of her generation to win the award.
Speaker 2: Could you share with us what it was that you held so fast--that you hated about this song?
Speaker 1: Well, "whoa whoa whoa," I mean they'd been writing such prolific, wonderful words for me to sing.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Hal David I feel is probably the best lyricist of our time. And he's written songs that will live long after we're all gone. And I got to the point where they would play songs for me, and if I said I hated it, that would be the single.
Speaker 2: Say you'd have to do that.
Speaker 1: That would be the single.
Speaker 2: That's the single.
Speaker 1: Definitely. Absolutely.
Speaker 2: That's always the way. How did you feel?  What did it feel like? Can you remember how you felt?
Speaker 1: Oh, yeah. Every single recording that I've made I remember. Every single I've made I remember, whether they were hits or not. I equate my recordings as my children, you know, and people always ask me, "What's your favorite song?" All of them. Every single one of them happens to be my favorite.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: You know, you can't distinguish your favorite child.
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: You know, and that's the way I feel. And some wonderful things are--accompanied each song. So yeah, they're all babies.
Speaker 2: I understand that completely. You do know that in my act at this moment, I am doing a tribute to you. I have stolen everything you ever recorded.
Speaker 1: Oh, great.
Speaker 2: And I'm having the best time, really.
Speaker 1: Good.
Speaker 2: But I have to tell you, sometimes, they make me cry because they bring back such memories.
Speaker 1: Oh, good.
Speaker 2: And they're so beautiful and important. So I must say that the true test of your relationship is in the songs.
Story_ID: 14869
Speaker 1: Let's see how you feel about this song.  Okay.  (singing) What do you get when you fall in love, a guy with a pin to burst your bubble. That's what you get for all your trouble. I'll never fall in love again.
Speaker 2: In 1970, Dionne won her second Grammy Award for best-selling album for the hit, 'I'll Never Fall in Love Again', written by Burt Bacharach and Hal David, continuing the phenomenon, and racking up 30 hit singles and close to 20 best-selling albums.  (singing) Raindrops keep falling on my head, just like the guy whose feet are too big for his bed, nothing seems to fit. And I'm never gonna stop the rain by complaining. You'll never get to heaven if you break my heart, so be very careful not to make us part. You won't get to heaven if you--if you break my--if you break my heart. What the world needs now, yeah, is love sweet love. It's the only thing that there's just too little of. A chair is still a chair, even if there's no one sitting there. But a chair is not a house, and a house is not a home when there's no one there.
Speaker 1: Her recording of tunes like 'House is Not a Home', 'Alfie',--  (singing) What's it all about, Alfie?  --And 'Theme From the Valley of the Dolls'--  (singing) Gotta get off, gonna get, have to off from this ride.
Speaker 2: --Made Dionne a pioneer as one of the first female artists to popularize classic movie themes. From new arrangements to former classics, Dionne always set musical standards that to this day go unmatched.  (singing) Now that I found you, tell me how did I live without you? Honey, it's plain to see--
Speaker 1: The early 1970s brought about significant changes in the life of this phenomenal entertainer. Scepter Records had folded, and she signed a new partnership with producer-songwriters Bacharach and David at Warner Bros. Records. The relationship, however, became strained there and eventually resulted in the demise of the collaborating dream team of Warwick, Bacharach, and David.  (singing) And then came you, yeah, then came you.  Whoa, yeah.
Story_ID: 14870
Speaker 1: When I heard about the breakup of the relationships [with Burt Bacharach and Hal David], I was shocked. I was also very disappointed, and I was disappointed because you were disappointed, too.
Speaker 2: It was an immediate wake-up call as to what has to be done once something is over.
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: The unfortunate part is that Bacharach, David, Warwick were known in the industry as the triangle marriage that worked. And as it turns out, we got divorced. You know, time is probably the best friend anybody can have--
Speaker 1: That's right.
Speaker 2: --If you use it properly.
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: And it did give us all an opportunity to kind of spread our wings and try other avenues of approach. And as a result of that, 'Then Came You' was nominated for a Grammy [Award]. It was my very first number one record without Bacharach and David.
Speaker 1: Yes, yes, yes.
Speaker 2: It all worked itself out.
Speaker 1: That was very important for you.
Speaker 2: Yes, it was.
Speaker 1: And sometimes divorces are a good thing.
Speaker 2: Yes, sometimes they are.
Speaker 1: We don't aspire to them.
Speaker 2: No.  But it happens, you know.
Story_ID: 14871
Speaker 1: Now that you were practically out on your own, how was it working with the other producers? You worked with Thom Bell, the Spinners, Johnny Mathis, Isaac Hayes. That must have been fabulous.
Speaker 2: Barry Manilow, the Bee Gees, Jerry Ragovoy. I mean I had a good time.
Speaker 1: Yes, and they were waiting for you.
Speaker 2: Yes, they were.
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Do you want us to play a little bit of the new collaborators so we can see where you went with that?
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: In 1978, Warwick signed with Arista Records and soon after received another Grammy Award for Best Performance, Female Pop for the gold record 'I'll Never Love This Way Again,' produced by Barry Manilow.
Speaker 2: (Singing) Friends face in time, come to me.
Speaker 1: She also received a Grammy that same year for Best Performance, R&B Female for the gold record 'Déjà Vu,' written by Isaac Hayes.
Speaker 2: (Singing) Long ago, they call it déjà vu.
Speaker 1: Next, she collaborated with Barry Gibb of the Bee Gees for the chart-topping 'Heartbreaker,' proving that she was still at the top of her game.
Speaker 2: (Singing) Why do you have to be a heartbreaker when I was being what you want me to be?  Suddenly, I--,
Story_ID: 14872
Speaker 1: Now, you do something very, very well that we all have to learn how to do, and that's that you know how to forgive. And you've been--
Speaker 2: But I don't forget.
Speaker 1: Okay. But if you can do the forgive part--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And you were reunited--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --With Hal, Burt.
Speaker 2: (simultaneously) Hal David and Burt Bacharach, yeah.
Speaker 1: How in the world did that happen?
Speaker 2: In the period of time, which was actually twelve years, that we were separated, it really gave me an opportunity to grow. I had both of my sons at that time, and it was a period of time where I was very busy being a mommy. And that was my primary interest at the time. Bacharach called me because Aaron Spelling had written a show called 'The Finder of Lost Loves,' and Aaron point-blank told him, "There's nobody that can sing this stuff but Dionne, so you've got to call her up 'cause we want her to sing it as the title for the show."
Speaker 1: And this is Burt talking to Aaron Spelling.
Speaker 2: Uh-huh, and Burt had to call me. You know, you just kind of sit back and wait. Time takes care of everything.
Speaker 1: Everything that goes around comes around.
Speaker 2: He called, and very few people had my private number, and this call came in on my private number. And when I picked up the phone and said, "Hello," I expected to hear a voice that I was familiar with consistently.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: And "Hey, Dionne."  I said, "Yes? Who is this?"  And, "Burt." I mean it could have been Burt Reynolds. It could have been Burt--so naturally, I said, "Burt who?"
Speaker 1: I love you.
Speaker 2: And--
Speaker 1: You had to do that darling.
Speaker 2: I had to.  He explained to me what was going on, a new television show, a new song, and Aaron insisted that I was the only one he wanted to do this song. So would it be okay to come over and play it for me? And I said, "Yeah, of course," you know. And I must say, when true friendships really are friendships, regardless of what seems to put a wedge between them, it's removed when it is absolutely honest. And when he came and rang the doorbell and in his own words, "ran to his security blanket," which is the piano, it was as if no time had passed at all.  It really was. It was a wonderful reunion. I think it was a fabulous song, 'Finder of Lost Loves.'  And--
Speaker 1: I have to tell you that I don't remember their success during that twelve year period. However, I remember your success, so.
Speaker 2: (laughs) Well.
Speaker 1: You were very, very gracious.
Speaker 2: They had a couple of successes. They really did.
Speaker 1: Did they?
Speaker 2: Yeah. Well, yeah. I can name just a couple of things.
Speaker 1: Yeah, okay.
Speaker 2: For Hal, it was with Julio Iglesias and Willie Nelson, 'With All the Girls I Loved Before.'
Speaker 1: Lovely.  That's wonderful.
Speaker 2: He wrote that--
Speaker 1: That's right.
Speaker 2: --Away from Burt.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: And then, Burt wrote 'Arthur's Theme.'
Speaker 1: The film?
Speaker 2: Yes, for the film, won an Oscar [Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences Award] that year. So they had some success.
Speaker 1: Oh, they were very, very talented, but the threesome was the winner.
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. That was the magic.
Story_ID: 14873
Speaker 1: TV and film played an important part in your career, and your debut into the world of film was in a film called 'Slaves' in 1968.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Now, whose film was that?
Speaker 2: That was a Theater Guild Production film. Herbert Biberman was the director, and that was my first effort at being in a film and actually starring. I must say, though, that Ossie Davis and Stephen Boyd, they really walked me through that film.
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: They were the kindest, most generous, giving people I've ever worked with.
Speaker 1: You were very fortunate to have them.
Speaker 2: I certainly was.  Ossie will--he will guide you through.
Speaker 1: He embraced me like I was one of his babies.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And he said, "Don't you worry about anything," and Stephen the same thing. And either side of you, you just can't fall, you know.
Speaker 2: That's wonderful.
Speaker 1: It is fabulous.
Speaker 2: It was an incredible change for you, when you get in front of that camera and you are alone, and you have to make that scene work. And it's all new to you.
Speaker 1: And you have to remember to say the words and not sing them, you know.
Speaker 2: That's right. And your reputation was there, my darling.
Speaker 1: Yes, it was.
Speaker 2: You know, you've already been--you are Dionne Warwick . So now, you're trying something new.
Speaker 1: Yeah. It was interesting. It's something that I certainly hope to do more of.
Story_ID: 14874
Speaker 1: We come to this part in your life that was very fascinating, I think, for most of us: 'Solid Gold.'
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.
Speaker 1: 'Solid Gold.'  Let's take a little look at you on 'Solid Gold.'
Speaker 2: Okay.  Hold on, hold on.
Speaker 1: Dionne was a huge success in her television-hosting debut on 'Solid Gold.'  Her variety program, 'Dionne and Friends,' brought about the ability to bring her immeasurable talent directly to the living rooms of millions of Americans.
Speaker 2: Hello. Please welcome my very special guest and my dear, dear friend, Mr. Barry White.
Speaker 1: This also led to other television ventures, like the made-for-TV concert 'Sisters in the Name of Love' with fellow songbirds Gladys Knight and Patti LaBelle.
Speaker 2: And the fact is that we will always be friends, always.
Story_ID: 14875
Speaker 1: I was very moved the first time I saw you do that, because I know how you are about your friends. And you are very supportive, and you have been to the ladies that were on there with you as well as a few others.
Speaker 2: Yes. A friendship to me is vital. It's the blood that runs through my veins, you know.
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: They're very important for me to be there when I need to be.
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: And I'm finding that when I call somebody a friend and they reciprocate, that they'd really been there. They are friends, so.
Speaker 1: Yes.  That's lovely.
Speaker 2: Yeah, it's important
Speaker 1: I'm going to say this quite seriously to you. As you age, you will find that that is more and more important. Those friendships that you built as you were coming along, and they hung in there and vice versa, you hung in there with them, very important when little muscles and things are not sitting up as high, and little things are getting, you know. It's great to be able to talk to you about this. You came together with a group, and you recorded something that I think means a great deal to all of us. I don't really know how that came about. The song is called 'That's What Friends Are For.'
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: How did you do that? How did you make that happen?
Speaker 2: You know that was the weirdest thing in the world. I was doing a project for Arista [Records] at the time, and [Burt] Bacharach and his then-wife--don't keep track--Carole Bayer Sager.
Speaker 1: Oh, Carole.
Speaker 2: I had just left their home, listening to songs because they were going to produce a few songs for the new project. And that night, you know how we all--well, I know I do it. I cannot sleep without my television on. It's like I've got to hear noise.
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: And I was in that twilight, you're almost asleep but you're not quite, and it was the end of the film. And the music woke me up, and it was that song. And it was being sung by Rod Stewart. It was the song from a film called 'Night Shift.'  The next day, I knew it that night. I knew immediately whose music it was. I mean nobody writes like Burt.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: I don't care what they tried to imitate, nobody writes like this man.
Speaker 1: He is a genius, indeed.
Speaker 2: But I had no clue as to who wrote the lyric. And the next day, when I went back up to hear some more songs, I brought this song up. And it was so funny. He said, "Well, now we know four people that know this song."
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: You know, Carol, Burt, Rod, and Dionne. And I wanted to record it. And as a result of it being about friendships and the meaning of friendships and--I felt that I wanted to include some of my friends.
Story_ID: 14876
Speaker 1: And if I should ever go away, well, then close your eyes and try, feel the way we do today, and then if you can remember--
Speaker 2: Not only was the AIDS epidemic a cause close to the heart of Dionne Warwick, she was also a key participant in the 'We Are The World - USA for Africa' relief effort with Quincy Jones and Michael Jackson. She also served as the U.S. Ambassador of Health, a post she held during both the [Presidents Ronald] Reagan and [George H. W.] Bush administrations. Her tireless efforts to help others and give support to those less fortunate are qualities she learned early in life from her parents.
Story_ID: 14877
Speaker 1: I find that so many women in our profession, we've very strange personal lives. It is because the roles are--we are in the role, usually, that is taken by the male. And you, like, myself, you were married at a very early age.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And you married a lovely man.
Speaker 2: Yep.  I married him twice.
Speaker 1: Yes, you did.
Speaker 2: For punishment.
Speaker 1: We've come to ask you about that today. But you had beautiful sons [David and Damon Elliott].
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.
Speaker 1: And do you have any idea why you decided to marry your husband again?
Speaker 2: It was one of those can't do with, can't do without. When Bill [Elliott] and I got married the first time, I realized one day that I couldn't do everything that I was doing before I got married. You know, my freedom--just kind of--
Speaker 1: Just a bit changed.
Speaker 2: --Boxed in.
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: And I am a free spirit. I mean I really am. And but then, he knew that before he married me, too, okay. But at any rate, I just woke up one day and said, "You know what? We're not supposed to be doing this. This is not what we're supposed to do, not right now, anyway."  And that's why I had to laugh when I said the first song I did for [Burt] Bacharach was 'Mexican Divorce,' because that's where I went.
Speaker 1: That's what you did.
Speaker 2: I went to Juarez [Mexico] and stayed overnight like I was supposed to, signed that little piece of paper. I came back Dionne Warwick.
Speaker 1: Yes, yes.
Speaker 2: No Elliott in sight. And about nine, ten months later, I was on my way to San Francisco [California], where he had moved to. And I was working at the Fairmont Hotel. And he came to see me, and we started talking. And that was basically all we did, because I wouldn't let him in my room. And I was leaving for Italy shortly thereafter, and his sister happened to be living in Italy at the time. And he decided two days after I had gone that he was just going to come to Italy. And when he got there, we got married again in Italy.
Speaker 1: I was talking to someone that was in my life for about nine years, and a very, very famous man. He said to me, "So why have you decided to be single?"  I said, "Because I've learned that I don't know how to be married."
Speaker 2: Yeah, it's true.
Speaker 1: It took a long time for me to understand. I don't think we know how to be married.
Story_ID: 14878
Speaker 1: I was always amazed at your management of your children [David and Damon Elliott]. They were always a part of you.
Speaker 2: Absolutely, and they still are. There was never a time that--well, they were on the road with me in the very early years. And every summer, of course, they were with me. My work schedule actually revolved around their schedule. Then, I didn't miss PTA [Parent Teacher Association] meetings. I didn't miss the cake sales at the school. I was a carpooler. You know, there was never any doubt in my mind that I had to make a choice. There was no choice.
Speaker 1: With your children?
Speaker 2: That's right they're your primary.
Speaker 1: And they said you did not take any stuff .
Speaker 2: And still don't. You know there both--one is one is six [feet] four [inches] one is six [feet] two [inches]. And I tell them like my mother used to tell my dad and my brother. I will get on a stepladder.
Speaker 1: To put you in your place.
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: And they're working?
Speaker 2: Yes, they're both very much involved in the industry. I'm so proud of them both. David started that ball rolling writing and producing. He wrote Luther Vandross's 'Here and Now.'
Speaker 1: Oh!
Speaker 2: You didn't know that? So he was really responsible for Luther getting his first Grammy [Award].
Speaker 1: That's right.
Speaker 2: And Damon, my baby--he'd kill me if he heard me say that--my six foot four [inches] 260-pound baby--he's producing. He's in the new genre of music, the hip-hop area. But his--he's just fallen into a pot of honey, and he's really producing and writing for females: Mya, Destiny's Child, Pink.  It's amazing. Well I.
Speaker 1: You must be very proud.
Speaker 2: Well, let me button this so I can pop it.  Yes, I am.
Story_ID: 14879
Speaker 1: You did have an open mind about one of your songs.
Speaker 2: Absolutely. 'What The World Needs Now is Love' is what you're talking about, and what I did basically was because I went--these are babies, and these are our children. These are people that we have to take responsibility for and the avenue of giving them the right way to go.
Speaker 1: That's right.
Speaker 2: These are brilliant young people. They're business people. They run their own companies. They have zillions of dollars in the bank. And I think that given the opportunity, they could address anyone in a fashion that would be palatable and would be able to understand, and I wanted to let the world know that. I wanted to let the world and them know that in order to get my attention, you can't curse at me. You cannot call me out of my name.
Speaker 1: Oh, thank you.
Speaker 2: There are ways that you can talk to me.
Speaker 1: Thank you, yes.
Speaker 2: And it wasn't easy. It wasn't easy at all because you have the, "Oh, this Dionne dissing us."  Yeah, I'm dissing and thating too. But what I want you to understand is that I care enough about you to confront you.
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Be a part of something that I'm doing. If I happen to be a part of your problem, show me how to be a part of the solution.
Speaker 1: Absolutely.
Speaker 2: Well, when I went to record, I asked my baby, I said, "Damon [Elliott], do you think that they would do it?"  He said, "No. I don't think so."  I said, "Would you do me a favor and ask?"  He says, "Who do you want?" And I took two of the very first ones, was Flesh-N-Bone, who I slapped around a lot, and Kurupt, who I slapped around a lot. And they were the first two that said "yes."  And when we got into the studio, the first--the only thing I said to them basically was the prerequisite is, is this is a song that is very dear to my heart. We will not do anything to mutilate it.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: I want you to stay true to what is being said. I want you to write from your heart what you feel about how this world could use more love. I must tell you, I was overwhelmed at the prolific beauty of the words that these children wrote, not one curse word, not one derogative mention of anything outside of what they felt would make love the primary issue of the world. And it was written so you could read it, and it's just--it was--
Speaker 1: It was something for them to think about. It was a jumping off place for them that was new.
Speaker 2: And it was a way for them to do something without their peers thinking that they sold out. Damon produced this, too.
Speaker 1: Oh, let's hear it. Okay.
Speaker 2: Yo, mom. Who thought that this could happen.
Speaker 1: Nobody but you.
Speaker 2: Love is what we need. So if you get that, the blessings will proceed, so please give back. Coming at ya, Mobb Deep on this song, and now it's on. Come together for born, better yet form Voltron. Spread love like mustard, bust it, making knowledge be born so trust it, it's B-D-K, learn to love it. What the world needs now--what the world needs now is love sweet love--what the world needs now--what the worlds need now--is love, love sweet love. I know just exactly what world needs now, plead it. Everybody come show a little love for your family, Jesus we need it. And even when I flip through the pages of my history, slowly reveal the mystery, got to get it together quickly in this industry. Lord, we don't need another mountain. There are mountains and hillsides enough to climb. There are oceans and rivers enough to cross, enough to last till the end of time. Yo, yo, yo. I could see far and beyond, me and my auntie Dionne with the homie Fazon, who's cool as freon. As the music plays on, portrays and stays on, got this thing together, got to get our game together. Life is life and if your ears are open you could see when you scope doors closed or open. Whether you're in or you're out You're always in and that's for sure, and that's what friends are for, for what the world needs. What the world needs now is love sweet love. What the world needs now is love sweet love. L is for the lies that they told and the lines that they crossed when they burglarized my soul, they cold. O is for the outsiders looking in, times is looking grim. You can't even trust your friends, damn. V, 'cause it's very necessary that various policies get variated and eradicated, I hate it. E is for the extra mile you had to walk just to talk to your homie who was locing and to show him you have love for him. What the world needs now is love sweet love, what the world needs now is love sweet love. What the world needs now is love sweet love. What the world needs now is love sweet love.
Speaker 1: Help the children. Thank you, madam. Help the children
Speaker 2: (simultaneously) That was so much fun.
Speaker 1: Are you having a good time keeping all this together?
Speaker 2: I'm having a great time. You know that, I feel that eventually, I'm going to stop using this.
Speaker 1: Not necessarily.
Speaker 2: Well, at the pace I'm using it.
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: And there are a lot of other areas that I want to dibble and dabble in. I think that we should take advantage of all the talents that God gave us.
Speaker 1: I think so.
Speaker 2: And if we don't use them, he's going to snatch them away from us. So I try to do everything I can.
Story_ID: 14880
Speaker 1: Is there any advice; is there something you would say to young people? It's such a hard question.
Speaker 2: This is the most difficult question that anyone could ask anybody.
Speaker 1: Yes, it is.
Speaker 2: What advice would you give? I don't give advice.
Speaker 1: Thank you. I don't either.
Speaker 2: I can't. I know because I don't take advice well, either.
Speaker 1: I'm not good at that, either.
Speaker 2: I think that if, like anything, whatever it is that you really, truly want, you just go for it. I mean that's the only advice that anybody can give.
Speaker 1: Yes, I think so. I think we both believe that it's important that what we do in life, we recognize that that is our demonstration.
Speaker 2: Absolutely.
Speaker 1: We're not just going through this to do--
Speaker 2: It's not an rehearsal.
Speaker 1: No, this is it. This is it, and your decisions are your responsibility, and your children are watching and your friends' children are watching.
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: So this is called whatever you present to the world, that's what they see. And that's what our young people emulate.
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Pattern themselves after, you know.  And I totally agree with Charles Barkley.  I don't want anybody to look at me as a role model unless--only based on the fact that I'm human. I have frailties, I have faults, and every now and then--not too frequently, but enough times--they will rear their ugly head. And that's when everybody wants to point the finger. But that's when something my grandfather told me ages ago comes into play for me, "You point a finger at me, look down at your hand, and three will will point back at you."
Speaker 1: It's important to do that.
Speaker 2: Absolutely.
Speaker 1: We are all human.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And thank God we are.
Speaker 2: And I think that, you know, role models for children should be right there in their faces every single day.
Speaker 1: Every day.  Every day. I really believe that that is the major part of your legacy,
Story_ID: 14881
Speaker 1: If you thought about what is the legacy that you'd like to leave, what would that be?
Speaker 2: Oh, my goodness. I'd just like to be remembered as being me.
Speaker 1: Well, that's a lot.
Speaker 2: Because I am who I am. I mean this is the package. I don't care if you see me a day from now or a year from now. And that's why I don't have wrinkles, and that's probably why you don't, either, 'cause you don't have to stop and think about how you were with this person at that particular time.
Speaker 1: Well, I'll have to say that's true about you.
Speaker 2: You know?
Speaker 1: Absolutely.
Speaker 2: I like me. I had to grow to like me, but I do.  I like me a lot. I know there are places and areas that need attending to and changing that I will be working on. But I've got a lot of time to do that. And I just feel that if I have to be remembered for anything, it was she was always Dionne.
Speaker 1: If your past and how you've chosen to deal with it is any indication of our sitting here, I think that's enough of a legacy, and I'm very, very proud to call you my friend. You've shared things that I was surprised--I didn't imagine that you were going to share with us. Thank you for being so open and giving to us tonight, Miss Dionne Warwick.
Speaker 2: Thank you.
Speaker 1: (Applause).
Story_ID: 14882
Speaker 1: And I never thought I'd feel this way, and as far as I'm concerned, I'm glad I got the chance to say that I do believe I love you.  And if you should go away, well, then close your eyes and try to feel the way we do today, and then if you can remember, both of you, keep smiling, keep shining, knowing you can always count on me.
Speaker 2: The preceding program was produced by the HistoryMakers, which is solely responsible for its content. Funding for this program was provided by AT&T Broadband, Exelon [Corporation], and Walgreens [Co.]. Additional funding was provided by Harris Bank and the 'Chicago Tribune' and other participating sponsors.
Speaker 1: That's what friends are for.
