Story_ID: 168057
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe; I'm interviewer for The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is--
Speaker 2: OFF-CAMERA VOICE:  Porter Versfelt.
Speaker 1: Porter Versfelt and Scott Stearns.  Observing is--and I let that name slip out of my head too--
Speaker 2: OFF-CAMERA VOICE:  Jodi Merriday.
Speaker 1: Jodi Merriday and Mrs. Warner.  Sir, can you please state your name and spell it for us please?
Speaker 2: Clinton E. Warner. C-L-I-N-T-O-N, W-A-R-N-E-R.
Speaker 1: And what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: 7/11/24.  Place of birth Atlanta, Georgia.
Speaker 1: Sir, what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: I'm a retired surgeon.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: M.D.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what is today's date?
Speaker 2: Today's date is 8/12/03.
Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: We're at my home in Atlanta [Georgia].
Story_ID: 168058
Speaker 1: Before we go into depth.  There are five People magazine-ish type lightweight questions that we always ask and they just require a short answer.  The first one is: sir, what is your favorite food?
Speaker 2: Baked beans.
Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: Yes, blue.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you have a favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Fall.
Speaker 1: Vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Vacation destination.  I used to travel a lot.  I don't travel as much as I used to, which it's been practically the routine places all over Europe, Africa, South America.  Routine places, but right now I have a phobia about flying and it started before 9/11 [September 11, 2001].  And I haven't flown in five or six years.  I, I, I want to.  I had to resign from some of the things that I had to make journeys on the plane to meetings and things.  I just told them I couldn't do it anymore.  It, it's, it's a personal thing, it's just a phobia.  And, and I was told by an airline hostess once, who was a patient of mine, that the reason I was like that is because I didn't like giving up control to the pilot.  If I were flying it, it would be all right.  And I think that has some, some legitimacy to it also.  Nevertheless, my friends know that I don't fly.
Speaker 1: But do you have a favorite place to go?  (Simultaneous)
Speaker 2: I have a second home in Hilton Head [South Carolina] that we bought some years ago.  I like, I like to go there.  When I was traveling, I liked the cruises and things like that.  Now I'll cruise now, but I won't if I can't drive to the port.  If I have to fly to the port, that's, that's just out, to the point of leave.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, do you have a favorite phrase, or saying?
Speaker 2: I hate to say this, but, I--yes.  I trust in God and everybody else I check.  That, that has been--I just recently remembered that [Ronald] Reagan used something like that when he was dealing with Russia in the Cold War, and so forth.  He said: "Accept, but verify."  Which is the same meaning.
Story_ID: 168059
Speaker 1: Well, let me ask you about your family history.  Can--how much do you know about your family history?  How far can you trace your family back?
Speaker 2: One side--on my mother's side I can trace it back to slavery.  My grandfather was a slave and through his point of freedom and so forth and his story.
Speaker 1: Now his name was Hubert.  (Simultaneous)
Speaker 2: Was Zachary Hubert.
Speaker 1: Can you spell that for us?
Speaker 2: Z-A-C-H-A-R-Y, Hubert, H-U-B-E-R-T.
Speaker 1: Okay.  He was--you know when he was born?
Speaker 2: He was born in Georgia.  He was born as a slave.
Speaker 1: You know about when he was born, about what year?
Speaker 2: I'm not absolutely sure at this time.  I know that he died in the early 1920's.  He was around seventy or eighty at that time.  He was probably when he was freed from slavery around twenty and--I'm sorry.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So he was probably born around 1840 I guess, if he was twenty.  (Simultaneous)
Speaker 2: Somewhere like that.  I should know, but I, I don't.
Story_ID: 168060
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well, tell us about him.  Now he, he has--there are a lot of stories in your family about him [Warner's maternal grandfather, Zachary Hubert], right?
Speaker 2: Yes sir.  He and some brothers were, were freed by a plantation owner in the county adjacent to where he moved, it's called Warren County, Georgia.  The house that he attended has been preserved down there, which I'll come to next.  However, he was given--some of the slaves did not want to leave the plantation.  They wanted to stay in the protection of the master, and so forth.  But he was not of that kind.  He was well thought of, I know that, by the slave master because they put him in charge of a lot of things to do around them.  He accepted two bales of cotton as his going away gift.  And he moved into the next county where he had heard that some land was available that blacks could buy--Negroes, at that time.  And he promptly moved over, rented some land, obviously the worst land in the country, it was available to him in that county.  He personally, physically cleared the land and started his own home.  He ended up with building a church in that community.  One of his sons built a school in that community later on.  I believe it was a Rosenwald School, but I'm not absolutely certain about that.  He developed a community and he was respected and kind of a leader of the community.  When he was attempting to buy the land, he rented it first and then made an arrangement with the white owner to, to lease-purchase type of thing, to buy it.  When he completed his payments and went to get the deed from the owner, the owner--white owner, refused to give it to him.  And he'd paid all of the money that he'd agreed to pay.  He scoured the neighborhood--the area, looking for a lawyer who was willing to take a case like this, of a black suing a white at that time, for equity--for justice.  He finally found one who challenged the owner and he released the land.  It's a story about--this story that I'm relating is all in a book that was written by one of the family members, Dr. Lester Russell, I think, who's a professor at Morgan State [Baltimore, Maryland].  The title of the book is 'Profile of a Black Family' [sic, 'Profile of a Black Heritage']. He had twelve children.  I'm speaking of my grandfather, who was the ex-slave, who he raised and worked them on the farm; sent all twelve to college.  All twelve of them finished college over the years.  He was very proud of that fact.  And they were variously successful in life.  Among them were three college presidents, many professional people, one artist, I know of.  They're all deceased now, including my mother [Mable Hunt Warner], who was the youngest girl of the twelve.   After such (unclear) I have to mention that all of the men of the family did go to Morehouse College [Atlanta, Georgia].  One of the sons was in the first class graduating from Morehouse College, his the eldest son.  It goes on and on.  I just refer people to that book.  It's a lot of interesting stories, and really history recorded there.  I'm kind of proud of that heritage.
Story_ID: 168061
Speaker 1: Now you (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: We do--we have formed--the descendants, a foundation and I've taken the liberty to profile the black heritage, that's (unclear).  The fact that the Foundation [the Camilla and Zack Hubert Foundation, Inc.] is dedicated to--it was small scholarships to students who go to college from that county.  In occasions over the years where students have not gone to college from that particular county--Hancock County, Georgia, in, in that event, we just give them to the schools, usually Atlanta University Center [Atlanta, Georgia], small donations applied towards books.  Nowadays just--I won't argue so much and the prices has gone up, and it doesn't help very much, but it's a help for the students and that's the objective of that foundation.  We have something that one of his sons [Benjamin F. Hubert] formed called The Association for the Advancement of Negro [Country] Life.  At that time he was president--Ben Hubert, was president of Savannah State College, in Savannah [Georgia].  And he used the, the land that he inherited from his father, who I was speaking of, Zachary Hubert, to develop a--that organization, which was to help black farmers get the most they could out of the land, not selling it, but developing it and produce.  He built a log cabin and several other structures there.  He had demonstrations of farm experiences and the expertise to do that, and that, that accomplished for several years.  Ms. Eleanor Roosevelt was one of the supporters of this.  He did win a Peabody Award for this.  There were some other figures (unclear) with him that are in the book.  I can't really remember them now.  But the cabin still exists.  It just happen to end up on the land through my mother [Mable Hubert Warner] who bought the land from the rest of the descendants who'd moved away who didn't wanted it.  It still exists as a farm.  It recently was awarded what's called the Centennial Farm Award.  Which is done by the [Georgia] State Department of Natural Resources, the Division of African American History.  And it was given that title and--because we also had a plot on there that was in the National Historic Register.  We will receive a second award, which is called the Heritage of Georgia Farms.  At that time this was designated, only a couple years ago, there was only--this was the fourth black farm that had been in the family--of that same family, at least one hundred years, and still existed as a type of farm.  It's a form of African American history and there's a division of the U.S. Department of State that handles all of that.  I was kind of proud to accept that award.  Jimmy Carter is going the president, is going to be the speaker when the farm is awarded the subsequent grant.  The family is now in the process of trying to decide what to do with the land.  It--the crop that they had at first was timberland, mostly.  But it's been cleared out.  It was a store, it was a school, there was the log cabin that the community still uses.  They had a high school reunion down there just a few weeks ago, where they started at, beginning at that cabin that I'm speaking of.  The home house was burned down.  The exact Hubert home house was burned, but the--that's about it.
Story_ID: 168062
Speaker 1: Now the servant--there were--you said that out of that group (unclear) twelve children with which your mother was, was a part of, three of them became college presidents?
Speaker 2: Yes, sir.  One was president of Langston University [Langston, Oklahoma].  His name was Zach Hubert.  He was named--the first son after the father, his father--my grandfather.  The other one was name Ben Hubert.  He was president for a long period of time at Savannah State College [1926-1947].  It's called that now, but it was Georgia State College at that time [1932-1996].  And we have a different Georgia State College now, so that name was changed to Savannah State College, which is in Savannah, Georgia.  And Reverend C.D. Hubert, before, while the Board of Morehouse [College, Atlanta, Georgia] was searching for a president, before they hired Dr. Mays [Dr. Benjamin Elijah Mays], for three years, was the acting president of Morehouse College here in Atlanta.  I don't say that to brag, but I do say that to honor my grandfather, who, who, who developed this kind of family culture that we hope we can possess today.
Speaker 1: Yeah, that's a tremendous accomplishment, to get twelve (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Well, thank you.
Speaker 1: --children right out of slavery into college, you know.
Speaker 2: Thank you.
Story_ID: 168063
Speaker 1: Now (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: He taught himself to read.  I should go back to that.  Zach [Warner's maternal grandfather, Zachary Hubert] was a favorite of a similar child of the slave owner.  And early on it was against the law to teach Negroes to read, or slaves to read.  However, this young Hubert--white Hubert [surname of the slaveowning family], kind of, sort of, if you will, attached himself to Zach and he taught him to read.  Now during this process his father discovered that and both of them thought they were in trouble.  When his father discovered he was teaching him to read, he told the little the white Zach to continue to do so, to bring his lessons home from school every day and then transfer them to Zach and teach Zach.  And that was, at that time, he knew he was breaking the law, but that was the type of family that were the slaveholders.
Story_ID: 168064
Speaker 1: Now, now what was your mother's full name and can--
Speaker 2: Mabel Hubert Warner.
Speaker 1: Can you spell that for us?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Mable, M-A-B-L-E, H-U-B-E-R-T, Hubert, Warner, W-A-R-N-E-R.  She married my father [Clinton Warner, Sr.] in 19--early 1920s.  I was born in '24 [1924]; had two sisters and....
Speaker 1: Do you know your mother's birthdate (unclear)?
Speaker 2: October the 22nd, I believe.
Speaker 1: Okay.  What, what, what year?
Speaker 2: Nineteen hundred [1900].  She was born in 1900.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And now, I'm going to ask you about your father too. But first, your mother--what was she like growing up and what kind of person was she, you know, as a mother?
Speaker 2: Just like she was, a loving parent who, who taught us by example.  I don't ever remember my father or my mother sitting down and telling me this is what you should do; this is what you should not do.  But by example, of the three children, we learned what was correct to do and so forth.  She was a loving mother.  She was a "Jeanes."  She went on and got her master's in English at Columbia University [New York, New York] as she was teaching and she was just a loving, capable mother.
Speaker 1: Now, were, were you getting ready to talk about the Jeanes Fund, or the Jeanes supervisors (unclear).
Speaker 2: She was for a while a Jeanes supervisor [Jeanes Foundation, also known as the Negro Rural School Fund].   Which is a program, I think, related to the Rosenwald [Julius Rosenwald's philanthropic fund], at least in purpose, to teach black women and black families to do good with the land and (unclear) products from the land, to do better, how to handle them technically, to canning and preserving, cooking and et cetera.  It's'--I think it's a defunct program (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: It is.
Speaker 2: --but it's well known in the South by most people when it existed.  I used to take trips with her when she had to go out in the field she would take me with her and I learned a lot just, just from watching and the people seemed to like and respect and value the teachings that she gave.  That was in Troup County [Georgia], LaGrange, Georgia.
Speaker 1: I know hearing the Jeanes supervisors was very important, getting schools started in rural areas and helping people with practical matters, and organizing family life and that sort of thing.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 168065
Speaker 1: Now did she [Warner's mother, Mable Hubert Warner] have any experiences as a little girl that shared with you that you can tell us about?
Speaker 2: I never heard any negative experiences from my mother or from my father [Clinton Warner, Sr.], really.  If you talked about something, you put it in a--more of a positive light, or just a fact and without any particular connotations.  I, I don't know if that answers your question or not.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And she initially went to (unclear) (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: She was the one--she finished college.  She went to Jackson State, which is now known as Jackson State University [Jackson, Mississippi].  Exactly how and that occurred, I don't know.  But I do know that my uncle was the president at the college at that time.  She went there and then subsequently she received a degree from Arkansas State College in Pine Bluff, Arkansas [sic, University of Arkansas at Pine Bluff], along with my father, who finished Hampton and to this day I can't understand why he went back.  But I think it had something to do with teaching certification, because as soon as he completed that he was appointed a principal back in Georgia, in Lagrange, Georgia, Troup County, of the black high school.
Speaker 1: Now, now your father had a different experience from your mother in terms of growing up.  Can, can you give us his full name and spell that for us?
Speaker 2: His name was Clinton, C-L-I-N-T-O-N, Ellsworth, E-L-L-S-W-O-R-T-H, Warner, W-A-R-N-E-R.  He never knew actually who his father and mother were.  That's all I can tell you.  However, he was, for whatever reason, placed in a settlement that existed at that time.  There was a movement across the country to assist black people.  (Simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: The settlement house movement.
Speaker 2: --Settlement House, I think that's what they called it.  I've done some research on it and gotten a little far.  Anyway, the point was to train young men and women in good manners et cetera, and educate them.  He was sent to college by a young white women at that time, who ran the settlement along with another friend who did know his family and so forth.  But they both were sent to Hampton College [Hampton Institute, later Hampton University, Hampton, Virginia] and they went and finished and the outcome of that is that he maintained contact with this family.  And about two or three years ago we discovered that they were having a family reunion in Savannah.  We were invited to come down there because of the close relationships and I guess we were designated as the Barton [ph.] family guests, but more than that, they, they just welcomed us with open arms because many of them did not know the story, and I kind of related it to them.  In some sessions we would talk, and at parties and dinners and stuff that were held during that weekend.  We were invited to come back and wasn't able to go this time, harder to find (unclear).  But we stay in touch with the people we met there.  They have a similar type family, and a similar type story, raised in Maryland.
Speaker 1: That's interesting.  Now, how did your parents meet?  Is there a story about how they met?
Speaker 2: I don't know.  All I know is about--I don't know and I'm, I'm hesitant to tell this story.  Dr. [Benjamin] Mays, who, who preached my father's funeral and mother's too, at my father's funeral we were sitting in the car waiting to go to the cemetery.  He was telling me how much he admired him, because he had given an eloquent speech at the funeral.  He said, "You know what?"  I said, "No, what?"  He said, "You know your father and I at one time were chasing the same woman."  I said, "No, I didn't know that."  So I just waited (laughter), I didn't comment to it.  He said, "But I, I believe he won out."  (Laughter)  "I believe he won out."  So the subject changed.  I didn't know what else to say about that.  I, I don't know how, how they met.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So at least we know there was a chase.
Speaker 2: (Laughter).  He thought that was a great thing that he decided to share that with me at that point and time.
Speaker 1: Okay.  But they, they met in college--was it in college that they met?
Speaker 2: I honestly don't know.  I, I--my father was a kind of an outgoing, very outgoing person.  He was a handsome young man and I don't know, I think he just moved around and he decided.  I honestly don't know that.  I don't know.  They just came together and he married her in Atlanta [Georgia].  So, I can't--that's something I should know, but I guess I just didn't worry about it.
Story_ID: 168066
Speaker 1: Now, you said that your parents [Mable Hubert Warner and Clinton Warner, Sr.] were married in the early '20s [1920s], right?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: And you were born in 1924 in a dormitory, right?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: On the campus of (unclear) (simultaneous)
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Morehouse College [Atlanta, Georgia].  That building is called Ray's Hall.  It's been restored several times.  And my father and mother were living in the dormitory in a small apartment.  And I was born there.  And you know I'm was told all of this.  Some, some, some memories you have you're not sure whether you were told that, or whether you remember that.  But I certainly don't remember being born, but was told that.  He came to Morehouse for the ROTC [Reserve Officers' Training Corps], to develop that unit, or something to it.  He liked it so much he stayed there and began to teach manual arts.  That was a course at that time and it's basically building things and fixing things.  And he was experienced in that for some reason.  Anyway, he wrote that and I have a real letter.  Something came up a few years ago and one of his students had written me a letter when he ran across his name and told me how much he appreciated his guidance and counseling back there when he was in his class.  Now this gentleman is ninety years old in Baltimore [Maryland].  He's (unclear) member--McKinney, [HM] Richard McKinney.  (Simultaneous)
Speaker 1: Right, Dr. Richard (unclear) (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: Richard McKinney, who wrote the letter.  I know him very well.  In fact, he called me the other day to go down to see about his daughter who was visiting here, who had a, had, had a little mishap.  But it turned out all right.  And he called me back to thank me for taking care of it.  But I, I was, I--that, that, that letter meant so much to me that he wrote that I had it framed.  I still have it framed.  It's about my father.
Story_ID: 168067
Speaker 1: What, what was your--what is your earliest memory, childhood memory?
Speaker 2: I remembered distinctly--I wasn't told this.  When we left Atlanta [Georgia], driving to Arkansas, Pine Bluff.  I remember that trip.  I remember when we came back because I was ten years old when we came back.  But I remember the trip going down in a T-Model Ford.  My father [Clinton Warner, Sr.] was so proud that he bought one.  That was the latest thing.  And we made it there and, and it's kind of spotty at that time.  We had lived with some people and, and somewhere during that time my father built--bought the land, built a store, which like a college inn, right adjacent to the campus, the entrance of it.  It became very popular.  We lived on the second floor.  He made a place for us to live there.  It was very nice.  I had no problem at all.
Speaker 1: So your father actually built the (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: He built the (simultaneous)
Speaker 1: --the place that you ended up living.
Speaker 2: Because he was into that sort of thing.  And it was a very popular place, called the college inn, like most colleges.
Speaker 1: It was like the student union (unclear) (simultaneous)
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Yeah.  And then we got the call to come to, to, back to Georgia.  I remember that trip.  We had a dog and passing through Mississippi.  He had built a little trailer-like thing that stuck under the bumper of the T-Model Ford on the back, with a cage with a wire and he placed the dog--Skippy was a German Shepard, and somehow, coming through Mississippi, the latch came open or something and Skippy jumped out.  We spent three hours--that trip stopped until we drove back and found that dog, put him in and continued the trip to come on to LaGrange [Georgia].  I don't, I don't know why I mentioned that, it just--you asked me about what I remember.  Before we came to Georgia, while we were still in Arkansas, and I think we were in the process of going there then, we went to the World's Fair in Chicago [Illinois].  This was the fair that Sally Rand, (unclear) was, was, it was just outstanding.  But, it took us (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: This was 1933, yeah.  (Simultaneous)
Speaker 2: '33 [1933], that's right.  And we left the fair, course I wanted to see Sally Rand, I was reading the paper and stuff, but I never did see Sally Rand.
Speaker 1: She was a fan dancer.
Speaker 2: Yeah, a fan dancer.  That was very exotic at that time, you know, it was almost like J-Lo [Jennifer Lopez] right now, in that culture, back then.  But anyway, I didn't get to see her.  But I did get sick there.  I got sick there and, and in Chicago [Illinois] while I was visiting that fair.  And the leading black surgeon at Provident Hospital [Chicago, Illinois], they put me there, and I remember this, and he was called in to see about me.  He declared that I had appendicitis, and he needed to operate.  My mother [Mable Hubert Warner] said, "No, there will be no operation.  I don't believe that."  Ulysses--most people listening to this will remember this name, Dr. Ulysses [Dr. Ulysses Grant Daily] --I can't recall it, but he was pretty famous in Chicago in the '30s [1930s] and later.  Anyway, she got her way and I got well without my operation.  I didn't have appendicitis.  He thought I did.  And being a surgeon, I can understand why he recommended that now.  But she was, she was--I thought that was my mild-mannered mother.  She, some things she just, she'd draw a line in the sand about.  She wasn't going to have her son operated on.  Anyway, we got to LaGrange.  We had to live in with a whole family, moved in with one of the teachers at the school he was going to be the principal of East Depot Street High School [later, East Depot High School, LaGrange, Georgia].
Story_ID: 168068
Speaker 1: Now, before you get too far into LaGrange [Georgia], I wanted to maybe go back to Pine Bluff [Arkansas] and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --talk about your early life as a child. Can you give us a sense of some of the sights and sounds, and smells and growing up when you were little.
Speaker 2: Okay.  This was a college community [University of Arkansas at Pine Bluff, Pine Bluff, Arkansas] that I was in when I was a child.  And we participated in all the events and things and ran around looking at this, going to football games and stuff.  John Watts and John B. Watson was the president of that college at this time [only Watson was president].  It was strictly segregated, of course.  But it--that wasn't an issue to me, because I never had the experience of being around whites, I knew of them, they--when we went to the movies downtown--the Singer Theater, I remember that name.  Boy, I--my memory is getting good.  We would have to sit upstairs.  And I think that's where I saw some of the some of the cowboy movies, Tom Mix, and stuff like that on Saturday afternoons, but that's--other than that, the typical college things from a kid's aspect.  But my thing was a Mrs. Barnes [ph.] who was the principal of this demonstration school that the school ran.  And I went through the fifth grade under her supervision.  And I know she, by example too, she taught.  And the teachers were good.  I didn't have any problems.  I was known as a smart kid for whatever reasons.  I don't know.  I don't remember (laughter).  What else is there, the only time I remember that I think I stole something, and I'm not sure about that, the only time in my life.  On a playground there was a nickel discovered down, and right now I'm not sure whether we were looking for that nickel, or if it was just there, and I put my foot on it, to cover it.  And I just managed to put that nickel in my pocket.  I took it back home.  My mother [Mable Hubert Warner] was, was running the little restaurant in there, and I loved hamburgers.  I said, "Mama, can I have a hamburger?"  She said, "What."  I said, "I'm going to pay for it."  And I gave her the nickel and she made me a hamburger, but I never did tell her where I got it.  I said I found it.  My wife [Sally Johnson] reminds me when I was telling that it could have just been a lost nickel, it was there when we got there, and I just found it.  I didn't steal it.  But, I don't know, I had the feeling that I'd stole it from somebody.  I got that hamburger though.  That taught me a lesson because I worried about that all of my life.
Speaker 1: So, so in your family there's a strong code of (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --not taking what doesn't belong to you.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  It was just, as I remarked earlier, there was just the atmosphere in the family, but actions and what we saw them do, and it just, just kind of seeped in.  And no, nobody sat us down with lessons.  And we knew how to study.  We knew we were expected to do that and well, it just wasn't a problem; family problems that we see now, because it's about challenges now.  There was a control, when I look back on it, but a benign control that taught, taught children what's right, what's wrong.
Speaker 1: Did your parents believe in whippings and that sort of thing?
Speaker 2: I cannot, I can never remember being whipped, or not, or my two sisters.  I cannot remember.  If we did it was an unusual accident, an incident.  I know (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 168069
Speaker 1: Somehow we kind of understood what our parents' [Mable Hubert Warner and Clinton Warner, Sr.] goals were for us, and we were to study, we were to go to church, we would, you know, take a little lesson outside of school and just generally improve yourself.  Other than that, just kind of move, move on from that, because I tell you--I mention my racial experiences, that was a zip, zero, and it didn't make a big difference to me about sitting up there, I thought it was okay, sitting up in the (unclear) to see a movie.  And I never thought much about the race problem and so forth, and being black as opposed to white, I didn't, during that time.  What got me was when I came to LaGrange, I was reading before, and I really began to read a lot.  I read all the black newspapers, Pittsburg Courier for example, in which Benjamin Mays wrote columns.  As I read those columns, a sense of awareness came to me about being black, even though I was living in a small town in deep Georgia, on the black side of town, because I never had a particular reason to go downtown and mix--and I became aware of this great injustice.  Say, "How can this happen?" when I became aware of segregation.  And those columns stimulated me.  You may remember George Schuyler, who also wrote a column in the Pittsburgh Courier.  His daughter was a famous pianist (simultaneous)
Speaker 2: Right, yes, Philippa [Schuyler]-- (simultaneous)
Speaker 1: --And I was drawn too about that because I was taking music lessons at that time.  But that, that really impressed me, the mood, the train car--the train segregation, and so forth, and, and you know, I got kind of, I got kind of militant about it and, and really, as a child, but I realized that I couldn't do anything.  Only press I had to read was the white country newspaper in LaGrange.  It never had any news about Negroes.  And the papers that my parents subscribed to, now I realize to give me a sense of the real world, as I read them.  And it was enlightening.  But I thought about that a lot.  I did as a child and then went on my way.  You know, I--God knows I can't solve this, but there's, there's definitely a problem here.  Then I discovered that the principal--my father--the school that my father was the principal of--our football clothes were discarded from the white high school.  We had to wear their--our books came only when they were discarded from the white high school.  And that (unclear) "this, this is not right, this is not right."  I knew that when I was in my early teens--twelve or thirteen, I said, "This is not right."  But that's the way it went.  And I tried some other experiences that I could talk about.  But that's how I became aware of what I considered to be an injustice.  When--I'm not sure when the Negro Digest came out which preceded Ebony, or whatever you called this magazine.  (Simultaneous)
Speaker 2: I think it became Black World later but it started out--
Speaker 1: That (unclear).  I think I was in college then.  I avidly read that.  But that was a later time.  But I knew all about--my mother taken us down to Tuskegee [University, Tuskegee, Alabama].  We had met [George Washington] Carver and saw his lab, and I was impressed by all of that--Booker T. Washington, all the usual history.  We had a black history month even then, back in the thirties.  I remember Paul Laurence Dunbar, come to think of it, stayed at our home in LaGrange.  Somehow he had invited him to the high school to talk to the students, and he gave a talk.  I didn't know him before then.
Speaker 2: Well wasn't Paul, Paul Laurence Dunbar.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: (Unclear).
Speaker 1: Yeah, the porter?
Speaker 2: Yeah, he died in 19... (unclear) (simultaneous)
Speaker 1: No, not Dunbar, I'm sorry (simultaneous)
Speaker 2: Langston Hughes or (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Langston Hughes.
Speaker 2: --Langston Hughes (unclear) (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: Langston Hughes--that's, that's--and I got a chance to meet him and so forth, and learn about what he was doing and so forth.  And I wasn't, I truly, I wasn't really impressed because that sort of thing wasn't much to me.  I liked the airplanes and cars and stuff like that.  But I, I learned.
Speaker 2: That's something, Langston Hughes staying in your house.
Story_ID: 168070
Speaker 1: Were there any teachers there in the school that made a big impression on you?
Speaker 2: Yeah, there was one, my sixth grade teacher, she was the newest, she was my first teacher in high school, sixth grade [at East Depot High School, LaGrange, Georgia], her name was Mrs. Ethel Harrison, was a long established family down in that area.  She was so kind to me.  Not because I was the principal's son, it was just her nature.  I was so shy when I went into that experience from Arkansas that I didn't really want to go out at recess.  I was just shy and she encouraged me to, to get over that and go out and join the kids.  I much--I told her "I'd much rather stay in here with you."  I continued to read and talk.  And I got over the shyness and went on, on out and absorbed the usual things as the principal's son.  But I, I think eventually, pretty quickly it got around that I wasn't being given A's because I was the principal's son, it was because I studied and knew the answers to those questions and they could see that in the classroom.  I didn't get any special benefits.  My father [Clinton Warner, Sr.], I know he was--looking back he had to be kind of a little worried about me, whether I might be queer or gay or something manner.  I wasn't outgoing.  He had to have concerns about that.  And one day when the stuff was going on--the so-called hazing, a joker walked up behind me and kicked me.  I just turned around and reflexively went after him, and he ran off.  My father observed that from the window and I think that was the turning point.  His son did have some courage and spirit.  He, he didn't, he didn't really mention it to me until later on, but I remember that.  And it also encouraged him that I decided that I would go out for the football team.  And it became apparent during the season; I have to say this, that I was not treated any differently because I was the principal's son.  They looked (unclear), but as things progressed ended up being the quarterback and the kids were, were truthfully, I received some respect (unclear).  I felt better about myself.  It helped me solve a problem of shyness and stuff.  Anyway, I was named the most improved player because I had never played football in my life.  I just came on out there.  I made the team, and so forth, whatever.  So I was proud of that.  And I was proud for my father because he could see, because I knew how he felt about me, but I just liked to read.  Other kids would be out playing, and even when I was at home, I just read magazines and stuff that they subscribed to.  I just had to read them.
Story_ID: 168071
Speaker 1: Now you took piano lessons?
Speaker 2: Yes.  I'm a piano devotee right now.  I practice every day.  I love--I was trained in classical music, the standard stuff, no jazz.  I'm a black guy that can't play jazz on the piano.  I don't have the rhythm.  I wasn't brought up that way.  And I'm not a good pianist, but I just enjoyed it.  And then when I went to college [Morehouse College, Atlanta, Georgia], that phase of my life had to go, had to go, because that wasn't the thing.  Something must be wrong with you, you taking piano lessons.  So I wanted to be one of the boys.  So I just gave up on it.  And all through the army I didn't do anything, through medical school [Meharry Medical College, Nashville, Tennessee].  Every once and awhile I'd play for a program or something.  And--but I wasn't good.  And during my practice I've always had a piano, you know, and just practice, but not seriously.  And since I've retired I've become a serious piano student. Practice every day.  I'm not getting any better, but I enjoy it so.  It's a relaxing thing and trying to master some of the masterpieces, classical pieces, and they sound pretty good to me.  I play for myself.  I won't ever--when people discover, "When you going to play something?"  It's just for me.  It's a personal happiness.  But I'm working on something with a golfer that I met out there, who's an organist down at Big Bethel Church [Big Bethel A.M.E. Church, Atlanta, Georgia].  We're working on a two piano thing, but I have to learn my part.  Because he say, "I can play.  You know, it's no big deal."  And he told me he's got two pianos down at that church and the first rainy day we don't play golf--but the first rainy day we don't play golf we'll go down there and practice, and try to work this piece out.  If I can get that one, which has been one of my favorite pieces all of my life since I first heard it--Rachmaninoff Number Two Piano Concerto.  Music lovers out there will know what I'm talking about.  But it's for two-part piano, two-piano rendition.
Story_ID: 168072
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, was the church a big part of your life growing up?  Now you said it was mandatory that you go.
Speaker 2: No, no, it was some friction.  Coming up I, I had to be somewhere between ten and fifteen, because I left home at fifteen going to college, somewhere in that area--in all my readings and stuff, I, I just, I went to church, parents said we had to go to Sunday school, we had to go.  But I never joined.  My two sisters [Marolyn Warner and Yvonne Warner] joined.
Speaker 1: What denomination were you?
Speaker 2: Baptist.  And they were a little concerned about that, but you know, to me, I don't see no sense in joining, I'm going.  What is, what is I'm joining for.  But anyway, I, I had a little skepticism about religion to be perfectly frank.  And, and I always concerned myself spiritual, but religious and spiritual is different to me.  They, they called a known minister student, they were friends of up here, (unclear), who later became pastor of a church down there, after we left, to come down and talk to me one afternoon.  And we sat and we talked and he just came right out and I--we're going to talk this out.  And he went through all the benefits of religion et cetera, et cetera.  I questioned this as a kid, and we had a frank talk and we didn't reach any resolution, so they left it alone.  And they left it alone.  And that's basically--this has no bearing on what we're talking about.  But basically, I believe I'm a spiritual person, but I've never joined a church yet.  I've gone to churches.  I see some I like and told (unclear) about coming to his church, I say, "You preach too long.  I don't want to come down there."  He said, "That's what I have to do, people want it."  But, that--I'm not an atheist.  There's something out there.  But I don't know if I need the church between me, and that something, whatever it is.  I figure I'll find my own way up.  The Golden Rule is a major thing and I try to live by that.  And without them ever teaching me the Golden Rule, my parents [Mable Hubert Warner and Clinton Warner Sr.] showed me and demonstrated that, that concept.  I feel, I feel like I'm talking about myself too much.
Speaker 1: Well this is what this is about.
Speaker 2: Okay, all right.
Story_ID: 168073
Speaker 1: Sir, when did you get, I guess, the idea that you might want to be a doctor?
Speaker 2: That's a good question.  Can I preface it?  Can I tell you what--under that control that I have with my family up to age fifteen when I left to go to college.  And I guess sixteen came on at that, shortly after that.  I realized I was under control because I saw what other children my age were doing.  Things I would, got to say I'd like to be doing, but, "I can't do that, I know the difference."  And, and when I got to college [at Morehouse College, Atlanta, Georgia] I decided that I was going to do all those things.  I did poorly in college the first two years.  The first thing I did was get drunk.  I started smoking.  In spite of my shyness I would chase women a little bit, sometimes I didn't know what to say to them and all that stuff, but....
Speaker 1: This was at Morehouse, right?
Speaker 2: Um-hum.  Morehouse in 1940, I came out the same year that Benjamin Mays came as the president.  And I did that two years just like that.  And I wanted--after the second year, I told my parents I wasn't going back to school.  I wasn't doing well.  I was going to drop out.  It helped that I discovered I could get a job at the war department, so might have -- yeah, '42 [1942].  Pearl Harbor was what they were going...They were hiring people for "fourteen-forty-four," fourteen hundred and forty-four dollars a year, a job in the war department.  It was a clerical job, (unclear).  But I applied for that and got.  That was more money than I'd ever heard of, probably more--almost as much as my father was making, $1,444.  They didn't like it, but I told them that's what I was going to do, particularly when I got accepted.  And I went on, spent a year there, and got drafted.  I told them the reason I was dropping out of college because I'm going to get drafted anyway.  So let me go and do some things.  But, but that was my wild years, wild.  And I got drafted, but--now I'm back to the question.  At that time I thought I wanted to be a dentist.  I wanted--there was only a few things you could strive for as far as a black person, preaching, I didn't want to do that; teaching, I didn't want to do that; physician; I don't think law was available to me in my venue at that time and I never thought of it.  I decided I wanted to be a physician.  And I got there and I found out how hard it was to do, and said, "Ok, I'll just switch over to dentistry, I'll take the easy road," that, that was my attitude then, a complete reversal.  But when I came out of the [U.S.] Army, I knew I had to go back to college.
Story_ID: 168074
Speaker 1: Sir, now, you served in the United States Army during World War II [WWII] and you went in in 1942, right?  And tell us about your experiences in the war.
Speaker 2: A black person, now what I tell you what I say is for the blacks to that war, pretty much for every black person.  It was completely segregated.  There were no black officers all the officers (unclear) segregated battalions and companies were, were white up until the time.  That's how it started out.  And I was, I was rebellious all the time.  I almost got court marshaled a couple of times.  I was asked to serve in the results of a test that you take when you go into the army to do some clerical work and stuff.  And I told them I didn't want to do that.  I wanted to be out on the field--outdoors and doing stuff the troops do.  And they granted me that request.  And--but D-day we, we came in from, from South Hampton on (unclear) land, water, beach, land vehicles, LSDs.
Speaker 1: Before you get in (unclear) I wanted to ask you like, what unit you were in and I wanted to ask you about officer candidates' school too.
Speaker 2: Okay.  That didn't come up when I was in basic training.  We went to New Orleans [Louisiana], a camp that's been disabled now, a camp right outside of New Orleans for training at--there, I was asked to become a sergeant on the first day of basic training.  And I said, "What does a sergeant have to do?"  They said one thing he has to do is get up before everybody else.  I said, "No, I don't--that's too early, I don't, I don't do that", and guy thought I was crazy.  Here was a chance for advancement in the army and I turned it down, I did.  I went on and stayed a private (unclear) (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: You have a philosophical view about, about the war and everything.  It seems (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --that it was unusual, anyway, right?  What, what, what were your views on, on the war and the army?
Speaker 2: I wish I had had the nerve of Cassius Clay [later Muhammad Ali], but I didn't.  I just went on.  I was just, was eighteen or something.
Speaker 1: You didn't really believe in, in war?
Speaker 2: I don't believe in the war.  But I had to do something.  (Unclear) started on the trip over on the Saint--[RMS] Queen Elizabeth, we went over to England, or Scotland, rather--getting ready.  On that trip I got seasick because we were on that ship down in the bottom of the hole--segregated down there.  And I got sick--I was just throwing up (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: The black soldiers were on the bottom?
Speaker 2: What?
Speaker 1: The black soldiers were at the bottom?
Speaker 2: Yeah, um-hum.  And the white officer came by--"Get up solider.  You need to be at the meal" or whatever the army term for that--"in the mess hall, you needed to go to the mess hall."  I said, "I can't go, I'm sick."  "Get up anyway."  I just turned my back to him and went on back to sleep.  I wasn't (unclear).  I said, "I guess I'm going to get court marshaled before I get off this ship", but nothing never happened.  I got better and started doing whatever I had to do.  Over there in England it was the same thing.  We laid around England there for a while.  And moved to--under those buzz bombs that were coming over--Liverpool [England], so forth.  We had a good time.  I had a good time.  Have I answered your question?
Speaker 1: Yeah.  Yes sir.
Story_ID: 168075
Speaker 1: The D-Day experience was seven days after.  There were still mangled bodies around and it was different from the movie, and we weren't in that actual assault, this was some days after.  We were supply troops.  We were stevedores--port battalions is what they called our outfit.  And you had to unload the goods and I distinctly, it's not a base claim, we know when we unloaded Patton's tank--his, his own personal tank, because they had alerted us to be real careful with that, now, that's the general's tank.  That's what we did.  We, we, slept on the ground a mile or so away from the beach in, in foxholes with tents over them, and marched to the beach every morning and got on the ships that we were assigned to and unloaded them.  My job was called (unclear) was a checker.  Which means that you verify every item that came out of the hole of the ship and recorded, and so forth.  And the guys--we had a good working relationship.  I was never laughed at about that or anything among the troops.  But we do--that's all we could do.  Then the march--the Battle of the Bulge--we were in France at that time in rural Normandy.  And the battle was going on and officers came by and asked for volunteers to go join the infantry to give them help from this lowly job that we had.  I said, "You got to be kidding.  I'm not going anywhere."  But some black guys did do that out of our company.  They went--they thought they would get a better standing with the army if they volunteered to fight.  I said, "No, I'm not going to do that."  So, other than that, it was during that time that I did see finally, a black warrant officer who was assigned to our battalion.  He took a special interest in me and asked me one day, "What do you think about going back to the States?"  I said, "I'd like to do that."  He said, "Go to the officers' training school."  I said, "I don't think I want to do that", and he was amazed how I could turn that down.  That offer didn't come to blacks that much--be sponsored to go to...I didn't do it, but I don't think I made a mistake.  I wouldn't have been happy in the army.  It was too rigid, too--you had to be obsessive, compulsive to be a good army solider, you had to be that.  It wasn't for me.  They dismantled our group and turned us into what they called an engineer group.  They dismantled the whole thing after the after the victory.  We went to Germany and, and Sweden and places like that--to ports because we had been trained with ships, but all we had to do was guard, do guards.  That's where I almost go court marshaled again.  I was assigned to a ship on a cold night, and we had this little thing, it was so cold, we'd seek the....  All we had to do was be on the ship with rifles and so forth and look around.  The engine room was always warm on the ship.  (Unclear) and we would sneak in and go to sleep--get warm.  It was cold, I mean fiercely cold out there.  And so the night officer, whatever you call him, came around checking the different sites and I wasn't there and he found me in there and he said, "You're under arrest."  (Unclear) I said, "Okay."  And I was, they took me back and--they, they--I lost my stripes.  I had advanced to T Corporal or something.  I thought I was going to get court marshaled, but they did not.  I was sleeping on duty in a war zone.  And I got them back, the stripes back and never got transferred or anything, or charged.  But I was a little shaky about that.  But, that's that's the (unclear).  I don't know anything unusual.  We were getting ready to go to the Panama Canal and they'd issued us like jungle-type clothing to go through there when the bombs fell on Japan, and then those plans were changed.  I eventually got home in '46 [1946], '40 [1940], yeah, '46 [1946].  And that's when I had to question with my father [Clinton Warner, Sr.] about what I wanted to do.  He said, "You still going for Madison [Wisconsin]?"  I said, "I don't--I think I want to be a journalist."  In his way, he had to be saying, "What kind of child did I raise?"  A black journalist--in 1942, what....  He said, "How you going to make a living?"  "I don't know."  I hadn't thought about it.  I said--so I went on back to school and made straight "A's". I was converted back.  I had gotten over that wild period--made straight A's in college and got admitted to medical school after three years of college.  I had two and did one more year and went straight to medical school.
Story_ID: 168076
Speaker 1: Now, tell us about Morehouse [College, Atlanta, Georgia].  I guess who was some-that--Dr. [Benjamin] Mays was there.  And what are your reflections on Dr. Mays and some of the other faculty people at Morehouse.
Speaker 2: It was a dedicated faculty.  They were inspired by Dr. Mays' presence and his beliefs and so forth.  It was a smaller--much smaller community than exist now.  And everybody got to know everybody.  The teachers were fabulous, fabulous.  Mays was fabulous, except I couldn't get over one thing--well, that was the first time I went to Morehouse.  It was mandatory to go to college--go to chapel, I didn't that.  But I did hear Mays one Tuesday--he spoke on Tuesdays, talk about a freshman from Mars at Morehouse, a freshman, and we were freshman.  And he was pointing out that that Mars freshman would look around him at you guys, not that, but with much more eloquent language, and be amazed.  He says, "I don't see anybody studying.  I don't see anybody going to the library.  That's what I'm use to at Mars."  He would be amazed--he made his point.  We weren't doing no full speed, like we ought to be as students.  It was a point that stuck with me and I asked him about that and he didn't remember which--he didn't remember that particular speech, but it stayed in my mind.  He was, he was a major influence at Morehouse and he is--his life's works remain that.  He and my father [Clinton Warner, Sr.] were good friends.  He ultimately asked him to come back and take over the dormitories and campus--the maintenance, and he did that for years.  Presidents changed, but then my father got older and they gave him another job, they just kept him.  He ended up--when he was almost as out of it as I am.  He'd just go sit in the post office and help somebody out.  They never let him go and he was proud of that.  And he got sick and came home.  They just kept paying him and didn't ask him to do anything.  But I didn't thank them after it was all over for doing that.  And that he was well liked.  Mays was an influence.  And actually, I have to say that my father was an influence.  He was a student counselor at one time.  And well--he was in charge of the dining hall at one time.  Wherever he was, the students would remind me how strict he was.  You had to do this--you can't come in this line looking like that, to eat.  But they all respected him.  They liked him.  And I'd run into people almost--not daily, but--students that I don't even know, who were there when he was there and they say, "Your father, we really loved him.  He was--he made us see the light."  He was, he was a teacher too, there, in that role.  And so that, that spirit at Morehouse is what is developed into--what's called the Morehouse, not eloquent student, (unclear) oh my goodness, I'm blocking on that--a spirit, a type of spirit and it has a name.  And that's being maintained now, that image of Morehouse people are a cut above everybody else.  We feel that way--not feel better than everybody else, but that's that's, that's kept that school going, that, that theme and that proudness.  And the president is doing an excellent job.  I happen to sit on the board of trustees and my board is to be pretty exact too.  They're not afraid to speak out on issues that they think might harm or impair the students or the image of the school.  I'm not saying that it does, but when those issues come up they look to me to be against it unless it's going, going to help and I'm proud, I'm proud of that.  I know my father would have been proud to have me put on there, on the board.  I've been a long time.  It's time for me to rotate off, almost now, and I plan to do that.  Otis Moss, who is the chairman of the board of trustees, also went to LaGrange.  My mother taught him.  She trained him how to talk, how to speak, how to debate.  He won his first prize driving down to Savannah [Georgia], to the Savannah Oratorical contest.  My mother [Mable Hubert Warner] drove him down there.  He gives her credit for that.  And she drilled him all the way, from practicing his speech to down from Atlanta--from LaGrange to Savannah and he won that contest.  Horace Ward also came under my mother's tutelage.  I'm proud of these things.  And many others I could name, but these are names--maybe you also know.  Horace Ward is the guy to integrated the University of Georgia [Athens, Georgia].  He didn't integrate it, but he first started the process.  He got his law degree from Northwestern University [Chicago, Illinois].  But they've honored him since he's been back, and then Hollowell, the attorney who was involved in all that stuff.  Charlene Gault-Hunter, and Hamilton Holmes were the first two students.  During that time my office was at--my medical office was at--I was just a new physician--in Atlanta, and, from the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People], and Hollowell's office were in the same building.  [HM] Vernon Jordan came to me the day they were going down, said, "You need to come with us, doc.  We may have some stuff."  Said, "I want to go."  I couldn't go, I couldn't.  Something had come up in the practice, somebody was sick, or ill, or I just couldn't leave, and I hated that.  But he wanted me to go down there with them.  I would have gone.
Story_ID: 168077
Speaker 1: I want to take you to medical school at Meharry [Medical College, Nashville, Tennessee].  Now, you went to Meharry in (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) in 1947.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I did that one year, and expected to get the degree from Morehouse [College, Atlanta, Georgia] after I completed a year at Meharry.  I went there with the attitude that I was going to--if anybody else got out of Meharry, I am too, even with my spotted background.  And so furthermore, I wanted to do more than that.  I wanted to be one of the best students here, to myself, and I did.  I made A's all the way through medical school and left as, what do you call it (simultaneous) Summa cum laude.
Speaker 1: Um-hum.  And I wasn't, I wasn't surprised.  That was a good experience too.  People were intent on teaching valid, good, solid medical teaching.  When I finished there I felt like I was as good as any--we close to a break--good as any other medical student.  But when it--as I thought about it, we had to do internships and had to apply for them.  I said, "I don't really know of--I've been to black schools all my life--including this one.  And I don't know if I'm as good a doctor as doctors who went to Princeton [University, Princeton, New Jersey], University of Michigan [Ann Arbor, Michigan], and so forth.  So I applied for several hospitals for the internship, they wanted me to stay at Meharry and do internal medicine.  The chief pleaded with me to stay there and do my residency there.  And I said, "I can't do it."  I had to go.  And I ended up in a white hospital in Chicago [Illinois] called Michael Reese Hospital, which at that time was a well-respected institution.  And I was the second black they had accepted.  They had accepted a young Jamaican woman the year before I got there.  My experiences there were good, but I, I was going to find out whether I was good, as good my contemporaries who came from Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts], Princeton, Yale [University, New Haven, Connecticut], University of California [Berkeley, California], all like that--all Jews.  And, and I found out the first few days.  I was over them.  I'll give you a little example.  They couldn't even draw blood.  They had been to medical school and didn't know how to do it.  That, that's just an example. I was a better history taker, the duties of internship than they.  They assigned me to a little group--a Jewish boy, Mike [ph.], who told me as soon as he finished he was going back to Israel, and we became friends, and I guess he did.  And a white girl named Goldfolb [ph.] I lost contact with them.  But during that experience I was treated like you'd expect, most of the time, politely, sometimes little incidents.
Speaker 2: Okay, we'll stop here for a second.  Okay, we were talking about Meharry Medical School.  Well, you're, you're up at Michael Reese by now and you (simultaneous)
Speaker 1: Yeah. Yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: It's some other things I could mention about Meharry, but everything about Meharry, I--complimentary.  I have not been as strong a supporter of Meharry as I should have been, although I contribute money from time to time, and try to participate.  But because of my involvement at the new medical school, the (unclear), and I guess I just can't shoulder the both of them, but I'm a loyal alumnus of Meharry Medical College, and I do do some things for them.
Story_ID: 168078
Speaker 1: How did you like living in Chicago [Illinois]?  I mean, how was that different, because you'd been in the South--
Speaker 2: I loved it.  I could revert, but the social life, I, I could separate the two by that time.  I could be a good intern and work hard and read, but, and, but my free hours were mine.  I was a country boy from, from Georgia; I just had a good time.  I enjoyed myself.  I made some good friends up there that I still have--I don't know.
Speaker 1: You enjoyed the South Side of Chicago.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, and come to think of it, it wasn't comfortable.  I had the experience going out.  I wasn't comfortable in the West Side or going up to North, I guess.  I--you were only comfortable in Chicago at that time, on the South Side.  You could go, but you weren't comfortable, to those other places.  We went--one Saturday afternoon we were all off, Mike and some of his friends--and then I have another thing to tell you about, and they were going to--best description, a strip joint.  They, they wanted to go see one of the famous ones over in Gary [Indiana], and they said, "Come on."  I, "okay, I, I'm game."  They wouldn't let me in when we got to the door--that's the short story; and they wouldn't let them in because I was with them--in Gary.  So they were concerned about me and my feelings actually, and I said, "Man, don't worry about, let's go do something else--don't worry about it."  But, but that, that was an example of Chicago.  When I got time to rotate, we rotated to different services; that was the nature of an internship.  When I got to obstetrics, just before I was scheduled to rotate, the, the director of the hospital called me into his office.  I was, "Who is this dude want to talk to me, an intern."  Basically he wanted to ease me through to the point that I wasn't going to rotate through there.  He thought there might be some reject, rejections of me at that time as a black, delivering white women.  I assisted in delivery of white women.  To this day, I caved in.  To this day, I remonstrate with myself why I didn't stand up to that.  I guess I was so interested in my career than insist on it and make a fuss about it.  But that wasn't the place and that's why I understand so many of the blacks in history that we call "hang of heads," but that's all they could do at that time.  But  I apologize for that one because I should have done it anyway.  Anyhow, I did not rotate.  I did some more surgery, and did--completed all the other requirements.  When I finished, they asked me to stay.  They asked me to stay there and do my residence.  I say, said, "No, I got"--because they knew I was interested in surgery, and I had applied and I got it at St. Louis [Missouri].
Story_ID: 168079
Speaker 1: Yeah, you went to Homer [G.] Phillips [Hospital, St. Louis, Missouri] (unclear) (simultaneous)
Speaker 2: Homer Phillips was where I was.  It was connected to Washington University [St. Louis, Missouri].  But before I leave Chicago [Illinois], I have to tell you about a little poker game I got involved in with fellow interns.  They said, "You play poker?"  I said, "Yeah, I like to play poker," and I did.  We got into it and then a little hassle with one of the other players, something about whether he put his money in, or--and they turned to me, they just fussed for a little while about little stuff in the poker game.  (Unclear) One of the guys turned to me and said, "Oh, Clint, don't worry about these guys, they're just Jewish, that's what they do."  They argue.  They were all Jews, just like we sometimes kid ourselves about blacks.  I really appreciated that.  But I said, went on down there and I had discovered, I knew that I was fully prepared as any other medical school graduate coming from Meharry [Medical College, Nashville, Tennessee], I knew, I had learned that at Michael Reese [Hospital, Chicago, Illinois].  And I went down there, the pyramidal system--they had residents--they would have five to start with, and next year they would drop one or two and then the parameter would get two, and then finally they got to be the chief resident in the fourth year.  And it was a little cliquish thing, but I won that.  I won that award down there and ended up being chief resident, although I was the outsider, and the guy who I displayed, who they had thought--we're still friends.  He's, he's out on the west coast, somewhere.  I felt sorry for him, but I felt better for myself.  I didn't make the judgment.  They just people anyway, I enjoyed that experience too, because I wasn't married then, yet.  And I enjoyed the free time off in St. Louis [Missouri], but I worked hard.  I've learned everything I could, because I wanted to be--I just, I'd set some goals without even describing them.  I wanted to be the best that I could be.  When I finished that program and came down here, I knew, this is not bragging, I knew, I knew as much about surgery as any doctor in this country or in Europe.  I knew that.  I can say that without bragging.  I took my surgical certification exam, passed the board--what the call it--when they make you a real specialist, from two giants in surgery down in New Orleans [Louisiana] --it was segregated then, I had to go out to lunch--I couldn't--I was the only black candidate down there--with a guy named Michael DeBakey, maybe you've heard of his name.  He was a famous heart surgeon some years ago and (unclear) Ochsner, Alton Ochsner, those are two medical historians who were great, recognized world surgeons who examined me.  I don't know if that was a setup or what.  It didn't matter to me because I knew I was ready.  Some guys were so--come out there and getting ready to go, and they'd go vomit first, and that was because they--but I wasn't, I wasn't upset.  But (unclear) when I got in with these guys, and these people I'd read about, you know, and never--they carried me through a very rigorous exam--orally, because I had already taken the written and passed.  I had to take the oral exam; ended up they ended up after a session like we having here now, asking me one question, they said, "What would you then?"  And we were talking about a patient with regional enteritis.  It's a disease of the small intestine.  Sometimes it requires medical surgical (stet).  It's usually treated with medicine.  But when it outgrows that you have to operate.  So they ran me down the list, "What would you do then?  If you took that section out--which is what we do and join the intestines back together--and it spreads again, and that's what it's starting to do"?  I said, "I'd take some more out."  And then they finally got on down, "What would you do then?"  I forget what the specific question was, but we narrowed it on down to a dilemma.  And I said, "I don't know what I would do."  They both looked at each other and smiled and said, "We don't know either, what we would have done in that circumstance we painted for you.  We don't know what we would have done."  I knew I had it made then.  I passed that and came on back here.  Attitudes, I, I want to talk about.  When I came here as a surgeon, people didn't understand that concept, blacks didn't.  Only white people operated on blacks--(unclear) have trust.  I was in a barbershop once, right--a few months after I opened my office.  They said, "You the new doctor that's down the street here on Hunter Street", which is now Martin Luther King.  I said, "Yeah."  "What do you do?"  I said, "I'm a surgeon."  They said, "A surgeon!  You don't deliver babies?"  I said, "No."  They started laughing.  They'd never heard of that concept.  And he went on to say--this guy in the barbershop, "Man you going to starve to death."  I said, "Well, why is that, sir?"  He said, "No black folks will let you operate on them."
Story_ID: 168080
Speaker 1: I was referring to the situation where I found that blacks in this town [Chicago, Illinois], I guess everywhere, I don't know, they're not--they weren't used to hearing about a black surgeon who did only surgery.  And thought that--and it was true, that most of the black surgery was done by whites.  There was a surgeon here that preceded me.  He was not certified, but he was a good surgeon.  And as I made my in-roads here, he invited me to join him in practice.  However, I was certified and I just wouldn't do that, because he said, "What I want you to do is take night calls for me.  And I was scuffling, and maybe help out in surgery sometime, and deliver babies.  I said, "Doc, I can't do that."  And then he understood why, but he tried to pressure me, and I didn't do it.  We remained friends.  I'd help him out from time to time, and--but I wouldn't join him in his practice, because he told me, "You can't make it unless you join me", because, I wasn't, you know, I wasn't getting many referrals and all, but gradually I got the trust, I guess, or something and got....  Shortly after I got here it was time for me to apply for the American College of Surgeons, which is a national organization and membership, and that is just the--grouped in the highest thing you could get.  One of the requirements was to have three members of the College observe you operate and talk to you and so forth.  And I, and I went that route and asked three of my white colleagues to come over.  They, they would come to black hospitals and operate on their black patients.  And I got to know them, but none had the time.  I was refused; they said they don't have the time to do that.  So the next year, I went to a meeting and I'd go--I started going to those meetings as a resident, like a student going to these meetings, in Chicago [Illinois]--was the first one I went to.  They met in Atlantic City [New Jersey], and I was in this quandary, where nobody would give me the first step, because I knew I could make it into that organization once I got over the step.  I ran into Loyal Davis, Loyal Davis, who, who is the father of Nancy Reagan, who used a different name then.  He was big shot in surgery.  In fact, he was president of the American College of Surgeons at that time.  He also published the official journal of surgery, which is (unclear).  I still take it.  Anyway, I cornered him on the boardwalk in Atlantic City on a lunch break, and he listened to me.  He said, "I'm surprised, I didn't know that was happening."  He said, "Let me see what I can do about it."  I said, "Thank you."  I didn't ask him anything, I was just telling him the problems I was having "any suggestions" or something to that--it was a brief conversation.  But, within weeks of getting back I got invited to come down, they were going to pass up that--since the surgeons wouldn't agree to come in the room with me, and I'd go before three-member, white panel to interview.  And I went, and they were (unclear).  I knew them.  They were obvious--they hardly even accepted black patients.  Lawrence Butler McDowell's [ph.] father was one of them.  I, I'm not going to give you the names--he was a local politician.  He got killed.  But anyway, they grilled me, not about medicine, but about ethics and, and things like that.  At the time there was a big thing about fee spreading for surgeons.  In other words, if you sent me your patients, I'd pay you some money.  I never did that.  And, and they just grilled me and said, "We hear the black doctors over there do it all the time."  I said, "Well, you heard wrong."  You know, I just--and I went on through that, but those were the type of questions--not my capability as a surgeon because they knew that.  I had been there long enough.  And the next thing I knew, I got, got the approval to join and come up to Chicago again and be inducted, back in '64 [1964] or something, whatever.
Story_ID: 168081
Speaker 1: Well, were there--sir, were there any other (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yeah (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --black surgeons (unclear) (simultaneous)
Speaker 2: --there were a few.  There were a few.  There weren't many.  I can't tell you--a handful.  The guy who trained me in St. Louis [Missouri], William Silen, and a couple of other guys were, were in that organization at that time.  And there were, I won't say many, but a few.  The reason I say that, is when I got out, somebody wrote a book, or we did some research for the National Medical Association to see how many black surgeons were in Atlanta, and they could only count one hundred.  But all those hundred were not into this 30,000 men organization.  But I can't give you an exact figure.  I was the subect of a book by--his son practices here--he's going to be the president of American College of Surgeons next year, out of Omaha [Nebraska].  He's a west coast kind of--I'll get to his name [Dr. Claude H. Organ].  He, he will, if hears this, he'll respect my ab... name, absent.  The point is, he wrote a book--'One Hundred Black Surgeons' [sic, 'A Century of Black Surgeons: the U.S.A. Experience.']  Something like two volumes, I think.  And he was kind enough to include me in that book.  By that time there were more than 100.  But one time there were only one hundred, and that was after I got in the thing--black surgeons in the country.  And that applies to black physicians in general, especially in Georgia.  And that's why the medical school is here now.
Story_ID: 168082
Speaker 1: You are, are trained in general surgery and your specialty is diseases of the breasts, right?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.  I took that--at the time I trained in general surgery we did general surgery.  We did general surgery, we did neurosurgery, we did pediatric surgery, we did heart surgery, if it was necessary, and it wasn't, it wasn't classified as heart then--trauma, and kidneys, anything, urology, we were trained in all those fields, but, but they don't do that now, because, ear, nose and throat people--I did tonsillectomies, you know, it was all surgeons did that.  But it's been--the field has been narrowed down because the specialists who have developed, so-called specialties claim that field, and if you go to court as a general surgeon and somebody accuse you of doing something that's out of the, the spec-- the orthopedic surgeon could have set that bone, but we did that too in training.  We could do everything.  But, the, the legal liability of doing it is so--all general surgeons backed off.  I did it for a long time, until it became obvious.  I didn't want to face that question.  But there was enough general surgery.  Now I just--means abdominal surgery, burns and trauma, that's, that's about it.  I think I got off your question again, but I was....
Speaker 1: No, but that's--in just confirming what you do, you did.
Speaker 2: That's, that's how medicine has changed.  And I want--can I make a comment on medicine?
Speaker 1: Um-hum.
Speaker 2: The practice of medicine today--I made this statement recently and I stick to it.  I'm ashamed--I am virtually ashamed of the practice of medicine.  I won't blame it all on the, the business aspect of it that has developed, as you well know, I don't have to describe that.  But I'm ashamed of physicians and how they practice and what they will accept, and it's all about money.  Very few ethical-- I know, I'm, I was a little bit ashamed before I quit practicing because I was interacting with younger physicians who'd, who had notions--not all of them--notions that never entered my mind in their practice now, because they violate certain Hippocratic Oaths, et cetera and so forth.
Story_ID: 168083
Speaker 1: For an example, I mean, what would be an example?
Speaker 2: It comes to pulling the plug.  That's a good example because there is controversy about that.  I think there comes a point when you can do that, but if you do that just to save money, I'm against it, and I won't do it.  I don't care how much it costs.  It doesn't cost as much as a B-15, or a B-12, or a B--an atom bomb, you know.  I, I'm, I'm opposed to that.  That's just, that's all, the answer is just that some of the young doctors just (unclear) and making money.  And there's nothing wrong with making a living and support your family, but the idea I'm going to get rich on this, I never had that idea.  I don't have that.  In fact, when I came the average off the street was five dollars, between three dollars and five dollars for a full office visit.  Because I had to find out, I didn't know.  And I started out charging three dollars, the low end of rent.  And you know what, I enjoyed practicing medicine so much, when I accepted the three dollars I felt like I didn't--I shouldn't take it.  I'm not Jesus Christ. I'm a bad guy, bad thoughts, but that's, that's just the way I felt about.  And I gradually increased my fee.  But not--I just....  That's the controversy that's going to go on for a while.  And I, I'm probably one of the older fellows just see the changes are not acceptable.  That's all I mean.  The ethics is weakened by the pursuit of the dollar.  And the doctors are mainly forced into it.  That's why I stopped paying my dues for the AMA [American Medical Association].  They still consider me a member since I've been registered so long.  I just--I'm not that--I'm not interested in that.  I can't see why they would accept the government's hand over the practice of medicine, like it did before, but they went with it.  They said we're going to get the best out of this that we can.  And they're still doing that, the AMA.  I don't want to get into all of that politics, but I'm ashamed it matters so much in practice today.  People do things for money.  I mean you see the stories.  A tenant--one of the largest operators of hospitals in the country, for profit, been charged with doing heart operations that weren't necessary, because they're lucrative.  I can't give you a better example than that, and that goes on all the time.  That's a general practice of medicine in this country that's not talked about, but I'll speak about it.  Some of these operations are not necessary, just routine.  They're doing them to make money.
Speaker 1: Sir, there seems to be some sort of a surge in, in the number of plastic surgeries that are being advertised on, on television.  Do you see this (unclear) (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: Yeah, there are a couple here--couple black ones and plenty of white ones.  I don't--you know, it's, it's not covered under insurance and people are willing to pay that, it's fine.  They take their own risks.  If, if they get the results that they do.  And you know in this market, it's always marketed, it's a risk.  If you're not, you're not going to like the results--they explain all of that to you before, and you go ahead and if you don't like the results, that's "tough."  But, you are never going to see any results except good ones from plastic surgery from that--you know, that's all they're going to show you, that's all they going to advertise.  But believe me there are people who got messed up, just did get the results--just, they look no better than they did before, spent all that money out of their pockets, not insured.  But that's--I, I don't have a problem with that, it's free choice.   Except--I don't think they are responsible for doing unnecessary stuff.  If a person feels bad about himself, herself, gets plastic surgery and feels good, better, that's acceptable to me.  I can't control the cards.
Story_ID: 168084
Speaker 1: Maybe we, we can talk about the, the Civil Rights Movement.  We, we started talking a little bit about it before.  Now, now maybe we can, we can get into it now.  How did that--how did you participate in the Civil Rights Movement here (unclear)?
Speaker 2: I participated before I got here.  There was a thing called the tobacco farm up in Connecticut.  It was a habit for Morehouse [College, Atlanta, Georgia] students to go up in the summertime for jobs and work on the tobacco farm.  You sat down and you slid, and did the sort of thing like just picking leaves from the tobacco plant which would be used for cigar covers--Coleman Brothers Tobacco Farm, it was a tradition at Morehouse, we all experienced it.  I went there the first year and I worked hard.  I made forty dollars and came on back home and went back to the second year at Morehouse.  The second year I went up, I got involved in how much--I noticed that there were some other people that don't look like us, working in an adjacent farm and I made it my business to find out what they were being paid, and it was more than what we were getting.  So I raised the issue.  Yeah.  That was in the '40s [1940s], early '40s [1940s]--how come we couldn't....And there was a little explosion for a while.  And the owners and the managers came and called us off the field and talked, said "Anybody who doesn't go back out on the field might as well leave the farm, for the same amount of money.  That's all we're going to pay.  We don't have...."  So I left, and a couple of guys left with me.  I just left.  The, the--I told my folks about it when I got home.  They said, "Well...."  They come to smiling and whatever comment, but they liked that.  And that was one--I did the same thing when I went to St. Louis [Missouri].  The residency salary was fifteen dollars a month, and I checked around at other hospitals--Barnes, to find out what they were being paid.  They were being paid more.  I started a little commotion and we got a raise.  I, I thought that was just right.  And I don't call that civil rights, it just wasn't called that in those days.  Anyhow, when I came here I, I ended up in the, also the Spelman care for the Spelman patients [Spelman College, Atlanta, Georgia].  And I was the first black doctor to do that in that black college.  Because they'd all had white doctors before that.  And, and my connections with Morehouse, I just naturally got involved.  I felt the culture--black culture at that time, many blacks who could not participate in even talking about this because they had jobs that depended on the white people.  And people were fired from their jobs if they showed interest in that sort of thing.  And I said, now, I don't have a job for a white person.  I can do what I want to do--they can't fire me.  So I got, I got involved and started helping the students--bailed them out and sent them lunches and patrolling, picketing with them--went to jail three straight times, during that time.  And I was immediately bailed out, but I went.  One of those times I went to come to a court hearing for this previous offense--sitting in at a restaurant, I, Julian Bond, and everybody, the students, were arrested and immediately got out.  But I was late to that hearing--five minutes late.  And as I walked in and sat down, the judge pointed to me and said, "Come up here and get in that chair."  His name was Durwood Pye--put that name in there.  He was known in this county as being a, a bastard--excuse the expression.  He grilled me about why I was late and I told him, "Sorry, I had car trouble--traffic."  I was five minutes late.  He hadn't even started the court.  He said, "Well, are you a member of the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People]?"  I said, "Yes sir, I am."  He said, he said a few other derogatory remarks and said, "Are you a communist?"  I said, "No, I'm not a communist"--a couple of other questions in that vein.  You would have thought it was the CIA [Central Intelligence Agency] investigating.  And when he concluded, he said, "Bailiff, take this man to jail."  Well, well, and got out again, but that was the third time I went.  But anyway, the questions I answered were so--during one of the sessions the officers had built a new office--I offered it to the students for a communications center.  At least I had two or three phones.  I had a format of the building or something, whatever.  And they didn't need it (unclear), but they, they thanked me for offering it, so they could talk to each other at different sites and so forth.  And, what else here--I'll mention--no, I won't mention the name, but I'll tell you afterwards.  A certain civil rights leader came to me when all the Mississippi stuff was going on, and he wanted to meet at the office on Sunday, and wanted to know if I had any bugs or anything in there.  I said, "No, not that I know of."  I met him over there.  It was just he and I.  He wanted to know if I would be willing to serve, to treat injured people--blacks, because they were getting ready in Mississippi to do a militant thing, not a non-violent thing.  It was a movement within the core who wanted to get together and do that, and they were determined to do it.  But they were, you know, checking the resources and stuff, would I be available to come down there in case somebody got shot and hurt or something.  I explained to him that I couldn't come down there because I wouldn't have hospital privileges for was one thing.  And, but I would be willing to accept any patient that you could send here as a result of that disturbance and take care of them for free, and, and see that they got the care that they needed.  And he was, he was kind of satisfied with that, but I didn't hear anymore.  In fact, he had ended up being a patient of mine, yeah, he did.
Story_ID: 168085
Speaker 1: Is this during the Freedom Summer of '64 [1964]?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Um-hum.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Exactly.  And you didn't know him.  He is dead now.  But, I, well if I say it I, I shouldn't--James Foreman.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Um-hum.  I knew him well.  And, and I, I, I was, I was willing to do that.  I was ashamed though, and embarrassed after, was when I talked about it.  But right then, I was willing, and I could have covered my practice.  I would have gone down there if I, I didn't have to take care of my family and stayed and spent some time. (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Things were really (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --just as a doctor.  What?
Speaker 1: --Things were really hot down there?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah--there were four boys in a dam and Cushman, or whatever his name was.  Yes, I thought about that many times.  But, it didn't happen.  I guess the other people that were non-violent people kind of talked them out of it and they didn't get any support for it.  But they, they were ready to pull out, to pull out guns.  The Stokely Carmichael-type thing--he was involved in that time.
Speaker 1: It speaks to the (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: What?
Speaker 1: --amount of pressure that people were, were under at time.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Um-hum.
Speaker 1: The murder of [Andrew] Goodwin, [Michael] Schwerner, and [James Earl] Chaney and Viola Liuzzo and countless other people shot at and shot and beaten.
Speaker 2: The other thing, when I came here, there as a prepared surgeon I knew I was as good as anybody.  I applied at some white hospitals and got rejected.  They said, "We don't take Negroes."  One of them suggested, "Why don't you just use the black hospitals that's over there?"  I didn't know anything about that then.  But when things got hot, I got to thinking about it.  We ended up suing the Brady System, the Emory University [Atlanta, Georgia], the white medical association, the white dental association, everything that had to do with segregation of professional people in medicine.  I went to jail once at the Buckhead Biltmore Hotel [Atlanta, Georgia].  I'll get back to that.
Story_ID: 168086
Speaker 1: Well, let's, let's, let's do this lawsuit first (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Okay, finish that.
Speaker 1: That's, that's nineteen (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Actually (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --sixty-two [1962].
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Attorney [Donald Lee] Hollowell was--oh it was '62 [1962].  It was before--well, whatever.  You have the dates, I, I get confused about it.  I think it was (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Unclear) Brady, Emory [University] Hospital [Atlanta, Georgia], (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --in Fulton County [Georgia] (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --Association.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I was president of the [Georgia State] Medical Association at that time and I asked them to join me in the suit as a signatory with the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] and, and they--I said, "Well, I'm going to do it"--not just talking about it and just doing it.  However, when at a segregated medical meeting, see, it was a southern thing--custom, in a white hotel.  I said, "We're going down and go to that meeting and we're going to lunch afterwards in the hotel, we're not going to leave and come to a black restaurant.  How many of you willing to do that?"  They started fumbling.  That, that brings up a thing I called the "scared Negro disease."  But I won't dwell on that right now.  Anyway, got eleven to go with me and we went and did just what I'd asked them to do and we got--they called it trespassing then.  You were where you were not supposed to be.  About eight of us went to jail, the others kind of stepped out of line when they were asked--"we're asking you to leave."  And I don't, I don't blame them, they just didn't want to go.  We went on and got bailed out again.  Hollowell was the--did--the, the suit itself, never came about because he asked for, for a declaratory judgment, I believe I'm using the right term, to declare that this was unconstitutional--this type of segregation on the suit, they tell me and that's the way they settled it, and sent the judge's ruling out.  They never had to argue for, or against it.  It was so clearly inappropriate.  The judge ruled that, he was smart enough to do that rather than have a big fancy trial.  And it went away.  But the suit was filed.
Speaker 1: So you think they settled to save the state embarrassment (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --or save the (unclear) (simultaneous)
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Yeah.  The tide was turning a little bit.  They knew they couldn't keep that National reputation, and Emory--under those circumstances.  And they were proud to, to do that, so was the Medical Association, which when I got in it, I said, "I don't want this too."  These were all Republicans, I, you know, I don't think like that.  But, let's, oh, let's see now.  I, I think that's all the stuff of that incident (unclear).  White, black--expressways of this town when they built--the government outflow from the Eisenhower administration--the expressways around the county and all that--what we got was expressways that divided existing communities.  They were boarders. I-20 right up there was division line between blacks on one side and that's the way it existed.  That's why they built the route there.  Not through one neighborhood or the other.  And the same thing happened in other places.  Anyway, I was a young, just a young physician.  I'd bought a house and my wife was working and, and it was a small house and we were, we were doing okay, and then somebody opted out, I don't know why, to show me a house over in this restricted area that was for sale.  The guy said, (unclear).  It was twenty-one acres and it was just a little, regular, nice house on a nice view and all of that.  It was mostly pastureland right in this city.  And so, I, I, I, I bought it, and I moved in it, and got the usual, usual type things.  I have to say this--I'm going to say it.  Particular from a lot of women, neighbors, and stuff from around that neighborhood--it was all white when I was living there.  And started--they would call with the harassing calls--"Uncle Tom," "you black bastard," and all that sort of thing.  And I would--I'd shut them up right away.  I said, "Ma'am, you know, I'd go out with you tonight if I could, but I'm booked.  Your neighbor, I'm taking her out tonight.  I know you like black men," and they'd hang up (unclear), and garbage in the driveway.  And I was never physically threatened in that house.  What they did then was put up "Not For Sale"--blockbusting, that's what it was called.  That was a crime to go into a block and bust it.  For a black person to do that, nobody worried about it as housing, you know.  But--
Speaker 1: The dynamic of that is that a realtor would call all the white residents to say, "Don't you want to sell your house to them?" (Simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --and then try to get all (unclear) (simultaneous)
Speaker 2: At first they said, "We're going to stay here."  But then something else happened, I forget what the incident was and then those signs turned to "For Sale" the next day, just like that.  It took them some time to sell it, and--but they, they sold them all.  So it's right in this same neighborhood.  So, I just ended up buying over here.
Story_ID: 168087
Speaker 1: Dr. [Claude H.] Organ was the name of that I couldn't come up with.  He was the surgeon who wrote the book on 100 black surgeons ['A Century of Black Surgeons: The U.S.A. Experience'].  He's a well-known, respected surgeon around the country.  You may not know of him.
Speaker 2: Okay.  We were at the verge of talking about the wall--the Berlin Wall--they called it, here in Atlanta [Georgia] that was erected--I think the Mayor, Ivan Allen, Jr. had something to do with the atmosphere created around your integrating this part of Southwest Atlanta.
Speaker 1: That was a no-no and they called it blockbusting, blockbusting then in a neighborhood, all kinds of defenses against blacks doing that.  It just hadn't been done on such a known scale.  Anyway, when I bought the house he decided that he would put an end to this sort of thing by putting up a barricade in that I had to drive around, making it difficult for me to get to the house, and make it less appealing for others to buy into that neighborhood--people who were willing to sell--he would stop the blockbusting.
Speaker 2: Now this is the mayor of Atlanta.
Speaker 1: The mayor of the City of Atlanta.
Speaker 2: Ivan Allen.
Speaker 1: Ivan Allen.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: A reporter called--during that time, a reporter called me one time, that I remember from the Daily Atlanta Constitution [sic, Atlanta Journal Constitution] wanting to know about my feelings and so forth.  He said, "Why do you want to do that?"  I said, "I'm looking for a home for my family, and decided that was one I could afford, one that I would buy--that's where I would buy it, just like you.  I guess you would do that wouldn't you?"  Well, he never published--he never put my name in the paper.  It just referred to me as a black surgeon and didn't bother me.  But after thinking about it, I think Ivan Allen decided that he didn't want any violence to occur that--I'm, I'm just guessing.  Anyway, it, it just wasn't--it was known, and everybody here knew who bought the house, but my name never came up on the television shows--not that I was looking for it.  And I, I'm kind of thankful about it now.  It was less retaliation, you know, I would have been exposed to.  I'd get calls in the office, "Nigger come on home.  We've set your house on fire.  Come on out and see it," in the middle of my office hours.  I'd have to stop and excuse me, and run home and see it.  And it was a hoax.  That didn't really happen bad, stuff like that--well, it all the little annoying things, but that, I didn't worry about it.
Speaker 2: So this is a volatile period of time, though.
Story_ID: 168088
Speaker 1: Now, did--when you--I mean, did you have children then and--?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: 'Kay.
Speaker 2: A small son.  It was not a problem.  Surprisingly it was not a problem with my wife at that time.  I, I kind of, I might have expected--I brought her here from St. Louis [Missouri], and she didn't want to come south anyway for those reasons.  I mean we almost broke up, because I told her, "I'm going."  Her father was a, a physician who had, had expired.  And she wanted to stay and restore his practice there in St. Louis.  I said, "Oh, well, we are going to Atlanta [Georgia]."  She was so full of it, she left shortly after we got back and went home to mama.  Her mama sent her back in two days, so I didn't say nothing and she got okay.  And the incident that occurred on the way down there, we were driving--two cars--I like cars, and, and I always have.  And I had just bought a new Buick, black.  I was so proud of that car and I was driving it and I got too far in front of her--I knew I was speeding.  We were close to Atlanta then.  I wanted to get there.  And later she fussed about--"Well, why did you drive off and leave me like that", and all like that.  But, the patrol--state patrol stopped me and as you know, I was smoking.  They came up to the car and asked me to get out and all, this, and not politely.  And I was by myself, very little traffic on that road.  And one of them said, "Take that cigarette out of your mouth boy, when you talk to me."  Here again, I had a choice to make.  But I knew what that, that choice was--it was Hobson's choice.  They could have shot me and then said I attacked them.  After I, I--killed me, and that, that's happened in this area.  So I took it out.  And he wanted to know where I was going, where I was coming from and why I was going, and so forth.  Finally, they said, "Okay, get on back in the car, boy."  But it was, they, they weren't happy about this brand new spanking Buick.  It was looking good.  You know, I was just driving while black--the old stuff.  But I didn't challenge that either.  And I wouldn't challenge that now if I was in South Georgia.  Because that kind of thing happens now in South Georgia, I want you to know that.  Not in Atlanta--inside of Georgia there are people who do--and the police--who will do things like that.  And it's all over this country, not many, but some will--some still do.  I see them under the old flag thing.  I mean, "We not going to never, you know, never, never."  Did I answer that question?  I, I think I (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Unclear) (simultaneous)
Speaker 2: --varied a little bit.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: What was the climate....  You asked....
Speaker 1: We're asking--I asked you about the, the, you know, if your children were affected by (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --You had a small son.  Did, did he go to school (unclear) (simultaneous)
Speaker 2: Yeah.  He, he was in nursery school at that time.  My wife would take him.
Speaker 1: But did he end up having to go to an all white school out here, or--?
Speaker 2: Oh no, by the time he--the neighborhood was broken open by the time he got to high school.  And he was going to all black grammar school--he was....  By the time he got out of grammar school it was broken.  He went right up the street to high school and (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: You were the (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --It wasn't, wasn't a hazard to him.
Speaker 1: --You, you were the on... the only black resident in this neighborhood, the only for a short period of time?  Okay.
Speaker 2: Short period of time.  Because once they started selling that was it.  And I, I, I don't recall how long that was.  But it, it--once it started it was like a cascading thing.  Actually all of this section was all white--completely.  All the black neighbors you see out here and heard about here, none of those existed.  And without bragging, I, I have to say that, that one act, just happen to be, took the cork out of the bottle.  And it, it would have happened anyway.  Somebody else would have bought a house somewhere and started it, and made it legitimate.  I don't think that the Civil Rights Bill had been passed then, for houses.  I'm not sure.  I don't think it had.  So I didn't have any legal standing to do that.  You know, (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay.
Speaker 2: --it's over and done, it's now in the past.
Story_ID: 168089
Speaker 1: Now did, did you ever, did you ever meet [Reverend] Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.]?
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: And (simultaneous)
Speaker 2: I knew Dr. King.  He was--he came in as a freshman, was there when I came back in '46 [1946], '47 [1947].  And subsequently, after I got back I was reading about all the Montgomery [Alabama] stuff, the bus strike and all that, and I'll run into him from time to time.  One time I met him in the hospital.  He was coming out of the hospital, under a back porch, we stopped and chatted again he spoke to me, he knew me.  And I said, "Well, when you going to write your book?"  He said, "I'm writing it right now.  I'm on it, I'm on it."  And, you know, asked about his mother and that's all.  I don't say we were close friends, but I knew him--just like Maynard--Maynard Jackson, the same thing.  I, I don't have any tales to tell about his activities and behind the scene.  If you do, you could do Joe Lowery, you could rely probably, on what he said about it, because he was closer to him in the later part.  [Ralph] Abernathy was the one who really was with him early on.  But the thing about King, and I'm ashamed of Atlanta [Georgia] about this, but those were the times.  He could do all those wonderful things around the country, that we viewed as wonderful.  Black Atlanta did not accept him.
Speaker 1: And there was some friction (simultaneous)
Speaker 2: The preachers would not support him.  They never did--King never did anything in the City of Atlanta, because he knew the climate.  And he didn't want that to work against him nationally--I, I suppose.  I'm just....  But he never attempted it.  There were a lot of competitors.  We were talking about these other preachers here and they, they thought they were being out-manned, so they weren't going to cooperate with any of this.  There were many of blacks who felt we shouldn't sit-in, we shouldn't seek for that--seek equality.  We should just seek separate but equal, that sort of thing.  Many of them was on that.
Story_ID: 168090
Speaker 1: Now, 1967 you formed the Atlanta Surgical Professional Association.  And this is--this is the first minority medical group in surgery, I've heard.  Can you tell us about that?
Speaker 2: When I got here the spirit of cooperation between doctors was not particularly high.  They would work out their own little arrangements, and work them together, but nobody was familiar with the concept of a group practice--a partnership practice.  And, I, I just, I just got real busy and just wanted to do it.  My wife was advised me not to do it.  She said, "They going to take all your patients."  The other surgeons I mentioned said, "You making a mistake.  He's going to take all your patients whoever you get in there."  So, I, I took one guy in and it worked out fine.  It gave me more time off for family and he was making a good living, and I was pretty generous, and subsequently we took another one in.  It was illegal to form a corporation at that time of physicians.  Because the law said a corporation cannot practice medicine.  We did that in whatever date it was, and the laws hadn't been passed.
Speaker 1: Sixty-seven [1967].
Speaker 2: But I was certain that they would be passed on the state level, and so they invented what they called the LLC, or one of those terms--PCF, I forget, whatever the term.  The laws changed, but the lawyer was kind of shaky about it, who did it for us.  And I convinced him to, "Go ahead, you're not going to lose your law degree."  And he filed the papers--we got that certification--Atlanta Surgeons Professional Association.  When some of the whites started doing that they wanted that name, but they couldn't have it--those white surgeons.  And then it is a common thing now, but it was unknown.  Yeah, and it worked out.  We stayed together for thirty something years--thirty-five years, But that was the first time that ever been attempted in a black neighborhood.  Really, may have happened around the country somewhere I don't know about.  But I, I don't--hey, I don't believe in this first Negro stuff to do this--first Negro to do that.  I don't believe in that, but it was rare.  I don't believe in that.
Story_ID: 168091
Speaker 1: I have a joke--some friends of mine, and they--we talk about somebody, somebody--do you know what the Boule [Sigma Pi Phi Fraternity] is?  No, okay.
Speaker 2: Tell, tell the people that are going to be listening to this.
Speaker 1: The Boule is an organization--it's the oldest organization of its kind in the country.  It was--it's going to celebrate its 100th year, in 1904, in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], where it was born.  During that time, black professionals felt a need to have an organization where they could just talk to each other about their problems and cooperate.  And it started in Philadelphia.  It's now a national organization--chapters over the country.  It, it, it, created--I was chairman of--no, not me, let me describe, describe the organization, and it's grown.  It has over 3,000 members.  It has a foundation--almost $10 million dollars.  It's used for scholarships and public, you know, assistance.  And, I sat on that board, also the board of that--trustee of that foundation. It was (unclear), one time here.  (Unclear) is the Greek term for the president of that association.
Speaker 2: These are all Greek (unclear) (simultaneous)
Speaker 1: Yeah.  (Simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Unclear) (Simultaneous)
Speaker 1: --Because it takes a lot of culture from the Greeks in the way it's organized, names, (unclear), Archousais, Archousais; the wives.  But after that it becomes all black, black improvement.  Now, this organization was great and it use to be people would fight to get in it, and they still do.  They like the stature, so-called.  But I, I've gotten a little tired of it now.  And I speak up about that at some of the meetings.  It's, it's not, it's varying from what it was started out to be.  It's more of "I promote you, you promote me", that's, that's not the object.  But we have a good social action program here.  We work with students.  We don't approach the thing of the "100 Men", that you know about and around the country.  Here, they whip our butts in terms of social action and doing things.  There're about ninety members here.  And I told them that the biggest thing you're doing now, is planning the Christmas party.  You start planning it after the first one is over, and you spend a lot of money down therea big part of our budget.  And we don't need to be doing that.  But you know, these people, they don't....  So, but they know my views about it.
Story_ID: 168092
Speaker 1: So becoming more social [Sigma Pi Phi Fraternity, the Boule] than, than, than (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yeah.  (Unclear) (Simultaneous)
Speaker 1: --than act... (unclear) (simultaneous)
Speaker 2: They've become--um-hum.  They've become more social and pride in, in having your name associated with (unclear).  I never had that, and I don't now.  But a lot of them--people do.  It, it will get its act together.  It's a good organization for a good purpose.  It's just the politics, the jealousies, just, you know, you have to stay true to yourself when you're in an organization like that.  They think if they give the best party in town, that's something to seek and its, its no goal or objective--that shouldn't be.  It's not one of mine.  And it shouldn't be the goal of this organization.  "Well, we don't do...."  Yet, they do though, they do.  That's exactly what they do.  Now, the critics in that organization can fire back at me if they want to, but they really do, but its, its going to change.  I would, I--they appointed me a long range one (unclear), who was the chief--I had been appointed this committee to--for a long range plan, and I wrote it up, because the committee wouldn't ever meet with me as a joint session, maybe once, to structure what we wanted to look like in ten years.  I basically wrote it and called a meeting in New York [New York] and they didn't like that, they came, most of them came and I just read it to them.  And they started objecting this and objecting to that.  I say, "Well you can, you know, you can object, but you know you had your opportunity, because I've contacted each of you at least three times about a meeting--come--and I'll go wherever you want to go, just to get your ideas.  I asked you to mail them to me, one or two did."  So, we just moved on and, and I knew I was in trouble then.  But I presented it at the national meeting in St. Louis [Missouri], no Kansas City [Missouri], it was some years ago, and the people individually bought it, but the politics said, "No, we don't need to move that fast."  All I was saying is document your original principles; do it in a business-like way, get computerized, which they weren't at that time.  Get a strong message--stop being so secretive, and, and get a little publicity about what you're doing.  Eddie Williams has been a president of that--of the thing in Washington (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Of the national (simultaneous)--?
Speaker 2: --and he just kind of used it to--he didn't, he didn't really do nothing.  I'll call--I don't mind calling his name.  And people were proud that he was the czar, the grand czar, we call it.  And he did a good job, but all I'm pointing out is--but, I'm bragging again--they are moving now to adopt all of the things I recommended, in my recommendations.  When I presented it and they discussed it for a while and somebody recommended that we just put it on the table and study it some more--not adopt it, but they've adopted all the ideas I had. (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Now, now they (Unclear) (simultaneous)
Speaker 2: --but McKinney was a strong supporter of mine.  He helped me, he wrote the foreword.  He agreed with it.
Speaker 1: Who's that and (unclear) (simultaneous)
Speaker 2: McKinney (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Unclear) (Simultaneous)
Speaker 2: --that's David McKinney at the (simultaneous)
Speaker 1: Oh, David McKinney.
Speaker 2: The professor that I mentioned up at Morgan [State University, Baltimore, Maryland] whose retired.  And I had some (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Oh, Dr. Richard McKinney.  You mean Doctor Richard McKinney?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, that's his (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --Yeah, that's his first name (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --I think.  Is that his first name?
Speaker 1: Yeah.  Who was the president of Storer College [Harpers Ferry, West Virginia] at one time, a long time ago.
Speaker 2: Is that right?  I don't know all that.
Speaker 1: (Unclear), yeah.
Speaker 2: (Unclear).  There some other McKinneys out in California, but he's--I, don't know.
Speaker 1: He's 97.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah, and still clear.  He can give, boy; he can get up and talk in eloquent words.  I respect him.
Story_ID: 168093
Speaker 1: There was a, there is a, there was a growing theory in the conspiracy--black conspiracy community that the Boule [Sigma Pi Phi] was the super-secret organization working to keep black people in a stratified, you know, place.
Speaker 2: Something like a black Carlyle Group, I'll just mention that name, that's what you're saying, but that's not true.  It may have been perceived and some chapters may have tried to do stuff, but they always hadwhen they first started this thing of secrecy, something like the Masons.  They had to have a road map to do, and there's no reason for that today, you know.  I guess the Masons--don't they have the secrecy code or something?  I've been invited, I said, "No." I didn't join, I don't need that, but, you, you're right.  But it's a significant organization.  It does have power.  They didn't want to take advertisements in the journal.  That was one of my recommendations.  We have a monthly, or quarterly journal, and, that was part of my recommendation, we had to take advertisements.  We had to make this a profit-making venture--publishing this magazine.  It's costing us money.  They say, "Well what about looking...."  I said, "We can solve all those problems, just making yourself known."  So now they take advertising, in color in, in the journal.  But that was part of my plan.  But, I'm pleased that it's being done and it's being less secretive.  But, the secretive when they started getting--they started accusing each other of show-boating, you know, "Why you speaking for Boule?  They should come to us," give me a break.
Story_ID: 168094
Speaker 1: Now, you, you're involved in a number of different civic activities and boards.  You, you have--you were the chairman of a black bank here (unclear) (simultaneous)
Speaker 2: That was something like a business--just a savings and loan.  I was very proud to be invited to--on that board, twenty-something years ago.  There were some fantastic people on it.  And ultimately they elected me chairman and the restrictions--the black banks didn't buy the institution when it fell on....  I resigned the chairmanship 'cause I could see where it was going.  The board wasn't supportive and they were, but they just didn't know what they were doing, not that they were ignorant.  They were smart people.  But they were relying on the things in the past and you couldn't rely on that now.  You had to compete with the white institutions.  And they weren't able to do that.  I resigned.  I stayed on the board and the guy who--well, okay, that's it.  But, the end was it was absorbed by another black bank--Citizens Trust.
Speaker 1: Was that a mutual federal bank?
Speaker 2: Yeah a mutual federal bank.  Um-hum.  And I'm proud to say I wasn't chairman at the time that it happened because I saw it coming, but I was still on the board.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 168095
Speaker 1: You were the chairman of the board of trustees at Morehouse School of Medicine [Atlanta, Georgia]?
Speaker 2: That's the thing I'm most proud of, and I will say that.  I am proud of that.  When this school came to here--the notion of the school came, I was part of the group that we ought to have a black medical school, because we, we, there were only--we had a slogan that seventy-five doctors by '75 [1975] in Georgia--black doctors.  There were less than seventy-five in the whole state, so we took that slogan and from those notions and discussions said, "Why don't we just see if we get a medical school."  Had to go--I was not the president of that organization at that time.  The idea had to be taken--the president, at that time, took it to Atlanta University [later, Clark-Atlanta University, Atlanta, Georgia]--that's the normal thing.  He was turned down because it was a university professional school we're were talking about.  The colleges couldn't do that, we thought.  So--and he's a good friend of mine-- Vernon Jarrett [sic]--not, not the Vernon Jarrett, of the other thing up there, the one here-- (simultaneous)-
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) In Chicago [Illinois].
Speaker 2: --Who subsequently became, he was the president after what-so-name died.  He turned it down.
Speaker 1: Vernon Jordan, you're talking about.
Speaker 2: No, not Vernon Jordan, Jarrett.
Speaker 1: --Jarrett, okay.
Speaker 2: Well, we went to visit--Lou and I went to visit [HM] Vernon Jordan to get his, not approval, when he was the--in New York--the, what was that, that college fund.  What did he have--yeah the college fund.  When he (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: United Negro College Fund.
Speaker 2: And he said, "We don't need no...."  I'll, I'll tell him.  He....  "We, why do we need another black--why do we need a black medical school?"  Which was just, I guess it was a legitimate argument.  We should be making an effort to infiltrate or go to the white institutions, but we needed it, we needed it for a lot of reasons because it was still racism in medicine.  The more Thomas Jarret was the person I was talking about.  He rejected the idea.  So they went around--they went to the--ended up with Morehouse [College, Atlanta, Georgia], Dr. [Hugh Morris] Gloster, he liked it.  "This is a college, go start a medial school."  He liked it, and he--the history is well known.  He authorized three people to write a grant, to study the project.  He got a million dollars for the grant.  They studied it and recommended it, and got all the support that you need from the foundations and stuff to, to support it.  At that time they were talking about when the schools were coming along, there were too many positions in this country--maybe we'll cut back.  And it had to be told there're not too many black positions, and point out the statistics that ended segregation, and they were still segregated in that area, you know.  The ratio wasn't proper.  And the health outcomes were not proper, and there was a reason for that, because of the racism that was then and now also.  And what happened after that committee studied it and made a recommendation to do it, they formed a medical education project.  Gloster then had Lou [HM Louis Sullivan] to come down and run it.  I'm reading all this, I know all about it in the papers, but I'm not actively involved in it, because after they got to that level, he brought us at that time.  I said, yeah, I was on the board of the trustees.
Speaker 1: By Lou, you mean Dr. Louis Sullivan?
Speaker 2: ...Sullivan, yeah, our president at that time.  And it began to take hold and (unclear).  Lou came to my door--I knew him, but you know, I wasn't hanging around, wasn't doing nothing, and, and asked me--he came to ask me if I would accept the chairmanship.  Now, I was pleased, but he didn't know it, because I wanted to know how I could get involved in this.  This is something I wanted--this can't go on--I, I'm going to be involved some kind of way.  I wasn't talking about the--just, just being a professor there or something, you know.  But he asked me that and, and there was a chairman of the medical education projects, so he brought me on to that, first, knowing that as soon as we converted to this medical school, I would become the chairman.
Story_ID: 168096
Speaker 1: And that, that happened, and he [HM Louis Sullivan] worked hard.  And I've, I've written my opinions about him to people.  We worked together.  He's one of the hardest working persons I have known.  He didn't have the greatest management style in the world.  I don't mind saying that, and he needed some guidance and sometimes we would disagree, you know, on a lot of things, but we would always work it out and move on.  We, we weren't in that position that jealousy got into the thing.  We were all looking at the best thing for the school.  I could go into some detail about that.  I'm going to save that for my book (laughter) that I intend to write.  But anyway, I have to give him credit and everybody does.  He likes to be called the founder, but the actual truth, as I said it, he was brought on, and he was a good president.  Yeah, yeah, I guess he has a right to say that, but I don't--whatever.  This is my report.  His--we worked closely together.  I was busy practicing surgery, but I made time for that school.  What I had to do, do different responsibilities was the thing.  I would take trips then, I was flying then.  He got Barbara Bush to join the board, and, and I love her.  There was the other Bush [George H.W. Bush], and that Bush, the Vice President, helped us get the first building.  Lou's, Lou's impact was, was, was wonderful.  I spent so much time, he'd come by here, knowing that I'd be available at night, maybe, and not so much during the day, and we'd talk until 12-1:00 in the morning.  She told me one time, "Why don't you go on and marry the guy, you stay up with him so long."  And, okay.  But, we, we, we made it through.  We had a couple of things, I have, but I have a lot of....  On my retirement from the school one of the board members wrote me a letter saying all the usual things you say to people who retire--I spent ten years.  And they mentioned that you and I and the letter just dug down--early on you and I dealt with a situation that could have been fatal to the school that will forever remain absent from history.
