Story_ID: 428563
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe.  I'm interviewer today for The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Matthew Hickey.  Ma'am, could you please state your name and spell it for us please?
Speaker 2: Linda Marie White, L-I-N-D-A, M-A-R-I-E, W-H-I-T-E.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Is White your maiden name?
Speaker 2: Yes it is.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Okay well it's your name.
Speaker 2: Well not necessarily, because a lot of people use their maiden name professionally, so--
Speaker 1: Yeah, okay, all right.  And what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: Yes.  April 21st, 1942, Cleveland, Ohio.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: Now I'm retired.  Been retired for a little over a year from the [U.S.] Social Security Administration.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what is your present position?
Speaker 2: I'm the national president of Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority, Incorporated.
Story_ID: 428564
Speaker 1: Now before we go into depth, there are five People magazine-ish type questions we always ask, and they only require a short answer.  The first one is, ma'am, what is your favorite food?
Speaker 2: Probably macaroni and cheese, prime rib, roast (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: Probably green, more of an aqua green.
Speaker 1: Okay, as evidenced by your sweater.
Speaker 2: I mean this would be a color that, I mean I wear frequently.  I mean long--it has nothing really to do with Alpha Kappa Alpha.
Speaker 1: Okay, it's not pink and green.
Speaker 2: No, no, I rarely wear the combination.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right now do you have a favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Not really.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you have a favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: No.  But I've traveled to various parts of the United States and I've been out of the country, but it's not like I frequently go to, say, the Caribbean or some place.  I enjoy the opportunity to travel and some place new is fine.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: I guess a phrase in the sense of sort of a philosophy.  I've always felt that you can't relive the past.  The only thing you can do is learn from it and move forward.
Story_ID: 428565
Speaker 1: Now I'm gonna ask you about your family history.
Speaker 2: All right.
Speaker 1: I'm gonna ask you about your mother's side and your father's side.  But first can you give us the full names of your parents and their dates and places of births and spell their names for us?  That's a big--that's a lot.
Speaker 2: Let's see.  My mother was born Mary Fennell, F-E-N-N-E-L-L, October 29th, 1919 in Canton, Ohio.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And your father?
Speaker 2: My father was born Lemnon, and it's spelled L-E-M-N-O-N.  His middle name is Spruiell, and S-P-R-U-I-E-L-L White.  And he was born November 30th, 1907.  He's been dead so many years now, it's--but I know it was November in 1907.
Speaker 1: Is your mother still living?
Speaker 2: No, both of my parents are deceased.
Speaker 1: All right.  Now is there a story behind your father's name?  Very interesting name, Lemnon.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Spruiell.
Speaker 2: The Spruiell is his mother's maiden name.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you know what kind of name that is or where it comes from?
Speaker 2: No.  I don't know we are any relation to a family of Spruiells.  There was a big historical piece on a Spruiell plantation out in North Carolina.  We don't know whether or not we are really related to that, that family, it was a slaveholder I understand with lots of children and they migrated throughout, you know, the southern part of the United States.  But I couldn't say with accuracy that we can actually trace our history there.
Speaker 1: I hear you.  Odds are there's a good chance you're probably related to that group on some level just because of the odd, the odd of--the oddity of the name, you know.
Speaker 2: A history book was done.
Speaker 1: It's such an odd name.
Speaker 2: And I know they, they sent some members of our family and requested some information from them, but I don't think anything really came of it.
Speaker 1: Okay, now what about Lemnon?
Speaker 2: Now that I have no idea because it's been spelled varying ways from Lemnon to Lemon and that--so--and I've seen on the family records my father's name spelled both ways, but there was no--
Speaker 1: So it could actually be Lemon.
Speaker 2: It could be.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  It sounds like the Greek Memnon, except with a L you know in a way.
Speaker 2: You know I don't think it was at that level (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 428566
Speaker 1: Okay well tell us about your mother's [Mary Fennell White] side of the family.  How much do you know about her side?  How far back can you trace them?
Speaker 2: I know more about my mother's side than my father's [Lemnon White] side.  I have family pictures of my grandmother [Marie McCoy Gaye] who was born in 1899 or 1898.  I have a picture of her mother.  I have a picture of her mother's mother.  My grandmother was the youngest of about twelve children.  And her sister who was almost twenty years older than my grandmother, essentially raised my grandmother.  And I know they had an older sister who was something like twenty years older than the sister who raised my grandmother.  And some of the records reflect at least thirty-seven, thirty-eight years old because she was the oldest member of the family.  She died in the '60s [1960s] at 105, somewhere along there.  And everyone else to my knowledge, died much earlier.  You know, in their seventies.  So, I figure that if you just go back and trace the differences in ages from one member to the other, probably goes back to about the 1830s.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you know the name of your great-great-grandma?  You can go back to your great-grandmother, right?
Speaker 2: Yes, I can go back.  Her name was Julia and the--her mother's name was Victoria.
Speaker 1: So that's your great-great-grandmother, Victoria.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And she may date back to the 1830s.  She may have been born in the 1830s.
Speaker 2: She may have been.  The picture I--the one picture that I have of her, she's an elderly woman.  It looks like one of those tin type, type pictures.  So I mean, I'm just estimating.  If you figure that my grandmother was born in '98 [1898], her sister was born about '78 [1878]. You have to figure--and the other sister was born probably at the--right after 1860-something.  Then--
Speaker 1: So your grandmother was born in--
Speaker 2: 1890.
Speaker 1: 1890.
Speaker 2: Ninety-nine [1899], 1898.
Speaker 1: But she had a sister who was born in '78 [1878].
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: So that would--
Speaker 2: And then she had another sister who was born--who's--there was a twenty year difference between her and that sister, the oldest sister.  So--
Speaker 1: Yeah, I think you're right.  She goes back maybe to the 1830s, yeah, yeah.
Speaker 2: So, and you figure well if they were in [Rome] Georgia, I have no indication that they were freed, free slaves.  So you figure they lived on the plantation, they probably got married early and had children early.  So I'm, I'm trying to be conservative in saying, well maybe you know, she could have been a fifteen year old having--but given also that they lived a fairly long time considering the time period, it's possible that they didn't have children at twelve and thirteen.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Yeah, but that's something.  You know so you go back--your great-grandmother is like Civil War era.  She, she would have been an adult, active during the Civil War.  Are there, there any stories form that side of the family?
Speaker 2: Not really.  Didn't talk about the family.  I remember only one comment that my grandmother made, and it was just sort of in passing 'cause I was asking her.  You know what was going on back, back then?  And she said, "Well I really don't remember, but I remember the old folks talking about people putting things in people's food."  But that was, that was the only thing that--
Speaker 1: People putting stuff in people's food.
Speaker 2: Yeah, you know.
Speaker 1: The implication being that slaves who were cooks--
Speaker 2: There was no, there was no good intent in what they were putting in the food.
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah.  Well there, there are rumors and stories from the old days that the people on the plant--on--slaves that worked on plantations actually controlling the diet of the people that they worked for.  And if they--something happened they didn't like, they could actually--they'd get pretty rough on them by serving them the food that's the wrong thing in their food, you know.
Story_ID: 428567
Speaker 1: The only other thing I know about the [maternal] family is there is some indication that there's Cherokee in the family.  Whatever heritage there is, it's not traceable.  And I know that you have to have--be able to trace a certain percentage to claim that you are a Cherokee.  And jokingly one member of the family said, "Well you know there's monies available if you can show that you're Indian [Native American]," you know and she asked my mother [Mary Fennell White], "Do you know who exactly was the Indian in the family?"  And my mother said, "I would suggest you go to the United Negro College Fund [UNCF].  I don't think tracing the Indian in the family is going to help you."  But when you look at the pictures, my great-great-grandmother may have been half Indian.  It's--I mean she's certainly an American dress, but if you looked at her, she could just as well have been part Indian as anything else.
Speaker 2: It's very likely.
Speaker 1: And then the only other--and again I say rumor because there's nothing, there's no factual information to back it up.  My great-great-grandmother's name was Byrum [ph.].  Now, part of the family history says that Byrum was English, left Georgia, went back to England.  Left them with some property which was taken, which if it were true, would not have been uncommon to have you know, taken the property from family.  But that's--I don't know how much fact is fiction, you know, that is.  But those are the only stories that I've heard historically about my mother's side.  Her--my grandmother's father was a circuit writer preacher.  Never had seen a picture of him.  And this past summer I was at a cousin's funeral and she had a family album that had pictures that her mother had kept.  And there was a picture marked McCoy.  And McCoy would have been her father.  Or in this case, the cousin's great-grandfather 'cause we had the same relationship.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: So that's, that's as much--
Speaker 2: Now what part of Georgia are they from?
Speaker 1: Rome, Georgia.
Speaker 2: Rome, Georgia, okay, all right.
Story_ID: 428568
Speaker 1: Now what about your father's [Lemnon White] side of the family, how far back can you trace them?
Speaker 2: I really can't trace them past my grandfather [Neal White] and grandmother [Jenny White], and I never knew them.  But I know that my father's father's name was Neal White.  And her name was Jenny.  And I don't know--Jenny Spruiell had to have been, her name.  And I know the--my grandfather--my uncle said that he had been raised by a storekeeper.  So I don't-- in Mississippi, you know.  So I don't--he had a sister, she lived here in Chicago [Illinois].  Unfortunately, we never got any information from her and she lived to be quite elderly.  But I just--I mean I really don't know, other than my father's sisters and brothers.  You know I know about them.
Speaker 1: Okay.  But none of them really know about their past, their--
Speaker 2: They're all deceased.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Everyone on--every sister and brother on my father's side is deceased.  Interestingly, my father's father was very much interested in education.  And even though he was not an educated man, he gave, like, the lumber for their church there in Smithville, Mississippi.  And that church still stands today.  I mean they built a new edifice, but the very fact that you know he would give what little he could to see that there was a church, and a school in their community.
Speaker 1: Now, now where is Smithville [Mississippi]?  What's that close to?
Speaker 2: It's near the Alabama line.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It's very rural part of Mississippi.  Near I think Aberdeen [Mississippi].  I, like I said I know it's near the Alabama line and not--it's in the northern part of Mississippi.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Okay near Tupelo [Mississippi] I guess and that.
Speaker 2: Yes, yes that would be the area.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: 'Cause I think Tupelo's the county seat.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Story_ID: 428569
Speaker 1: Well, tell us about your mother [Mary Fennell White] and what was she like and what did she do and did she get a chance to go to school and that sort of thing.
Speaker 2: Yeah, my mother grew up in Canton, Ohio.  She went to elementary school and completed high school at the famous Canton [McKinley Senior] High School [Canton, Ohio] at the time.
Speaker 1: [Canton] McKinley [Senior] High School [Canton, Ohio]?
Speaker 2: McKinley High School.  In fact, I went to her 50th class reunion.  It was an interesting class because there must have been 1,000 graduates in her class and there were only--there were fewer than ten African Americans.  And one of the people in her class was Roi Ottley [sic, Marion Motley] who became a famous football player for the Cleveland Browns.
Speaker 1: Roi Ottley was a, he was a writer, too, wasn't he?
Speaker 2: Now he may have become a writer.  I don't recall.  I just remember--
Speaker 1: You mean, you mean Mike Motley.
Speaker 2: No, it's Motley.
Speaker 1: Marion Motley.
Speaker 2: Marion Motley, that's right.
Speaker 1: That's the--
Speaker 2: 'Cause Roi I think is his--
Speaker 1: Thank you, thank you for correcting that.  Yes, yes.
Speaker 2: Marion Motley, he was--
Speaker 1: Marion Motley.
Speaker 2: Yeah he's famous fullback for the Cleveland Browns.
Speaker 1: Right.  Well he went to Camp McKinley [Lisbon, Ohio] and he was there when my mother was there.  But my mother got married in Canton.  She and my father lived in Cleveland for a very short period, and moved to Chicago [Illinois].  She was a homemaker for probably the first thirteen, fourteen years of my live, and she finally went to work about my sophomore year in high school.  She went to work for the University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois] as a tray girl.  And I would say my mother was a young, intelligent woman.  She had been active in the PTA [Parent-Teacher Association] and the local president, but there were not many jobs, white collar type jobs for black women in the '40s [1940s], early '50s [1950s] who had just completed high school.  But she did quite well at the hospital and eventually retired as the person in-charge of their catering department, and was considered a part of management.  So--and was named--given the [Reverend Dr.] Martin Luther King [Jr.] Award there.  Very, very wonderful person, wonderful mother to all three of us.  Wonderful personality.  People liked her and my friends liked her, liked her to the point that when I didn't live in Chicago, she was still included in activities because they liked her as a person.
Story_ID: 428570
Speaker 1: And while she [White's mother, Mary Fennell White] was working at the University [of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois], there were a group of students, black students who were in the business school [Booth School of Business, University of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois].  This was the late '60s [1960s], '67 [1967], '68 [1968], who adopted her.  And they remained close to her until she died.  All four or five of them did--have done extremely well, they're all living.  But they just saw her as someone they could talk with.  And it was true.  I mean, they adopted her, but it was also true of her relationship with other white students on the University of Chicago's campus.  And she'd sit there and listen to them as they would explain their physics problems.  I mean things she knew absolutely nothing about, but they felt you know they could talk with her and invited her to their graduations and their family functions.  But like I said, she was a--she was definitely a people person.  A woman of strength because my father died in my sophomore year in college.  And she was the one who continued to encourage us to finish school.  She made many sacrifices for us.  I mean I can remember her not having many things that you would have wanted your mother to have.  But she was interested in us finishing college, so she was willing to sacrifice, whether it was a new dress, or maybe not eating regularly.  And I didn't find out some of those things until after I finished school.  Just to conserve money that--and we could have money at school--that she made very, very great sacrifices for all of us.  And it was true not just for me, but for my sister [Judy White Rushing] and for my brother [Spruiell White].  And for so many others.  I had a college roommate who she let live with us for almost a year.  And we lived in an apartment.  And we certainly--I mean it was just enough room for us.  But it didn't matter that someone else was there.  And our house was always open.  My brother had classmates who would come from Luther College [Decorah, Iowa], who could easily afford hotels, and they would bunk in our house and it didn't matter that they bunked on the floor or whatever because they liked coming to Mrs. White's house.  So I mean, that, that was the kind of woman; she was active in the church.  I would say she was a spiritual woman.  She had a lot of faith.  And she, she was able to face the many trials and tribulations that passed through her life with equanimity.  It's--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And I loved her.
Speaker 2: Okay.  What--church did you all attend?
Speaker 1: St. Mark United Methodist Church [Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 2: And it was at 50th and Wabash?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And--
Speaker 2: And you got one brother and one sister.
Speaker 1: One brother and one sister.
Speaker 2: Okay, and you are the--are you--
Speaker 1: Oldest.
Speaker 2: You're the oldest, okay, all right.
Story_ID: 428571
Speaker 1: All right well tell us about your father [Lemnon White].  What was he like and what did he do?
Speaker 2: My father worked for the New York Central [Railroad].  A very, I would say, quiet man.  Very interested in education.  Definitely a religious person.  I mean he was the one who made it a point to see that we were at church every Sunday that he was home because he was United Methodist.  And so we joined the church that Othello Ellis belonged to when they moved to Chicago [Illinois].  My father took a lot of interest, and I probably had a closer relationship with him than my sister and brother because he died while they were in high school.  But I can tell you little things that my father would do in terms of sitting down with me with homework.  And even though he worked on the railroad and he may have been gone, you know, two days at a time, he would talk to you.  And I mean he was known for someone that would sit down and just wouldn't say "No" to you, but give you a full explanation.  And I can remember working through a math problem.  Now mind you my father had not finished college.  He had taught school in the rural south, but had only gone to school maybe a year and a half in terms of college, and to a small, to Alcorn [State University, Alcorn, Mississippi].  And I was adding and I was going through this scenario of well, you say two and two is three, you know, two and two is four, four and two is six and you carry over this, that and the other.  And my father--I can remember stopping me and saying, "Carry, carry what Linda?"  And I said, "Well teacher said"--and I went through the list again.  He said, "Linda if you don't understand conceptually what you're doing, you're never going to remember this.  You don't carry anything over.  This is a group of tens," and he went through to explain to me the reasoning behind what I was doing.  Now, this, when I look back on it, was amazing.  He would go to school, and my mother [Mary Fennell White] was always in school because of being active in the PTA [Parent-Teacher Association].  But my father would visit every one of our classrooms.  And he would just come up and he'd ask to visit the classroom, and he'd sit in the back.  He'd sit in the back to see what I was doing, and he was sitting there to observe what the teacher was doing.  And I can remember there being one teacher, it wasn't my teacher, but it was, I think, my sister [Judy White Rushing]'s teacher.  And my father went immediately to the principal and said, "This young man does not know what he's doing in the classroom, and you need--to work with him."  But that was the-- kind of individual he was.  At the same time, he was a lot of fun.  The boys in the neighborhood--he liked to play basketball.  And, years later, one of the, the guys who lived in the neighborhood said to me, "Linda, I remember Mr. White.  He put our first basketball hoop up in the alley.  And that's how we got to play, because he put it up and got the basketball for us."  And you know I knew they played basketball, but I didn't think about the fact that my father had made this effort.  And I can remember the morning he died.  All the guys in the neighborhood came to my mother's house and said you know, "Mrs. White, what can we do?"  You know can we wash the windows or do whatever, out of respect for my father.  And he wrote me the nicest letter when I was in college [Clark College later, Clark-Atlanta University, Atlanta, Georgia].  He became very ill my sophomore year, and it was during the period of the sit-ins.  And my mother was very upset because I had called them and told them I was going to sit-in at Rich's.  And she never--she didn't quite express concern, but you could hear the concern in her voice.  And my father wrote me a letter.  And they sometimes would write joint letters.  And he said that, "if this is something you feel is important, I support you in it.  And although I can't come and be there with you, I, want you to know that I'm with you in this."  And, you know, and in essence that, "I love-- you."  And I--you know I look back at that and it really makes you feel good that you had parents who were that concerned about you, who cared that much about you, were willing to--to listen to what you wanted to do.
Story_ID: 428572
Speaker 1: Tell me about growing up.  Now you, you grew up in Woodlawn [Chicago, Illinois] I guess?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: No?
Speaker 2: You might say it may have been the Greater Woodlawn, but it really wasn't.  I grew up at 62nd and King Drive, which was the old South Park Street [Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 1: So--and South Park was a--
Speaker 2: Like Washington Park [Chicago, Illinois]?
Speaker 1: Yes, um-hm. And it was an interesting experience growing up because on South Park between 63rd and 61st there is no break going west.  So most of the children I played with were within that block, except that I had--my parents had very close friends who lived on the other side of South Park [sic, South Parkway].  And so those were children that I played with, but South Park was a dividing line.  So they went to one elementary school, and I went to Betsy Ross [Elementary School, Chicago, Illinois].  I was a pretty good student in school.
Story_ID: 428573
Speaker 1: What were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up?
Speaker 2: All right.  The one thing I remember is the "L" [elevated train].  It was otherwise, I mean a, a clean neighborhood in the '40s [1940s] and '50s [1950s], it deteriorated over time.  But at night you could always hear the L because at 63rd Street the "L" made a loop and went down--wasn't quite Calumet because the tracks were between Calumet and Prairie Avenue.  And so those were always night sounds.  In terms of when I grew up there I lived in an apartment building that was a court way.  And they had--it had grass in the center.  There were bushes and there was a tree that sat out on the front near the--closer to the sidewalk.  As children, we were not allowed to play on the grass in the courtyard.  Aside from the fact that Mr. Mayes, the janitor, would move you if you ever thought that, but your parents didn't allow you because that was something--it was, you know, property that you kept up and there was Washington Park [Chicago, Illinois].  And when we wanted to play on grass, mother took us to the park.  And she probably took us to the park every day.  Otherwise, you played on the concrete.  There was another apartment building next door, so we had what was called the gangway.  And you could jump rope on that, or you could jump rope out on the front, but that was on a sidewalk portion.  So you know, we spent time playing hide and seek, jumping double-dutch and sometimes played softball because there was an open, vacant lot on Calumet [Avenue] at that time.  All of that's been filled in now.  But you could--going to school you would cut through what we call the vacant lot to get to 61st [Street] and Calumet and continue on down 61st Street.  But I would say--let's see what else was interesting?  You had the grocery store and the cleaners on the corner, and there were medical, it was a medical office building there.  It was safe to walk down 63rd Street all the way to Jackson Park [Chicago, Illinois].  There was like a bakery.  I can remember before you got to the IC [Illinois Central] train station.  Transportation was wonderful.
Story_ID: 428574
Speaker 1: --But you were asking me about sights and smells.
Speaker 2: Yeah, sights and sounds and smells of growing up in the neighborhood [Woodlawn, Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 1: Neighborhood--
Speaker 2: Now could you walk all--you said you could walk all the way from 63rd [Street, Chicago, Illinois]--all the way down 63rd to Jackson Park [Chicago, Illinois] going east I guess on 63rd Street.  And from what I have read, what people have said, that part of 63rd Street was very developed and in terms of--
Speaker 1: Yes, and it was I mean--
Speaker 2: It's desolation now.  That's why--
Speaker 1: It was a nice area.  You could--I mean and I say that because you know in the summer time we would go to Jackson Park Beach [63rd Street Beach, Chicago, Illinois].  I mean that was--I mean people still go out there, I live off of the lake, but I mean I don't go on the beach anymore.  But I mean parents would take you to the beach or we'd go up to Washington Park [Chicago, Illinois].  And I can remember, you know, you go up to Washington Park, your parents would fix some sandwiches.  You would eat your lunch and you'd come back home and you'd have your nap.  And I finally figured out that naps were to give parents a rest; they really weren't for (laughter) for the children.  But that was--and up to the playground.  I mean but parents, rather than say, being allowed to tear up your neighborhood, my mother [Mary Fennell White] was home.  Many of my friends' mothers were home.  And so they took us to the parks to play.  And I mean we didn't spend money on, like, entertainment.  I mean maybe you got to go to the movie theater every now and then.  But it wasn't like you were--they were spending lots of money to keep you entertained.  I mean they just took advantage of the, the free things and some you know you got to maybe go to summer camp at the Y [YMCA, Young Men's Christian Association], and you would get to go on the field trips with school, the Y.  But it was, I have to think, a wonderful, it was a wonderful time in my life.
Speaker 2: So the YMCA was at Indiana [Avenue] and, what?
Speaker 1: Fiftieth [Street].
Speaker 2: Fiftieth and Indiana, okay.
Speaker 1: And see I belonged to the Tri-High Y in high school, in the Y.
Speaker 2: So the, the Y was close to the church, too.
Speaker 1: Yes.  And see I grew up in St. Mark Church [St. Mark's United Methodist Church, Chicago, Illinois], so we would go to Sunday school and it's a funny thing, but when my father wasn't home, and we didn't have a car.  But we would go to Sunday school.  And then frequently after Sunday school, my mother had another good friend and they had an adult Sunday school class.  And we would go over to Dorothy's [ph.] house and she would fix waffles.  Well we knew on Sunday that my father was home, that we were going to have to stay for the service, you know the regular service.  And you could be assured that you were gonna have to do that, you know, two times a month because he would generally be there at least two Sundays a month.  But--
Speaker 2: Did you have more fun when he wasn't there?
Speaker 1: But you know as, as children, you know it was, it was great, you know to go to Sunday school, you know.  And then skip the other part of it.  But you grow up and, and you want to become a part of the full activity of the, of the church.  But you know when you're seven, eight and nine, I don't think we're much different than the seven, eight and nine year olds today.
Story_ID: 428575
Speaker 1: Now, now you went to Betsy Ross [Elementary] School [Chicago, Illinois]?
Speaker 2: Betsy Ross.
Speaker 1: And it's right, right there in the neighborhood.  Not too far away.
Speaker 2: Walked to Betsy Ross.
Speaker 1: Yeah, Wabash [Avenue] and 61st [Street] I guess.  Now how was, how was school?  What did you--did you like school?
Speaker 2: I did like--I mean I always liked school.  And I can honestly say that the teachers I had in my years at Betsy Ross were excellent.  Looking back today, I mean I thought they were good teachers when I was in school.  But I know I had some of the best.  I learned from them; they were teachers who were interested and during the time period I was there, I had white teachers and black teachers.  And, and my early teachers like in the primary grades.  Because when I entered Betsy Ross, the faculty was pretty much white until they got a black principal and Anna Coleheim [ph.].  And then--
Speaker 1: What was her name again?
Speaker 2: Anna Coleheim.  And she would later became the principal at Hyde Park [High School, later Hyde Park Academy High School, Chicago, Illinois].  Well I learned that many of those faculty members who were white did not want to work under a black principal, even though many of them had been excellent teachers.  I mean I didn't feel a sense of discrimination or being put down in their classrooms.  But apparently having--being under the leadership of someone black was not--and many of them left.  But Mrs. Coleheim as a prin--a principal, demanded excellence of all of her teachers.  And she demanded excellence.  And she was subject to call your parent, and I mean my--'cause my mother [Mary Fennell White] was active in the PTA [Parent-Teacher Association], she, she knew her quite well.  But she was a principal who--you know like when my father [Lemnon White] died and I'm in college, brought dinner to the family.  The principal who I thought was awful in eighth grade because she was so strict, because I can remember taking a trip to Springfield [Illinois], and like young people we were talking on the train all night.  And she told my mother, "Linda was yakking all night long on the train."  But she was someone, still, who was looking out for the best interests of all of her students.  I had an eighth grade teacher, Louise Ann Murray [ph.], and Mrs. Murray invited to her home, and she was known for doing this, and she lived in the neighborhood, which is uncommon today.  Most teachers in some of our--especially our inner city schools, do not live in the neighborhood where the--but she invited some of us over.  Now Mrs. Murray played the piano, and she played the harp.  And her husband was a jazz pianist.  So she invited a few of us over I'm sure for an evening of culture.  And she played the harp for us and her husband played the piano.  And she served us probably some lemonade and cookies and, we went home.  But, that was the kind of school environment that I grew up in.  And you know I left that environment and I've been to other places, but I can say honestly that the, the best foundation I got there.  And I, and I know that there are probably many other schools that had more, had--provided stronger foundations because of the resources that they had.  But it's amazing, when you have excellent teachers, you can go far beyond what maybe your, your wildest expectations might have been.  And I felt they prepared me to go to high school, to any high school.  And even after I got to college, I felt like that grammar school foundation was very important.
Story_ID: 428576
Speaker 1: Well, tell us about high school.  You attended Parker High School [later, Paul Robeson High School, Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 2: Attended Parker High School.  You know I asked my parents [Mary Fennell White and Lemnon White], you know I wanted to, to go to quote, what was a good high school.  And in order to go to a high school outside of your district, you had to, to live or have a fake address.  And fortunately my parents knew somebody in Parker's district.  They didn't know anybody in Hyde Park [Chicago, Illinois]'s district, that I could use their address and go into Parker.
Speaker 1: Now otherwise you would have had to attend to--
Speaker 2: I would've had to go to Englewood [Technical Prep Academy High School, Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 1: Englewood.
Speaker 2: Now you know in retrospect, students who were doing well at Betsy Ross [Elementary School, Chicago, Illinois] who did go to Englewood, have become well known people today also.  It was just, you know, it was what you thought was going to be better for you.  And-- you hoped that you were putting your child in the best situation.  I was, you know, able to do it.  But Parker--I mean those four years were good years.  I was in accelerated programs most of the time.  In fact, they found out my address by the second grading period of my freshman year, and I believe the only reason why I wasn't transferred was because I had made the honor roll.  And so they weren't willing to put me out, out of Parker.  But, you know I had good teachers.  What I did find out about Parker, and again this was years later, it was a good high school.  But in looking at high schools academically, they had accelerated programs for many of the youngsters who were going on to college.  But a large part of the population for that school district were students who were not going to go to college.  They would go into-oh, the girls into bank clerk type jobs, secretaries.  The guys went to other kinds of trades and so forth.  So they weren't considered a high--it wasn't considered a high school that the majority of the students were college bound, but they did provide for that amongst a select group of students.  Whereas Hyde Park, at that time, the majority of students were--the program was geared toward people who were college bound.  But I had good teachers, and I did well.  One incident I--and I was trying to think about things I might share.  I went to high school and I'd never been in an integrated situation and you're, you know you're excited.  This is going to be something new and the students, you know all of the students were nice.  And if you're in honors type programs, you associate with certain students that, you know, are nice and you're in high school but you don't socialize together.  But I can remember a devastating experience that occurred my senior year.  From a math teacher that I highly respected.  I mean I thought he was just a, a wonderful math teacher.  And there was a young lady, black young lady who was a year ahead of me and she'd graduated and gone to college.  And she'd gotten pregnant.  And he said to me, oh must have been like that Fall, "Is that what you're gonna do?  Go off to school and get pregnant?"  And I was just devastated.  I mean, why would you think that that was what I was gonna do?  Aside from the fact, I mean, these kinds of things happen to many young ladies, but that he would look upon me and say--and I, you know and I realized because I was black, that this is, this is what we did, you know.  And I, I never quite felt the same toward him afterwards.  But, otherwise, you know the experiences were good experiences.  And, the teachers that I had--and he was an excellent teacher.  I mean, but certainly not the person that I would want to say have before my children.
Story_ID: 428577
Speaker 1: Now were you involved in--did you get involved in any--
Speaker 2: Activity?
Speaker 1: Yeah, activities in high school [Parker High School, later, Paul Robeson High School, Chicago, Illinois]?
Speaker 2: Yes, I was in the--I was in the National Honor Society [NHS], I was in the math club, a math tutor.  I was on what was known as the Green and White Squad, which was a--sort of the service group in the high school.  I didn't sing in the, the Glee Clubs.  I had no voice.  But I worked on the school newspaper, the press, the yearbook.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So did you--were you involved in any sports or anything like that?
Speaker 2: No, no, no.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I tried out for the cheerleading team.  I made the, the first cut, and then they sent me to the sidelines.
Speaker 1: Now let's see.  Now did you all have separate proms there or something?  I've heard about that, but--
Speaker 2: No, I mean my--when I was there, we all went to the same prom.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I can remember we went right over here to the Shoreland Hotel [Chicago, Illinois], which is the dormitory now for the University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois].  And I can remember us complaining as students because we had to go to the Shoreland Hotel, and of course at that time everybody wanted to go to one of the downtown hotels.  And everybody swore that the teacher who was in charge of student activities, I can't even remember her name now, but that she had an in with the Shoreland Hotel.  No matter how you protested, you still ended up at the Shoreland Hotel.
Speaker 1: She must have had some kind of deal going or something.
Speaker 2: That's what we figured.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  Now when, when you were in high school--was 63rd Street [Chicago, Illinois] still the jazz street, or had it declined in terms of that?  'Cause there were a lot of--
Speaker 2: No, it was still--like on Cottage Grove [Avenue, Chicago, Illinois], but now when I talk to you about family, like the Pershing ballroom [Chicago, Illinois] was a favorite place for many to go and dance.  I was not allowed in the Pershing.  And of course you--I mean I knew better than to ask 'cause my father [Lemnon White] was not going to allow me to be in the Pershing.  Now I mean many of the high school students got to go up there and dance and it was popular.  But I never got to go.  As an adult, I think Budland [ph.] was on that same street, and I probably went in there once or twice.  But they had--I belonged to a high school, like I said, the Tri High Y.  And we had social events in what was the grand ballroom, which used to be above the, the Tivoli Theater [Downers Grove, Illinois].  And there was a, a ballroom called the casino ballroom that was above the Maryland Theater [Chicago, Illinois].  All these places are, are gone now.  There was a skating rink on King Drive [Chicago, Illinois]: Park City.  And I tended to skate at St. Anselm's [Catholic Church, Chicago, Illinois] because I wasn't that good of a skater, and you needed to be a really good skater to go to Park City (laughter).
Speaker 1: St. Anselm's a Catholic church right over there--
Speaker 2: Yes, yes and they had a, a gymnasium there at 61st [Street] and Indiana [Avenue, Chicago, Illinois].
Story_ID: 428578
Speaker 1: Well when, when you were a senior in high school [Parker High School, later Paul Robeson High School, Chicago, Illinois], were you sure about what you wanted to do as a career and that sort of thing?
Speaker 2: Not necessarily.  I knew that I wanted to go to college.  I was pretty much interested in government and political science.  And I thought pretty much of working for the government, although I toyed with the idea of law, but not to any serious degree.  I didn't go into school as a pre-law student.  But I mean it was very clear that I was going to go to college, although how I was going to go to college, was probably a mystery.  But I-- mean I did get scholarships.  It wasn't like my parents had money to-- pay tuition and so forth.  But there was just never, there was just never a question in my parents' minds or my mind that--or in my sister [Judy White Rushing] and brother [Spruiell White], that we weren't going to go to college.  And I wanted to go away to college.  And fortunately I was able to receive a scholarship from the United Methodist Church and a-- job on campus in the post office so that I was able to facilitate that.  But--
Speaker 1: Okay.  So how did you choose the college that you wanted to--that you finally attended?  How did you choose Clark [College, later, Clark Atlanta University, Atlanta, Georgia]?
Speaker 2: Well it just so happened that an associate pastor at our church, Reverend George Tate [ph.], had taught at Clark.  And he had just returned, he and his wife had just returned to the, the city [Chicago, Illinois].  And I had seen the yearbooks and he had told me some things about the schools and the University Center, the Atlanta University Center [Atlanta, Georgia].  And it was considered a, you know, a fine, small college.  And it was an opportunity to go away.  And so--and they accepted me.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you graduated in 1960, right?
Speaker 2: No, '59 [1959].
Speaker 1: Fifty-nine [1959]?  Okay.  And then you, then you went to Clark that fall I guess (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes.
Story_ID: 428579
Speaker 1: Well how did you like Atlanta [Georgia], you know, after being raised in Chicago [Illinois]?
Speaker 2: During that period, it's hard to totally get a sense of Atlanta because you are very much confined to the, the college [Clark College later, Clark-Atlanta University, Atlanta, Georgia] campus.  First year you weren't--you could maybe go off campus, go shopping maybe like on a Saturday.  So it wasn't like you explored Atlanta, unless you had friends who lived in Atlanta.  And most of my friends were friends in the dormitory.  And the members of the sorority who lived in Atlanta, for the most part would come on campus.  So my real knowledge of Atlanta came through the sit-ins, I mean recognizing that you couldn't go to--and eat in public facilities or they were segregated.  And at the time period that I was there, [Reverend Dr.] Martin Luther King [Jr.] was very strong, and everyone was pushing at that point to integrate Rich's Department Store.  So I, joined the, the group of marchers.  Actually got arrested, and placed in jail for a couple of-- hours.  One thing I've said about that experience is if you don't know what freedom is, be locked up, and you understand fully the absence of freedom once the bars close on you and you've been fingerprinted.  Atlanta was, you know, I attended church in Atlanta and basically within the, the school community.  The church, the restaurants, went to Paschal's [Restaurant, Atlanta, Georgia], that was a-- real big thing in those days.  Hunter Street [later, Martin Luther King Jr. Drive, Atlanta, Georgia] was quite a--commercial area.  Full of black businesses.  You had--and I guess that's one of the things that impressed me about Atlanta, were the, the black businesses and black business people there.  But I didn't really, I didn't really get to know Atlanta, per se, until after I graduated, and came back.  And of course in some respects, I don't even recognize it today from the community that I knew when I was in school.  In fact I was just there this past weekend.  I'm on the Board of the United Negro College Fund [UNCF], and we took a-- tour of the Atlanta University Center [Atlanta, Georgia].  And I had a difficult time figuring out exactly what street I was on because all of the street names have been changed to, you know, Martin Luther King--Hunter Street is no longer there, that's King Drive [Atlanta, Georgia].  So you're trying to get a fix on where you are.
Speaker 1: And (unclear) Lowery Street [Joseph E. Lowery Blvd., Atlanta, Georgia].
Speaker 2: Yeah, right.
Speaker 1: Everything, yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, but, but it certainly has changed.
Speaker 1: Who were some of the student leaders when you all were protesting against Rich's Department Store?
Speaker 2: Well at Morehouse [College, Atlanta, Georgia] was [HM] Julian Bond --Julian Bond was very active.  At Clark it was [Benjamin] Ben Brown.  I mean these are the people who are well known.  Ben later became a--one of the Democratic Party vice-chairs and became a State Representative in Georgia, along with Julian Bond.  These are the people--I mean and of course Martin Luther King I knew, and I can't say knew well, I was in the group that was led by his brother, [Alfred Daniel Williams] Al King.
Speaker 1: AD [Alfred Daniel Williams King], AD
Speaker 2: AD.  And I'm sure--you know I just don't remember.  I remember Julian and I remember Ben.
Story_ID: 428580
Speaker 1: When I was taken into the courtroom, every group that preceded my group was turned over for some form of prosecution, all of us were charged with the same thing.
Speaker 2: What was the charge?  What did they charge you with?
Speaker 1: It probably was trespassing.  I'd have to--I have a copy of the--my papers because one of the things you don't realize when you do things like this, is that your records follow you.  So even though they say they expunge the records, there's nothing to make me believe that my fingerprints aren't on file someplace.  And, but when we were called before the judge, there was one white gentleman in the group.  We were dismissed.  And of course the concern at that time was that if you were turned over, and you know found guilty or what have you, where would you remain in jail?  If you were in Atlanta [Georgia], you knew that you were reasonably safe.  That you could, you would not necessarily expect bodily harm in Atlanta.  However, the concern was with students who were transferred to jails in south Georgia.  And some of my classmates were sent to south Georgia.  And those conditions were a little different.  And fortunately they were released from jail, but they were there a number of days.  So that--it makes you, it makes you stop and think.  You know I'd say to any young person, I don't regret what I did.  If I--if that's the one thing, if--you know if I had it to do over, I'd do it again.  But you--as a young person at that age you don't necessarily realize the full consequences of what you're doing.  And I, and I would say to anyone that, you know you--you need to think about the decisions you make because they can have a lifelong impact.  And once you make your decision, then you move ahead.  But you couldn't have told me at the time that I might have been hurt.  Even though I, I knew of people who had been hurt.  You don't think these things happen to you.  You're quite naive at seventeen and eighteen.
Story_ID: 428581
Speaker 1: What about--now what did you major in--at Clark [College later, Clark-Atlanta University,Atlanta, Georgia]?
Speaker 2: I was officially social science, but I really was a political science concentration.  Clark didn't offer a major in political science.  So while I took most of my courses in political science either at Clark or at Morehouse [College, Atlanta, Georgia], that was the area that I was most interested in.
Speaker 1: Now who were some of the teachers available there that taught you?  Any, anyone sort of stand out?
Speaker 2: Mr. Fishman because--and I can't remember his first name.  He came to Clark from the University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois] and he was the one that sort of talked me into going to the University of Chicago afterwards and to--he had graduated out of the school of international relations.  But I chose to go into the school of political science and do my, my master's there.
Story_ID: 428582
Speaker 1: Now at Clark [College later, Clark-Atlanta University, Atlanta, Georgia] you pledged AKA [Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority].
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, now this is important to this story I guess.  So tell us about that.  Now how did--no one in your family had been a member of a--
Speaker 2: No, that's not, not true.
Speaker 1: That's not true.  Was your father--
Speaker 2: Although that wasn't really a factor in my joining the organization.  As it turns out, my first cousin on my father [Lemnon White]'s side, and either the second or third cousin on my mother [Mary Fennell White]'s side, were both AKAs.  One was initiated at Fisk [University, Nashville, Tennessee], and the other was initiated at Jackson State [University, Jackson, Mississippi].  But I really hadn't had a discussion of Alpha Kappa Alpha with them before going to school.  I mean it was nothing that they encouraged me to do or not do.  I don't think it came up in the conversation.  My joining had more to do with the young women on campus and who I had became friends with and what I observed of the, the organization on campus.  And teachers who were members of the sorority, on campus.  But more probably with the, the young women whom I associated.  And I was friends with the women in both groups.  I chose to pledge AKA.
Story_ID: 428583
Speaker 1: In those days did you--did--was there a lot of--I mean did you have to stay on line a long time and was it, was it rigorous?
Speaker 2: It was not rigorous in comparison to the groups that pledged before me.  The process had been a, a nine month process prior to my pledging.  The year that I pledged, the university had changed the rules and cut down the whole process to six weeks.  So just the sheer length of time; I didn't experience that.  And you know I have young people today who come to me and say, "Well we really need to, to bond for a much longer period of time and because we just don't get to know each other before we make selections."  And I tell them that, look, I was initiated forty years ago.  And you don't bond in a period of a week, two weeks, nine months.  You begin to bond when you, you're a part of an organization doing something with people and your expectations of who's going to be a good soror and who is going to not be a good one.  I said I've seen the full gamut.  I've seen those who worked extremely hard as--and they were termed pledges then, and on the campus and who weren't active later.  And I've seen those who we would have considered lazy and didn't do anything to support the program on campus, and they are stalwart leaders today.  So you can't make those kinds of unqualified judgments about people or time.  It's--what you give over time.  Given over time in terms of service to others when you are working with someone else.  And that's the, that's the distinguishing thing to, you know for me, that it's--lifelong.  And, an intake period, which is what we call it now, is only a part of the process.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you all pledged for six months.
Speaker 2: Six weeks.
Speaker 1: Six weeks, I'm sorry six weeks.
Speaker 2: Yeah, and you know you had, you know you had--we were members at that time of an Ivy Leaf Club, and you know you had meetings and you know you were supposed to, you know, learn about the organization and learn how to conduct meetings and function as a group.  And at that time, you know we dressed alike on certain days and you had what was a probation period where every day you wore something different.  Those things are no longer a part of what we do today.  Many regret, and when I say that, younger people, they look back and they say well why can't we do those kinds of things?  And we say, well you know as we look back on it whereas some things may not seem harmful, these things don't really reflect what we're--about.  And they don't add to what we're about.  So dressing in uniforms and things of this nature, is just not relevant.  And, we're about more than wearing pink and green, and performing and singing.  All those things are--I mean those are nice.  I mean and they're enjoyable.  But the organization, as it was intended by the founders, is more than just social interaction with each other.  And the social interaction, I'm not gonna downplay it.  Some of my closest friends and closest relationships are members of the sorority.  But--it's more because of what we do together for other people that gives us some purpose that is of--value to me.  And I think with most persons who are active certainly as graduate members of the organization.
Story_ID: 428584
Speaker 1: Well while we're at it, why don't we talk about the history of the organization all down the line?  Can you really tell us how--did AKA [Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority] get started?
Speaker 2: It got started in 1908 at Howard University [Washington, D.C.] by nine young women were the cluster group.  Our founder was Ethel Hedgeman Lyle.  She was from St. Louis [Missouri].  And interestingly enough, when you look at her family history and the sorority has done a biography on Ethel Hedgeman Lyle.  Her family were contributors to building I believe Lincoln University [Jefferson City, Missouri].  The group of women who founded AKA were probably just one generation removed from slavery.  They were very clearly the fortunate group of African Americans at that time in that their parents could somehow afford to send them.  So they were privileged in that, in that sense.  Not that they were necessarily wealthy, but if you think back to a period of 1906, 1907, that you could send a child to school, and away to school.  And many of the members of the organization did not necessarily come from the Washington, D.C. area.  And so they were started in 1908.  In 1913 we incorporated as, you know, a national organization.  And for a period of almost a hundred years, have been an organization that has given back to the community from the early days of, of providing social services to the Freedmen [The Bureau of Refugees] in D.C., to major projects like the Mississippi Health Project where we actually went into the Delta of Mississippi and provided health services and educational services during the summer.  Laid the foundation for a lot of the money that now goes to sickle cell anemia research because what we started, the federal government eventually picked up.  And so it ceased to be one of our major programs.  We still support sickle cell anemia.  But we've operated the Job Corps Center in Cleveland [Ohio] -- that was a twenty year project, training for young women.  Today in my administration, and it's true of every president's administration, that they've had service that they've given back through varying programs.  But we focused on scholarship, that's a continuing program of Alpha Kappa Alpha.  We have a national after school reading demonstration project that's been funded by the Department of Education, where we actually have tutoring sites throughout the United States that are--we're actually doing research to see if children actually learn using a particular methodology, reading one-to-one.  We provide the Presidential Scholarship Incorporation with the, the President of the United States through the Corporation for Community and National Service has a scholarship and they funded us to the tune of almost 2.5 million dollars over a four year period.  That if we give 500 dollars to a student--and here's what is interesting about that program.  It's a student who has given service.  So many of our scholarships are strictly academic scholarships.  But this scholarship is given to a student who can demonstrate that they can be accepted at a college, but they have to have given a hundred hours of service to their community to be eligible.  There is no grade point average.  The requirement is community service.  And so our sorority throughout the United States is providing scholarships that are matched by the federal government.  We have a program on SIDS [Sudden Infant Death Syndrome] outreach.  We had a major conference in Detroit [Michigan] back in May [2003] where we actually, in cooperation with the Child Health and Community--Child Health and Human Development Agency out of NAAH [National Alliance Against Hunger], along with women in the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] and 100 Black Women [National Coalition of 100 Black Women].  We were the lead sponsors in Detroit.  The other group sponsored in other parts of the United States.  We had over 500 persons in attendance.  Health care professionals, mothers who actually came in to be trained on SIDS and, and providing SID information to families and communities.  And we probably reached over 15,000 people through that effort.  So I have to put in a plug, babies sleep safest on their backs.  We also have a program where we celebrate [Reverend Dr.] Martin Luther King [Jr.]'s birthday, not as a day off, and many people think of it as, you know a day off from work.  But for us it's labeled a day on of service.  So on his birthday or that weekend, we are going throughout our communities across the country celebrating his birthday by giving some service in the community.  Whether it's shelters, nursing homes, food pantries, the whole, the whole gamut--
Story_ID: 428585
Speaker 1: Is that connected with AmeriCorps in any kind of way?
Speaker 2: AmeriCorps is a part of that organization.  The Corporation for Community--
Speaker 1: National Community--
Speaker 2: New Community Service, is the sponsor of the [Reverend Dr.] Martin Luther King [Jr.] Day.  And we have a partnership with the corporation.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: And I believe here in Chicago [Illinois] when our chapter did it, I think we had AmeriCorps volunteers.
Speaker 1: Helping.
Speaker 2: Who worked, who worked with us in that particular program.  But it varied across the United States.  So we're interested in health, we're interested in education, we're interested in the black family.  Much of what we do with the black family is through our programs of, of education.  Because when we have the after school program, we're working with the parents, because they're such a key, key factor in children learning how to read.  So you know we're working with them, with--we have a partnership with the Points of Light Foundation and we're--on the National Family Volunteer Day, that's our major program with them.  This year our focus on family volunteering will be reading so that our service projects will involve reading to children, reading--the emphasis is on reading this year.  Last year the emphasis was on whatever kind of service, you know, a local chapter wanted to provide.  So you know we're in--involved women.  Last week we were on Capitol Hill.  Not this past weekend, the weekend before last.  And we sponsored a public policy conference because we're interested in the issues that affect African Americans and the people who make decisions.  So we had a conference at the time of the Black Caucus, and we had speakers such as [Congressman] Elijah Cummings who is Chairman of the Black Caucus, Senator Mary Landrieu, Louisiana, Eleanor Holmes Norton.  We went up on the Hill [Washington, D.C.] and our people, you know, talked with their own congressmen.  We had an opportunity to meet Hillary [Rodham] Clinton, Senator Clinton came out to see us.  So I mean Alpha Kappa Alpha is involved in the full spectrum of life here in America.  And you know, and I'm proud to be a part of an organization that has contributed so much in 100 years.  There are very few organizations that, that last a hundred years.  And for an African American organization to last that length of time, I think is quite an achievement.  And of course what's most important is what we do the next hundred years.
Story_ID: 428586
Speaker 1: I heard a story from someone else we interviewed a long time ago that said that AKA [Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority] and Delta [Sigma Theta Sorority] were formed around the same time.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And one--
Speaker 2: The Deltas were formed in 1913 after we were incorporated.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well they told the story that--the people that were more inclined for service went for Delta, and the others, more social people were in AKA or something but I don't, you know, these are all--
Speaker 2: Well you know, I mean it's--we always kind of laughed at, at how the, the history, the history is in the eye of the beholder.  We even have one of our history books titled that.  But my understanding of the, of the history is that there certainly was a schism around 1912, 1913.  The--there were members of the organization who quote, wanted to be more Greek led--Greek-like.  They wanted to change the colors and, you know, out of that the other group was formed.  I think in terms of general purposes, there is not much difference between the two organizations.  I mean the women choose to belong one or the other.  I would never say that the Deltas aren't about service and education, just as I'm telling you that that is what Alpha Kappa Alpha is about.  And it's true for the fraternities and the other sororities that were formed in that time.
Story_ID: 428587
Speaker 1: Probably the Greek letter fraternities or sororities in the black community have become more service oriented over time.  I mean that's just my general observation.
Speaker 2: Well if you look at--
Speaker 1: There was a time when they were criticized on campuses by the black students as being superfluous and fluffy and really was not any--
Speaker 2: I think, and I think what you, you have to--our undergraduate base is certainly an important part of our organization.  But black Greek letter organizations as opposed to the majority group Greek letter organizations are more alumni-focused.  So if I looked at the membership of Alpha Kappa Alpha, probably--or maybe ten percent of the membership at any given time, is an undergraduate membership.  And the active membership is a graduate membership.  And very clearly when you look at what graduate chapters are about, they are much more service-oriented.  I think when you get to the college campus, you certainly see more of the social activity.  But they're even involved in service.  Maybe not always to the degree that we want them to be, but we have for example, one of our chapters because we receive funding from the Intuit Foundation, actually they received money as an undergraduate chapter, to conduct a tax freedom day that they managed totally, helping people to file tax returns.  The--I wanna say automated--
Speaker 1: TeleFile , what was it--1040, 1040--
Speaker 2: Right, right.  You have to--you have to have computers and things available.  And they gave them I think about 2,000-some dollars to go ahead and conduct the project in the community.  And they were able to manage that.  I mean they had maybe some guidance from the graduate chapter, but for the most part they were the ones who did the work.  They were the ones who helped the people file.  They were the ones who showed them how to input the forms.  So even within that context, you find that undergraduate chapters are doing things.  But I'm not going to deny that too frequently what we see are quote, the step teams and things that are not related to what we're primarily about.  And there's--and there's nothing wrong with having a step team.  But I think all of us as presidents of organizations that say this is not the--this is not the image that we want to project.  These things are fun, but that's not what we're about.  And we've had particular issues with that and I won't call any network names, but step shows have become very profitable.  And everyone from people who manufacture gym shoes to TV programs, they always want to show the fraternities and sororities stepping.  They don't want to really hear about what they're doing academically, or if they, if they do wanna hear about it, let's say we'll give twenty-five minutes to the, to the performance, and five minutes to the other.  And we stand back and look at that.  But what is that projecting to an audience of young people?  What are they seeing?  Do they want to join because of the five minutes, or do they want to join because of the twenty-five minutes of looking cute and jumping around?  And, and that isn't what we want to convey because it's not what we're about.  But you could, you know we have to be careful about the images that get projected about us.
Story_ID: 428588
Speaker 1: Maybe we'll ask you some more about AKA [Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority], but we--had you in college at Clark [College later, Clark-Atlanta University,  Atlanta, Georgia] and you--went on to the University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois], all right to grad school in political science.  Now tell us about that.
Speaker 2: That was, again, another interesting experience.  I was there in the School of Political Science for--at a time when there were, there were probably two black people in the, the whole school.  I remember there being a guy in the PhD program and there may have been someone else.  So it was an environment that was all-white.  Many of the undergraduates had graduated from quote, Ivy League schools.  I remember there was a guy who had a jurisprudence degree from Yale [University, New Haven, Connecticut] and although I certainly liked the University of Chicago, I mean it's a very prestigious institution, they could also make you feel that if you came from some place less than their standard of colleges, that you weren't quite as sharp as the other students.
Story_ID: 428589
Speaker 1: Now, who were some of the professors at the University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois]?
Speaker 2: Well I remember Morton Gratson [ph.].  I can't remember the most famous professor in the school at that particular time.
Speaker 1: You say he was author of, of books--
Speaker 2: Numerous books.  If--I can't recall, but I could give you, I could give you the name later.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It's--like on the tip of my tongue, but I can't think about it.
Speaker 1: Right, right.
Speaker 2: But the classes were small.  That was something that was different from classes I had attended at Clark [College, Atlanta, Georgia].  There were some that lecture hall type courses, and those were huge.  And I didn't--I hadn't experienced that at Clark, either.  One professor I had, I took a course in Constitutional law.  And surrounding me, I'll never forget, was a guy who had a degree in jurisprudence from Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] and it just seemed like this class was full of Harvard, Yale [University, New Haven, Connecticut] and here I was, a graduate of Clark.  And you know I felt--and I had had a bad experience with another professor who had told me on entering the, you know, his class, that you're a graduate of--in essence, a black college.  And these people, you know, have had much more training and you're going to have to work much harder than them.  Well I mean, I knew I was coming to the University of Chicago and anybody in their right mind knew that they were going to have to work harder.  But it was--a putdown, you know just on the basis of where I'd gone to school.  So by the time I got to this Constitutional law course, I wanted to just--I wanted to get through the course.  So I didn't, you know normally I'm a very talkative person, but I was very quiet in the course, and I was there every day, and I took my exams, and I wrote my papers.  And the professor gave me the most encouraging word that I had gotten that entire time that I was there.  He said, you know, he said, "I found out you're a very bright student.  I can tell from your responses and so forth."  And he says, "I'm only going to give you an A minus, I would have given you a full A, but you didn't say, you know because you were quiet, I didn't get to have that interaction with you."  He says, "But what it has taught me is that when I teach again, I'm going to call upon students to get their thoughts.  Because your knowledge was hidden from the rest of the group, other than what I could see on what you, you know, had written and responded to."  So, I mean I felt a lot better.  I said, well, maybe I'm not dumb as I thought I was, you know.  But Grant McConnell was another person who was in the school because he was my--ended up being my advisor.  But that's still not the famous person that I'm thinking of.
Speaker 1: Okay and the famous person is--an author of some books you say?
Speaker 2: Yeah, well they all authored books.
Speaker 1: Authored books, yeah.
Speaker 2: I mean you--that's the one thing you find about places like the University of Chicago, the textbooks are the, are the books that are written by the professors who are teaching the classes.
Story_ID: 428590
Speaker 1: You were there for--during '63 [1963] and '64 [1964].
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: Now did you--in '64 [1964] I know there's a lot of activity down at Mississippi and people were going to--some students were going to Mississippi to work with SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee] and that sort of thing.
Speaker 2: No, I wasn't a part of that.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Yeah, but did, did you hear, you know discussion about it?  I know one--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Some of the students that were down there were from the University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois].  I know a couple went down--
Speaker 2: But I don't recall it as being a part of the discussion in class or with students because see I worked--when I was--and that's something that's not normal at the University of Chicago. I worked while I was in graduate school.  Many of the students did not work while on full fellowships unless you were in say like in pre-med or, or you know, something of that nature where you would be working in labs and so forth.  But many of the students just did not work, were full time students--
Story_ID: 428591
Speaker 1: Did you stay with family members in the--
Speaker 2: Yeah, see I didn't live that far from the university [University of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois], so I commuted every day.  And, and I worked in the University of Chicago Hospitals [Chicago, Illinois].  And I was a medical transcriber.  So I went from every summer I worked in a different department.  And then when I went to graduate school, I worked most of the time in the radiology department.  And I worked for a Dr. Vermeulen [ph.], and he was the head of the urology department.  And he was a wonderful person to work with.  Very, very gruff.  You would--it was so interesting because all of the interns and residents, I could see them, I worked in his office and you could see, and they would check to see if he was in the office 'cause he was--he looked sometimes like a mad scientist, you know.  And he had this map of the Middle East on the wall and he might point out things to them and they might have to respond.  But in any case, he tried to talk me into going to medical school.  And I said--and I'm thinking medical school, you know, this man must be out of his mind.  I mean I did not see my bent in--I mean although I had done well in math and biology that did not seem like the area that I was strongest in.  And he tried for the longest, you know you should, you should go to medical school; you should enter here at the university.  And I said, "Well thank you Dr. Vermulen, but no thank you."  But I know I'm getting a little off the subject, but one of the things I did do while I was at the university, I typed a book, part of the manuscripts that were used to present the Nobel Peace Prize to I believe it was [Charles Brenton] Huggins at the University of Chicago in the medical school [Pritzker School of Medicine, Chicago, Illinois].  And I had an opportunity, all of these people from famous doctors and scientists from all over the world sent things to contribute to the book, and part of my task was to, you know type up the manuscript.  So that was, that was sort of an interesting experience.
Story_ID: 428592
Speaker 1: When you graduated [from University of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois], you had a master's [degree] in political science?
Speaker 2: Political science.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what did you do with that?
Speaker 2: I went--at first I worked for Illinois Department of Children and Family Services, but I always had a desire to work for the government.  So I worked for them for about ten years, I mean ten months.  And then I took the Federal Service Entrance Examination and was offered, off of the exams, two positions:  One was to write for 'Smokey the Bear,' and the other was to work for the [U.S.] Social Security Administration as the claims authorizer.  And I knew someone who worked there, who had worked there.  And at that time, they had a lot of attorneys in claims authorization.  And she told me that, "Linda this is, this is a good, a good job.  You know it has its ups and downs, but it's a good starting point and I think you'll do well and it'll offer you--"  she had gone on to another agency.  So I went to work for Social Security and I worked for them most of my, my career.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And now while you're working with Social Security Administration, was AKA a big part of what you were doing in life?
Speaker 2: It was still--I mean they--the two of them--I was functioning in both organizations.  I probably devoted as much time to work as I--well more time to work because there were simply many more hours that I was giving there, but I was very active in the sorority at the same time.  Experiences that I gained in Social Security I was able to transfer to Alpha Kappa Alpha [Sorority, Inc.], and Alpha Kappa Alpha experiences I was able to transfer to Social Security.  And a lot of these were management-type experiences, and working with people.  And, I think that's probably one of my strengths is being able--to work with people.  And I was able to work with people within the Social Security Administration, as well as within the Alpha Kappa Alpha.
Story_ID: 428593
Speaker 1: Yeah, AKA [Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority, Inc.] is a large organization, there's many chapters all over the country.
Speaker 2: Yes, over nine hundred throughout the United States and--
Speaker 1: And abroad.
Speaker 2: And abroad, yes.
Speaker 1: There are chapters abroad.  How many--what is the scope of AKA in terms of chapters?  How many are--
Speaker 2: Over 900 and some.
Speaker 1: Okay, and how-- many coun--
Speaker 2: What countries?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: United States, we have in South Korea, Japan, Okinawa [Island, Japan].
Speaker 1: South Korea?
Speaker 2: Yeah, Okinawa, well it was West Germany but I mean that's where our chapter ism in West Germany, Saint  Croix [U.S. Virgin Islands], Saint Thomas, Nassau [Bahamas], Freeport [Bahamas], Bermuda.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So now are these chapters--
Speaker 2: And England, but--the chapter there is not active at this time.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now these chapters in Korea and--are they populated by African American women?
Speaker 2: Yes.  Pretty much people who are on military bases or families on military bases there.
Speaker 1: Is it the same with--
Speaker 2: Or diplomatic posts.
Speaker 1: Is the same as with--West Germany?  I mean or, Germany.
Speaker 2: Yes.  Most of our chapters that are outside of--well in Europe and Asia, are pretty much military base chapters.  The ones in the Caribbean are local, I mean there are chapters that--the members of the chapters have various fields of endeavor and so forth.  I mean it's not, it's not military-related.
Story_ID: 428594
Speaker 1: What's been the most rewarding thing about being the--a part of AKA [Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority, Inc.] for these many years and ascending to the top position?
Speaker 2: I'd say two things.  Certainly the friendships that I've developed over the years have been wonderful.  I mean there have been people who have been mentors to me.  People who have been with me in times that were very good.  People who have been with me at times that were sad in my life.  The other side is what I feel like I've been able to do through working with other people.  I mean I'm proud of my accomplishments within the organization, but I've always looked at it as it's not about Linda White.  I mean -- I think I'm an effective leader.  But I'm only effective because there are people who are willing to follow leadership and who are willing to go out, and carry out the programs that we're mutually interested in.  And that for me is--has been rewarding and to, to know that I could take on more responsibilities over time.  You could not have told me as an undergraduate, that I would have ever been president of Alpha Kappa Alpha.  I mean for some people it's been a lifelong goal.  But I mean it wasn't my goal at the time of joining.  But just last year at my 40th class reunion, I had a classmate's husband from Morehouse [College, Atlanta, Georgia] to tell me, he said, "but Linda, I don't know how you didn't know, because all of us knew forty years ago that you were gone be president of Alpha Kappa Alpha."  And I mean I was just dumbstruck.  And then my college roommate said, "I remember during graduation that we were talking about that.  You may be, you know you may not have been there when the conversation took place."  But that, you know that really made me stand back because--I had no idea that my classmates had viewed me in that way.  I mean we were all friends and students together and I mean I was active on the campus, but--it's amazing the things you learn about yourself in terms of how others view you as time passes.
Story_ID: 428595
Speaker 1: Tell me, ma'am, what are some of your hopes and concerns for the black community today?
Speaker 2: Well, I have a real concern about us destroying ourselves from within.  I mean I look around -- at the drugs in our community, the inhumanity -- of people toward other people.  I look at the education of our children and although I'm not--a teacher by profession.  Our children who cannot read and write.  And I know that given the kind of world in which we live, that if they don't learn to read and write, they're not gonna be competitive.  They're not gonna be able to--let's not talk about good jobs, let's talk about being able to provide adequately for yourself.  I mean being able to provide like my parents provided for me, and they didn't have a lot.  And some of these things--I don't think some of our younger people see, appreciate.  I'm concerned about the lack of accountability amongst some of our young people.  You know there's--it's like I'm not responsible for my actions.  And I don't know whether sometimes as parents and friends, we don't support them in, in this, you know.  I mean because I take care of all your problems for you, and these are I mean are, are middle class children I'm referring to now.  And you know -- you do no wrong.  And then when something really awful happens, then I wonder, why did it happen?  But probably the education of our young people is the thing that concerns me the most.  And I saw it as an administrator with Social Security and you're wanting to hire people and you're wanting to advance people.  And they lack so many skills.  And you wouldn't think that on a job where you are hiring people who are supposed to be out of high school at least, that you're having to go back and teach them basic reading, math, something that obviously our schools have not done.  They didn't do what my schools did for me when I was coming through.  And it's--a disaster when you think about the world in which we live.  'Cause the jobs where you did strictly physical labor.  You can't even be a janitor today.  I mean you can say that somebody can learn how to sweep and scrub floors, but the chemicals.  I had an uncle who was a janitor for the library system.  And he said even there, you had to know how to read the chemicals to mix to do things.  I mean and--that was a janitorial job.  It's devastating.  I mean I--we, you know we can't become overwhelmed by it to the point that we don't do anything, but it's something that certainly disturbs me.  And I, I just hope that -- what I do through the organization and other organizations, helps to you know, alleviate some of that.
Speaker 1: Okay.  At this juncture, and you're still, you're not that old yet, but though retired.
Speaker 2: Sixty-one.
Speaker 1: Yeah, that's not, not--
Speaker 2: It's not old, no.
Speaker 1: Not these days--
Story_ID: 428596
Speaker 1: What would you see as your legacy at this point?
Speaker 2: I have to think.  Someone who has encouraged and inspired maybe others to do, and to do quality work, whether it was a job, or to provide quality service.  And even that's true of the job, because I was in a service position.  But I think that's probably my legacy of encouragement and leadership; encouragement to others to want to give back to others.
Story_ID: 428597
Speaker 1: Is there anything that you would do differently?
Speaker 2: You know many people ask that question.  And I've always found that a question to not have a lot of value because you can't go back and do things differently.  And I, you know I think I said at the beginning when you asked me words and philosophy and so forth.  If I went back and I changed this, there would be something else that I didn't do right.  And that's a part of being a human being.  To me, you know the only thing you can do is to try -- to learn from your experiences.  And you can try to learn from them so that you try not -- to make the same mistakes.  But you know regretting and all of that -- it doesn't serve a very useful purpose, at least not for me.
Story_ID: 428598
Speaker 1: How would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: I think as a person who was a good person.  Someone who was considered to be kind, and thoughtful, and caring of others.  And of course you, you know I'd like to be remembered as someone who was intelligent and articulate.  But I think the more important things is I'd like to, to leave with people thinking that I was -- a good person and -- I was someone that my family and friends could feel proud that they knew and who was a part of them.
Story_ID: 428599
Speaker 1: Oh, I mean it was just as an undergraduate during the sit-in period--
Speaker 2: You should, you should tell us about it.  I mean yeah, this is--go ahead, yeah.
Speaker 1: It was a political forum, [Reverend Dr.] Martin Luther King [ Jr.] was the major speaker and I was one of two student speakers.  It was in the '60s [1960s] and--it was probably as a result of my being in the political science department [University of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois] and being encouraged to, to be a part of such, you know, public programs.  But that's something I will always remember because not many people can say that they were on a program with Martin Luther King.
Speaker 2: What was your impression of Dr. King?  I mean did you, I mean in those days I mean now he's elevated to the point where -- he's a holiday and all that.  But, but what was your impression of him, you know, then?  When he was, you know--
Speaker 1: When he was--
Speaker 2: Yeah, he's more accessible and he was somebody -- that was a black leader in the black community.
Speaker 1: I felt that he was accessible.  He was not someone, you know who I knew to go into his home and things of this nature, but my sense of him was that he was accessible, accessible to -- the student leaders.  I mean certainly I thought of him as an orator at that time.  I mean he was someone I looked up to, even in the '60s [1960s], as someone who was the leader of the movement at that time.  And so much has happened over the years, it's hard to separate what -- I saw as an undergraduate student from the man who became Martin Luther King, you know, over time.  But you know an important person in my life at that point.
Story_ID: 428600
Speaker 1: I'm to the left.  Next to me is Sylvia and her last name is spelled C-I-C-H-O-C-K-I.  She's my cousin.  And my brother and his, and my godmother, who was--
Speaker 2: And your brother's name is?
Speaker 1: Spruiell White.  And it's S-P-R-U-I-E-L-L.  And my--standing behind is my godmother Lois Laster.
Speaker 2: In this picture is my sister Judy [White] Rushing, my brother Spruiell White, myself and a good friend of the family, James Hill, Jr.
Speaker 1: All right.  This is me with Jesse Jackson.
Speaker 2: And what was the occasion?
Speaker 1: It was a reception during the Chicago National Convention in '98 [1998].
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: This is me with Charlie, [HM] Charles Rangel, Congressman from New York.  And this was at the Black Caucus, and it may have been '99 [1999], 2000, somewhere along there.
Speaker 2: This is me with Madam Tutu [ph.].  And this was in Detroit [Michigan], 1986.
Speaker 1: This is me with former national president [HM] Norma White.  The gentleman is a judge on TV, he's the famous one.  And--
Speaker 2: Mathis?
Speaker 1: Mat--is that--
Speaker 2: Is that, that Mathis?
Speaker 1: Who's on the--
Speaker 2: Looks like it.
Speaker 1: There's a couple of them, Joe Brown.
Speaker 2: Mathis, yeah, and that was at a, a public policy conference and probably the same one where I was with Charlie [Charles] Rangel.
Speaker 1: Mae Jemison at her book signing here.  Let's see, this is 2003, 2000, somewhere around 2001 too.
Speaker 2: This is me with Johnnie Cochran and I believe that's the--it's either the '98 [1998] or the '96 [1996] Boule, our national convention.
Speaker 1: This is me with [HM] Emil Jones [Jr.], and I believe he was here prob--he may have been here for the book signing or something.
Story_ID: 428601
Speaker 1: It was yeah, it was at one of our [Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority, Inc.] national conventions.  It may have been '96 [1996], he [Representative John Conyers] was given an award and I believe that was probably taken in Baltimore [Maryland].
Speaker 2: Okay, who is that and--
Speaker 1: John, Representative John Conyers.
Speaker 2: Okay thank you, all right.
Speaker 1: That was taken in Richmond, Virginia in '90 [1990].
Speaker 2: And what was the occasion?
Speaker 1: It must have been after the--our--banquet at the national convention.  That was so funny.  All of the, the way the show was set up, they had a small venue.
Speaker 2: Yeah, that's Clifton Davis.
Speaker 1: And he [Clifton Davis] was the entertainment that evening.
Speaker 2: He's a--big one here, panoramic one.  Next one, we're--on the next one.
Speaker 1: And this is a picture with me and next to me is Edna Lee who is a long-time family friend.  And it was at her, it was--an anniversary celebration.  And I believe it may have been her 51st, 52nd, because they didn't celebrate the--50th.
Speaker 2: And this is me with the mayor of Birmingham, Alabama.  And the minister of this church was very active in the Civil Rights Movement.  And he--I had been presented a key to the city.
Speaker 1: Birmingham [Alabama], that's not [Frederick Lee "Fred"] Shuttlesworth?
Speaker 2: No, no.
Speaker 1: Why were you presented the key?
Speaker 2: I was the speaker for--at the local chapter's Founder's Day program.
Speaker 1: And this is a group of friends that I worked with at Social Security.  To my left is Rita Wilson [ph.], Ellen Gary [ph.], Barbara Boscoe [ph.] and Boscoe is a maiden name, I never remember her married name, myself and Marva Watkins.  We all worked at--in the '65 [1965], '66 [1966] together at the Social Security Great Lakes Program Center.  And we've remained friends.  We get together about once a year, usually around [Dr. Reverend] Martin Luther King [Jr.]'s birthday.
Speaker 2: And that is me with Ben Johnson at the White House during a public policy conference.  He was [William Jefferson] Clinton's Domestic Policy Advisor.
Speaker 1: And this is out in front of my church, St. Mark United Methodist Church [Chicago, Illinois], and my pastor [Rev.] Dr. Myron McCoy is on the left and I'm next to him.  My cousin who was an Assistant Pastor there, Dr. John McCoy, no relation.  And my sister Judy and I can't think of the other associate's name.  But my cousin has just become the senior pastor at St. Mark.  He and his wife are, are coming to us from Clarksdale, Mississippi.
Speaker 2: And this is at the awards ceremony for Social Security.  I received a Commissioner's Citation.  This was in the late '80s [1980s].
Speaker 1: What was the citation for?
Speaker 2: Outstanding leadership.  The Commissioner's Citation is one of the highest awards that you can receive within the Social Security Administration, and I've received a Commissioner's and I've received a Regional Commissioner's Citation.
Speaker 1: And this is at the ceremony.  The--to my left and right are two--were two regional commissioners at the time.  Paul Barnes [ph.] was the Regional Commissioner and Myrtle Habersham, I believe Myrtle was in Atlanta [Georgia].  Paul is now in the--one of the major directors in Social Security.
Speaker 2: And this is my retirement picture, and I received a leadership award from the Chicago [Illinois] Region and the regional commissioner James Martin is presenting the award to me.
Speaker 1: And that's me and my official photograph.
Speaker 2: And this is my mother [Mary Fennell White] in the center and my sister Judy [Judy White Rushing] on my left and me one Sunday at church. (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: And this is as Ms. Clark College [Atlanta, Georgia].  I was the homecoming queen in 1961.
Speaker 2: She didn't mention that.
Speaker 1: This was a picture taken at work [Social Security Administration] for the combined federal campaign.  And it was the kickoff and I was a part of a skit.  The idea of being able to see the executives looking funny.
Speaker 2: That's my baby picture.
Speaker 1: And that's my high school picture.
Speaker 2: Was that graduation?
Speaker 1: Yes, and that was taken while I was at Stanford [University, Stanford, California], when I was a graduate student at Stanford.  That's something I didn't mention.
Speaker 2: No, you didn't.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I received a federal yearlong fellowship to go to Stanford University in the School of--well it was the educational program and systems analysis.  And it was out of the engineering school at Stanford.
Speaker 2: That is my grandmother, Marie McCoy Gaye.  McCoy is her maiden name.
Speaker 1: And when was that shot?
Speaker 2: I would say 1914, around in that area.
Speaker 1: And that's my sister [Judy White Rushing] and I, and let's see, I was probably about four and she was about two.
Speaker 2: This was for a special occasion?
Speaker 1: No, I think it was just somebody taking pictures.
Speaker 2: All right.  Now the person to the far left standing up, is my great-great-grandmother, Victoria.
Speaker 1: Do you know any of the others?
Speaker 2: They are I think the person in the center--I'd have to look at the back of the photograph 'cause I don't know them.  They're Byrum [ph.].  She was a, a Byrum.
Speaker 1: Yeah they're like--they seem to be great uncles and aunts.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Father's family.  You're not gonna get the--okay let's see.  To the far left is my uncle William White.  My father is next to him, and his name was Lemnon White [Lemnon White].  Next to him is his mother, Jennie [ph.] White.  And my father's father is next to him, and that--his name is Neal White.  The woman sitting between--the back, is Jeanetta White, my father's sister.  Coming up in the foreground is my uncle Clinton White.  The other brother in the back, I don't know his name.  He was deceased before I was born--my family didn't meet him, I mean the others.  And the aunt on the far end is Magnolia White.  This was taken at their family home.
Speaker 2: That's in Smithville, Mississippi.
Speaker 1: And then that's me with my grandmother at my college [Clark College later, Clark-Atlanta University, Atlanta, Georgia] graduation, Marie Gaye [Marie McCoy Gaye].
Speaker 2: And that's, my sister [Judy White Rushing] is to the left.  My father [Lemnon White] and mother [Mary Fennell White] are in the background.  My brother [Spruiell White] is hidden.  He's right in front of my father, he's covering his face.  And I'm next to him (laughter).
Story_ID: 428602
Speaker 1: This had to have been high school [Paul Robeson High School, Chicago, Illinois], looks like my prom dress.
Speaker 2: And there I was must have been about two, three.
Speaker 1: Really nice photograph.
Speaker 2: I had an uncle, or--not an uncle, but--either a family friend or distant relative liked to take--did a lot of photography.  So there are a lot of pictures of me and my sister [Judy White Rushing] and brother [Spruiell White] say that there are very few pictures of them because I was the baby at that time and that's when he lived in Chicago.
Speaker 1: And his favorite model.
Speaker 2: No.  I'll tell you one thing, they always said about me.  There wasn't a camera I didn't like.
Speaker 1: Cute baby, though.
Speaker 2: Now this is out in front of our house on King Drive [Chicago, Illinois].  I'm at the back in the far left, my sister Judy is waving her hand.  My brother is on the tricycle.  Patricia is the little girl next to him, she lived in the building.  And Sandra was another little girl we grew up with.
Speaker 1: Now that one was taken in Ohio at the DD's [ph.] picnic.  That club is still--it's a men's club.  And that is a picture of my brother on the left, my sister, next to me is--wait, next to my sister is Brenda Lancaster and myself, and--I mean the others are Brenda's cousins and I can't think of their names at the moment.
Speaker 2: And that's my grandmother [Marie McCoy Gaye], my mother's mother.
Speaker 1: That's your grandmother?
Speaker 2: That's my grandmother, that's my mother's mother.
Speaker 1: And that's me.  Those are proofs.
Speaker 2: What were you arrested for?  Mug shots.  Not looking too happy.
Speaker 1: That's better
Speaker 2: Doctor must have said smile.
Speaker 1: That's one Christmas at my aunt and uncle's home.  Early high school.
Speaker 2: That's a picture from high school [Paul Robeson High School, Chicago, Illinois], and it's been cut out, but that was from the math, from the math group.
Speaker 1: And that's my sister Judy.
Speaker 2: And that's my brother.
Speaker 1: That's my brother also.
Speaker 2: That's me with mayor Harold [Lee] Washington and Steve Elina [ph.].  I was the district manager of the Chicago East Social Security Office.  And we made a visit to the--to talk with the mayor.  I don't remember the--details of the conversation.  But one of the things--he lived in the same building that I lived in, and when our office was renovated, and we had an open house, Harold Washington came to the, to the open house.  That was a real big deal because you could never get you know, that kind of public official to--
Speaker 1: And this is my Tri-Hi Y [Clark College later, Clark-Atlanta University, Atlanta, Georgia] group.  And well I'm back in the center, and my mother, yes.  And then my mother is at the far right with the mothers in front.  Yes, there's my mother.
Speaker 2: I don't know if I ever told you, but we capture the photos from the video on photo shot and manipulate them then.
Speaker 1: And this was a grammar school picture.  I was a part of Mrs. David's Spanish dancing group.  But we were perf--at Betsy Ross [Elementary School, Chicago, Illinois], this is outside of Betsy Ross.
Speaker 2: And where are you in the photo?
Speaker 1: Third from the left with the large sombrero.  Yeah.
Speaker 2: That's my grandmother's father.
Speaker 1: What's his name?
Speaker 2: I think it's William McCoy.  You've heard me mention McCoy.  None of these three McCoys to our knowledge, are related to each other.  My grandmother's father is not related to my pastor and my pastor's not related to my cousin, all of whom are McCoys.
Speaker 1: This is a fundraiser that I chaired.  The opening of Sydney Poitier's movie 'A Piece of the Action'.
Speaker 2: Yeah, 1977 or something like that.
Speaker 1: Yes, yeah.
Speaker 2: And that's taken outside of--on the steps of--outside of Hillary [Rodham] Clinton, Senator Hillary Clinton's office.  And that's with me with her and other members of the sorority who are--were on Capitol Hill as a part of our Public Policy Conference.
Speaker 1: And the other people below me, now see--they're not members of Alpha Kappa Alpha, okay.
Speaker 2: Now that one is a picture of my father [Lemnon White] and mother [Mary Fennell White] and my sister [Judy White Rushing].  I'm hidden on this picture.  You, you won't be able to see me on this because I'm in the far left lower hand corner and you really only get to see the top of my--
Speaker 1: Okay, and what was this photo spread for?
Speaker 2: Well -- the magazine did an article on the life of a dining car waiter, you know a person working for New York Central [Railroad].  And they decided to do it on our family.  And they, actually came into our home and I guess interviewed us and they, you know, took pictures.  I don't know whether that was the cornflakes ad, I mean or whether mother was just serving cornflakes.
Speaker 1: That's a--the magazine is called The Negro Traveler.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Get the cover of it.  There's a couple more.
Speaker 2: Yeah, you have to kind of come down, yeah, all right.  I'm on the far right.  My mother is holding my sister and there's my father going off to work.  Interesting thing about men who worked for the railroad.  Now he was a dining car waiter, but I never saw him go to work in other than a suit and a tie or a sports jacket.  Said that he used to laugh.  They looked like they owned the New York Central.
Speaker 1: And I assume that that's--I mean that's my father, but I think the setting is probably at one of the places they stayed, one of the hotels or something they stayed when they were on the road.  I don't think that's our house.  I remember that robe.
Speaker 2: Could you turn it vertically and I'll shoot the caption?  So they would stay at hotels?
Speaker 1: Well yeah, or some type--you know when you would go into a city, they had accommodations for them some place where they, you know, all of the railroad workers would stay.
Speaker 2: Anybody publish anything like this anymore?
Speaker 1: No, I think it ran for a couple of years.  And then it went out of business.  I-- think at that point you know, Ebony sort of took off.  There may have been, you know, lots of magazine-type--
Speaker 2: Is this something we could have a copy of?
Speaker 1: Yeah, you can take that.
Speaker 2: You have to be careful when you get pictures. This is a picture with me as vice president and members of the board of directors of Alpha Kappa Alpha.
Speaker 1: Okay and when was that taken?
Speaker 2: It would have been taken before 2002, somewhere between--
Speaker 1: All right, now this is at my retirement party.  And this is a picture with me and various members of the sorority.  And they came from all over for my retirement.  And that was taken in December of 2001.
Speaker 2: And this is your retirement from Social Security [Administration].
Speaker 1: And that's me with a former national president, Dr. Eva L. Evans from Lansing, Michigan.
Speaker 2: And this is me with a long-time friend and sorority member, Marva Lee, Marva J. Lee.
Speaker 1: This -- this is a group of sorority members.  Prior to my coming into the Presidency, I held-- a planning meeting and facilitator training because I wanted some input from the organization.  And these persons were facilitators and resources from the varying regions who went back --
Speaker 2: This is me with another very good friend, Ilana Brody [ph.].  She's now the national membership chairman.
Speaker 1: And this is me with Juanita Doty is standing next to me and Jean--I can't recall her name, but Juanita next to me is my national program chair and she's the one that sits on the noard of the Corporation for Community and National Service.
Speaker 2: This is me with a number of the past presidents of Alpha Kappa Alpha.  And the lady in the center, and I don't know her name, but she's a seventy-five year member of Alpha Kappa Alpha, and she was present at the regional conference.
Speaker 1: And this is me with two other, with two sorority sisters who you've seen, Essie Blalock [ph.] is to my right and Marva Lee is to my left.  Essie is now my Executive Assistant while I'm in office, and Marva is on our Foundation Board.
Speaker 2: The--every year at our convention, we [Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority, Inc.] have an exhibit and it's called the 'Ivy Academy'.  And it displays all of the regional reading exhibits, educational exhibits, outstanding program exhibits in that conference.  And this was the ribbon cutting ceremony.
Speaker 1: This is me with a soror at a regional conference.  I think it's my own regional conference, and they're presenting me a gift.
Speaker 2: And this is me with some more sorors.  Let's see.  (Unclear) who is my national standards chair now.  Marva Lee on the Foundation, Ilana [ph.]--
Story_ID: 428603
Speaker 1: My name is Julieanna Richardson and I'm the interviewer.
Speaker 2: All right.
Speaker 1: And Matthew Hickey is the videographer.  And I'm going to say that this interview is a supplement to [HM] Linda White's interview of 2002 [sic, 2003] I think.  And--or previous interview with The HistoryMakers.  And it is specifically for the--a video for the AKA [Alpha Kappa Alpha] Sorority Centennial Celebration that will be held in Washington, D.C. this year of 2008.  And I want to--so these questions are specifically for that, but I want you to slate the interview.  And I'd like you to--I want you to start out by stating your name and spelling it for us.
Speaker 2: All right.
Speaker 1: And give me your date of birth
Speaker 2: All right.  My name is Linda Marie White, and I was born April 21st, 1942.
Speaker 1: And our location?
Speaker 2: Location of birth?
Speaker 1: No, location here, I'm sorry.
Speaker 2: Location is Chicago, Illinois.
Speaker 1: Okay, and today's date?
Speaker 2: May 30th, 2008.
Speaker 1: Okay and your occupation?
Speaker 2: Retired at this point.
Story_ID: 428604
Speaker 1: We're gonna start out and I wanna ask you 'cause we're really trying to get a sense of what happened, you know during your [presidential] administration [Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority, Inc.].  And I want to--I'm gonna change sort of the order of the questions.  I wanna ask you how you came to join the sorority in the first place?
Speaker 2: Well I was certainly on a college [Clark College later, Clark-Atlanta University, Atlanta, Georgia] campus at the time.  And I looked around at the women who were members of the organization, and I had two family members who also happened to be members who were older than I was.  And it looked like an organization that fit my goals and aspirations.  And people whom I felt like I would be comfortable with as sisters.
Speaker 1: Now what does that mean, though, who fit your goals and aspirations?
Speaker 2: Well they were women who were interested in scholastic achievement, they were women who were interested in, in serving others.  And also women who were interested in having a good time and were friendly.  We were regular young women in that sense.
Speaker 1: Now you--tell me when you got involved in the organization.  Do you know who was the grand basileus at the time?
Speaker 2: Marjorie H. Parker [Marjorie Holloman Parker].
Speaker 1: And what did you know of her or who did you meet at that time, leadership that impressed you?
Speaker 2: Well Marjorie was the Historian for the sorority.  So you know you had read, you had to read practically her books.  She was a person whom you saw at conferences and she also happened to be the very good friend of one of my classmate's mothers.  So I had met her when I was a college student.
Speaker 1: And what struck you about her in terms of was it the history, was it her knowledge of the organization, was it--
Speaker 2: Knowledge of the organization.  Very self-effacing woman, but a very strong woman.  Very pleasant to be around and -- I got to know her a little more through the years in some of the positions that I held in the sorority.  And she was always with her sister.  She--it was interesting because she always had her sisters, even though they were not necessarily in high positions, but they traveled as a group.  So that if you were taking care of Marjorie, which was one of my responsibilities, you took care of her and you took care of her sisters.
Story_ID: 428605
Speaker 1: When you were as your--tell me the positions you held in the--sorority [Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority], the different positions.
Speaker 2: Well first of all, I mean I could start with the, the top positions that I held at each level.  I was the basileus or president of my local chapter after having served in several offices there, and as committee chairman. I was one of the few supreme basili who was never a regional director, but I did serve on regional committees.  And at the national level, I was the protocol liaison, there were two of us.  We wrote the protocol manual for the organization.  I served on the Job Corps committee, and I was also the national secretary, the vice president, and the--became the president, and I was also the president of the Educational Advancement Foundation, which is the not-for-profit arm of our organization.
Speaker 1: Now tell me what influenced your decision though, to seek the position of supreme basileus?  Was it a-- natural next step, or--
Speaker 2: It was more of a next step.  It was never my lifelong ambition to be the president of Alpha Kappa Alpha.  It sort of grew in terms of the responsibilities that I assumed over time.  The love that I received from my sisters during the good times and the hard times.  Their allowing me to grow as a woman and to fine-tune my leadership and management skills, so that as I took on new positions with greater responsibility, and found that I could do them very well, I felt that there was another step that I could take.  And at the time I sought the position of supreme basileus, I thought very, very carefully about that, because it's very different to lead an organization that's a national organization, as opposed to being a board member.  And my friends all said to me, "Well, you were able to make those other decisions very quickly, what, what's taking you so long?"  And I said, "Because there's a lot of commitment there and I need to think about the impact on my family, my friends, whether I can get the votes to become President."  I mean whether that was really something that was a viable opportunity for me.  And with prayer and a lot of consideration, I decided, yes this was something that I wanted, I could do, and I never looked back.
Story_ID: 428606
Speaker 1: Tell me--so you came into office [as president of Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority, Inc.], what were you wanting to do and accomplish?  You know with, with the position and-- how was that viewed?  Was it a clean slate, or were you looking to continue the, you know the legacy of the person who, you know, preceded you?
Speaker 2: Not necessarily the legacy of the person who preceded me.  I had a very strong foundation to build upon.
Speaker 1: Now can you talk about the person who preceded you a little bit?  I'm sorry.  Wrong?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay sorry, okay.
Speaker 2: I tried to phrase that--I mean and it's--
Speaker 1: No, that's fine.
Speaker 2: But there were lots of things that I was looking to do.  One of the things I wanted to do was to strengthen the bonds of sisterhood.  And I also wanted to improve the reading skills of children in grades K through three, and I also was looking to work with other organizations to improve and strengthen the black family, and to see what we could do to reduce the health disparities between minorities and the majority community.  And sisterhood, for me, was at the core of accomplishing those things.  Because working with people, and you--can't accomplish anything by yourself.  And for me, it was how you worked with other people and modeled that behavior for other people that could draw them to your program and to your ideas.
Story_ID: 428607
Speaker 1: So in that respect, can you describe then the programs that you actually put in place?
Speaker 2: Yes I can.  The thing for my [presidential] administration was the spirit of Alpha Kappa Alpha [Sorority, Inc.], which embodied really the sisterliness and how we would go about carrying out our program because we were sisterly toward one another, as well as sisterly toward people who were not members.  The major programs were the Ivy Reading AKAdemy and Young Authors Program - that was the signature program for my administration.  The next two emphases were the black family and working in the area of health, reducing health disparities.  And with that we--the health disparities we collaborated with like the National Institute of Health and American Cancer Society. With the black family we worked quite a bit, had a very close relationship with the Points of Light Foundation and participating in their national days of service, and making that a part of our program.  So those were sort of the major things we did.  We did a lot of other things, but the, as I said the Ivy Reading AKAdemy and the Young Authors Program, that was the signature program.
Speaker 1: Can you talk about--I thought that was very good, but I like you--cause we changed the focus of this video to talk more about programs than about leadership.  Seems like there's another leadership video being done.  So, so I wanted to ask you to state, you know to restate that, but I wanna hear in quantifiable terms.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Like you know, you know, what actually--how many people did you touch?  You know.
Speaker 2: I-- can give you--we first of all provided three million hours of service through our programs.  We touched almost a half million people.
Speaker 1: Can you go--I'm sorry, I hate to do this to you.  But -- can you go back and give the names of the programs and the people you touched.  Just like--you know how you were describing it before.
Speaker 2: Well the Ivy Reading AKAdemy [sic, Ivy AKAdemy] - that was a demonstration program, largely underwritten by the [U.S.] Department of Education, where we actually worked in nine demonstration sites across the United States to improve the basic skills that children need to enter grammar school, kindergarten.  And so many black children in communities that were economically deprived, and other minorities, too, come to school without the basics.  I mean the things that we think of that are common to, to middle class people that your children know the ABCs or they've had exposure to reading.  So many other children, they come to school not even knowing their last names.  So we had a very specific reading program that we implemented that was--we provided training to the site coordinators.  We provided training to the students, or other teachers working in the program, 'cause not everybody was a college graduate who worked at a training site.  Some were students in college, because it was the reading one-to-one program that followed a very specific method of teaching children to read.  And when the University of North Florida [Jacksonville, Florida] evaluated our program, they found that children had gained maybe one to two years in reading level improvement.  Comprehension, we didn't accomplish as much as we wanted to do in that area.  What we found in poor communities, children don't stay in the same school sometimes for more than a couple of months.  They're constantly moving.  Family relationships are training, and it's very hard to teach -- a child in that setting when they can't consistently participate in the program.  But overall, they felt that our program had been a successful program, and one that we wanted to see not just rest with Alpha Kappa Alpha, but be duplicated in other communities and many school districts and other organizations carried on the program after I went out of office.
Story_ID: 428608
Speaker 1: What did you learn in that process about the black community, or about education or children in the process of implementing this, you know, significant program?
Speaker 2: It's very--working -- in a economically deprived community, it's very difficult.  I mean the, the children are delightful.  They, they really are very interested in learning.  But they need a lot of support systems, and sometimes those support systems weren't immediately available.  And, you know, we tried to provide as much as we could.  But I would say to anyone that- it's not an easy task and school systems are--have been trying all kinds of things to improve the -- reading skills of minority children and children like I said, who are economically deprived.  But you have to work at it because if -- they aren't unable to read at grade level early in the game, they just fall so much further behind in school and are really not prepared to be competitive in life as a, an adult or high school student, or to be able to go to college because they've never gotten the fundamentals.
Speaker 1: Now you--that--cause I cut you off at the point.  You were giving quantifiable, you know--
Speaker 2: Yes.  And -- that was one thing that I especially wanted.  We had a number of programs that have dealt with reading, health, many programs that serviced mankind, and were good programs and I would never disparage them.  But I wanted something quantifiable.  I wanted something that could be measured to say you either did something or you didn't do something.  But it was acceptable not to achieve what you started out if you learned something from it so that you could make some changes or some other people could make some changes.  And I got quantifiable data.  And, like I said, we worked with University of North Florida [Jacksonville, Florida].  And they produced that data for us, and--
Speaker 1: So talk about your data.  How many people did you reach, you know--
Speaker 2: Overall I think we reached about forty-five thousand students in a program, in a demonstration site there may be were no more than twenty-some children.  But the chapters carried on the program to the extent that they could without funding, without being a part of the actual demonstration.  But many of them got people to work with them who could do statistical data, count the number of hours spent in their program.  So they supplemented what we were able to do on a demonstration basis.  And that reached a much larger number of people.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 428609
Speaker 1: Now I wanna go back to you even--well no.  Let me ask you when you came on, can you describe, and I think you talked about it, but can you describe what your vision was for AKA [Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority, Inc.]?  I mean what were you positioning the institution as?
Speaker 2: I was--my goal was to be able to, as I said, strengthen the bonds of sisterhood.  Because I felt that was at the core of who we were as an organization.  And to brace us for a period of time in which a change was tremendous, and the needs of our membership and the people we served were changing very quickly.  And so I wanted programs that were flexible enough to meet those needs.  I did surveys to find out what our membership was interested in doing.  I -- looked at what they felt they saw as the needs of members of the community.  I asked a lot of questions and I did a lot of preparation.  I can tell you I spent almost a year doing research and planning.  I mean it just didn't--we just didn't sit down one day and write out a program and a script.  Some of the things the organization told me was that, structurally, they didn't want to spend all of their time in coming to meetings 'cause jobs didn't permit them to, to do that as they once did when everybody was a teacher or a social worker.  So those were some things that--they wanted to focus on youth.  And so I, you know, I limited my focus to young people and children because they said they were interested in providing tutoring and -- enhancing the reading skills of children, and helping them to improve their thoughts about themselves, their, you know, their own self esteem as children.  These were the things the organization fed back to me, and I pulled together a core group of people and, you know, we sat down and talked about the data we gathered and, what would be the -- best way to go about translating that into a, to a program that was worthwhile.
Story_ID: 428610
Speaker 1: You know in, in many ways when I hear you talking about the theme of--
Speaker 2: Spirit.
Speaker 1: You know spirit of sisterhood that it was almost as if that was what the organization [Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority, Inc.]--you were returning the organization to its roots, which came out of, you know, sisterhood.
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: So it was almost a renewal of vows in some respects?
Speaker 2: In some respect I guess you could describe it in that way.  What distinguishes a sisterhood from any other organization that serves?  Because I've served on other boards and they have good purposes and they do good things.  But you don't have necessarily a relationship that--with the persons whom you serve with.  I mean you may be friends, but as sisters, we spend a lot of our time with each other, caring for each other, and caring for ourselves and each other in a way that can translate to you being there for somebody else.  If I can't act sisterly toward my own member, how can I go out and serve someone else and expect them to feel comfortable with me, to feel that I really want to do something for them?  You have to exemplify that kind of behavior.  For me as president - and I think a lot of people would tell you this - that I tried very hard to model sisterliness to my members.  If -- I couldn't--not it wasn't for me a play.  But if I couldn't embody that kind of behavior, then it wasn't much that I could say to them that they should go out and do it.  And -- to treat other people as human beings.  If I didn't treat them in the same manner.  And I, you know, I know sometimes I look serious, but I'm always a person trying to smile most of the time.  I mean, even if I were telling you what I thought, you know, I always try to, to smile and not sugar coat it as much as, to just try to be human and treat you as a human being.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So how was your vision, then, of, you know, sisterhood or -- how was that designed to ensure the sorority survival?  How did you see it as a function of ensuring survival?
Speaker 2: Two things.  If we did not retain the core of sisterhood, we would die.  And if we weren't flexible enough to change, we would become obsolete.  And I think I left the organization with a capacity to change and to strengthen those bonds of sisterhood which were at the core of our being.
Story_ID: 428611
Speaker 1: Now -- how was your vision communicated and carried out during your [presidential] administration [Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority, Inc.]?  It's one thing to have a vision.
Speaker 2: That's true.
Speaker 1: It's another to have it implemented, and especially, I mean there are how many members?
Speaker 2: Almost two hundred thousand [members] today.  But you are very correct when you say you can have a vision, you can even do a lot of research, and you can put a lot of things down on paper, very slick.  And I can assure you that all of my materials that -- I distributed were top notch materials.  But you've got to sell your program.  And you've got to, not make, but help people to want to be a part of what you're trying to do.  And you've got to give them the guidelines, and sources of information to work with, and steps, and alternatives for them carrying it out.  You've got to train them, and you've got to provide them feedback, and you've got to train again.  And we must have trained throughout my entire administration, whether it be at regional conferences, local chapters, national conferences called boules, leadership seminars, all of those were used as tools.  And of course, I gave annual reports to the organization every opportunity that I had for an interview, for the newspaper, the television, for our website.  I seize that opportunity and encouraged -- my members to seize that opportunity.  Teamwork was very important, and I was very fortunate to have a good team behind me, because they sold my program.  They as--I feel like as much as I did, but even more because there were more of them, they turned around and went back and trained, gave the materials out, talked with their members, were excited about the program as I was, and that enthusiasm caught on, you know, with the membership.
Story_ID: 428612
Speaker 1: At the end of that boule [Alpha Kappa Alpha national conference], I had -- a video presentation.  One at the banquet on the night I was installed, which gave some family history and it talked about--I was interviewed in that boule, or interviewed for that video where I talked about my goals for the organization, my program, and the different facets of my program.  The next day, I presented like a slide presentation, a PowerPoint.  And we went over in greater detail what I planned to do.  And when that boule closed, those in attendance walked away with a CD of what I had said the night before, and the PowerPoint that was done the last day, as well as printed materials that they could take back to their chapters.  When they left the boule, they knew what the Spirit Program was and what they were going to do and needed to prepare for.
Story_ID: 428613
Speaker 1: In front of us is a beautiful book, 'Pearls of Service [: The legacy of America's first black sorority, Alpha Kappa Alpha,' Earnestine Green McNealey].  Can you talk about you know how that book came into being and, you know, and that being one of the results of your [presidential] administration [Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority, Inc.].
Speaker 2: I wanted to -- do a new history book, and I wanted the person [Earnestine Green McNealey] who had originally been selected to do the history sometime before, she didn't get an opportunity to do it at that time.  And I asked her in my administration, would she write an updated history for me.  And I knew about her capabilities as a person who had a degree in journalism, had done a lot of research, was very knowledgeable about the organization [Alpha Kappa Alpha].  And she took our history book to a new level.  She pointed out to me that history books, first of all, don't have a shelf life of more than four years before they need to be updated; that they were more pictorial today than they were in past years when all you were doing was simply reading, and maybe seeing a few black and white pictures.  She wanted to do something that was larger, not only in content and size--but quality of paper, color pictures, and she really did extensive research on the organization and she interviewed many people.  So this book, 'Pearls of Service', is a result of her, her work and of course I'm included, my administration is included in the history book, but all of the past presidents and executive directors are included in terms of their accomplishments during their administration or significant events that occurred during their administration.
Speaker 1: So what did people say when they saw that book?
Speaker 2: They were astonished because she did a lot, she did a lot to sell the history book.  She would give them teasers at a-- leadership meeting of some things that were gonna be included.  She told them things about the founders that maybe we didn't know and how Delta Sigma Theta was founded out, you know, as a break-off from our organization, but many of their founders were originally Alpha Kappa Alpha women.  And there was one soror who came to a meeting that was being held and stopped, you know, all of this discussion about changing the organization and, its colors and symbols and becoming "more Greek".  But the other organization was founded and it's one we're all so proud of.  We talk about them, you know, as our children and they have referred--one of their presidents referred to us, you know, in very positive ways.  And -- it was good I think for the larger community because their work is certainly as significant as ours.  I just, you know, chose Alpha Kappa Alpha because for me, that was the best fit.  But I would never disparage any of the other Greek letter organizations.
Speaker 1: Nice approach.  You know, you always hear, "I'm Delta," "I'm AKA" --
Speaker 2: Yeah, well I'm an AKA and I'm proud of it.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: And I can look at somebody else as my sister in Greekdom, or my brother in Greekdom.
Story_ID: 428614
Speaker 1: Now what did you learn about leadership?  You wanna--what did you learn about leadership while serving as the supreme basileus?
Speaker 2: It's not easy.  You have to pick your battles, and you've got to think hard about what -- you're doing.  You've got to be willing to listen to people. And communicating clearly and articulately about your program is one thing, and that's an aspect of leadership.  But listening is just as important.  And you've got to be a person, for me, who can listen and not expect to have yes people around you.  I looked for somebody--it didn't matter if I--if you were smarter than I was.  But if you tell me the truth, now I may not agree with you, and that may not be my final decision, but I wanted to hear it.  And my team felt comfortable enough to tell it to me.
Speaker 1: And now what do you think were lessons that you learned, you know, out of your experience, that were the most valuable and constructive for you?  You said it was, you know that it was hard, you know it was hard.
Speaker 2: Leadership is not easy.  One of the things I learned was that I had some strengths that I was unaware of.  A major crisis happened at the very, very beginning of my term, and I wouldn't wish it on any president of Alpha Kappa Alpha, or any president of any other organizations.  But a hundred million dollar lawsuit was filed against us for allegedly -- permitting underground hazing, and two young women died, which was a tragedy.  We were finally found not liable, and we certainly had never condoned such behavior, but it was a fact, the lawsuit was a fact.  I had to deal with it.  I couldn't push it aside and I was able to stand up to all of the pressures.  I -- had to stand up to the attorney who was the prosecuting attorney in the-O.J. Simpson trial [People of the State of California v. Orenthal James Simpson, 1995].  I had to sit across the table from him -- and I could - go, I felt, toe-to-toe with him about my organization.  And it was something that I didn't realize I had within me, the strength to -- be able to stand up.  Certainly God was very much a part of that in my--along with my own inner strength, but I'm proud to say that the organization is--I wouldn't ask for the situation, but we were stronger, and a stronger organization after that crisis.  And we carried out the [Spirit] program in spite of having to deal with the lawsuit.  And that to me was a major achievement.  You--the lawsuit could have destroyed us as an organization.  Not only financially, but destroyed -- our image of--as being women who served and helped other people.  But, my team, we kept the program going.  They were determined that they weren't going to let the lawsuit overwhelm what we were as an organization.  And we made the accomplishments that I hoped to accomplish, and we settled the lawsuit in a way that indicated that we were never held liable for what occurred.
Speaker 1: So now you were, you, your induction ceremony was in what year?
Speaker 2: Two thousand two [2002].
Speaker 1: So 2002 to 2006--
Speaker 2: Six [2006]--
Speaker 1: Is when you served, okay.  And, and the lawsuit lasted how long?
Speaker 2: Almost the entire term.  I think we settled finally about--probably a year before I went out of office.  So, I mean I was constantly dealing with that at the same time I was continuing to stay focused on the program.
Story_ID: 428615
Speaker 1: How were you able to get--you said it left the organization stronger.  So I'm just trying to understand were there--what was the result of that from - an operation or policy standpoint that left the organization [Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority, Inc.] stronger?
Speaker 2: All right.  One of the things that I did immediately was to form a risk management group that looked at all of -- our written policies on membership intake.  I brought in the committee chairman, two of the sorority members who were--happened to be judges, one a federal district judge, one a supreme, state Supreme Court judge, who had previously worked on our hazing policy.  But I brought them back in to look at what did we need to do.  And, like I said, we revamped our membership intake policy to make it very clear to members, if they weren't clear before, what was not to be tolerated; what we were about in terms of a membership process.  We published pamphlets targeted at pre-teens, college graduates and undergraduate members so that the public as well as the organization understood what we were about.  And when you talk about bringing in members from--who were not--maybe had no association with Greeks, they had perceptions about what you have to do to be a member, none of which is true for anybody today.  But they still have these perceptions, and hazing goes on in other organizations.  It goes on in the military, bands, college bands and things that--and so they expect that this is the right way to do things.  And they can't understand that dehumanizing someone, and you're black, and -- you've come through slavery and were dehumanized by the people, how can you go out and dehumanize one of your own?  And that's the point we tried to get across in our materials, and to make it clear you didn't have to do these kinds of things to become a member of Alpha Kappa Alpha.  We weren't about that.
Story_ID: 428616
Speaker 1: So is hazing now, has it stopped with the--
Speaker 2: No, no, no.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It hasn't stopped.  It's an--you know it's something that you continue to work with because there--and I mean I'll admit even members in the organization are people who still think well it wasn't like when I was initiated, or this is what I'd like to see done.  What you do though, is you get rid of them quickly and then you take immediate penalty action.  And it--you know, if they really have done something that's extremely egregious, you remove them from the organization.  And they know it and they--we've also talked to them.  But it's not just a risk.  You think something you do in college only affects your time in college, not recognizing that this follows you the rest of your life.  We have young people who were removed or suspended, and with the technology today, these things pop up on Google sites.  People applying for jobs.  One young lady called me, she had passed the bar and was being interviewed for a top law firm and she wanted to see if, you know, this couldn't be erased from the history.  No it cannot be erased.  You did what you did when you did it, and that's a part of our record.  There's no, there's no point in which this gets erased; that's something we tell you, you need to think about.  And yes, maybe the firm hired her, but if you had a choice of outstanding, five outstanding women, why would I choose someone who has something on their record that I wouldn't be proud of?
Speaker 1: Yeah, you know haze--you know we were -- just talking about hazing the other day so that was--that put a lot of attention on -- the sorority, you know and its--and, you prob--were concerned, I mean the sorority had to be concerned about being presented in the wrong light.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: With out of all--with outside and people not knowing all the good work.
Speaker 2: Yes, yes and -- that's why it was important that you continue to do the good work and try to get that out to the larger public.  If you spent all your time on trying to not get--found guilty, but you focused totally on that, they've already destroyed you.  And we were never--and I-- wanna make it clear.  We were not found guilty of anything.  But the time and energy that you spent on that, it was a real challenge to not let it consume you.
Story_ID: 428617
Speaker 1: Tell me what your greatest moment was.
Speaker 2: Being installed as president [Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority, Inc.]--my sister [Judy White Rushing] and brother [Spruiell White] and my godmother [Lois Laster] were both present at my installation [2002].  And my mother [Mary Fennell White] and father [Lemnon White] were deceased at that time.  So having them there and they were also included in the video that was shown at the banquet.  And they told, you know they talked about me as their sister and what it was like and so forth.  And some of those comments that they made about their sister were funny.  But that was just a joyous time.  And my godmother, at that time she was ninety, and she made that trip to, to Orlando [Florida] to see me installed.  And she had been like a mother to me, even though she didn't live here, but she and my mother had been close friends.  And it was just, that was just a wonderful, wonderful--
Speaker 1: Can you describe it a little bit more?  I mean can you take yourself back to that day and, you know what, what time of day it was--
Speaker 2: The-- actual installation was at the banquet, which was in the evening.  Didn't start probably until eight o'clock.  And I probably didn't get installed until nine-thirty, ten, somewhere, you know, so it was late in the evening when the installation.  But before the actual banquet, I had a reception in my suite, and I invited all of the past presidents and people who had worked to get me elected and, you know it was just a nice time that we could, you know, all get together, and we all dressed up for -- the banquet and the people who had been leaders in the organization got to meet my family members.  And some husbands came who otherwise didn't accompany their wives to our convention.  But because they knew me, they wanted to come, and they did.  And so that was, that, you know to have that kind of support, wanting to be there at your big moment, was, like I said, just exciting and wonderful.
Story_ID: 428618
Speaker 1: Now would you, had you to do your presidency [of Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority, Inc.] over, would there be something else that you would change or do?
Speaker 2: Julieanna [Richardson], I've been asked that question a lot of times by a lot of different people.  And my response tends to always be the same.  Number one, you can never go back.  So I don't--I find that not to be useful conversation.  What you--I tried to do was to learn from those experiences so that as I encountered other things in life, I could use some of that -- to move ahead.  But ---you can't, you just can't go back.  You can't live it over.  And so all you can do is the best that you can while you're there and try to learn from each experience and do a better job.
Speaker 1: Now one, let's see, one thing, it says one thing is essential to ensure that we walk rather than back into the next one hundred years.  What does that comment mean to you?
Speaker 2: That you just don't slide into the next hundred years.  You still have to be proactive.  It's important that you continue to strengthen the bonds of sisterhood because again, that's -- the core of who we are.  You have to be continually flexible about changing.  Don't leave everything out that you, you learned in the past or did in the past.  But you have to recognize that as society changes, that people may need different things from you.  And the organization needs different things from--people want different things out of the organization.  And if you recognize that, then the organization can survive.  You always want to provide service because that's what you do.  Sisterhood is how you do it.  But the service has to take into consideration the changing times in which you live and the changing people.
Story_ID: 428619
Speaker 1: How, since you mentioned sisterhood and sisterhood was a key component of your, your [presidential] administration [Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority, Inc.], how has the sisterhood dimension taken a back seat to all--to the pledge of service to all mankind?
Speaker 2: They work hand-in-hand.  They don't really take a back seat.  Otherwise you would be no different from UNCF [United Negro College Fund], 'cause I served on the national board of UNCF and support it to this day, it's a strong organization.  But it's not a sisterhood or a brotherhood.  It's -- a group of like-minded people who are interested in education and young people being educated.  A sisterhood looks at the relationships among its members.  The kindness, the caring for each other.  And you carry that over to the, the service that you deliver.  And, and I guess that's what I--and I know that's repetitive, but it's for me, just very true.
Story_ID: 428620
Speaker 1: What are your hopes or concerns for the sorority [Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority]?  Or the--or what do you see as the greatest threat to the survival of the sorority?
Speaker 2: Well certainly, hazing is a threat.  It's always a threat.  Because it may not represent the 200,000 or what the, the ninety-nine percent of the organization does, but one or two individual members who do something can potentially destroy the organization.  So that's -- a threat that the organization has to always be conscious of, monitoring, looking to see how you can get people to -- change their behaviors.  The other thing is standing still and -- not being willing to change.  There are corporations and industries that have died because they didn't change.  And Alpha Kappa Alpha is a corporation as much as it is a sisterhood.  And if it only looks at what it did in 1908, 1928, 2008, and never goes forward, it'll die, too.
Story_ID: 428621
Speaker 1: Now what do you want your legacy to be?
Speaker 2: The things I'd like--because the history books are there.  And they will describe -- the programs and all of the interesting things that we did and the accomplishments, and I think there were many.  But I think what people will remember most, they are going to remember those two books that were published by young people in grades two through six.  Those are some of the hallmarks of my administration.  That history book that I showed you earlier.  The 1,200 square foot traveling centennial exhibit.  That is something that will stand forever because it's a permanent exhibit that will be housed somewhere permanently, and it was developed during my administration.  And finally I think people will always recall the Spirit of Alpha Kappa Alpha.  Many will remember that it's maybe Linda White who is associated, but they'll always talk about spirit.  Spirit--what we did, spirit that was a program, spirit as something very spiritual.  But it symbolizes something.  That ivy leaf and the Spirit logo.  I think people will remember that.  The other thing -- and I didn't mention this.  But the technological changes that were made to improve the infrastructure of Alpha Kappa Alpha will also be remembered.  It was during my administration that we were able to register for conferences online, we were able to pay chapter dues online, we were able to input data about service hours online.  We were able to capture monies received from grants, from not-for-profits, corporations, government organizations online to show not only what was the total dollars received, but what did we do with it.  And one of the things that is important when you collaborate with other organizations, they want to know what did you do with the money.  Not we know that you spent it because we didn't get any back.  But how did you use it?  And did you use it for the purposes that you said you were going to use it?
Story_ID: 428622
Speaker 1: --Not only program, but we [Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority, Inc.] also looked at structure.  And one of the things that people said they wanted was you know to be able to, you know, pay the dues online and to be able to register online and not have to fill out all of these pieces of paper and, and wait, you know, for weeks and weeks.  And, and but see with the payment of dues online, they got their membership cards for the new year right away.  If you-- did it online and it came back maybe within say a week or so.  And it had been maybe, six, seven, eight weeks before you would get a new membership card.
Story_ID: 428623
Speaker 1: So you, you know what I hear fascinating--this is sort of taking me back to when we were having I think lunch at Pearl's Restaurant [Chicago, Illinois].  And you know you were talking, you were actually at that time talking about the centennial, you know and coming up.  So--and what I hear, you know, you saying, I think about, you know, the fact that you had--first of all, you had a business plan going into your administration.  And that probably saved you in some respects from this hundred million dollar lawsuit you didn't anticipate.
Speaker 2: Yes.  If I hadn't--my planning started a year before.  For some presidents because it was the way things were done at that time, their--while they may have had ideas and talked with some people, their actual--a lot of the planning started after they were elected, the formal planning.  And by the time I came to the formal planning stage, my national program chair, she came to the meeting with, "These are the things that are there, what would you like to add to them?"  And--but she was prepared when she walked into the meeting.  It wasn't a sit-down and say, "well what do you think we ought -- to do" kind of meeting.  I mean they were there to-- work, to offer some ideas.  But she had something to present to them.  And that made a-- big difference because my team leaders, the national chairmen, they knew what they were supposed to do.  So they could go on and do things and carry out their program with their committee members.  And I didn't have to be present at everything they did.  I was present at the initial planning before the lawsuit broke.  But the lawsuit broke like in September, and the--I went into office in July and I met with the committees and even the new board in August with a, you know almost a full directorate meeting.  So they-- were champions.  And I knew it was important that the entire board and committee had to feel that they had a part in a stake in the Spirit Program.  Even though I'm not the person who's doing reading.  If I've got membership, how does membership, and what I'm going to do in terms of exciting membership about being a part of Alpha Kappa Alpha and reactivating?  I--my (unclear), we have to understand the program and be able to excite our members.  So I always met with all of the committees once a year, but all of them together, except for maybe sometimes the Finance Committee 'cause it wasn't necessary to--finance was something that you could do in a separate, smaller meeting.  But for the most part, everybody was together.  So they felt like they were a part of the larger team, you know it just wasn't a small group here.  But there were a hundred people.  And they got to know each other, and they fed off one another.  That spirit--that spirit.  They were able to bounce that back and forth across each other.
Story_ID: 428624
Speaker 1: You found that you had the makings of really a very effective leader in many ways.  Now I wanna ask you because I don't think, you know many people outside the black community or even in the black community, I don't think they really understand how large an organization, you know maybe AKA Sorority [Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority] is, you know.  And, and can you--I mean you talked about--just mentioned, alluded to the 200,000 members.  But--
Speaker 2: That's the larger membership.  Some of those people aren't financial.  But in terms of active membership, the membership actually increased substantially during my term.  I may have come in with a financial membership of thirty-nine to 40,000.  And by the time I left, we were probably at 50,000, close to 50,000.  And I'm sure the membership will be--will show significant increases this year if for no other reason than it's the centennial.  So you can't come unless you're a financial member.  So that in itself will increase the, the membership tremendously.  The real test of the, the membership will be how many will stay after all of the -- big celebration is over.  But you know time will give you some indications of that.
Speaker 1: Can you give us an inside look into the sorority?  I mean what-- is this, you know, what is this organization inside?  I mean how many chapters, you know, what--
Speaker 2: We have over 900 and some chapters.  We're in practically every state in the United States.  We're in the Virgin Islands, the Bahamas, Bermuda.  We're in Korea, Japan, Okinawa [Okinawa Island, Japan].  We'll probably reactive the chapter at some point in Liberia.  And that chapter decreased because of all of the wars and so forth going on.  But, like I said, 200,000 members and located in all of the--practically every state in the United States.  I'm trying to think where we don't have a chapter.  And I think South Dakota and North Dakota are in our region.  I don't--and we may have members, but I don't know that we have formal chapters.  But we do have a chapter in Utah.  We have a chapter in Oregon.  We have a chapter in Seattle, Washington, and we have a chapter in Alaska, and we have a chapter in Hawaii.  And then you look at, you know, all of the southern states and the northern states like Illinois, Indiana, Ohio, Michigan, New York, Connecticut.  So it's--California going west, Nevada.
Speaker 1: So what is the structure that's set up to run this?  You know the national headquarters are here in Chicago [Illinois].
Speaker 2: The national headquarters are here in Chicago.  The-- boule is the-- governing body, and it meets every two years.  When the boule is not in session, the directorate governs the organization and makes the decisions for the organization when the boule is not in session.  The--there's some things that have to come to the boule.  Like if we were to expel a member, that expulsion can only take place at a boule.  You may have that person in suspense, or have removed all of their membership privileges, but the final expulsion, that has to be done by the boule.  But the directorate can conduct most of the business, and the boule has set the direction.  Like my program even had to be approved by the boule before it was implemented, and that's been true for every national president.  We have the executive arm of the sorority, we--which is the corporate office and the staff on one side.  The regional directors, they report to the national president.  You have national committees, you have regional directors who govern regions.  I could give you--I think in the history book ['Pearls of Alpha Kappa Alpha: The History of America's First Black Sorority,' Earnestine Green McNealey] there is probably a structure, like a diagram of the, the organization (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Organization. Okay.
Story_ID: 428625
Speaker 1: The other thing I wanted you to address was the impact that the sorority Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority, Inc.] has had on the community at-large.  You talked about your programs.  But the organization is very well funded, right, isn't it?
Speaker 2: Well the organization, the organization is pretty much funded by membership dues.  Each administration seeks other funding for its programs that they implement.  I partnered with a number of organizations that probably like the [U.S.] Department of Education funded my--the Reading Academy to the tune of one point five million dollars.  Because you can't run a program that you're gonna evaluate with volunteer staff.  Volunteers are important, but paid staff are a necessity.  So you need funding for all of that.  And while the local chapters as they implemented the program, used their own monies from their dues and any grants that they could secure at the local level to run their programs.  We're basically membership dues organization and, of course, I mean, out of those dues, you try to, you know, you build your capital base.  But it's--
Speaker 1: So from a--what is it on an annual basis would you say is the budget of the sorority?  Is it--
Speaker 2: I would say probably a couple of million dollars.
Story_ID: 428626
Speaker 1: When you did this, this--your education program, that--wasn't Rod Page, was he the--
Speaker 2: Yeah Rod Page was the--Rod Page was the head of DOE [U.S. Department of Education] at that time.  And, you know, when you ask about exciting moments and happy moments.  When we did the Young Authors Program, Laura Bush came to our boule because all of the young authors were invited to come to the boule with--and they had a book signing.  And she was there to present to them their awards and to congratulate.  If you could have seen the expressions on the faces of those children, that they were meeting the First Lady.  I mean we talk about Democrats or Republicans, but to a child that, that isn't what's important to them.  You know it's the President of the United States.  It's the-- First Lady.  And that they would have an opportunity to-- meet and be congratulated by such people.  And the head of the Points of Light and you know heads of Merrill Lynch [Wealth Management], you know and just making it, just a wonderful occasion for these children and showing them that they were really young people with a lot of talents.  And if you--like I said, if you could have seen the gleam on their faces.  I mean, they were the--they were the cutest youngsters, and they weren't all black children because we had a competition that was really nationwide and the final selectees to be in the book was done by a carefully selected group of people who were authors and people who were knowledgeable about writings of children.  And they actually made the, you know, the final selection so that it was somewhat independent of the sorority itself.  So that--and the reason it was an anthology was because they didn't want to--at first we were gonna do -- a book that was just one child from the second through third grade and one child or two children from the fourth through sixth.  And each year we were gonna present this book.  And there were so many talented children, and at that stage they don't write long books, that they thought it would be much more worthwhile to do an anthology which included the stories of many children.  And so you have many children in the--whose stories are reflected in the book, written by black youngsters, white youngsters, Hispanics, children and their parents came to see them.  Even the expressions on the faces of parents and I remember one Hispanic youngster, her whole family came, her sisters and brothers and they were little children.  And they were just so quiet, you know in the, the meeting.  And just tickled to death about their sister.  I mean 'cause some of these things brought tears to your eyes when you read some of their stories.  Some were funny, some-- you could see some hurt.  But--and that's why I think the--those two books will be one of the things that will be remembered from the administration.
Story_ID: 428627
Speaker 1: What is--talking about your [presidential] election [Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority, Inc., 2002] and the, you know what influenced your decision and what propelled your candidacy.  I want you to like--
Speaker 2: I think I did --
Speaker 1: You didn't answer that one.
Speaker 2: One of the things I think--well let me--
Speaker 1: It wasn't your lifelong goal, but--
Speaker 2: I remember stating that, that it wasn't my lifelong goal.  But it was the love that I received from my sisters during hard times and good times, and their willingness to allow me to grow as a woman and to assume greater positions of responsibility that I felt comfortable about taking on more responsibility, and reached the point that I felt that I had the kinds of skills needed to lead the organization in a period in which times were changing greatly and the needs of the members and the community that we served were changing.
Speaker 1: Can you talk about that?  What were changing in the times?  And you know, and what were the changing needs of society?
Speaker 2: Well in terms of our members were no longer for the most part, schoolteachers and social workers with very fixed time periods of work that many of our members were in the corporate world where they traveled a lot.  They also didn't have as much time to spend in meetings to regularly attend, say chapter meetings, but could do other things to help the organization.  The nature of their jobs didn't allow them maybe to do some things at work that other positions might have allowed.  They were busy women.  And not eight-hour-a-day working women.  Women who were working ten, twelve hours a day and were traveling for their jobs.  And that makes a-- big difference.  And to some extent, my experiences paralleled some of theirs.  I was in government and I was a director of large Social Security [Social Security Administration] offices.  And I had lots of people who reported to me, and I had to travel a lot to evaluate performance of offices, Social Security offices.  I always wasn't in town because while my basic office was in Chicago [Illinois], I had to travel to Ohio all of the time to visit offices in small towns like Ashtabula [Ohio], which probably never heard of and Warren [Ohio] and Youngstown [Ohio], which you may have, as well as Cleveland [Ohio] and Canton [Ohio] and Akron, Ohio.  As far west as Toledo [Ohio] and Sandusky [Ohio] and, what was that other-- just not major metropolitan cities, let's put it that way.  So you know I got to meet different types of people.  Small offices in rural areas were different in terms of the kind of people who came into the office and the people who worked in there.  I pretty much worked in an organization where there were very few blacks at the upper levels of what we called an area director and supervisors and office managers.  Our northern Ohio in terms of managerial staff when I took it over was primarily white, and white male.  And so that in itself was a-- challenge.  And so that prepared--it's interesting.  My work experiences prepared me for the position of supreme basileus as much as my experiences in the sorority prepared me to take on further responsibilities in my work life.
Story_ID: 428628
Speaker 1: For me, I wanted more than just feel good programs.  We do many good things as Alpha Kappa Alpha [Sorority] women.  And the programs that preceded me were very good programs, but they--many were not programs that measured the impact on what you were trying to do.  And qualitative data is good, but I felt it was important to have quantitative and qualitative data, which is why I sought an outside group to evaluate my signature program, the Ivy Reading AKAdemy, which was the reading program for children in grades K through three.  And they did show, or the data showed that young people had progressed one to two grade levels in their basic readiness skills for entering school.  And our--probably our weakest area was comprehension.  That we learned from the data, and it was something that if continued, you'd want to work more on.  But there were a lot of factors that affected comprehension, and a lot of that had to do with the communities in which children lived, the continual movement in--from home to home and place to place.  Could be in Mississippi for this part of the year, and might have moved to Alabama six months later.  I mean a great deal of transiency.  That--you have to have children to really achieve good comprehension at this stage, you have to have them in a program long enough so that they can retain and go through all of the steps that your program is designed to strengthen their reading skills and abilities.  And--but I still felt --and the evaluators felt that we had accomplished something that was good.  And that was--and we-- certainly felt good about all of the other things we did to enhance the program.  And that's good, but we can feel good and also be able to point to someone with data that we did good.
Speaker 2: Now what about the hours of volunteer service and--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: During the four years, we volunteered over three million hours of service.  We served over a half million people.  We donated or contributed twenty million dollars for the--toward programs other than just the reading program.  A lot of that twenty million dollars represents scholarships given to young people to go to college, or some other type of post-secondary education.  The--maybe grants to other organizations that were similar to ours whom we collaborated with to carry out programs for the family, the black family in particular.  So those monies don't just represent reading dollars.  But we believe in putting our money where we say we wanna do things.  It's not--gotta have some money to back it up, and we backed up our claims with, with some money and some actual service.
