Story_ID: 21165
Speaker 1: All right.  My name is Larry Crowe.  I'm interviewer today with The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Matthew Hickey.  Sir, could you please state your full name and spell it for us please?
Speaker 2: Woodrow Whitlow, Jr.  First name is W-O-O-D-R-O-W and last name is W-H-I-T-L-O-W.
Speaker 1: All right.  Now do you have a middle name?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Any nickname?
Speaker 2: No.  Well when I was a kid, my friends called me Dooney.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Nobody--nobody except a few old, close childhood friends call me that now and I don't go by Woody.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And sir, what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: December 13th, 1952 and I was born in Inkster, Michigan.
Speaker 1: And sir, what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: I'm the associate administrator for mission support with the National Aeronautics and Space Administration.
Speaker 1: All right.  And sir, what is today's date?
Speaker 2: May 3, 2012.
Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: We are at NASA headquarters located in Washington, D.C. [District of Columbia]
Story_ID: 21166
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now before we go into depth, there are five lightweight questions that are kind of a warm up that we always ask and they only require a short answer.
Speaker 2: (Unclear).
Speaker 1: The first one is, do you have a favorite food?
Speaker 2: Yes.  My favorite food is lobster, steamed.
Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: It's probably blue.
Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Well two times:  spring and fall.  I don't like hot weather and so in the spring before it gets hot and then in fall after it gets hot.
Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Several, typically an island and a tropical island.  I'm not a beach person but like--my family likes islands so I like taking them there.
Speaker 1: Okay.  The last question is, do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: Not really.  I do like the one where Stewart Scott used to use on Sports Center, you know he says "holler at a player when you see him in the streets".
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So that's what I'll tell people sometime as we depart.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 21167
Speaker 1: Now I'm going to ask about your family history.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: I'm going to ask about your mother's side of the family and your father's side.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And then we'll try to put them together.  Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us please?
Speaker 2: Willie Mae Whitlow.  First name is W-I-L-L-I-E, middle name is M-A-E and last name is W-H-I--T-L-O-W.
Speaker 1: All right.  And what is her date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: Let's see.  I know she will be 83 on July 9th, 2012 so I'll have to give you some calculations to back track that.  And she was born I believe in Dudley, Georgia.
Speaker 1: Okay.  I think it will put her around 1926 or 7, I think, but I--
Speaker 2: I started at NASA on her fiftieth birthday which was 1970--so that would have been 1929 would have been--
Speaker 1: '29 [1929].
Speaker 2: --her birth year, yeah.
Speaker 1: All right.  Now what do you know about your mother's side of the family?  Did--how far back can you trace them and what were they doing in history?
Speaker 2: Well I know quite a--I can go back pretty far, the people that I met.  My grandfather, William O'Neal, he came up from Dudley and I think it was, think he came up maybe in the 30s [1930s] or 40s [1940s].
Speaker 1: Now is that N-E-A-l or--?
Speaker 2: O'N-E-A-L.
Speaker 1: N-E-A-L, okay, all right.
Speaker 2: And so he came from Georgia to Inkster and you know to get a job working in the auto industry.  And so I, of course I know my mother's mother and her father William.  And we used to go visit his mother and grandmother in Detroit.  And Josephine O'Neal was his mother and Alice Atkins was his grandmother.
Speaker 1: Okay, so that's your--his--your great grandmother?
Speaker 2: Great, great-great--great grandmother and great-great grandmother.
Speaker 1: Okay, great grandmother.
Speaker 2: They lived together in Detroit, yes.
Speaker 1: And the great grandmother's name was?
Speaker 2: Josephine O'Neal.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And my great-great grandmother was Alice Atkins.
Speaker 1: Now did they all have roots in Dudley, Georgia?
Speaker 2: I think they--I don't know exactly where they--but they, I think they all came from Georgia.  They all came up from Georgia.
Speaker 1: They came up in the 30s [1930s] you would say?
Speaker 2: 30s [1930s], 40s [1940s], I'm not exactly sure but may have been the 40s [1940s] when my grandfather, when he came to, came up to Michigan to make a better way for the family.  In fact, he left the family behind till he came up and found work.  He never went back and he sent for the family, brought them up.
Speaker 1: So never went back to visit or anything?
Speaker 2: He never went back to Georgia when he came to Michigan.  And that would always be our summer trip, you know go down to Georgia, visit the relatives.  And when my grand--and my grandmother didn't work outside the home and she needed money, she'd call and he'd go to Western Union.  He'd send the money.  But he didn't go back to Georgia.
Speaker 1: Now there's a song, there's a Dizzy Gillespie song called, 'I Ain't Never Going Back to Georgia.'
Speaker 2: Oh, I didn't know that.
Speaker 1: It is, yeah.  A Howard professor played it at a concert (unclear) a couple of years ago.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: But it's a song written about, in the 1950s, early 50s [1950s] called, 'I Ain't Never Going Back to Georgia.'
Speaker 2: Hmm, yeah so my grandfather he never learned to drive a car and--but he worked for Cadillac Motor Division for thirty four years and he only missed four days.
Speaker 1: Is there a story about why he never learned to drive?
Speaker 2: He just never learned to drive a car, something he never learned to do.
Speaker 1: Okay, but he worked for Cadillac for thirty four years.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Yeah.
Speaker 1: Was he able to retire for any length of time after he worked?
Speaker 2: He, yeah he retired in, actually now you're taxing my memory. He was retired a few years before he passed away and I guess actually my grandmother passed away first.  One, it was the June before I finished college so that may have been, yeah June of 1978 and yeah, he didn't make it past the following February.  It really was tough on him once, you know once she passed away.
Speaker 1: So were there any stories about what life was like in Georgia from any of the family members?  Did they, did you get a sense of what--why they left?
Speaker 2: Well he--they left to come north you know cause you know jobs were plentiful in the big cities up north.  And they--and I would hear the stories about picking cotton of course you know and who could pick 400 lbs a day and who could pick 500 lbs a day and picking cotton.  And you look back and you see you just picked and there is a rattle snake coiled around the stalk you just picked over and you know so you hear those kind of stories and working in the fields and you know taking care of the hogs.  And I think it was just too--the real reason was to come north and just to make a better life for the family, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right so now, so your mother was born in Dudley.  Was she raised in Inkster?
Speaker 2: She was, now I think she was partially, probably partially raised--
Speaker 1: Raised, yeah.
Speaker 2: --yeah, in Inkster.
Speaker 1: And she would have been about ten, I guess if he came in 1940?
Speaker 2: In the 40s [1940s] yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah, she'd have been now ten or eleven and--
Speaker 1: So just calculating I'm just thinking now if he retired in--no, he died in '78 [1978], right?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: So he passed in '78 [1978] or some--?
Speaker 2: Seventy--yeah, February of '79 [1979] I think it was.
Speaker 1: Yeah, so when did he retire from Cadillac?
Speaker 2: Oh, I--
Speaker 1: Think about '74 [1974]?
Speaker 2: Maybe about '74 [1974] or yeah somewhere in there.
Speaker 1: And he worked for 34 years--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --so that would make him come in around 1940 I guess.
Speaker 2: Yeah, the 40s [1940s] or so, yeah.  Yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah, so she would have been about ten or twelve or so.
Speaker 2: About ten or eleven, yeah, yeah.
Story_ID: 21168
Speaker 1: All right.  So she went to high school in Detroit, I mean in Inkster, I guess?
Speaker 2: Yes.  Yeah.
Speaker 1: And so what did your mother do for a living?
Speaker 2: She didn't graduate from high school.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: She went, completed--I know she went as far as 10th grade but there's a story there.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I guess we'll get to later.  And she you know she worked at the local hospital as a, you know, doing cleaning, clean services at the local hospital and she also worked as a domestic in peoples' homes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  You said now there was a story you said about--
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Now my mother is--my grandfather and grandmother had four kids, three girls and one boy and my mother is the youngest girl and my uncle is the youngest child.  And so he was the first one to graduate in the family, whole family, 1958 he finished high school and my--Thomas O'Neal.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And so my mother decided well all her kids had to finish high school.  So I remember the night he graduated because you know that--at our school you graduate the second Thursday in June, that's when graduation always was.  And so I'm the youngest of my mother and father's four children and my sister next to me--so my brother, oldest--my brother is the oldest.  He had graduated in '65 [1965], then my oldest sister finished in '67 [1967] and then my youngest sister, she had dropped out and then I graduated high school in '70 [1970] and then I, of course I went on to college, first one to go to college.  And so my mother finally decided my sister had to finish high school and so she took her down to sign up and took her in to sign up and you know they started taking her to school to make sure she went and started going in to make sure she stayed.  And so finally the teacher said well you need to sign up and so my mother signed up and so my--1974, second Thursday in June, my mother and my sister graduated high school together about two weeks after I finished, got my masters degree from MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology].
Speaker 1: Gee, that's--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So she went back to get a--do you think that when she was in high school that the value of working was higher than finishing school for her and her family at that time?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I think that the working and you know they always say well you only went to, you only finished high school you know if you were planning to go to college.  And the opportunities were limited even if you finish college, you know.  I guess back then a lot of black college graduates worked at the post office or you were a teacher and you know so you went to work.  And after you went to school and you stayed there long enough to be old enough to work full time.  And so you know my father didn't finish high school and my mother as I said, finished about the same time I got my bachelors degree.  But I think she finished just to make sure my sister finished.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Now did your mother ever talk about, did she ever see herself doing anything other than working you know, doing you know regular jobs?  Or did she envision herself ever doing anything else than domestic working?
Speaker 2: No, I never heard her talk about doing anything other than say working at the hospital and you know and the side thing you know the domestic work.  You know her whole focus and my father's whole focus was on us to make sure that you know we got education.  And she'd tell us don't go down to school and embarrass us, you know so that was the focus (unclear).
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 21169
Speaker 1: Now can you give us your father's name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: Woodrow Whitlow.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Same as mine.
Speaker 1: And what is his date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: He's--his date of birth is, I know the day.  He was born on December 25th and I think it may have been around 1923.  But he was born the same day as my mother's oldest sister.  So I do know they talked about being--they were exactly the same age and when he came to Detroit I guess they dated and my aunt decided she didn't want him so she gave him to my mother and then they ended up being married for over fifty years.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now where was your father born?
Speaker 2: That's the story in the family anyway.
Speaker 1: Okay, yeah.  But where was your father born?
Speaker 2: He was born in I think, Lafayette, Alabama.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I don't know a whole lot about his family but I think Lafayette, Alabama and I know he talked about spending some time in Camp Hill, but most of his growing up he did in Birmingham.
Speaker 1: Okay. So he grew up in Birmingham, okay.  Now, you said now he didn't graduate from high school either but--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: But he, is there a story about how he came to Inkster or to Detroit?
Speaker 2: I think he came after--he was in the 101st CBs in World War II.
Speaker 1: Oh okay.
Speaker 2: So I think he came to Detroit after World War II.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now did he serve outside of the country?
Speaker 2: Yeah, he served in the South Pacific in like Okinawa, Saipan, all the places in the South Pacific.  So I got tired of him making us watch those, that movie with the fighting CBs with John Wayne when we were growing up.  Every time it come on TV, he'd make us watch it.  [Laughter].
Speaker 1: Okay.  So now, all right.  So okay, so his, was his impression of his service like a positive one?  You know did he kind of feel good about what he did during World War II?
Speaker 2: Well as much as he made us watch that movie I--he must have--he was proud of it and he, you know he never said anything negative.  And he never talked a lot about the war except you know, like I say, he would encourage us to you know watch John Wayne be a hero when we were children.  And he did have this, sort of like a year book and there were pictures of him on the ship and he would show us the, you know the pictures and--but he never really talked much about you know about fighting in, or fighting or building--I think CBs were a construction battalion but he never talked much about the war.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So he didn't have any stories about what happened over there, how they were treated or anything?
Speaker 2: No, um-um.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, now he came to Detroit after the war then?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now did he work in the auto industry too?
Speaker 2: No he didn't work in the automobile industry.  He drove a truck for years, hauling steel for this local steel company and I used to ride with him a lot, just liked riding with him.  And then he worked some at the funeral home and again this was a side job for Diggs family.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And it was--Congressman Diggs had I think six chapels around Detroit and then he had a cousin Jimmy Diggs had a chapel out in Inkster.  And so he worked for Jimmy Diggs for a while and then he worked for another funeral director, Mr. Frye after Jimmy Diggs left Inkster.  And he also worked in the--as a custodian in the school system for a while and then when I was in school I used to work with him and try to earn some extra money.
Speaker 1: Now that could be a, you know a decent job in the Detroit Public School with benefits and everything.
Speaker 2: The Inkster Public Schools, yeah.
Speaker 1: In Inkster, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Yeah.
Speaker 1: So do you know what he did for the Diggs?
Speaker 2: You know just you know helping with the arrangements you know driving the limos, driving the hearse, you know if somebody had to go to the morgue or the hospital to pick up the person and bring them back, you know to prepare them for burial.
Speaker 1: That's right, he had a chauffer's license cause he was driving a truck, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, you--yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah, they could get a special chauffer's license--
Speaker 2: Yeah he would have had to have one.
Speaker 1: --so you could use that, yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah, he never talked about chauffer's license but I guess you're right if he was hauling that steel he had to have some kind of special license that would be renewed every year.
Speaker 1: That's right.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So that's probably how he was able to get you know, I mean that was entre into doing other driving jobs.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 21170
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now you said the story of how your parents met was the--he was dating this one sister and--
Speaker 2: Right, at least--yeah, at least that's what my aunt always would say you know.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: They were dating and the one he was dating and she'd say oh I decided I didn't want him so I gave him to Willie Mae.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So when did they get married?
Speaker 2: Oh man.  I'd have to go back and try to piece that together cause I do remember actually when I was living in, I think I was living in Virginia, maybe I had moved to Cleveland, but before he passed.  So he passed in '99 [1999] so maybe a year or two before that we had their fifty, we had their fiftieth wedding anniversary celebration so it may have been like the late, like maybe the late 40s [1940s] when they got married.
Speaker 1: Yeah, 1949 I think it's (unclear).
Speaker 2: '48 [1948], '49 [1949] or something, yeah.
Story_ID: 21171
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now when you think about your parents' personalities and their talents and their dispositions and their looks, who do you think you take after the most?
Speaker 2: Oh I, well people tell me everyday I look more and more like my father so certainly looks from him.  Both had that influence.  My mother actually was the tougher of the two.  And well see my dad he was sort of like the softy and you know we'd go and we'd go to get saved.  And you know so, but I think my personality is probably more his, maybe my drive is more of my mother's.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 21172
Speaker 1: Now when you were growing up, how many brothers and sisters did you have around?  I mean well can you name your brothers and sisters and give your place in the order?
Speaker 2: Okay.  I'm the youngest.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: William O'Neal is the oldest of all of the children.  Linda, Linda Whitlow or Linda Donald now, she is the next oldest and then Jacqueline Whitlow, she was next and she's deceased and then I'm the youngest.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  And in your household growing up, did you live with your grandparents at all or were you all on a separate (unclear)?
Speaker 2: No we--they lived maybe about, growing up maybe about a--less than two miles away.  And, or maybe less than a mile away.  If I was at my grandmother's house and I go up to the corner, I could look all the way down the street and see the houses on the street you know the way the street curved.  And it, think it was, seemed back then like a long distance but I bet it was about a mile away, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 21173
Speaker 1: Now can you describe the neighborhood you grew up in and I mean did you stay in the same place for a long time or did you move around a lot?
Speaker 2: We moved around all within Inkster.  And the first place I remember living was in actually the place they used to call it, the Carver Homes or maybe they called it cardboard city.  And it was a series of like horseshoe shaped streets.  It had multi-family units.  And the first place I remember was a four family unit, you know, two stories and with four entrances and so that's the first place I remember living.  And then we moved from there and that was on a street Crystal Court.  And the thing I remember there was that one of my elementary school math teachers had a single family home up on the, red house up on the corner, a lady, a teacher by the name of Ms. McGough and she never left the neighborhood.  And in fact we could just walk right, a couple of streets and then across the baseball field and right to the, and the playground right to the elementary school.  Then we moved not that far away really like on the other side of the elementary school to a single family home on a--still renting though on Manning.  And I can't tell you exactly how long we stayed there but then we moved to another two family unit, two streets over.   And now we were talking earlier about Katherine Schaffner [Katherine Anderson Schaffner], well she was Katherine Anderson then.  We were on Manning.  The next street was Ludington which is where Catherine lived and then the next street was Kewat (ph.) which is where we moved.  So we moved just two streets over to this two family unit.  And in fact out the back door was the Youngs' house, Wanda Young.  She sung with the Marvelettes.  And then up the street were a couple of other Marvelettes lived on--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --that street, on Kewat.
Speaker 1: Yeah, Katherine Schaffner is one of the Marvelettes and so you lived close by the Marvelettes?
Speaker 2: Yeah, all in, they're all in the neighborhood, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 21174
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now I'd be remiss if I didn't ask you about some of the history of Inkster.  Inkster has a particular history.  I think it was created by Henry Ford.  But what's your take on the history of the town of Inkster?
Speaker 2: Well actually Inkster you know at the time that you know my family started coming there of course was viewed as one of the best places really in the country for African Americans.  You know to live in Dearborn [Michigan] for African Americans wasn't a real option you know if you came and worked for the automobile industry and so Inkster was really a suburb of Detroit [Michigan], a bedroom community.  And a lot of the people who came up from the south or who, a lot of the African Americans who were working in the auto industry, that was a great location to live, a nice suburban location to live.  Because as I said to live in Dearborn of course where Ford was--is headquartered, was not something that at least the blacks felt like they could--they had the option to do.
Speaker 1: Now why not?
Speaker 2: It was--that's just the way it was you know African Americans didn't live in Dearborn at the time that I was growing up.  And I don't know what the African American population in Dearborn is now.  I know there's a significant middle eastern, a population of people of Middle Eastern descent, but when we were growing up, for some reason or another you--we did not live in Dearborn.
Speaker 1: Was it because the--?
Speaker 2: Racial prejudice, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: All right.  So we always ask this question well you were chronically on where you lived and I think the last place is a double house.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And then was there another place after that?
Speaker 2: Oh yes.  We--and so, when we were living on Crystal Court and Manning and then the two family unit on Kewat, we were renting.  And so my parents bought a house on Hopkins, still in Inkster but on the other side of Inkster, what we call the cross Inkster Road, so it was east of Inkster Road.  And so they bought a house there and in that house till, for a few years and then they moved and bought another house which is where my mother currently lives.  And this was in the 70s [1970s], early 70s [1970s] when they bought the house where my mother currently lives now.  And we call that's north of Michigan Avenue and of course when I was a kid, African Americans even in Inkster did not live north of Michigan Avenue, we all lived south of Michigan Avenue.  But now that's not the case.
Story_ID: 21175
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now this is another question we always ask.  How--what were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up?
Speaker 2: Oh, the--of course when I was growing up, you know, Motown was, and the music industry was--Motown was king in the music industry at least from our vantage point.  And of course the Marvelettes were from the neighborhood.  They had Motown's first number one hit and so you know I can just remember particularly in the summer you know when you had the doors open, the windows open, the radios blasting, had WCHB, the first black owned radio station in America, two dentists, Dr. Wendell Cox and Dr. Haley Bell.  That's how you get the call letters, WCHB.  And we said it was Inkster.  Now people in Rom--actually if you go to the, where, the site where it was, it was actually in Romulus [Michigan], Michigan, but when they were on the radio they said WCHB in Inkster.  And so we claim the country's first black owned radio station.  So listening to you know Motown on the radio and you know that was big.  And of course then everybody had ideas for songs that they could write that they could take down to Berry Gordy [American record producer and founder of the Motown record label].  And then you know other sounds you know were you know us on the playground.  We had a, you know we had a sandlot baseball team, the Inkster Pirates and had a gentleman you may have heard of by the name of Leon Wagner who, whose a graduate of Inkster High School.  He played on the team and he went on to star for the Cleveland Indians and eventually I think he played for the Los Angeles Angels for a while and had a long career.  And you can see him in, I think he was the first baseman in Bingo Long's Traveling All Stars and Motor Kings.  And so just the sounds of being on the playground and every, everybody played baseball, at least all the boys.  We all played little league baseball.  There's so many baseball teams in the city.  And then of course Inkster was big on basketball, you know.  We pride ourselves on the high school basketball team.  So just the sounds of going to the games, being in the gym and the cheerleaders are going and other sports like you know football.  So--and of course I played little league baseball and so you know just the, just those sounds at het playgrounds.  You know, hey batter, batter, batter up.  Or hey, got to get him out.  Or it only takes one.  It don't matter about those.  It only takes one to get it out of here.  And so those are some of the sounds that I remember.
Speaker 1: Okay, what about sights?
Speaker 2: Oh the, you know just--I can remember you know like I said my grandfather never learned to drive a car so we would--we'd take him down to visit his mother and grandmother driving down I-94.  And I can remember and that big tire there, there's a big tire on 94.  I can just remember that and--
Speaker 1: Yeah, this is a, what a twenty, thirty foot tire--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --that's on I-94?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: It's like the gateway to Detroit.  When you see the big tire you know you're coming into Detroit.
Speaker 2: Yeah, you're getting close.  If you're coming from the west, you know you're getting close.  And of course Inkster is close to Detroit's airport and the airplanes would come right over and just to see the airplanes you know, come over.  And we were about three or four miles from the airport so they're low, they're, and they're close so they're constantly coming over.  You get to a point where you really don't notice them or they're not disruptive.  But when we were kids when they would come over, you know we didn't have cable TV so they would mess up the TV picture when they, you know when they would come over.  And so, that was one of the sights that, especially when people would visit from out of town.  They would always enthralled by you know how low the airplanes were when they would pass over.  And so you know other sights were you know just growing up, just everybody getting together.  You know particularly the family gets together at different events you know be it you know Christmas or thanksgiving and particularly in the summer when you have like Memorial Day and you know 4th of July and Labor Day, you know going to the park and just to see all, just the chance to see all the family.  And you know my father would--he always pride himself on how well he could barbecue so of course that was one of the smells of growing up is--would be the summer picnics and of course you know any of the big dinners where there was lots of cooking going on.  You can just, remember just waking up to the odors of cooking in the house.
Speaker 1: Okay.  What about smells?
Speaker 2: Again, I say the--
Speaker 1: Oh the odor there of cooking.
Speaker 2: Yeah the, you know the--you know we were--Inkster is a suburb so we didn't get the smells of what you would get say if you were in say, near a plant or say an automobile factory or something like that.  We, no--we didn't get that.  You know maybe we went fishing, there would you know be, you know the, catch fish and bring them back and I could remember we'd bring the fish back and scaling them and of course that's a little unique smell.  Or--but my father did like chitterlings and so that's one I can remember when my mother would be cleaning the, cleaning those chitterlings.  Now that would be a very unique and not too pleasant smell that would be in the house.
Story_ID: 21176
Speaker 1: Now where did you start school?  What was the name of your first school?
Speaker 2: The first school I went to was George Washington Carver Elementary School in Inkster.  And that's how, it was of course the first neighborhood I can remember living in, it was called the Carver Homes.  And so, and right across the playground and the baseball field where the Inkster Pirates played--in fact the Inkster Pirates played on the same baseball field as I played on as a little leaguer at the Carver Elementary School.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now this interesting, you know there is a close relationship between George Washington Carver and Henry Ford.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Henry Ford founds Inkster.  The elementary school is named for George Washington Carver, the Carver Homes.
Speaker 2: Go ahead.
Speaker 1: Were you aware of those things when you were coming up or did you--?
Speaker 2: No, I, when I was growing up I wasn't aware of that.  But I am, I was aware of the fact that you know we weren't always the City of Inkster since--you know since I was born we actually were the Village of Inkster and then we became, at some point we became a city.  And, but later on you heard the stories about how Henry Ford was say very--what's the right word?  Maybe not benevolent to blacks but really looked out, that was the stories you heard.  And so that's--
Speaker 1: Patronizing (unclear).
Speaker 2: And so that's--yeah.  You know that's why Inkster was there and so many of the people you know in Inkster worked in Ford's plants.  But you know they worked in other companies' plants too.  You know I had friends whose parents worked for Chrysler and of course, all our relatives worked for General Motors.  But yeah, but you know, you hear the--I heard the stories later in life about--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --you know how Henry Ford was supposed to have been so good to the blacks who came up to work in the plants.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So now did you like school?
Speaker 2: Oh.  I found school fun.  And I was good at it and so I liked doing it.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Did you have a favorite subject in school?
Speaker 2: I always liked math and science.  And I had not favorite subjects in school (unclear).
Speaker 1: Well what were they?
Speaker 2: More of the softer subjects like English and history and you know and I, that was one of the big reasons I chose MIT [Massachusetts Institute or Technology] for college cause I thought and I found out incorrectly if I went to MIT I wouldn't have to study math--English and history anymore, I can only study math and science.  But then found out no, that's an important part of the curriculum.  And also as important, it's a very important part of my technical career.  You know particularly English and being able to write.  If you're not able to write, if you don't have writing skills, you're not going to survive in I don't care what field you're in.  And so I like to think I have very good writing skills.  In fact I, even since I've left, I left college, I continue to take writing courses and if you can't write you're not going to progress.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So did you have any favorite teachers in elementary school?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I had--I can remember of course my kindergarten teacher, Ms. Bennett and this name I can think of and when we were going to school everybody would say, oh I hope you get Ms. Bennett when you go down there.  And I had a second grade teacher, I can remember Ms. Lattimer--Ms. Latimore.  And eventually when I got to middle school, I had her husband for my drafting teacher.  And the gym teacher I can remember, Ms. Herbert and of course my principal was Mr. Baylor.  And he actually lived next door to the lady I eventually married and so he's--and they eventually named a school after Mr. Baylor.  So I was fortunate in, when I was going through school because all of my principals were black males and so you had that strong, black male influence.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you went to George Washington Carver.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Did you go there the whole time through--for elementary school or did you--?
Speaker 2: From kindergarten to sixth grade.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And then did you go to middle school or--?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I went to middle school, seventh and eighth grade, that was Fellrath, actually the name was Fellrath Junior High School.
Speaker 1: How do you spell that?
Speaker 2: F-E-L-L-R-A-T-H.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So did--I suppose you had more real science in middle school I guess?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  In middle school we started to do real science and I had one particular science teacher, Mr. Hegeman.  And that's when I really, really started to get interested in science was you know I started taking science from him.  And in fact I remember getting a school science award when I was taking science from him because you know how some people can make things really interesting?  Yeah.
Speaker 1: This is Mr. Hegman?
Speaker 2: Hegeman, H-E-G-E-M-A-N.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 21177
Speaker 1: All right.  Now when you were growing up around this period of time, United States was involved with the space race with the Russians.
Speaker 2: (Unclear).
Speaker 1: I think the Russians put Sputnik [first artificial satellite put in Earth's orbit] up when you were about five years old I guess and then--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --Alan Shepard [first American in space] went up in '61 [1961].
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And John Glenn in '62 [1962].
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And so all these events were on TV.  Did--were you paying attention to that?
Speaker 2: Oh, I was paying big attention to it cause I had, when I was in elementary school you know at--for some reason somewhere I saw some chemical formulas and I decided I was going to be a chemist.  And I started learned all, what all the symbols meant, eventually got a--I was this little kid with a periodic table of the elements on my bedroom wall and I was trying to remember all the formulas I could cause I was going to be this great chemist.  And then you're right, NASA [National Aeronautics and Space Administration] started launching people into space, Alan Shepard [Alan Bartlett Shepard, Jr.] and John Glenn [John Herschel Glenn, Jr.] and Gus Grissom [Virgil Ivan "Gus" Grissom] and Gordon Cooper [Leroy Gordon Cooper, Jr.] and all, you know the Mercury Seven [the group of seven Project Mercury astronauts selected by NASA in 1959], all those guys.  And I said, I'm gonna be an astronaut.  I'm not going to be a chemist anymore I'm going to go work for NASA.  So I was paying a lot of attention to it and that really shaped not, just not--my whole life you know cause I went from wanting to be a chemist to wanting to go work for NASA.
Speaker 1: Okay. Now did this make you unusual amongst the--your peers or was it not that big a deal?
Speaker 2: It was, it made me different.  It made me unusual.  But it didn't make me an outcast because I was always real good in sports.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: You know so I was you know--so while I wanted to be an astronaut and I wanted to work for NASA, you know I didn't, that didn't consume you know everything that I did.  I still did all the normal things that you know that my friends did.
Story_ID: 21178
Speaker 1: Okay.  So what sports were you involved in?
Speaker 2: Played, I played baseball.  Like I said we played little league baseball then we played you know pick up basketball and around they put football--you know we used to have these neighborhood football teams you know played tackle football.  So you know we'd get the guys from our neighborhood and you know we'd get the football, we'd even walk over to another neighborhood and okay then we play these guys.  And you know so you might be eight or nine years old and there might be some guys on the other team fifteen or sixteen but you had some older guys on your team too.  So we would just, so the kids in this neighborhood went and played the kids in that neighborhood.  And, but then you know of course the--I didn't play high school football then.  But no, then we had to pick up basketball games.  And, but no, the sport I was best at was baseball so I eventually ended up playing baseball in college.
Speaker 1: Now did you have a favorite baseball player when you were growing up?
Speaker 2: When I was growing up my favorite player was Willie Horton [Willie Wattison Horton].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: No. 23, played left field for the Tigers.
Speaker 1: Now there's a statute for Willie Horton at Tiger Stadium.
Speaker 2: Outside of Comerica Park, yeah. Yeah.
Speaker 1: All right.  And now they won the World Series in what year was it?
Speaker 2: 1968.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: The last time they had won--before 1968 they had never won the World Series in my lifetime and I don't think they had ever won a pennant in my lifetime.  And I think the last time they had won the World Series, may have been 1945.  And so in '67 [1967] we came close to making the World Series and then the next year, '68 [1968] we won the pennant you know, had Mickey Lolich pitching and Denny McLain went 31-6, last 30 game winner and first one since Dizzy Dean [Jay Hanna "Dizzy" Dean] and so it was a good season.  We had Willie Horton, Al Kaline [Albert William "Al" Kaline], he got hurt and then he came back.  And they say now he had been with the Tigers so long but now there's no place to play him.  So then they took the center fielder, Mickey Stanley, put him at shortstop and everything worked.  So he was able to play in the World Series and of course we got down 3-1 and came back and beat Bob Gibson [Robert "Bob" "Hoot" "Gibby" Gibson] in Game 7.
Speaker 1: So this is dramatic stuff.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  And you know in '67 [1967] you know, that time it was very volatile in America.  You know we had the riots in '67 [1967] and so it was very volatile.  And they were saying that the Tigers really had a big influence in kind of tampering things down in Detroit because you know how are you going to riot against each other when you know the team just won the World Series?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: So that was a very important social event too, the fact that the Tigers were good during that period.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  It seems to be so much affinity for that Tigers team on the part of so many Detroiters, black Detroiters.  Judge Damen Keith you know is a lifelong Tiger fan and--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --talks about that, that Willie Horton being his favorite player.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Now he, Horton did something dramatic didn't he in the game?  Did he hit the winning home run in the last game?
Speaker 2: I don't think he hit the winning home run in Game 7.  Somebody hit a triple over Kurt Flood's head.  I'm, I can't remember who it--Kurt had a, got a bad break on the ball and so there was a couple of things in that series that happened. In Game 5, somebody threw out Lou Brock at the plate and they made this big deal about the fact that Lou Brock didn't try to slide.  Bill Freehan [William Ashley Freehan] tagged him out and that was the turning point and we won that game and we won Game 6.  And, but there was a fly ball that got over Kurt Flood's head and I'm not even--I can't even remember who hit it.  But of course you know Willie had a big part in that whole season.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now this occurs in your--you're I guess in high school, a senior in high school or junior?
Speaker 2: I was a junior in high school at that time.  Fall of '68 [1968], yeah I was a junior in high school.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So in--now what high school did you go to?
Speaker 2: Inkster High School.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you played baseball in high school you said?
Speaker 2: No, I didn't play baseball--
Speaker 1: Oh you didn't.
Speaker 2: --in high school.  I didn't play any high school sports, I was concentrating on my studies because as my mother said, don't go down there and embarrass me.  So I was concentrating on my studies.  And I don't know what reason you know, if I didn't have time to play baseball at Inkster High, I'm trying to figure out how I found time to play baseball at MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology], but I did play at MIT.
Story_ID: 21179
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, now did you know the names of all astronauts, the seven when you were in school?
Speaker 2: I didn't know the names of all them.  I can--but I did know--well maybe I did.  I did know John Glenn.  I knew Alan Shepard.  I knew Gus Grissom, I knew Gordon Cooper.  I knew Scott Carpenter.  So maybe I knew the names of most of them and the interesting thing is I got pictures of me with John Glenn once I became director of the NASA [National Aeronautics and Space Administration] Glenn Research Center and he's someone I now consider a friend.  And I got a picture of me and Scott Carpenter.  So--
Speaker 1: Yeah I know those were the days when the astronauts were all publicized like celebrities.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Yeah.
Speaker 1: A lot of youth did know their names you know (unclear).
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Yeah, usually you knew who they were and yeah they were, I mean they were the face of America, the face of America technology, the face of America's worldwide leadership cause they were the ones that were going to show the Russians and the rest of the countries beyond the iron curtain how good we were.  You know of course we had all the engineers and scientists and things making what they did possible but they were the face of it.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you won a science award in middle school you said?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: All right.  And what was your project?
Speaker 2: Actually I didn't, I never had a science project.  It was for my, just my overall work in science and you know as the best science student.  So I never had a, I never did a science project.
Speaker 1: Not even in high school?
Speaker 2: Not even in high school.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Story_ID: 21180
Speaker 1: Now did you have any favorite teachers at Inkster High School?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, I had my math teacher, Mr. Houston.  And he would give us tests every week and he'd come in there and say don't come in here like some big dumb left handed lobster.  You're supposed to know this stuff.  And Mr. Williams was one of my math teachers, Jerry Williams was his name.  And Mr. Ford was a physical science teacher.  He was one of my favorites.  And you know we--you and I talked about him earlier and then I had my black history teacher, Ms. Anita Cobb.  She was one of my favorites.  Mr. Simmons was one of--an English teacher and I talked about how I didn't like English.  But--and he was probably the toughest of all the teachers we had but like I say my writing ability that I have now I owe a lot to him.  So he may not have been a favorite when I was going through but he certainly is a favorite now.  And that French teacher, she taught French and English--oh, I'm, the name is escaping me now.  But she live like, I know exactly where her house is in Inkster on the corner of Spruce and Beach.  I, I'll give you her name later.  I'll call my wife and say--but yeah she was really one of my favorites.  It's odd saying I can't remember one of my favorite teachers' names but at this point the name escapes me.  And Mr. Roberts was my drafting teacher and then my counselor who probably had the biggest influence, Dr. Ealy.
Speaker 1: Doctor--I'm sorry?
Speaker 2: Ealy, E-A-L-Y.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And--
Speaker 2: Ms. Reed.  Ms. Reed was my French teacher, yeah.
Speaker 1: Oh, Ms. Reed, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Now in terms of Dr. Ealy--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --what did Dr. Ealy tell you?
Speaker 2: Dr. Ealy always wanted to be a pilot but he was color blind, slightly color blind, enough to disqualify him.  And of course he knew my interest in--I decided if I was going to work for NASA [National Aeronautics and Aerospace Administration] I was going to have to go get a degree in aeronautics and astronautics.  And so he always told me he had this plan and we could sit in his office and when we were sitting in his office talking we could watch the planes come in, going--flying into Metro [Detroit Metro Airport] from his office.  And he used to always sit and tell me you're going to have to go to one of those big eastern schools cause I thought I could go to like Michigan State or--I never really wanted to go to the University of Michigan but Michigan State returned that they didn't have a program, right program.  But he used to say no, you're going to one of these big eastern schools.  So he's the one that insisted that I go to MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology] and when I was getting ready to go to MIT, I figured I'm, okay I'm going to go to MIT, make Dr. Ealy happy and then after I'm gone for a year, I'll transfer and go somewhere else.  And so when I applied to MIT and I got accepted, and they sent the financial aid package and Dr. Ealy got it, he looked at it and he said this ain't enough money.  You can't go to school for this.  So he got on the phone and he called them.  He called back up to MIT and talked to the people in the financial aid office and told them you all have to do better than this.  And they did better than that and made it possible for me to go to MIT.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So it sounds like you were a sought after commodity in some ways.  You could kind of write your own ticket.  Your grades were very good I guess, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, my grades were straight As and of course in the--and I graduated high school in 1970.  And of course at that time you know schools were really starting to look to having--the majority of schools were trying to have a more diverse student body.  And the first class at MIT that had significant African American representation was the class that went in the year before I went in.  And when I say significant, there were about fifty three or so African American students admitted to that undergraduate class.  And my class had about the same number.  So yeah they were looking to have more diversity in the MIT student body.
Speaker 1: Now were you recruited by GMI [Kettering University, formerly General Motors Institute] at all?
Speaker 2: No, I was not recruited by GMI.  I did learn about GMI later on because I ended up working three summers for the General Motors, at the General Motors Tech Center.  So I found out about when I--what GMI was and you know how they funneled--provided engineers for General Motors.
Speaker 1: Now did you know about them when you were in high school?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I knew about them.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But you know they were cars and I wanted to study airplanes and rockets.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Now were you the top student in your class?
Speaker 2: There were two valedictorians in my class and I was one of them.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Now were you involved in other activities in school besides science?  Did you run for office or anything or did you--?
Speaker 2: No, I didn't--I never held a class office.  I was in some clubs.  I'd have to pull my yearbook out to remember which ones they were.  But I was in some clubs, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Did you have to work when you were in school?
Speaker 2: In high school?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you didn't do anything extra?
Speaker 2: I didn't have a job and in fact my father didn't even want me to work in summer jobs when I was in college.  You know I got to go work, earn some money doing something.  And the only job I had was--well the course--well I did yeah.  I worked with him at the middle school.  That wasn't you know it wasn't a lot of hours a week so--but it was enough to earn me some money cause I had a paper route when I was in middle school and I built the paper route up pretty good.  I was making about $20.00 a week which in you know the mid-60s [1960s] was a lot of money for a kid.  But then when I was getting ready to go to high school, I sold the paper route you know cause you couldn't be cool in high school if you had a paper route.  Then I got to high school and found out I was broke.  So I needed to do something to make some money, so yeah I did work with him some at the high school.
Story_ID: 21181
Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Now when you were in high school, we mentioned the World Series when Detroit won the World Series.  Mentioned the riots--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --in '67 [1967] to the--did you know anybody affected by the riots?
Speaker 2: I had, of course we had a lot--in fact most of our relatives lived in Detroit.  And nobody you know lost their homes or got, or got hurt or injured or anything like that.  I do remember coming back on a bus, from a bus trip to Downtown Detroit in 1967 and it was little--you know the bus, got off the bus in the Detroit and it was interesting.
Speaker 1: Did you see like the aftermath of the riot?
Speaker 2: Yeah, you saw the damage and you know being in Inkster you know being away from it and you see it on TV, that's one thing.  But when you see it up close and you see it for real and you know you're a teenager then that's kind of striking.
Story_ID: 21182
Speaker 1: Now when you were growing up you said you didn't--I asked you I think before we started the interview if you had gone to Greenfield Village.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Which is the Henry Ford Museum about invention and create--and all that sort of thing.  And you said you never got a chance to go.
Speaker 2: I never went to Green--I had plenty of chances to go.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Cause it seemed like we always had school trips.  Somebody was all--always taking a school trip to Greenfield Village. And I do remember one time the school, the class went to Greenfield Village but it happened to be opening day and so I went to Tiger Stadium.  [Laughter].  So I skipped a class trip and went to the baseball game.  So I had plenty of changes to go to Greenfield Village and like when I go home because you know all our family is like still in Detroit or in Inkster, go--I'd go past Greenfield Village all the time.  And every time I drive past it, I say to myself I'm going to Greenfield Village one of these days and so maybe I'll take my grandchildren to Greenfield Village this summer.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So did you--did Detroit have the science museum?
Speaker 2: Yeah, Detroit had the science museum and we use to have this, the Midwest Science Fair.  School did take us down to that, used to have at Coble (ph.) Hall.  And the one thing I remember most about going to the Midwest Science Fair was one of the students had this real tall rocket that they had built and they had taken it out to Suffrage Air Force Base and flown it up into the atmosphere.  So I don't know what data they got.  I was more interested in looking at the rocket than looking at the data.
Speaker 1: Now did you have a--were you into model airplane building at all?
Speaker 2: Yep, I used to build model airplanes.  I used to build model rockets and take them out and fly them.  And in fact when I was dating my wife, I would take her younger brothers out and they still talk about that till this day going out into the field flying, launching these rockets in, up in the air.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I had a telescope.  I'd take them and let them look through my telescope and--
Story_ID: 21183
Speaker 1: It sounds as if, it sounds to me your parents [Willie Mae and Woodrow Whitlow] were really encouraging in terms of what your interests were and they wanted to make sure that you were successful.
Speaker 2: Yeah they were encouraging not driving me.  When I say encouraging you know if want to be an astronaut, go be an astronaut.  If you want to be a teacher, go, you know go be a teacher.  If you want to be a doctor, go be a doctor.  They didn't say oh you have to do this.  You--but I guess they say supportive may--right word.  But now if you want to do something wrong then you had to deal with those consequences.  As long as what you--long as you want to earn an honest living, they were supportive.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now did your brothers and sisters finish school and did any of them go to college?
Speaker 2: No.  My youngest sister went--you know she took some classes at the local community college.  My brother actually spent some time in the Detroit Tigers farm system.  So he did sign with them and played in the minor leagues with them for a couple of years.
Speaker 1: Okay.  That must have been exciting I guess to (unclear)?
Speaker 2: Yeah, you know, your brother is playing in minor league baseball so that's a big deal.
Speaker 1: Yeah, okay all right.  So when it came time to graduate, you knew you were going to MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology] right?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And you had the money in place.
Speaker 2: Money was in place.  All the money was in place.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: All of it came from them.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So did you just, did you then go to MIT in the fall of '70 [1970]?
Speaker 2: Fall of 1970 I enrolled.  Actually I went to MIT about two weeks after I finished high school.  This project interphase was supposed, was for primarily minority youth and they thought we needed our background sured up before we started the regular semester.  So we went to I think it was a six week program, maybe it was eight weeks, but six to eight week program at MIT.  And we earned some credits, took calculus and physics and some chemistry and I'm trying to remember if we took any writing.  But--so I actually, my first official credits are earned when I started in June of 1970.  Then came home for about three weeks in the middle of August, then went back to start the regular school year.
Story_ID: 21184
Speaker 1: Let me go back to high school for a second cause I forgot to ask about one of the big events of the 20th century and that's in July 20th, 1969 when Neil Armstrong walked on the moon.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Did--were you watching that with keen interest in those days or--?
Speaker 2: Yeah, we--I was actually at a summer program, Michigan State University Inner City Math Program.  So I was at Michigan State in a mathematics program.  And I'd gone home the weekend before the landing and I brought back a little black and white TV so I was up to watch the landing you know and the first steps on the moon, all of that.  So I made sure that I was able to see that so I actually had brought a TV back from home to watch it, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay cause it, there was no communal TV for you all to watch there or anything?
Speaker 2: I--yeah there was a communal TV but we had to be in bed by a certain time and I wasn't going to take a chance of whether or not they let us stay up and watch it.  So I had TV in my own room.
Speaker 1: Now how did you feel about that in those days?
Speaker 2: Oh, I was excited, you know.  I was you know, I mean my heart was beating fast cause I was nervous and--cause I wanted it to succeed.  I wanted the country to succeed and I wanted--so I really wanted to see this landing take place and they complete the mission and then get the guys back safely and then they could say--then we could say we did it, you know cause I can--you know cause it was as goal.  It was national goal set out, set forth by President Kennedy [John Fitzgerald Kennedy, Jr., 35th president of the United States].  But--and I guess I felt some national pride but more than that I just, I think I felt more personal joy you know just to see us be able to do this.  But then once we got on the surface of the moon and then I started thinking oh, well okay now we got to make sure we get back.
Story_ID: 21185
Speaker 1: Okay.  I know I keep rewinding but I'm thinking about 60--1968, Dr. King [Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] was assassinated.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And one story I heard about Dr. King is that he told Nichelle Nichols who was in Star Trek that she was thinking about leaving the show cause she didn't get enough lines.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: He said, stay on the show.  I'm a fan of the show and we need to have somebody to prove that black people are in the future doing something in science.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: You know, so do you remember what you were doing when Dr. King passed on?
Speaker 2: I can remember that night in April when it--it was April 4th, 1968.  I can remember the news coming on TV and I can remember a lot of anger you know that you know it's not--my first feeling was not that a single person did this.  But you know white, I said White America did it.  You know, why did they do it?  And you know so there was anger and okay we're going to go through this violence all over again in the country and of course we had some of that.  But yeah so, yeah I can just remember seeing the news on TV and getting very angry.
Story_ID: 21186
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now were you a fan of Star Trek?  Did you watch--?
Speaker 2: I've never liked Star Trek.
Speaker 1: Really?
Speaker 2: I don't--don't tell Nichelle Nichols that but my wife loves Star Trek and in fact my wife was visiting me this past weekend and they had the--a 30 year retrospective of Star Trek.  I think it--we checked cause everybody looked so young and it aired I think like 1996, 1998.  And Nichelle Nichols talked about Martin Luther King, the same thing, encouraging her, telling her you cannot quit that, you know quit that show.  So--but I was never a Star Trek fan.
Speaker 1: Now why not?  What did you--?
Speaker 2: I used to say oh some of this stuff is you know going from galaxy to galaxy in a matter of minutes or seconds or days or however long it was supposed to have been on the show is not possible but maybe now it is.  You know if we can figure out ways to bend the space time continuum.  You know you have to--can't even travel faster than the speed of light which would be required to do some of the things on the show.  And just somebody that didn't think it was scientifically real and so I was never into Star Trek.
Speaker 1: So even as a youth, I mean you knew enough about real science to suspect that those things could not be done?
Speaker 2: No.  But now it was really more, I see it more of a show on--the country know the diversity and everybody being equal and so it was a big, to me it made more of a big social statement than even being about outer space.  To me it really was not about outer space.  It was--and going from galaxy--it was really more of a social statement I think is what the producers were trying to do.
Story_ID: 21187
Speaker 1: Now okay, so MIT, so how did you--what was your first impression of MIT?
Speaker 2: My first impression of MIT, I was terribly, terribly disappointed.  The year before I had spent on the campus of Michigan State University, big sprawling Midwest land grant college and so I didn't visit MIT before I decided to go there.  And so I went up there for this project interphase.  They were supposed to meet me at the airport, they didn't.  So I left my--and I went to MIT with one of my high school friends, we graduated together.  So we left our stuff at Logan Airport in lockers and I asked somebody how do you get to MIT and they told us you know take a bus up to the subway stop and catch a train to Pack Street and the blue line to Pack Street.  And then you switch and take these other trains.  Eventually you take a red line to Kendall Square.  So we spent a long--we missed several trains cause we couldn't find Pack Street on the map.  You know they had the subway map, map of the subway system.  We couldn't find Pack Street on the map.  So finally we asked somebody to show us Pack Street on the map and they showed us.  And I said oh you mean Park Street.  So I said, oh these people up here don't even know how to talk.  So--
Speaker 1: So they said Park [pronounced Pock] Street?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I said--I heard Pack Street and I said oh, that's Park Street, that's not Pack Street.  So we eventually made our way to Kendall Square and we got off the train and there was a building that had an arrow on, MIT this way.  So they were--there were a lot of old warehouses you know (unclear) east, on the east end of campus.  And in fact there was I think a Brigham's, was it a Brigham's Candy Factory right next to the door.  Maybe it was a New England Candy Company, candy factory but right next to the storm that we stayed in.  And so it didn't fit my image of this big, Midwest land grant college campus that Michigan State was.  So I was like oh, so this is MIT.  So yeah I was--and in fact we were walking from the subway and we saw these two guys standing next to these tennis courts.  And we said, could you tell us where the MIT campus is?  And the guy said this is it.  And he said, are you here for interphase and we said yeah.  So we were on the campus before we realized we were on the campus.  But after being there for less than a semester and having the access to the city and everything, I don't think I could have made it at one of these remote campuses as opposed to where MIT was.  So I quickly learned to appreciate it. Okay, so this is Boston in 1970?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: All right.  So--
Speaker 1: Busing.
Speaker 2: Oh well tell us.  Tell us.
Speaker 1: Of course Boston--you know of course MIT is in Cambridge right across the river but that was a very volatile time.  You know they just started busing in Boston.  There was mass opposition to it.  There were some politicians made their career on opposing busing you know cause the people in South Boston didn't want the black students coming there and so you had to be very careful where you went in Boston at that time, had to be careful where you--and then what time you went.  Make sure it wasn't too late, too dark because it was--some places it wasn't good to be you know particularly if you're a black student, you didn't know the city.  And so it was quite volatile there at the time.
Speaker 2: Okay.  So did you go into Boston much?
Speaker 1: Yeah, we went into Boston, of course you know we had a subway stop right there at the east end of campus.  And we'd go into downtown, we'd go into--of course we'd go to Roxbury and Dorchester and those places quite a bit.  We could walk across the river and because all the--I never joined a fraternity but the fraternity, most of the fraternity houses were on the other side of the river in Boston.  Are you going to take the subway to the north station and go see the Celtics play or we could walk across the river into, across the Harvard bridge and we could walk to Fenway Park, you know see the Red Socks and go to the Prudential Center to buy things if you had some money and go to the restaurants in Boston.  We--you know that's why I said having access to the city like that, I don't, I probably would have made it but I liked the MIT campus much better than I would one of these campuses that's you know that's quite remote from the cities.
Speaker 2: Okay.  So what was your course of study like the first year?
Speaker 1: First year I, you know it was calculus, the physics.  I took material science.  I took humanities.  I can't remember what humanities course I took.  And a normal load that would let--allow you to graduate in four years was 45 units.  I think I took, I always took like fifty one or fifty four and say a typical engineering course would be twelve units.  So if you took like a--three math and science courses that's thirty six units and a humanities course would be 9 units, that would be your forty five.  And I think I took maybe one other extra math.  But I remember taking calculus, physics, material science, humanities, one other and the same thing second semester, Calculus II, Physics II, maybe a chemistry course and a humanities and then one other.  I always took an extra course to make sure I was running ahead in my studies.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And I didn't have to take physical education cause I played baseball.  And but at MIT if you, when you go there and you enroll, you have to take a swim test, swim a hundred yards.  If you can't swim a hundred yards you know your physics--your PE class is going to be swimming.  So I was able to pass the swim test and I was playing baseball so I didn't have to take PE but I did take a pistol course and I took a rifle course and that was first semester.  Second semester, baseball season started.  So--
Speaker 2: Okay.  So did you have any trouble at all?
Speaker 1: No.  Actually, the longer I stayed and maybe it's learning the ropes, the longer I stayed, seemed like the easier it got.  You know so it was difficult, it was hard work and we had to--and I'm not saying it was easy but I'm saying if you go there and you work hard, you'll make it.
Story_ID: 21188
Speaker 1: Tell us your study schedule.  You just told it to me off camera but--
Speaker 2: Oh, I would--of course I'm not an early morning person so I would try not--and the institute would open at nine o'clock so I'd try not to get 9 o'clock classes.  But you know I would take the classes during the day and if there were breaks I would study.  But then when I get back to my dorm room at night I would typically study to you know two, three, four o'clock in the morning every night.  So it was--worked hard.  But then on Thursday nights I would just study all night, wouldn't go to bed and because I knew if just make it through the classes on Friday then I had you know the weekend without having to go to classes to, you know to recover.  So make it through Friday, study some.  Friday evening then you know just kind of take a break on Friday nights and you know maybe go to a movie, go somewhere.  You know we had the movie series on campus, go to a movie just rest and relax and then sleep late Saturday.  And we'd go to the soul food, normally we'd go to the soul food restaurant on Saturday in Boston, Bob the chef.  So we'd go down there.  That was the big thing, we'd go to Bob the chef on Saturday, get you a good soul food meal and then come back and maybe, and start picking up the routine.  If not Saturday night then first thing Sunday morning because--depending on you know what you had to turn in on Monday, you know maybe pick it up Saturday night.  If not, maybe rest a little bit Saturday and then get up Sunday and start running again.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now who are some of your instructors there and yeah who are some of the instructors that you remember and what were they teaching you?
Speaker 2: I can remember of course Wes Harris was--he you now he taught fluid dynamics in the aeronautics department.  But when he came I was--he came in my junior year and so we started working together.  And so he ended up being my Masters Thesis supervisor and my Doctoral Thesis chairman.  And so he's someone who really--he's the one who really taught me about academic excellence and so I remember him.  And then people like Eugene Covert who taught aerodynamics, Judd Baron taught gas dynamics, Jack Kerabrock (ph.) taught propulsion systems, Jim Marr (ph.) taught structures.  So these are all the professors in the aero department.  And then there was Professor Orzag in the math department taught the advanced calculus courses and then the other--there was one guy, I did a concentration, under--humanities concentration in psychology.  And there was one, Professor Hans Torber (ph.) I can remember.  And I did it, I picked, I had to pick some humanities concentration and the reason I picked psychology is I had heard about this Hans Torber, this psychology professor.  And I said well maybe he can make humanities interesting.  So I--and he did.  So I took--and he taught brain science.  Then I took learning theory and then another, some other psychology courses.  But those are some of the ones, you know--and then all the guys in the aero department, Professor Widnall and--Sheila Widnall [Sheila Marie Evans Widnall]--she actually became secretary of the air force for a while before she went back to MIT.  And I talked about Professor Marr and instructors and just a great group of guys in the aero department who were Course 16 as we affectionately refer to it as.  We don't do names at MIT, we do numbers.
Speaker 1: Really?  You--
Speaker 2: Yeah, a course--
Speaker 1: People have numbers?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I can tell you the courses I took like my math course, I took 8--physics course is 801, 802, 803.  My--because physics is Course 8.  My math courses I took 1801, 1802 and 1803.  And then I took advanced calculus, 18075, 18076.  And then I took in Double E, a course 6.14 and the office is in Building 37 and the other aero is Building 35 and some was in Building 9.  And so I don't know the names of a lot of stuff at MIT but I can tell you the numbers associated with it.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now what was--now was it exciting being around so many people with the same kind of focus of you know--?
Speaker 2: It was motivating, exciting and you know and you know it--and it, it really was.  I'm at MIT, you know, you heard--I didn't know what MIT was but you know when you hear people talk about bright people, say oh yeah, he's going to go to MIT.  Or you watch, you see it on TV, even now you say oh yeah, well this person's from MIT.  And so yeah to be there in that environment--and at first it was a little intimidating.  And you know the one thing, my freshman year you know these, hear these students at the other table and they were talking about some math thing and then they pulled out, a napkin out and they start writing on this napkin and then they left.  And we were all sitting around and I picked the napkin up and I looked at it and I said this not even writing.  Even I know that this is not correct what's on this napkin.  So I said well, yeah well I can make it through here.  So I went from, I'm going to go to MIT for one year and transfer to ended up staying there for nine years.
Story_ID: 21189
Speaker 1: Okay. So you stayed there [Massachusetts Institute of Technology, MIT] all the way through your Ph.D.?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: All the way through and--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And you got married somewhere along the line too right?
Speaker 2: I got married halfway through my freshman year.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Now that's unusual--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --for most college students.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: But you, so that means that you had a relationship back in Inkster I guess (unclear)?
Speaker 2: Well--
Speaker 1: Or--?
Speaker 2: Well actually I was telling you about Mr. Baylor living next door to my mother in law and well, and my wife's house.  But my mother carpooled to work at the hospital with--who is now my mother in law.  And the lady who is now my wife, she went to Seventh Day Adventist School so she got a ride.  I had to walk to school because Inkster Public Schools you know didn't have a lot of bus service so I walked to school.  And, but my wife rode to school cause she went to this private school.  And so I can remember in the third grade, my mother, well Ms. Barton coming to pick up my mother.  And so, who is that little ugly girl in the back in that car?  Cause I was in the third grade, she was in the third grade and then, but the Seventh Day Adventist School only went to the tenth grade.  So in eleventh grade she had to come to Inkster High School and then in the twelfth grade we started dating.  So I've known her since she was in the third grade but you know, we started dating in the twelfth grade.  And then my mother called up Ms. Barton one day and said you know who my son is trying to go out with?  He's trying to go out with your daughter.  Yeah, so that's--yeah, so we were, I--we, we're both from Inkster.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And we graduated from high school together.
Speaker 1: Now was your wife involved in science too at all?
Speaker 2: No.  She, well of course she did well in school.  She did well in math, she did well in science, but she has degrees in business.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And both of my daughters have degrees in psychology.
Speaker 1: Now did your wife finish her work in Boston?  Did she go to school in Boston?
Speaker 2: Actually she started at the University of Detroit which I think now might be Detroit Mercy.  And then she finished when we got to Virginia.  She got her undergraduate degree from Christopher Newport College.  It's now Christopher Newport University.  And then she got her MBA from Old Dominion University.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: All right.  So, the whole--most of the nine years you're married and you--okay.
Speaker 2: I was, most of the nine years I was married--when I was at MIT most of those nine years yeah, we were married.  I was living in the dorm at MIT.  She was living back home and then she's working at the University of Michigan.  And so I got real good at--back then you could fly from between Detroit and Boston, I think it was like twenty nine or thirty five dollars and so I got real good at being able to get up on Monday morning, get to Detroit airport cause we lived so close.  So I could wake up about 6 o'clock Monday morning, get to Logan Airport, catch the metro in and I could be on campus at 9 o'clock.
Speaker 1: Hmm.  So how long--?
Speaker 2: If that nonstop flight was running on time.
Speaker 1: How long did you do that before you all, you know lived together and--?
Speaker 2: Until I was, went to--started graduate school.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah and we got a--got married, an apartment in married student housing.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: All right, okay.  Now were there any big events on campus when you were at MIT that took place that you remember?  Any celebrities show up or people who were working on big projects other than your instructors?
Speaker 2: On campus, I can't--I'm sure you know we had famous scientists come on campus that--the biggest thing I can remember is going to see The Jackson Five in the Boston Garden.  [Laughter].  And, cause that wasn't on campus, but you know that was--we all made sure we, you know we went to that.  And, but I--nothing really sticks out in my mind as any really big people coming on campus.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: All right.
Story_ID: 21190
Speaker 1: Now I didn't ask you about religion at all but did you--was church a big part of growing up and is it still?
Speaker 2: Growing up yeah we had to go to church.  Parents made sure we did that, go to the morning service, afternoon service, evening service on Sundays.  And yeah, so yeah we are Christians.  Maybe I don't get to church now as much as I ought to.  And in fact, my wife keeps telling me you know we need to start going to church more regular than we do now.  And, but now with me working in Washington and the family being in Cleveland, you know I go home Fridays and Sunday is normally my travel, my return date.  But whenever we go over to Michigan to visit family, her mother always make sure that we get to the church.
Speaker 1: Now what was the name of the family church?
Speaker 2: We went--I went to Second Baptist Church in Inkster, Michigan.
Speaker 1: In Inkster, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: All right, okay.  All right--
Speaker 2: And so I go to church and I, normally when I go to church now it is in Inkster when we go visit.  And you know when we first got to Cleveland, we would go home to Inkster at least two times a month, maybe three times, sometimes every weekend we'd visit family.  So we would go regular but right now we don't go as often as we should.
Story_ID: 21191
Speaker 1: Okay.  So now what would be the name of your major in--at MIT?  What was it--?
Speaker 2: Aeronautics and astronautics.  My degrees are in, from the Department of Aeronautics and Astronautics.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  And what was your dissertation about?
Speaker 2: My dissertation was on unsteady transonic flow and that's flow about the speed of sound.  And so the airplanes that we ride on these days, the flow of the wing tends to get into the transonic range and so that's what makes it interesting.  And it's what we call nonlinear flow and nonlinear from the standpoint is that you cannot model transonic flow with what we call linear equations.  And so you use nonlinear equations where say you're not guaranteed an analytic solution.  So I was one of the early ones to do a computation of simulation of transonic flow fields.  And so I had to learn a lot from reading journal articles or papers cause there just were no textbooks on computational methods back then.  And so, we were learning it from papers that other people were doing and learning, in fact learning a lot of it from stuff that we were doing.
Speaker 1: Okay.  For the layman like me--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --tell us, what is transonic flow?
Speaker 2: Okay.  You have several regions of flow.  Now subsonic is flow that, say if you were at sea level, subsonic is flow that's at less than the speed of sound.  And the speed of sound is around 740 miles an hour at sea level.  Now transonic flow is around the speed of sound so that's, so that would be at the speed of sound.  And supersonic flow is flow that's greater than the speed of sound and then hypersonic flow we typically say that that's flow that's five times the speed of sound.  So say the space shuttle for example, starts off at rest and then it travels subsonic and then it goes through a transonic region and then before--and then it goes supersonic and then before it goes orbit, orbital speeds, that's hypersonic flow.  So the space shuttle was a vehicle that traveled, that was able to fly all the speed ranges.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.  So was there a--who was your advisor I guess, for your Ph.D.?
Speaker 2: Wesley Harris.
Speaker 1: Okay (unclear) sorry.
Speaker 2: Professor Wesley Harris, my Ph.D. thesis.  He was my thesis supervisor and my committee was made up of Professor Kerabrock, Professor Martin Landall is one I didn't mention earlier.  He's a big influence.  In fact other--next to Professor Harris, he was the biggest influence in my thesis work because he was maybe at that time the world's leading expert on transonic flow, Professor Eugene Covert (ph.) and Professor Judson Baron (ph.).
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So it was a good group, all giants in their field.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 21192
Speaker 1: All right.  So now when you finished your Ph.D. in '79 [1979], what did you do next?
Speaker 2: Oh, I started at NASA [National Aeronautics and Space Administration], went to NASA Langley.  When I was a Ph.D. student, I was actually supported by a grant, a NASA grant.  And so I went and worked, went to work in the group that had provided the grant.  So 19--July 9th, 1979, I showed up at Langley Research Center for my first day and to sign on and I called my mother because my mother's birthday is July 9th.  That was her fiftieth birthday.  I said I got a birthday present for you.  After being in school for nine years, I got a job!  So I started at Langley.  And it was interesting because my offer letter said this offer is contingent upon you completing your Ph.D. and I really had not completed.  I was done with all the work.  It was in the summer and so my thesis committee wasn't around for me to do a defense.  And, but the folks at Langley, my group wanted me to come on to work so they said come on to work.  So when I show up at personnel, they--you have to fill out a form, highest degree completed.  So I hadn't completed my degree so I checked Masters and so they wouldn't swear me in at my job.  Yeah, but they gave me a badge and sent me to work.  And so I worked Monday and your first duty station they give you an airplane ticket and one night in a hotel so you know a graduate student, you didn't have any money.  So--and they didn't swear me in so the next morning I woke up and I called out to the center and I got the deputy center director on the phone and I said I quit because they wouldn't swear me in.  I said I got sixty four other job offers and they all paid more than the one at Langley but I really wanted to work for NASA.  And so finally later that day my group leader got in contact with me and so he took me and we found housing so I did show up the third day and I've shown up every day for the thirty three years since then.  And so I did--by that Friday they got me temporary thirty day job at one grade lower and so I did go over and get sworn in on Friday.  And then after the thirty--before the thirty days were up, we were able to get my committee together.  I went back to MIT and I did a thesis defense and I was finished and so I was able to become a permanent NASA employee at that time.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So this is 1979?
Speaker 2: Right.
Story_ID: 21193
Speaker 1: Now I asked you I think before we started if you knew Katherine Johnson [Katherine Coleman Johnson, physicist, scientist and mathematician]--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --who was working for NASA.  She was there at Langley, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Right, Katherine was--of course Katherine was a mentor to all of us, but yeah she was there and of course she was one of the legends at least from where I sat.
Speaker 1: Tell us who she is and--she's a black woman who worked for NASA.  But tell us who she is and what she meant to you?
Speaker 2: Katherine was a mathematics whiz and when the time that Katherine started NASA, she couldn't be an engineer.  So she was what we call a human computer.  And there were just rooms of women who did calculations for the "real engineers".  And so Katherine did calc--orbital trajectory calculations and so when we were flying in space, she calculated those trajectories that the space craft would fly, like these parabolas and you know where--which way Alan Shepard's space craft is going to go so she did all these calculations.   And in fact before John Glenn flew which I think was the first mission where the trajectories were calculated using computers, John wanted Katherine to verify the computer.  So Katherine was an outstanding mathematician and then of course later on because the opportunities for women in NASA opened up and so she was able to move on and do many, many great things.  But--so she was at--started, well did her career at the Langley Research Center and so she was one of the lead mathematicians, not just at NASA, but in the world.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 21194
Speaker 1: Tell us about Harriett Jenkins [Dr. Harriett G. Jenkins].
Speaker 2: Oh now, I'm going to--now Harriett Jenkins and I always--and I just saw Harriett Jenkins last weekend.  But she was one of the ones who was very influential and I'm not going to tell you that story cause she says it's a fable.  I'll tell you off camera.  She says I keep telling this fable about how I ended up at NASA [National Aeronautics and Space Administration].  But Harriett Jenkins is one of the ones who when I was considering my, whether--where I was going to go work cause I had all these job offers, she was one of the ones who really convinced me to come work at NASA.  And Harriett was the Assistant Administrator for Equal Opportunity here at NASA headquarters.  And when you're in a room with Harriett you feel like you're in the room with royalty.  And we even have a program named after her, the Harriett Jenkins Pre-Doctoral Fellows.  So there's a program where we are increasing the number of underrepresented people with Ph.D.s and that program is named after Harriett Jenkins.
Story_ID: 21195
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right, so what did you work on at NASA?
Speaker 2: When I got to Langley, I was working on developing ways to compute the unsteady transonic flows past you know past aircraft or past wings so that those methods could then be used to determine the structural response of airplanes and to make sure that, basically make sure that they were safe to fly.  As you get on a plane and you see, you might hit some turbulence and the wings might start to bounce.  And, but all aircraft react or interact with what we call the fluid and the fluid in this case being the air, fluid structure interaction.  And all airplanes can, aircraft can get to a point where what we call instability or flutter where the--instead of the wings starting to bounce and it damps out, it will start to grow and you'll get catastrophic structural failure.  So I was working on aerodynamic methods that could be used to predict structural response.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Which is what I was, things I was doing for my thesis at MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology] and I said this group I went into were the ones that funded my thesis work.  So I was able to start at NASA and make a contribution right away because that was the work I had done in college.
Story_ID: 21196
Speaker 1: Okay.  What was the country's mood in '79 [1979] in terms of the space program?
Speaker 2: We were eager to do something.  You know we had in what 1972 was our last mission to the moon and then we, you know we had Skylab and--but we were gearing up in '79 [1979] you know to ready for the first flight of the space shuttle which took place in what April, April 12, 1981 I think was the flight of the first space shuttle.  So when I got to Langley, you know we were actually, the branch I was in was actually doing tests of some of the space shuttle models.  And so there was this new vehicle that we were getting ready to fly and you know every space craft we ever flew you know we had the capsules, we had Mercury, we had Gemini, we had Apollo.  They would fly one time and they would come back and we couldn't use them again.  But now we were getting ready to fly what we called the space truck.  It was going to be reusable and we could fly things to space and we could take things up and bring things back.  And I--and the public was excited about this new space plane which--reusable space plane.  And I was excited about it and--because I was going to work for NASA for you know, work at Langley for a couple of years and then I was going to apply to be an astronaut and then I was going to go fly on this space plane.  So maybe I was, certainly I was more excited than the general public was.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, now did you have a specific role in the Columbia mission?
Speaker 2: Not the--the Columbia or the Challenger?
Speaker 1: Well I'm just, I'll start with the Columbia but--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --but if you started doing something with the Challenger--?
Speaker 2: Well not, no I didn't have any specific role with the Challenger mission other than I had gone to school with Ron McNair who was on the, who was on that flight.
Speaker 1: Now what, Columbia was in '81 [1981] right?
Speaker 2: No, Columbia was in 2000.
Speaker 1: No?
Speaker 2: Challenger was the first one that we lost.  That was in what, '86 [1986] I think.
Speaker 1: Oh okay.
Speaker 2: We lost Challenger.  Columbia we lost February 1st, 2003.  And--
Speaker 1: Oh, I was just thinking about the first flight.  Columbia was the first one to go up.
Speaker 2: Oh, oh--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --the first flight of Columbia.
Speaker 1: Yeah, did you have anything to do with that?
Speaker 2: No we had done at our branch--I'm sorry.  In our branch of course we had done testing particularly of vertical tilt.  In fact, late in, not too long before the Columbia flew and yeah you're right, Columbia was the first shuttle to fly.  And I didn't have a direct role in it but the test engineers, I was a theoretician but the test engineers in our branch and done aeroelastic testing of the vertical tail structure or a model of the vertical tail structure for the space shuttle.
Story_ID: 21197
Speaker 1: Okay.  So and these early flights you were, you had, working with a team that was trying to make sure that the tailfin was--?
Speaker 2: Yeah, just the first flight.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, the test engineers, the aeroelast, the test aero-elasticians in the branch and we were in the aero-elasticity branch, were making sure that it was structurally stable.  And you hear, when you hear on the shuttle launch it's now passing through the area of maximum dynamic pressure and that's the point at which it--the vehicle would be most susceptible to any kind of bad structural response.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now in '83 [1983] you published a piece called 'XTRANTL.'
Speaker 2: Yeah, XTRAN2L, yeah.
Speaker 1: XTRAN2L?  Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And that was a--well tell us about that.
Speaker 2: Well that was a computer program that I wrote to simulate two dimensional transonic flow so that's where the tran, the T-R-A-N, stands for transonic and the 2 stands for two dimensional.  Now the X and the L at the end, I don't know what--I can't remember what they stand for but it was a program I wrote to model two dimensional transonic flow past airfoil sections which could then be used to--coupled with a structural model to determine the structural response of a two dimensional airfoil which you could use to gain insight into how a full, full up airplane wing would respond to some unsteady aerodynamic disturbance if it was flying along.
Story_ID: 21198
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now in '83 [1983], Guion Bluford [Guion Stewart "Guy" Bluford] becomes the first African American astronaut to go into space.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Now were you happy or disappointed that it wasn't you or--?
Speaker 2: Oh no actually I was quite happy when Guy flew.  You know it was a milestone for, I believe it was a milestone for all of us as a people.  Of course you know Ron McNair who I'd gone to school with and good friends with, you know still good friends with his family, you know he was in Astronaut Corp. and I thought well maybe it might have been Ron, but you know it turned out to be Guy.  But you know, it just opened doors for you know opened doors for a lot of folks.
Speaker 1: Just briefly kind of give us a little history of blacks as astronauts in the--I mean before Guion Bluford.
Speaker 2: Well we had Robert Lawrence who I think we--who is an astronaut.  He didn't fly in space but he is an astronaut.  Then we had see, Ed Dwight who's an African American astronaut.  And you know so these are pioneers who laid the groundwork for the astronauts who did fly in space, the Guy Blufords, the Ron McNairs, the Charlie Boldens, the Fred [Frederick D. Gregory]--now Fred's going to kill me cause his name is escaping me now.  But you know the Joani Higginbothams [Joan Higginbotham], the Stephanie Wilsons, the Bobby Satchers [Robert Satcher], Leland [D.] Melvins--Fred Gregory.  Fred's the one that ended up getting me to be deputy director of the Kennedy Space Center, you know.  But--and Fred was the first African American shuttle commander.  So, but you know Dwight and Lawrence, while they didn't fly in space, they certainly laid that groundwork and I count them as full-fledged astronauts.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, so you knew Guy Bluford right, from--?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I knew--know Guy Bluford.  Guy lives not too far from me back in Ohio, played golf with Guy on--every now and then.  And, but Guy was more not just an astronaut, Guy was a researcher and he's real proud of his books, his book collection.  And after he you know stopped flying and one day I was, when I was working at Langley, he walks in my office and he said I heard about you and I want, and I just want to meet you.  And I figured that should be me saying hey, I want to meet you.  And he came in and of course I had all my books in my bookcase and he started pulling out the books and he's trying to see what books I had that he didn't have and he was telling me about his books.  And so even now when I see him, he wants to tell me about new books he's got so he's more a scientist researcher and of course historic figure in the space program, but if you talk to him you would get that impression.  He's really about you know research and doing his studies cause he, you know he loves books.  And not just have them, he reads them and he knows what's in them.
Story_ID: 21199
Speaker 1: Now I know they made a movie called 'The Right Stuff,' I think it was a book.  But what stuff do you have to be--have to become an astronaut?  What are they looking for?  I mean what's NASA [National Aeronautics and Space Administration] looking for in terms of--?
Speaker 2: NASA's looking for people who can--special people and I know that's general but, one, people who are accomplished academically.  You have to have some specialty where you can contribute in space so it doesn't necessarily have to be a pilot cause most of the astronauts now aren't pilots.  Medical doctors, you know geologists, scientists, somebody who can, when we send you to space you can study things, learn things and bring things back to help advance the cause of exploration.  So that's why you see a wide diversity of backgrounds in the space program.  You see your engineers, your geologists, your medical doctors, your surgeons.  Because it's great you know when we send people to the moon, what better person to have on the surface of the moon than a geologist, somebody who can, instead of following some made our plans, pick this up, pick that up, we can say oh wait, that looks very interesting to me.  I think we ought to bring that back.
Speaker 1: So, what you're saying is that having skills as a pilot is not may not be that useful when going to space as an astronaut right?
Speaker 2: It would, it could be--it's useful and somebody's got to fly the vehicle but what a--I think the correct way to say that is not being a pilot does not preclude you from going to space.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So yeah going, yeah.  If you want to be the commander of the ship, you need to know how to fly.  So yeah, so piloting skills are very useful when going to space but having other skills also allows you to go and participate.  I think I had one friend who was on a return flight mission, STS 114.  His specialty was high temperature materials and thermal protection systems.  And of course you know the breach in the thermal protection system was the cause of the Columbia accident and so great guy to have on this mission.
Story_ID: 21200
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what was the--was the--oh, in '85 [1985], you published 'Characteristic Boundary Conditions for Three Dimensional Transonic Unsteady Aerodynamics.'
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And tell us about that.
Speaker 2: When we model flows on a computer, you model a finite region.  But when an airplane is flying for all intents and purposes, it's relative size you know to the atmosphere that it's flying, it's flying in something that's say infinitely big.  And so when you do the calculations and some unsteady flow you have, simulate waves of disturbances emanating out from say the wing.  And at some point because you're simulating time, these waves could hit or reach the boundary of your computational region and then they could reflect back into the computational box and contaminate your solution.  And, because in real life when an airplane, any disturbances we just propagate away from the airplane and just go on forever.  So these, what these binding conditions did, and this is a math, mathematical solution is that when the numeric, these numerical waves in the computational box propagate out and you get to the edge of your computational region, this simulates these waves continuing to just propagate on out to infinity.  And so it gives you a more accurate, gives you an accurate solution and better able to allow you to then assimilate what's going on around the airplane.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And so you continue to publish about this situate--you know, transonics basically--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --throughout?  Okay.  Now did you, now did the, in the 80s [1980s] did you act on you know, your desire to become an astronaut?  Did you--?
Speaker 2: Yeah, actually NASA had a call for astronauts and I got a call from headquarters informing me that, from the EO office that you know the, there were--they were--NASA was taking applications for astronauts and to let me know if I was interested that I should apply.  And of course I was interested and I applied and I got a call from the flight surgeon at JSC, said well we got your application, we're interested in it and he told me some tests I needed to take.  One was a stress test and then there were some eye tests.  One was the test for depth perception and color blindness and low light vision uncorrected.  And he told me to call back in with something called some Jaeger numbers or something.  He told me the eye doctor would know, just tell him Jaeger numbers and the eye doctor did.  So I knew I played baseball so I didn't have a problem with depth perception and I knew I wasn't color blind.  And, but I went in and took the test and I took the stress test and then I went and they gave me the low light uncorrected cause I wear corrective lenses.  And basically it was saying, now can you read that chart?  And I was like what chart you talking about?  I don't see a chart.  And so my test results on that test was a disqualifying number.
Speaker 1: Hmm, okay.  So you couldn't really see things in low light that other people--?
Speaker 2: Low light without glasses, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: But you don't have to have 20/20 but I think mine may have been something like 20/400 or something, some really big number that disqualified me from flying in space.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you're saying that the astronauts that went up, even the ones that had specialties in other branches of science had to be able to see and, I mean they had to pass all the physical--?
Speaker 2: Yeah, there are physical requirements that you have to pass.  And in this particular--now you'll see astronauts on orbit all the time wearing glasses so it doesn't have to be perfect.  But mind was so out of bed that it just disqualified me.  And, but the thing is, of course it was disappointing but not for very long because that beats going through life and not having applied and then get to this point and say oh, I wonder what would have happened if I had put in?  So I put in and I knew I was, I had a medical disqualification so don't worry about it.
Story_ID: 21201
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now '86 [1986] was the Challenger disaster.  Did you work on the Challenger at all?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I didn't do any work on the Challenger, but the thing I remember about that was I had watched every shuttle launch since the start of the program and that day I was at my desk, I was doing some work and we had it.  NASA was broadcasting the launch but I just got so engrossed in what I was doing I just lost track of time.  And I got a phone call from one of my friends saying the shuttle just blew up.  I said what do you mean?  He said the shuttle just blew up?  And then I, of course I knew Ron McNair was flying on that mission and so that was a big shock, a big loss of all of them but of course there was that, you know that personal loss.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now it was caused by something as I remember called O rings or something, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, there was an O ring that seals--you have the two solid boosters that are really assembled in segments.  They're not one piece, they're assembled in segments.  And at the joints where you, where the segments join, there were O--these rubber gaskets or these, what we call O rings that would keep the hot gases inside the booster.  And this one, there was a leak and the hot gas was able to get around the O ring and eventually burned a hole in the external tank that caused the catastrophic failure.
Story_ID: 21202
Speaker 1: Did the Reagan [Ronald Wilson Reagan, 40th president of the United States] Administration really support the-NASA [National Aeronautics and Space Administration]?  Do you, I mean do you--you came on I guess around the beginning of the Reagan Administration and I guess-
Speaker 2: Yeah, started in July of '79 [1979] yeah.
Speaker 1: Was there a difference in how the different administrations supported NASA over the years?
Speaker 2: Not a difference.  I mean we at NASA, we work for the president and so different administrations they'll come in and they have, of course they have different agendas.  Now you know, when you say support the program, yeah they love the program cause I consider NASA as a great source of national pride.  And so they have different things, persons have different things that they want to do.  And so Reagan came in, I guess it was the start, well didn't come in but when he was in that was the start of the space shuttle era.  And then after Reagan was, see that was see, Clinton [William Jefferson "Bill Clinton, 42nd president of the United States].  And then we start to assemble, well starting to try to get the space station designed and start getting those segments flown up.  And then we had Bush [George Walker Bush, 43rd president of the United States].  And so each--so we progressed through the presidents, each one has different goals they have for the space program.  And so we wouldn't--so you don't say that one doesn't support it.  It's just one has different goals.  And of course George W. Bush, you know said let's go to the moon.  Let's go to Mars.  Then President Obama comes in and he says, well we want to go to deep space but we have a different destination.  We want you to go to say nearer, the object nearest the asteroids who--which could pose a great threat to the planet.  So we'll learn about these and at the same time go to Mars as well.  Didn't say so much return to the moon and then Mars, but say have commercial entities take over the low earth orbit operations and NASA you all concentrate on advanced technologies to get further and further away from earth.  So when--can't say one supports NASA more than the other or one doesn't support NASA or the space program, they have different goals for the space program and all of them are exciting, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  I just wonder then how does a president, I mean these are not scientists.  I mean are they influenced by--you would think that I mean space travel would be bipartisan but you know I just wonder how their goals change with an administration?  You know I mean--
Speaker 2: Well the support for NASA is bipartisan and you say well how does--the president has advisors, office of science technology and policy.  So then it has a science advisor, has a NASA administrator which is--who is appointed by the president.  And so the policy--and you have independent advisory groups who could provide input and these advisory groups could be, are say the leading engineers and scientists that we have in the country that you know provide input.  And so these are the goals we ought to have so taking all that input of course, the president is the final person who decides okay exactly what the policy is going to be, what the goals are going to be.  But you know he listens to a lot of really bright people and takes that input to set the goals.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: In the early days, the Cold War had a great influence on you know what NASA would do and then in later times of the year people say things like well why are we wasting money going in space?  We could be spending it down here.  I mean that's the type of rhetoric you hear.
Speaker 2: Well yeah you hear people asking why are we wasting all this money on space?  And the first thing I ask them is, how many malls in space, how many car dealers are in space, how many jewelry stores are in space, how many grocery stores are in space and the answer is none.  The money is being spent right here on earth for the benefit of everybody here.  So the money is not being thrown away.
Speaker 1: The money is not going--
Speaker 2: The money is not being thrown away in space, the money is being spent here and providing benefits for everybody here on the space--spawning new businesses and new industries from all the technologies that come out of the space program, making life better here on earth.  So  the money is not being wasted in space it's being spent on the space program that's providing benefits, high paying jobs to folks right here.
Story_ID: 21203
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So you got involved in the 80s [1980s] I guess with helping to establish programs for minority youth and the sciences, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: There is a program at Old Dominion and just tell us about your involvement in that?
Speaker 2: Well there was a friend of mine, Professor Gregory [V.] Selby who had worked at NASA, then he went and took a faculty position, first at Hampton University and then over at Old Dominion.  And so he had this plan to establish a program to help inspire minority youth to go into science, technology, engineering and math careers and so he first just got some support from the university and so he asked me to come help him and so I did.  And so we put together programs where we would bring these students in on Saturdays and we would teach them things like teach them math, take them to computer labs.  So every week we'd take them to different labs in different engineering disciplines.  And, but we would give them some core computer skills and some core mathematic skills and then we'd give them some core English skills as well, and just to expose students who otherwise say may not be exposed to what engineers do.  And--or what scientists do and just like come out, spend the time and learn what engineers do.  And it's amazing how excited the young folks were, one, to be coming to a college campus and two, to be learning some things.  Particularly they were learning things that you know their peers weren't learning.  And so I haven't kept up with those students but I would hope that at least some of them these days are working in what we call the STEM [science, technology, engineering and math] fields.
Story_ID: 21204
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now in 1989 you are named the U.S. Black Engineer of the Year in Government.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Now who presents that award and how did that come about?
Speaker 2: Well that was, that's presented by the career communications group.  You know Tyrone Taborn [Dr. Tyrone D. Taborn] is the CEO of Career Communications Group.  And so they put out a call every year for nominees for these awards and I was nominated and I was fortunate enough to get selected, to receive one of the awards that year.  And the person who won the overall black engineer of the year award that year was Donnie Cochran of course who flew with the Blue Angels.  So it was great to get to meet him.
Speaker 1: All right.
Story_ID: 21205
Speaker 1: Now 1990, the space shuttle Discovery is launched to display the--to deploy the Hubble space telescope and Charles Bolden [Charles Frank "Charlie" Bolden, Jr.] serves as the pilot.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Tell us about Charles Bolden and did you know him and what role did you play on the Discovery flight?
Speaker 2: Okay.  I didn't have any role on that mission.  But I did not know Charles Bolden at the time that he was the pilot on that mission.  However, I am, I'd like to think I'm linked to that mission because in 1990 I was doing my first tour at NASA headquarters and I went to work an assignment in the astrophysics division and my first day there was the first day that we tried to focus the Hubble mirrors, which of course we had this spherical aberration which we since have corrected and made Hubble this great observatory that it is.  So my time in astrophysics was exciting and some of it because of the status of Hubble at the time.  And two years later I was working an assignment at headquarters where Administrator [Daniel] Goldin had asked Charles Bolden to lead these teams to look at efficiencies at NASA and I was selected to be vice chair to access to space independent review team or called the Red Team.  And so that's when I first Charles Bolden and the first time I worked for him.  So--
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now he's the head of NASA.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  And now I work for him again.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So 1992, Mae Jemison became the first African American woman in space.  Did you know her before she went up?
Speaker 2: I didn't know Mae.  I did not know Mae before she went up and of course since then I have, I've met Mae and she's just somebody you're proud to know and her accomplishments and just good to be able to say you know somebody who was a trailblazer for the Joan Higginbothams and the Stephanie Wilsons and all the other African American female astronauts who are going to come behind them.  Maybe even my granddaughters might follow in Mae's footsteps.
Story_ID: 21206
Speaker 1: For young people who--I knew I saw a poster in your office of the black astronauts and people that work with NASA [National Aeronautics and Space Administration] like Ms. Johnson and others.  When young people see those, I mean are they--it gives them something to strive for.  But are there--I was also you know when I looked at the poster coming up the way I did, I know there's a story of struggle there too in terms of overcoming racism and sexism and racism--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --in terms of black women.  You want to--what's your take on that and is--are we making progress?
Speaker 2: Yeah, we're making progress, yeah.  But there are people on that poster one, to represent to current generation that everything is open to you.  You're not limited in what you can do.  Now one person who is not on that poster, she's deceased, is Mary Jackson.  And I interviewed her for this paper I wrote on African Americans at NASA and she even told me how being at a place where they had separate bathrooms, black women, white women and the building she worked at didn't always have bathrooms for black women.  So she may have to go to another building to go to the bathroom.  And so, yeah there's great struggles there to overcome some of the biases that we had to get through you know to get to where we are.  People thinking like Katherine Johnson can only do calculations for engineers.  Or Christine Darden who is on that poster, she was--started off doing the calculations for the engineers.  Now Christine went on to become maybe the world's expert in sonic booms which is what we need to understand to fly supersonically.  Wes Harris is on that poster and you know he went to UVA and--University of Virginia and talks about having--he lived on the lawn.  I think maybe only the second African American to live on the lawn and the struggles that he had, having lit cigarettes thrown at him on that campus you know and then several people in there who came into NASA and had to overcome the biases of you know, what can African Americans contribute.  But there are also three other people on that poster other than me, Isaac Gillam [Isaac T. Gillam, IV], Don Campbell [Donald J. Campbell] and Julian Earls [Dr. Julian M. Earls] and myself who, the four black center directors in the history of NASA.  So it shows--the poster illustrates the struggles that the early folks had to go through and I don't consider myself among those who had to struggle the most.  But it also shows what's possible and how far we've come.
Story_ID: 21207
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right, 1994 you became the Director of the Critical Technologies Division in the Office of the Aeronautics at NASA [National Aeronautics and Space Administration]  Headquarters in Washington, D.C. [District of Columbia].
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: So, now you had been in Cleveland at some point right or did, is this before you went?
Speaker 2: This is before I went to Cleveland.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: And this--
Speaker 1: All right, well tell us about this job.
Speaker 2: Oh this was actually my first senior executive service job and I was responsible for the research and development of long range high payoff technologies for the aeronautics disciplines.  And so we were able to focus on not the near term but long term concepts, those exciting, revolutionary things that would change the way we do aeronautics and aviation.
Speaker 1: Okay, so the planning--?
Speaker 2: Well not just the planning.  We actually funded--I had a pretty sizeable budget and I had programs at the NASA Centers in, you know in material science and aerodynamics and propulsion, guidance navigation and control, even human factors you know because when pilots fly long distance and you know they need rest cycles and the like.  So things that would not, you would not necessarily see in the next say five years or so but things that would have benefit far down stream.  And in fact, one of the concepts, a blended wing body aircraft that--they're still not in service.  There have been some test models built but that was one of the concepts that I funded under this program, advanced concepts in aeronautics.  And so it was very--so we were looking at long, long range technologies, things that you might not see in service for you know fifteen, twenty, twenty five years or maybe a few things even longer than that so a very forward thinking program.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And how long did you do that for?
Speaker 2: I was at the headquarters, in that position for about eight and a half months.  And I was, I had come up from Langley [Langley Research Center], from Hampton, Virginia.  My family was still in Hampton and so I got that program started on its way and I had an opportunity to go back home and I took it.
Speaker 1: Okay, now home, you're talking about Detroit?
Speaker 2: No, back to Hampton, Virginia.
Speaker 1: Oh Hampton, okay.
Speaker 2: That's where my family was.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I would go home every weekend but I had opportunity to be home everyday.  So I took that opportunity.
Speaker 1: So they stayed at Hampton which is not that far away (unclear)?
Speaker 2: Right.  Then, it was about a two and a half to three hour drive.
Story_ID: 21208
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Now in '98 [1998], you move on to the NASA John Glenn Research Center at Louis Field in Cleveland.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Right, where you became director of research and technology among other positions.  So what were you doing there?
Speaker 2: Well when I started at Langley [Langley Research Center] I was in a--first started Langley in 1979, I was in a branch.  I later became a branch head.  I was over that, eventually over that branch.  And then I eventually became division chief which put me over chief of structures and this was still at Langley.  So that put over about five branches or six branches, all doing structures research.  Now when I went to the Glenn Research Center as director of research and technology, I was then responsible for five divisions of research.  So I was over all the research except micro-gravity science.  So it was nearly 500 civil service researchers whereas a division might be about a hundred folks, I think it was over 500 people--over a wide variety of research disciplines.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And so it was things like materials, high temperature materials, propulsion, power, aeronautics aircraft propulsion, instrumentation and controls, comp, communications technology.  So it was a wide variety, just a suite of research activities that I was responsible for.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right, now you got a chance to meet John Glenn there too right, who was a senator at that time I believe from (unclear)?
Speaker 2: No, he had retired--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --as senator.  And, but the--when I went there in September of 1998 and it was Louis Research Center.  Then there was a, maybe it was a bill that passed in congress that changed the name from Louis Research Center to Glenn, John Glenn Research Center.  And then we had big name change ceremony and so that's the first time I met John Glenn was during that time.  And since then we've met many, many more times and like I say he's someone that I consider a friend, he and his wife, Annie Glenn.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right, so you were in Cleveland for how long at the John Glenn Center?
Speaker 2: I was the Director of Research and Technology for five years at the Glenn Research Center.  And then I was reassigned as the--and this was after the Columbia accident, I was reassigned in September of 2003 as the Deputy Director of the Kennedy Space Center.  And so I reported down there and of course the big focus then was return flight.  You know we had the Columbia accident.  We had lost a seven person crew and we had some--many things we had to do to start back flying the space shuttle in space.  And one of the roles of the Kennedy Space Center is processing the space shuttle.  And so with the engineers at Johnson space--actually Johnson, Marshall, Stennis Space Center, of course they do the engine testing, but this was an agency wide effort.  There was not one center that was not involved in making contributions to getting space shuttle back safe to fly and clear to fly again which we did in July of 2005.
Story_ID: 21209
Speaker 1: Okay.  I think it's something I passed over here is it before you went to the Kennedy Space Center you published a piece called 'NASA's Vision for 21st Century Aircraft.'
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Can you tell us about that?  That sounds--
Speaker 2: That was a paper that I think it was co-authored with Dr. Arun Cera (ph.) where we looked at propulsion systems.  And the Glenn Research Center is, one of their core competencies is propulsion systems for aircraft.  And so we were looking at different kinds of aircraft engine systems that might go on the airplanes in the future.  The focus is, was, is on more fuel efficient, means burn less fuel, more environmentally friendly which means they would, these engines would be quieter, and would be less pollutant to the environment.  And so we looked at some concepts, one all electric engines, engines that say would run on say fuel cells or maybe batteries or some combination.  We looked at hydrocarbon fueled engines, say instead of two big engines or four big engines, what we call distribute propulsion, many small engines to get the same performance and different structural concepts.  So we looked at various types of aircraft engines that possibly could appear on future aircraft and enhance the aviation system.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And then later on in 2004, you published 'Propulsion and Power for 21st Century Aviation.'  So this-'Progress in Aerospace Sciences' so this is a continuation of that same work?
Speaker 2: Right, yes.  A lot of--
Speaker 1: It's to try to refine the--
Speaker 2: Right, a lot of the similar concepts.
Speaker 1: Yeah, try to refine propulsion and power for new aircraft or new vessels.
Speaker 2: Yeah, but these concepts had goals of one, being safer, reducing the accident rate by 90%, being more environmentally friendly, being able to get, moving people and goods further, faster at any time and also ways that we can relieve the congestion in the air space so that, you know release--reduce delays.
Speaker 1: These new fuel--did--have any of them had any impact on the car industry, the auto industry in terms of new efficient engines or--?
Speaker 2: Well, no we developed, well we develop batteries.  It's a power source not just for airplanes, say batteries for space craft applications, even space station applications, fuel cells for aerospace applications.  And there are and have been some vehicles built and they're still in the experimental stage that run on fuel cells, hydrogen, in particular hydrogen fuel cells.  Of course we have battery powered cars now that can use some of this aerospace technology.  We have some research around the agency looking at what we call alternative fuels, say fuels made from biofuels, say fuels made from algae for example.  And we have flown some aircraft using biofuels but these have, these types of fuels have not made it into the automobile industry, but some of our technology has made it into the auto industry.
Speaker 1: And this is, I've heard this said of NASA many times that a lot of things that are--materials and processes and other things that are developed by NASA influence other items in society, improve you know technology in a lot of other ways.
Speaker 2: Right.  Just so many areas that we impact, say things like sensors that we make.  Now that has a direct application to the auto industry.  Some of our optical devices have direct applications to other industries.  I mean there are just thousands of technologies that come out of NASA research you know that help drive the economy and like I said help spawn new businesses and in some case maybe even new industries.
Story_ID: 21210
Speaker 1: Okay.  What were some of the highlights of your term as director of the NASA Glenn Research Center?
Speaker 2: Well when I became center director we really, the agency made a big change in direction and to be a viable center, we had to make a big change in direction.  So leading that change to make us, to increase our emphasis on more space systems research and development to--we won major roles in what was then the Project Constellation which was the program to--Program Constellation to put people permanently on the moon and to go to Mars and so our work in developing a service module which would be the power, propulsion and communications for the capsule that the astronauts would ride in.  Our role, went in a role there, went in a role and developed and upper state simulator for a test vehicle and that vehicle actually flew.  So to be at the Kennedy Space Center when that thing lifted off with that upper stage that had been built by Glenn employees on it, that was a very proud moment and securing roles in things like electric propulsion for deep space missions and while continuing to excel in our traditional areas in aeronautics.  And those were really high points is to see the center make this big turn and do it successfully and to increase the business base you know from less than 400 million to near 800 million dollars a year, that's--those are highlights.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now you were there until, for about five years, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I was there nearly years again and that was as center director.
Story_ID: 21211
Speaker 1: In 2007, you were named Career Communications Group Scientist of the Year?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: That's quite an accomplishment.  Who bestows that honor and where did that come from?
Speaker 2: It was 'Science Spectrum' magazine but it's, but the overarching organization again is Career Communications Group.  Again, Tyrone Taborn is the CEO of Career Communications Group and so now somebody unbeknownst to me submitted my name as a nominee so I was totally surprised when I got the call that I would be the overall scientist of the year for 2007.  So it was a great honor, but it also was a big shock.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right, now 2010, NASA Administrator Charles Bolden names you the associate administrator for mission support at NASA headquarters here in D.C.?
Speaker 2: Right, correct.
Speaker 1: So you've been here ever since.  This is now your second year?
Speaker 2: This is my--
Speaker 1: Yeah, third.
Speaker 2: I finished two years.  I'm into my third year.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I was actually in a meeting in Florida and getting ready to watch the BCS championship game in January and I got a call from the administrator and he described this job he wanted me to do.  And he had mentioned it in a meeting in, back in December of 2009 and he was creating this new position and he wanted someone to fill it, someone who had been a center director.  And so I started calling all my ex-center director friends and saying there's a job out there for you and--because he was looking at me when he said he wanted a center director to do it and I was perfectly happy in Cleveland.  But you know again, it's a big honor to--one, that he would think to ask me and to trust me with such a big responsibility for the agency.  So--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --happy to, proud to do the job.
Story_ID: 21212
Speaker 1: Okay.  Describe a day in your life and how does a typical day go?
Speaker 2: Oh a typical day is, well my situation is again, I'm now working in Washington.  My family is in Cleveland so I'll get in, I'll come in normally at, come into the office and normally I will, well we'll have a senior staff meeting of the senior leaders of NASA [National Aeronautics and space Administration] to start the day and that typically runs anywhere from thirty to forty five minutes depending on the issues you know that we discuss.  There are lots of meetings and they--a lot of them relate to budget.  My budget's around 3.6 billion dollars and responsible for activities at all the centers so I may have meetings you know trying to strategize how do we provide the right capabilities for NASA's missions at the centers and that would be with, might be with my staff and my direct reports.  And, might have a tag up with a couple of my direct reports, I do this on a weekly basis and--well bi-weekly basis and just to touch base to make sure that you know I don't need to help them do some things that they're trying to do or they'll keep me up to date on things that they're doing.  And I try to have some time to read over things, set aside like an hour and a half in the middle of the day that's called Do Not Schedule.  So that's when I read, take some time to read through things, help me in my decision making process.  And typically I get out of the office sometimes, I try to, I keep saying about 5:30 or 6:00 but it typically ends up being about 7, 7:30 because my family's not here.  And then I'll take things back, to the apartment and I'll work and typically--if I get to bed by 1:00 a.m., that's early.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So you have a pretty intense day.
Speaker 2: Yeah, full day, lots of meetings.  And the time, most of the time when I get to actually sit and work is time when I get back to the apartment in the evening.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Now if my family was here with me, I would have to modify that day and then on Fridays I head home to Cleveland.
Story_ID: 21213
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now in 2010, you were named an American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics fellow.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Now what does this mean and what does this afford you?
Speaker 2: Now the AIAA, the American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics, has different grades of membership and you start as a member and then senior member, then associate fellow and then fellow.  And only one, we had one fellow, we elect one fellow for every thousand members and so we have about twenty eight thousand members so this year we were able to elect twenty eight fellows.  And so there is one grade higher than that which is honorary fellow, but excluding that fellow is the highest level of membership that you can have and you evaluate it on your technical contributions to the field, your status and your leadership positions you have in the industry you know, what your peers think of you and your service to the association.  So the, those--you're evaluated on those categories and I'd like--and it's so hard to get.  It's, you know one of, one for every one thousand members, that's--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, so that says you made significant contributions, not just to your field but also to your professional society.
Story_ID: 21214
Speaker 1: When you look back on everything you have done to this point, what today would you consider to be your legacy?
Speaker 2: I would think my legacy would be the people that I've helped.  And, cause I, I've done a lot of reaching back and bring people into the agency.  I worked a lot with universities and I've worked a lot with getting young people into the STEM field.  So I'd like to think that those people when I'm gone they, I will continue to work on through them and so that and I think my early work in unsteady aerodynamics because people still think of me as an aeroelastician.  And so the early work I did in unsteady aerodynamics and then the work that I've done with helping the fill the pipeline and making sure that the country has as much as I can, a supply of technical people who represents all of America.
Story_ID: 21215
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now the shuttle program officially ended in 2011.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: What were the plan--well what--how do you feel about that and what are NASA's plans?
Speaker 2: Well when the shuttle--the shuttle--well my career spanned the entire shuttle program so it was, you know sort of melancholy.  You know, when I saw Discovery fly over the capital a couple of weeks ago going to its final home at the Air Space Museum, there was a bit of sadness.  But at the same time you know it's like renewal.  You know the shuttle's been flying for thirty years and nothing can go on forever.  And so while you know you think back of the impact that the shuttle had on my career and impact that I had on the shuttle throughout my career, it was some sadness.  But then you think wow, we, you know we, we're focusing on going to deep space.  You know the shuttle could only get to low earth orbit, now we're talking about going out, going to asteroids.  We're talking about going to, you know going to Mars.  We, we're going to, we, we're going to incentivize or thrive in commercial space business.  So when you think about all the things that are coming you know it's exciting.  And you know so you--we thank the shuttle and all the people who worked shuttle, including myself for their contributions and what this wonderful flying machine did.  But man, the future is exciting, the future is bright and just can't wait to see what we're going to do next as we venture further out into the solar system.  And the first time that you know we dock next to an asteroid and the first time or those first steps on Mars, I hope I'm around to see it cause that's going to be exciting and it's going to inspire another wave of engineers and scientists to come into this field.
Story_ID: 21216
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now we always ask this question.  Now what are some of your hopes and concerns for the African American community today?
Speaker 2: I want the African American community to be a part of this.  My hopes you know, because you know you see so much negative and I don't want the community to be overcome by that negative.  Because when people ask me well how did--you know what did you do?  What did you do different?  How did you make it?  And I tell them, I'm like most of the other people in the African American community.  It's just the ones you see on TV is that small percentage and I don't want to see us dragged down by you know the negative that seems to get publicized more than the positive.  And so I want to see the African American Community, one, we need to strengthen--I would like to see the family strengthened.  And with that I think comes increased performance in the classroom, a better performance in the classroom.  And of course we need to become stronger economically and I see that, the way through, to do that is through education and so that's what I'd like to see, the African American community really put a stronger focus and emphasis on education and particularly on STEM education.
Story_ID: 21217
Speaker 1: Okay.  Tell us a little bit about your family.
Speaker 2: I'm--oh my immediate family, my family.
Speaker 1: Today, yeah.
Speaker 2: Oh my family.  Okay, I've been married forty one  years, same woman.  [Smiling].  She's a project manager for the City of Cleveland Water Department.  We have two daughters--and my wife's name is Michelle.  My oldest daughter is Mary.  She has a masters degree in psychology and counseling and went to James Madison University and--for undergrad and Howard for her Masters Degree.  And then my youngest, Dr. Natalie Whitlow has a Ph.D. in psychology and she went to Clark Atlanta Undergraduate and University of Missouri for graduate.  And then each has, each of them has a daughter and Anessa is 10, Chandler is 8 and they're just two wonderful grandchildren.  So--and we're very close, close knit.  And so like I say, I work in Washington, my family's in Cleveland.  And as soon as we finish this interview and I have a couple of other meetings, I'm on my way to Cleveland a day early this week.  I'm not going to wait to Friday, I'm gonna, I'm going Thursday.
Story_ID: 21218
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now is there anything we haven't talked about that we need to mention before I ask my last question?
Speaker 2: I think we've hit it.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well, last question is similar to legacy, a little bit different.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Sir, how would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: I'd like to be remembered as someone who had quite a bit of natural talent which a lot of people have, but the work ethic to take advantage of it and someone then who used that, wanted to provide for us his family and to make sure that his family has everything that they need.  So--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So someone who took care of others, yeah.
Speaker 1: All right, well thank you so much.
Speaker 2: Thank you.
