Story_ID: 620491
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe, I'm interviewer today for The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Scott Stearns.  Sir, could you please state your full name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: Ray, R-A-Y, Floyd, F-L-O-Y-D, Wilson, W-I-L-S-O-N [HistoryMaker Ray F. Wilson].
Speaker 1: Okay sir, and what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: Second--two, twenty-six--no, 02/20/26 [February 20, 1926].
Speaker 1: All right.  And sir, what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: Retired.  Retired and kind of like community servant ombudsman maybe.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you're a community--you're a retired chemistry professor?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: Right.  You were at TSU?
Speaker 2: I retired from the position of Lloyd Woods Distinguished Professor of Chemistry [L. Lloyd Woods Distinguished Professor of Chemistry] at Texas Southern University [Houston, Texas].  Worked there fifty years.
Speaker 1: Who--who was Lloyd Woods?
Speaker 2: Lloyd Woods was the head of the chemistry department and the--at the beginning of TSU and remained in that position until his retirement after twenty or more years' service at Texas Southern University.  So he was kind of like the creator of the chemistry department and did quite a bit of research, outstanding research.
Speaker 1: All right.  So you're also a co- as you are retired now, you're a community ombudsman, you say?
Speaker 2: Well, community servant, I'd just say simple word.  Community servant.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  And sir, what is today's date?
Speaker 2: Pardon?
Speaker 1: What is today's date?
Speaker 2: Today's date is August the 11th, 2007.
Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: We're at the residence of Ray and Faye Wilson [Faye Gray Wilson], 3506 Arbor Street, Houston, Texas 77004.
Story_ID: 620492
Speaker 1: Before we get started, there are five lightweight questions we always ask as kind of a warm up, and they only require a short answer.  The first question is do you have a favorite food?
Speaker 2: Yes and no.  My wife [Faye Gray Wilson] claims that I get--I'm satisfied at eating almost anything and I like--grew up in the country so I like plenty of vegetables or raw foods, and then just whatever I can get my hands on.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: Favorite what?
Speaker 1: Color.
Speaker 2: Color.  My wife claims that I like green.
Speaker 1: Okay, do you have favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Favorite time is probably all year long, maybe spring.
Speaker 1: All right.  Do you have a favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Everywhere, only I like to go.
Speaker 1: Okay, and the last question is, do you have a favorite phrase or a saying?
Speaker 2: Probably, if you don't work, you'll steal.
Story_ID: 620493
Speaker 1: I'm gonna ask you about your family history.  I'm gonna ask about your mother's side of the family and your father's [Fred Wilson] side, and we'll start with your mother's side.  Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us please?
Speaker 2: Yes.  My mother's full name was Beulah, B-E-U-L-A-H, middle name was Oatfield, O-A-T-F-I-E-L-D, McCloud, M-C-C-L-O-U-D [Beulah McCloud Wilson].
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what is her date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: I don't know the exact date.  Place was Cedar Creek, Texas.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Can you give us a guess as how--when you think she might've been born, 'cause a--
Speaker 2: Ah, she died--
Speaker 1: --you were born in '26 [1926].
Speaker 2: --in 1971 at the age of seventy-nine.
Speaker 1: Okay, 1890s then, yeah.  Okay, okay.  Oh, now Oatfield is a peculiar middle name.  Is that a--the name of someb- another family's surname, last name?
Speaker 2: I don't--I'm not sure, the origin of it I'm not sure.  I know of no other person with that name, middle or otherwise.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  All right, now what do you know about your mother's side of the family.  How far back can you trace the people on that side?  Can you trace them back to the slavery days or that far or--how far?
Speaker 2: I can't, that's one of the things I plan to do soon.  I met her mother, I knew her mother and she was coming to live with us during the summer.  Her name was Mary McCloud, as I recall.  My grandfather [John McCloud] on that side I don't know him because based on my mother's representation, at about age fourteen years old he died.  And she quit school at the age--she was sixth--she was in the middle of the sixth grade and she just quit school and came home, stayed at home to help her mother rear the children and provide livelihood.  Our grand- my grandfather on that side died long before she ever got married.  She got married at age twenty-five.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now are there any stories about your grandfather or any stories that your grandmother tells about, you know, life in--were they all living near Cedar Creek?
Speaker 2: They were born, reared in Cedar Creek.
Speaker 1: Do they have any stories about that place and what happened there?
Speaker 2: They grew up on farmland in the countryside, and I think 160 acres because the (unclear) sold that property about thirty-five years ago, 160 acres, but they acquired--
Speaker 1: That's a lot of land.  Did they have cattle?
Speaker 2: Back in those days, everybody had a couple of cows and sometime a few head of cattle because hogs and cattle were livelihood.  That was a fundamental portion of the food.  So, the environment that I grew up with, poor, rich, everybody had at least one or two cows to milk.
Speaker 1: Okay, just for milk, butter and that sort of thing.
Speaker 2: Right.  That was my job to milk and churning the butter, sometime I put it in a jar and shake it up, that was my job.  And I had to go and get the cattle in the morning when that train would--at 4:30, the train you'd hear it blow and it was several miles away, then I'd wake up by that train whistle.  Go and get the cattle, bring them in and milk them.
Story_ID: 620494
Speaker 1: I don't know, you're the first person in Houston [Texas] I've asked this question of, but I'm kind of surprised as I sit here it became, I just had the realization that nobody that I've interviewed has grown up in Houston or in Texas this week that's talked about black cowboys at all.  Is--were there any--was there any such thing as a black cowboy when you were growing up or when your mother [Beulah McCloud Wilson] was growing up, did she ever talk about it?
Speaker 2: We didn't talk about cowboys as such, but horses and mules were indispensable--was an indispensable part of the environment.  Transportation, you either walked and but if you had to go several miles you go by horseback.  If you had a load, everybody had a wagon and so you hooked the mules up--a doubletree, you used two mules and use a doubletree, hook them up and so cotton and so forth, you carry it in a wagon.
Speaker 1: Carry it to market in town?
Speaker 2: Yes, wagon.  And one wagon would carry a bale of cotton easily.  So, and then you would have a buggy.  Some people had--if you, an average person in the community you had a buggy, and a buggy you'd have one or two horses, sometime one horse.  And the buggy you'd go to and fro and the horse would just kind of at a trot, and so that was a fast way of transportation, five or ten miles an hour, rather than walking, you would be traveling at three to four miles an hour, unless you're a real professional walker you could do four or five miles an hour.  So that was from place to place, wagon and you ride--a saddle--in the family you'd have one or two saddles and people would go by horseback.  But black people didn't call it cowboys much, they called it a mode of transportation.  Cowboy was something you looked at as white people being a cowboy.
Speaker 1: I think I've talked to some Mexicans or Mexican Americans that actually call white people the cowboys, that's what they call them.
Speaker 2: Even the songs, we kind of looked around on the left side, cowboys were really signified white people only.  And so, and blacks would ride those horses, but they'd ride them without saddles, break them and so forth.  Yes, I mean, they would ride, but we didn't look at them as cowboys, at least in my community we didn't.  But we would ride, crawl up on that horse with no saddle or anything and ride them until the world looked little.
Story_ID: 620495
Speaker 1: Now the- were there any stories in your family about--this is another thing, nobody's talked about any contact with Native Americans or Indians in the whole week that I've been here.
Speaker 2: Okay now, my [paternal] grand aunt, Aunt Maddie [Maddie Wade], I grew up with her.  In my book I write about that.  When slavery was over it came to Texas a little later, that was delayed.  My grand aunt, Aunt Maddie which is my (unclear), was a slave, and when slavery was over, she was about thirty-seven years old.  So, I'm one of a few people living persons who had the opportunity of not being here in slavery time, but grew up with a relative who was a slave and was able to talk to her.  And I was the person that would walk the countryside with her.  And she died at about 105 years old.  And the day that she expired, she would go to the white people's house, so she was a good friend, so in slavery time, and see we were just intimate friends.  I was her--I slept in the room where she did.  I had a pallet, she had a bed.  And the white people would give her different things, you know, and she--we'd bring them--I would help her bring them back.  And they had a master and a mis- you know, a master and his wife, they were white.  They owned the plantation.  My Aunt Maddie was the person that lived on site with the master and his wife--
Speaker 1: In the house?
Speaker 2: --and she took care, she lived in the house with them.  And you know, back then, the--she looked just like white, but she was, you know, if you had one drop of black blood in you then you're black.  So she took care of the master and sometimes there was a better relationship between the master's helper, you might--some people call his second wife.  There's a better relationship between the master and that person then it was between him and the wife, his wife.  So, the slaves, when they would do something wrong, she'd always describe to me, they had a pot, a kettle, in it was a mop with rags--and in it was salt, and it would whip them and they'd be bleeding and then mop them.  And so she could go up and say, she'd tell about how she'd get him, tell him don't do that, and he would stop.  So she would look out for the slaves.  And it was beautiful stories that she would te- and she could not read nor write.  She'd make a X.  And she could go to church and could tell you all about the sermon, and tell you about anything in the Bible.  I believe she was--probably had a photographic memory and everything, but could not--could not write.  Very smart.  And it's how we see things and forget about them, next day we don't remember, she could tell you everything in her life span.  And my mother [Beulah McCloud Wilson] and dad [Fred Wilson] got married.  My mother from Cedar Creek [Texas], my dad was born and reared at Cedar Creek.  My aunt, at one time, then because she accumulated large areas of land, now, probably with not having an education she lost all of it except a hundred acres--114 acres.  And so she gave my dad half of it and that's the way we started.  And my mother and my grand aunt lived in a house together, never had an argument.  Very--and so I learned a lot of my traits, really sharpened them under my mother and my grand aunt.
Story_ID: 620496
Speaker 1: Now, was your grand aunt your mother's aunt?
Speaker 2: She was from my dad's [Fred Wilson] side.
Speaker 1: She was from your dad's side, okay, all right.  What was her name, her full name?
Speaker 2: Maddie Wade, W-A-D-E.
Speaker 1: Now the people that owned that plantation were their name Wade too?
Speaker 2: I believe--I believe it was, yeah.  Wade or Wilson because everybody in that community, most of them were Wilsons and she got married, I believe, to a Wade.  She probably was a Wilson--probably Wilson.  Wilson-Wade probably.  And so in my life span, she expired that day we were walking across a hot field, it was probably 105.  She--and I took her up under a shade tree.  And when she got--collected herself, then we went to the house.  And she never got out of there.  My mother [Beulah McCloud Wilson] would take care of it.  She called up the order.  And that was the first person I had ever seen expire.  And so she--my--she'd take a chicken and cook it and make a soup and so forth, and she'd say, "Oh this is so--so good."  She just appreciated the way my mother took care of her.  And that was about eleven o'clock.  Her eyes, one turned that way, and she expired.
Speaker 1: She was walking before she, you know, she (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, we--she--that was--she walked and that day maybe about eleven o'clock, she just gave out, sat her under that tree because I was eight or nine, or something like that.  Then when it got a little cool, then I helped her up to the house.
Speaker 1: So you were eight or nine years old you say?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Okay.  That's a good story, that's.  So she could really, she told you about what life was like in those days.  That's good to have somebody that can talk about that.
Speaker 2: Yes, and she could tell the truth about it and we were just like partners.  See, I was her walking cane more or less.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  Did she have her--did she have you read to her and that sort of thing?
Speaker 2: How was that?
Speaker 1: Did she have you read to her?
Speaker 2: She would--yes, would read to her and then she'd say, "Where do I put my X?"  And I'd show her where to put her X.  I remember that well.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  So some document that had to be signed--
Speaker 2: Yes (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) she--you could tell her?
Speaker 2: Right.
Story_ID: 620497
Speaker 1: Did your mother [Beulah McCloud Wilson] have a chance to go to school?
Speaker 2: Oh she finished six and a half grade.
Speaker 1: Okay, that's right.
Speaker 2: And she stopped--dropped out to help her mother, my grandmother [Mary McCloud], rear the children.  But my mother was very smart, a photographic memory.  I'd take her to the associations and she could meet fifty people and would remember their names and all of their children.
Speaker 1: Now, what do you mean by the associations, we don't have that--that designation (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, in the country--in the country, we were Baptist and the land where the church was situated my [paternal] grand aunt [Maddie Wade] gave the church that land.  We built a church on it and it was Bluff Creek Baptist Church.  Then every summer you would have association and that would be when all of the churches throughout the region would come together and it was--what's that creek just before you get to Austin [Texas], about four or five miles.  They would have the association and that would be when the church people would come together and have a joint meeting, maybe half the State of Texas would be at that meeting.  So my mother looked forward to going to that every year and if I was in school, I'd come and take her to that.  And that was a great, great--where you meet friends, you know, to and fro.
Speaker 1: People from all over Texas?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.  That was the thing she looked for to that every year.  And my mother would remember all the people and their families, the names of them, and could write obituaries, could write better than I can.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now did your mother have any other talents?
Speaker 2: She was--she could sew, embroidery.  She could cook and I believe rice, she could cook rice I believe it was thirty or thirty-five different ways.  She was the best cook I've ever known.  Yeah, very smart.  My dad [Fred Wilson] went to school only half a day and he was very smart.
Story_ID: 620498
Speaker 1: Now give us your father's full name and spell it for us (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Fred Wilson.  Fred--
Speaker 1: Fred Wilson?
Speaker 2: --F-R-E-D, Wilson, W-I-L-S-O-N.
Speaker 1: No middle name or anything?
Speaker 2: No middle.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now what is his date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: It'll be the same thing.  He--she [Wilson's mother, Beulah McCloud Wilson] died in seven--in December, December the 23rd, 1971.  He died June the 14th, 1971.  And she was seventy-nine when she died and he was seventy-eight, and they were essentially the same age, maybe half a year difference.
Speaker 1: Okay, so he was born in 1890 something as well, yeah, late 1890s.  And--and he was born in Cedar Creek [Texas] as well?
Speaker 2: Yeah, both of them.  So, he came to live--came from Lee County, Texas, again Lee County, Texas where my Aunt Maddie [Wilson's paternal great aunt, Maddie Wade]--to live with her.  Then he went back to Cedar Creek and married my mother and brought her too.
Speaker 1: Okay, so your Aunt Maddie actually is from Ce- Lee County?
Speaker 2: Lee County.
Speaker 1: Okay, Texas?
Speaker 2: Right, right.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  And--
Speaker 2: And that's quite a will (laughter).  See well I said Giddings [Texas], but really it's Giddings, which you go seven miles to Manheim [Texas], then Bluff Creek [Giddings, Texas] was the community where the black people lived there.  When I grew up there was 95 percent black--90 percent black, 5 percent white, and now that little community of Bluff Creek is about 95 percent white--98 percent and about 2 percent black.  And I owned 284 acres of land and then blacks owned six, four and five.  Whites own it all now.  And the same way in Arcola [Texas], right out of Houston [Texas] here.  Arcola, a twenty minute drive from here, I got a ranch, 121 and a half acres.  Fifty years ago or more when I bought, I paid less than fifty thousand dollars for that.  It was 90--about 80 percent black, about 10 percent Hispanics and 10 percent white.  Now, it's about 90--it's about 70 percent--80 percent Hispanics, about 15 percent white and 5 percent black.  And I'm about half of the black--
Speaker 1: Population?
Speaker 2: Land, you know.
Story_ID: 620499
Speaker 1: Tell me something about your father's [Fred Wilson] si- you told us about your Aunt Maddie [Wilson's paternal great aunt, Maddie Wade] and--any other stories about the ancestors on your father's side (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay.  My father smoked, he didn't drink.  My mother [Beulah McCloud Wilson]--so, they just worked, hard-working persons.  And acquired one, two, three farms, and I'm the only survivor, so I'm the owner of those three farms in Lee County, Texas.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So your father, he moved back to--well he moved, he settled in Lee County I guess or so?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes, yeah.
Speaker 1: So is that where--now you were born in Giddings [Texas], right?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  But let's--Giddings, Lee County, and we always say Giddings, but we don't really live there.  That's the town, you got Manheim [Texas], the store, and then Bluff Creek [Giddings, Texas] is the community.
Speaker 1: Okay, so (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Farmland where we--where we lived.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you actually lived in Bluff Creek?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So, should we put down here you were born in Bluff Creek or should it be Giddings?
Speaker 2: Well, according to the records I'm born in--in Giddings, Lee County, Texas.
Speaker 1: Okay, you were raised in Bluff Creek and that's the black community?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Let's make note of that.  That's important, you know, to have the names of these places down, so.  So, what did your fath- did yo- did your father have any stories of growing up that he shared with you?
Speaker 2: Yes.  Paige [Texas] was another little town.  See, after four o'clock, black people, if they didn't know you well and if you weren't respected, you could not be on the streets after four o'clock in Paige.  My dad could go, and he had a T Model Ford [Ford Model T] and he had a flat or something.  He could go--you couldn't go in the front door, but you could go to the back door and they didn't bother him, they would help him if they could.  So, but if you were a stranger, you couldn't walk the streets after four o'clock.
Speaker 1: So Paige, Texas is close by?
Speaker 2: Paige adjoins, you see Giddings, you go--going off--you go through Giddings, if you're going west, Giddings, then Paige.  So Paige is just smaller than Giddings.
Story_ID: 620500
Speaker 1: Now those were days when your father [Fred Wilson] was, I guess as a young--as a young man, those were the days of the Ku Klux Klan [KKK] and that sort of thing (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, oh yeah.
Speaker 1: Was that active in that part of the country?
Speaker 2: Let me tell you, it's been later than that.  When I went to the University of Texas [University of Texas at Austin, Austin, Texas], Heman Sweatt [Heman Marion Sweatt] opened the doors, he sued Painter [Theophilus Painter], I rode to school with him.  And they--since I had a master's [degree] from Texas Southern University [Houston, Texas], they--and the rules said they had to give you a scholarship, teaching scholarship.  They didn't give me a teaching scholarship, they gave me a research scholarship because they would be afraid I'd have trouble with the white girls and then--and Dr. Watt, they interviewed me and told me, "We're not gonna give you a teaching, we'll give you a research scholarship."  I was happy because I didn't have to work, I could start on my research.  And so--
Speaker 1: So you just--just tell me the racism existed even, I mean it's been existing for a long time.
Speaker 2: Hey, my first exam, a white girl, one this side and one on that side, and then I had a research lab office, would come in and sit every day and they would--but I never--I would just let them sit there, wouldn't do anything.  Then somebody got raped, or they made out like somebody got raped.  They would pick me up every day, take me down and give me a polygraph.  And so, Dr. Watt and so forth knew.  He went walking--running with the judge and the senator, a representative one.  So, he went over to talk to the president and said, "That fellow ain't raped anybody."  And so they went and talked to the governor and--and got a immunity, got immunity for me so they couldn't arrest me.
Speaker 1: But they would arrest you on a regular basis you say?
Speaker 2: Uh-huh, and take me down.  See I wouldn't have--didn't have time to study my classes, every--and still I'd just gotten there, I made the highest grades on every class I had the first (unclear).  So after that they didn't bother me anymore.
Story_ID: 620501
Speaker 1: We're gonna get to that part of the story, but I just wanted to ask you some questions about your father [Fred Wilson].  Did your father get--have a chance to go to school?
Speaker 2: Went half a day, one half a day.  Left and went hunting.
Speaker 1: Okay, so he's--was it--so they had a school, but he didn't really think that he should--
Speaker 2: Yeah, one--had a school.  He went one day, but he learned how to--the teacher stayed with us.  And so--
Speaker 1: When you were growing up?
Speaker 2: Yeah for--and before.
Speaker 1: So when you were a little kid, the teacher actually stayed in your house?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  And somebody just, I think a few days, worked with him and so he'd read and write, and so forth.  Just took him a couple of days and he was very smart.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  So, let's see now.  Now, when you look at your parents' personalities and talents, who do you think you take after the most, your mother [Beulah McCloud Wilson] or your father?
Speaker 2: My mother.
Speaker 1: Why?
Speaker 2: I took after my dad in terms of management, but my mother was a manager too.  See, we didn't have insurance, but he saved up money for a sick day, for a rainy day, and they both were like that.  And they both were hard workers.  So I took after both of them.  But my mother was education.  She wanted us to get an education.  My dad wanted us to be farmers.
Speaker 1: How many brothers and sisters do you have?
Speaker 2: No sisters, had three brothers [Freddy Wilson, Ural Wilson, and Marvin Wilson].
Speaker 1: Three brothers, okay.
Story_ID: 620502
Speaker 1: Do you have an earliest childhood memory, first childhood memory?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: What is it?
Speaker 2: You--you mean, do I remember the first of my existence or?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Yes.  I--the most compelling thing when I was seven years old, one of the teachers said that I would not be--I would not be successful.  Said that I was gonna be a ladies man, I was gonna have them crying, I was gonna have a lot of children.  And that's stayed on my mind.  And I said, "I'm gonna show you."  And so, that was kind of a motivation for me.
Story_ID: 620503
Speaker 1: Now, what were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up?
Speaker 2: My mother [Beulah McCloud Wilson] said that you ought to always try to have a home.  You ought to always--she says the ant puts away things, you know, for a rainy, cold day and you need to pr- she always said this, the good Lord made us to provide and work for ourselves.  And a lot of people think, you just sit back and good Lord will come down and do it all for you.  But she says, He helps only when we've gone to our extreme and then we've gone to our extreme, and He comes in as a means to help us.  And so she despised a person being lazy and thinking the good Lord is going to come and do it for you.
Speaker 1: Okay, so she encouraged everybody to work hard?
Speaker 2: Work.  Even in the church [Bluff Creek Baptist Church], she would come in and she thought the preacher should be paid well and they'd be giving twenty-five cents and fifty cents.  And she sometimes be a little late because--'cause she'd fix a dinner so we could eat.  She'd come in and put a hundred dollars in it.  If they were putting in twenty-five cents, she said I'm gonna put in twenty-five cents and put in another extra hundred dollars.  We all got to eat and live.
Speaker 1: So they were doing fairly well, yeah?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: You know, because this is--we're talking (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) My dad [Fred Wilson] had a bank account.  Didn't have an insurance policy, but they always saved, paid his taxes, property taxes.  He had to pay poll taxes too then.  But--
Speaker 1: Now, poll taxes is the tax you pay to--for the right to vote right?
Speaker 2: That's right.  And so you probably wouldn't understand it, but a man was the head of the house.  And so the man--separate property, he owned that.  But if the wife owned property, she couldn't convey that without his jointure.
Story_ID: 620504
Speaker 1: You were talking about--
Speaker 2: Father [Fred Wilson], my father.
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, but in the context of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: You were saying that he had paid poll taxes and--
Speaker 2: So, so you could own property, but if you didn't pay your poll tax you still couldn't vote.  And so he paid the poll tax so he could vote and my mother [Beulah McCloud Wilson] couldn't vote.
Speaker 1: Now, they actually--you could only vote if you owned property in Texas at that time?
Speaker 2: You--that's right.  You could--had to own property and not only did you have to own property, you had to pay property tax and that poll tax.  You'd have to have that poll tax receipt.
Speaker 1: So if you didn't own anything--
Speaker 2: You couldn't vote.
Speaker 1: --and pay poll tax, couldn't vote?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Well, that's--
Speaker 2: You had to pay two taxes, property tax and poll tax.
Speaker 1: It should've been illegal according to the Constitution of the United States, but it wasn't in Texas (laughter)?
Speaker 2: Well it was illegal, but that issue hadn't been ruled on to that extent.  But--see you had Jim Crow law.  Jim Crow law, that's state rights, you see.
Speaker 1: Absolutely.
Speaker 2: (Laughter) See you said the Constitution of the United States.
Speaker 1: Absolutely.
Speaker 2: Each state, the law in Texas will be a little different from Louisiana's.  State rights, Jim Crow.
Speaker 1: Okay, so a woman who--a woman could not vote unless her husband paid the property taxes or what?
Speaker 2: No, unless her name would be--have to be on that.  And see franchising women was just in 19--
Speaker 1: Twenty [1920], 1920, yeah.
Speaker 2: See white women didn't have a right to vote 'til then.
Speaker 1: Right, that's right.  That's right.  So, now--
Speaker 2: See you couldn't even sit on the front seat, you went in this way and black people go in the other way.  You--just procedure on everything.  You get put in jail.  You couldn't go to the white bathroom or--
Speaker 1: Okay, so they had the signs up in--in these towns in Texas where you grew up, black and white?
Speaker 2: That's right, water fountain too.  You could not drink water out of a fountain.
Speaker 1: Did you ever get off the sidewalk for white people when they were coming and that sort of thing?
Speaker 2: Yeah, but out in Giddings [Texas] where you worked, they didn't bother you like that.  But you--but if you went to the house you couldn't go in the front door, you go around to the back.  You--only if you were working in the house, then you could go out the front door and sweep off and then come back in.  But if you didn't work there, you had to go to the back, so you knew that.  But, we had one fellow who walked, and he would come over and eat my mother's cooking and come over every night, so not everybody treated you, there's some things you had to do.  You couldn't go to the front door.  But, there's some white fellows taught us how to swim, you know, so--it--you'd have some friends a lot of time.
Speaker 1: So, those kind of friendships depended upon the character of the white people--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --and not the laws of the locality.
Speaker 2: My dad, one of the farms that he bought, you could not go in if a fellow had--is a farm adjoining ours.  They wanted two dollars an acre, a hundred acres, then it went to four.  And my mother said, "We better buy that."  I couldn't go into the front door and take the money and buy that.  I went and got Mr. Herbert Wachsmann, and I drove my father, and then he went in the front door and my mother said, "Let's offer him ten dollars an acre.  That's a thousand dollars."  And then he got the papers drawn, and that was a good friend of my dad's.  And so he took the money in, had the papers drawn up and came back and gave them to us.  But you couldn't go in the front door of a businessman, you go to the back and knock on the door or get a friend, another white friend come in.  And it--Mr. Herbert Wachsmann, my dad's, one of his best friends, you know, was a white fellow.
Story_ID: 620505
Speaker 1: Did you know anybody that didn't wanna obey those rules and got in trouble or anything?  I mean, do you know somebody that--
Speaker 2: Yes, yes sir.  The head of the school board, Superintendent Dave Everett [David Everett] and my oldest brother [Freddy Wilson], they were good friends.  There was a white fella, chastised him and he whipped that--he whipped that fella from left to right, but then he had to leave because they were looking for him and so he went and then he went to Huston-Tillotson [Samuel Huston College; Huston-Tillotson University, Austin, Texas], and then got to be a minister, came back and got to be superintendent here.
Speaker 1: Okay, so he was an educated black man.  He didn't--he wasn't gonna take that kind of treatment, but he had to get out of town though, right?
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: His name was Dave Edwards, you say?
Speaker 2: Dave Everett.  He's deceased now.  He used--
Speaker 1: Evans or Edwards?
Speaker 2: Everett, Everett, E-V-E-R-E-T-T, Everett.  And we come and--came and got a job here, I was working at Texas Southern University [Houston, Texas], he was in Robstown [Texas], had a paper that he was editor.  He came and talked to me about taking the job.  And he had come to our home on weekends and stayed.  You--you had some fellows who would stand up (laughter).
Speaker 1: They had--I guess they had to count the--they had to figure out what they had to do next?
Speaker 2: They were looking for him, but he was gone.
Speaker 1: Now was anybody ever--did you ever hear of anybody being killed or lynched in that part of Texas?
Speaker 2: No, no they didn't.  Before that, I would hear bailiffs talking about them dragging people, but you know, during my time, we worked, and the four of us would labor the crops and we'd go to the whites and work for them, and my mother [Beulah McCloud Wilson] would give us--we'd take that money, and that was our school money.
Story_ID: 620506
Speaker 1: And we'd grow up on a cotton pick, and there was only two persons that could out pick me, I was eleven years old, was Cotton Picking Red and my oldest brother.  So we would--we would do all of our crops and finish them and then go up on a cotton pick and so forth.  And I enjoyed, yeah, three, Cotton Picking Red, my oldest brother [Freddy Wilson], and a mechanical cotton picker, those are the only two that could.
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Now, who was Cotton Picking Red, you haven't tell us about him?
Speaker 1: He was a fellow who wen the whole season, he'd start down south, Corpus Christi [Texas], and pick cotton.  And they'd pick cotton and go out west, and then on the day before Christmas, they come home and they'd been picking cotton over half of the year.  And that was his profession.  And so (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Did he have red hair, was he really--really that (unclear)?
Speaker 1: He was kind of red, you know, because he was not black like me and he wasn't white like the plantation owner, but yeah, but he could go and that's all he did was.  And I would--I could pick half a bale, I was at Huston-Tillotson [Samuel Huston College; Huston-Tillotson University, Austin, Texas] working on my bachelor's [degree] and they had just nine weeks summer.  I'd get out and leave and go to Rosebud [Texas], and pick cotton and I'd get out there early, six o'clock, by eleven I'd have eleven hundred pounds.  I enjoy--I got a ranch here and then three in--I got a tractor and our ranch--I sold a lot of my cattle because too much work.  You see how we had stuff stacked then, helping people in the community.
Speaker 2: So is there a secret to picking cotton that fast?
Speaker 1: I had a brother that could hardly pick, stand up in the field and--he could hardly pick fifty pounds on a day.  I picked eleven hundred and get out there at six.  Eleven o'clock I'd have that big long sack and I could just pick that--this--that cotton.  It's just all over that stalk.
Speaker 2: Is there a secret to it, do you have to do something special to be able to pick that fast?
Speaker 1: It's nothing secret about it, it's just working your fingers and you're moving and so forth, and some people don't take the cotton and put it all back there.  You take your--knock it open like that and you see it, it's like swimming or anything.
Speaker 2: Okay, so you develop a motion for it.
Speaker 1: Right.  I could pick three rows, I'm so fast that I'd be walking straddled this one and I'd pick that cotton on this one and just be walking with that long sack.  I was a little fellow, I'd almost need somebody to help me pull it up on that be- you know them boards.  A hundred fifty pounds, I need to crawl up every--it would be hard for me to empty.
Story_ID: 620507
Speaker 1: What school did you start at?
Speaker 2: Pardon?
Speaker 1: What was your first school, the name of your first school?
Speaker 2: Bluff Creek Public School [ph.].  Then after that I went to Giddings Colored High School [Giddings, Texas] and then I went in the [U.S. military] service for two years, submarines.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I'm gonna get all that.  But well, tell us about grade school.  Now, your mother [Beulah McCloud Wilson] impressed upon you that you should get an education, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  My da- we, see my oldest brother [Freddy Wilson] and next brother [Ural Wilson] was in the service.  My dad [Fred Wilson]--only ten grades was out there at Bluff Creek.  I have to go to Giddings to get eleven and twelve.  My dad did not want me to go to the eleventh grade, he wanted me to stay on the farm.  I finished all of them, the crop because I'd get up at four or five o'clock, I wouldn't go to bed until ten o'clock, eleven.  When school time came, my dad wouldn't let me go to school.  He said he wanted me to be a farmer.  My mother and I would--did all the work.  Feeding the hogs, I wouldn't let him--I'd do all of it.  Come time to go to school, I was doing all the work and done gathered the crops, had laid everything by, he still wouldn't let me go.  My mother and I, we would get together and team up on him.  So finally, we reached an agreement.  If I would come back every weekend and work, and I told him I could work--get in forty hours, and so he agreed.  I was three weeks late going to school, but I got--went to school.  But when I graduated, he was the proudest person in the world.  He was so.
Speaker 1: So you had to actually stay in Giddings [Texas].  Did you have relatives in Giddings that you stayed with?
Speaker 2: I stayed with reverend elder, so--and so I stayed there.  And then every--I'd get out of school and I would walk, that's nine--that is nine miles plus reverend elder lived two miles other side of Giddings, so that would be eleven miles.  But I would take my suitcase and everything to school with me on Friday, then I would walk to Giddings.  And I could walk that and I'd leave there at three.  I let--sometimes let me leave a little early, 2:30, I would be there in time.  Then I would get--get the cows milked and everything.  Then Sunday afternoon, I'd leave about five o'clock, walking back and I would walk that.  I had a raincoat, except for the rain, it didn't make any difference.  With a raincoat I was just like riding in a car, walking.
Speaker 1: So ho--how long did it take you to walk that eleven miles?
Speaker 2: It would take me about two hours, fifteen minutes.  Two and a half hours.
Speaker 1: Two--two and a half hours?
Speaker 2: You don't raise your feet too high, and you would have to trot, run to keep up with me.
Speaker 1: You run--you're walking about six miles an hour, or five, six miles an hour, really?
Speaker 2: And you learn how to do that.
Speaker 1: So you were moving (laughter).  Two and a half hours, that's a pretty good pace.  Okay.  So, now did you have some favorite teachers or--in school or were there any heroes or mentors in the community that you looked up to?
Speaker 2: My mother was my hero.  I got along fine with the teachers, but you'd have a little jealousy like that.  And if a fellow hit me, I would hit him back.  And teacher would whip me and wouldn't whip the other folks.  I was good to the teachers, respected them.  And that's just about the extent.  I didn't--I've never had trouble with people.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you had good home training in--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --in other words.
Story_ID: 620508
Speaker 1: Were there any favorite teachers at Giddings Colored High School [Giddings, Texas]?
Speaker 2: After I finished, they were all favorite.  And while I was there and they were favorites.  I didn't.  They all liked me, was proud of me and I was proud of them.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Nobody took a particular interest in--but it seems like you're a real smart fellow, hardworking guy?
Speaker 2: Let me just tell you some (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Somebody would say hey this guy's special, you know.
Speaker 2: Let me tell you.  When I left Texas Southern University [Houston, Texas], if you're looking things--in it there, the new building, they were displaying me all over the--but when I left I had a room bigger than this of my publications and so forth.  And somebody stole them and burned them up.  So my life's work and I never--I never said a word.
Speaker 1: Somebody stole your publications?  From the school?
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.  And our refrigerator, everything.  But that--you don't let a little things like that worry.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Let me get back to school though.  So, when you were getting ready to graduate, when did you graduate from Giddings?
Speaker 2: Nineteen forty-four [1944].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I got delayed so I--then I went straight in the [U.S.] Navy.
Story_ID: 620509
Speaker 1: Were you drafted into the [U.S.] Navy?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: This was World War II [WWII], right?
Speaker 2: World War II.
Speaker 1: Right.  So you were drafted into the Navy.  How long did it take them to draft you after you graduated [from Giddings Colored High School, Giddings, Texas]?
Speaker 2: Oh I was deferred--they let me finish school, then they drafted me.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  So you graduated when you were eighteen?
Speaker 2: Nineteen forty-four [1944].
Speaker 1: Nineteen forty-four [1944].  Okay.
Speaker 2: Got out--got out in '46 [1946].
Speaker 1: Okay.  So where did they--now you were stationed on a submarine, right?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Well first of all, now the Navy was (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Bainbridge, Maryland [at U.S. Naval Training Center, Bainbridge].  I went and took my boot training in Bainbridge, Maryland.
Speaker 1: Okay, you were in an all-black unit, right?  You were in an all-black group, is that possible in the Navy?
Speaker 2: I was in an essentially all-black unit, right.  But I was at Bainbridge, Maryland and when I--everybody was graduating from boot--they were sending them to the South Pacific.  Putting them on a landing ship.
Speaker 1: Now let me ask you this before we go further.  Had you ever been away from Texas before at this point?
Speaker 2: Good question.  Never had been outside--never had been outside of Texas before.
Speaker 1: Had you ever been outside of that little--that--that--Lee County [Texas] and all that before?  I mean, had you ever been like to Houston [Texas] or Dallas [Texas]?
Speaker 2: No, Corpus Christi [Texas] to pick cotton and so forth, just--and Cedar Creek [Texas].  Good question, I never thought about that (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So you're a young fellow just, you know-
Speaker 2: Eighteen years old.
Speaker 1: --yeah leaving for the first time.  Leaving home for the first time.
Speaker 2: And knew nothing about myself.  But they gave me a test, first time I had a standardized test, you know, the boxes and so forth.  So they said I made one of the highest tests that anybody had ever made at Bainbridge.  So they said, "You should've been at Officer Candidate School."  And so then they asked me to join the submarine service.  And I was glad because I didn't have to go to the Pacific, I went to submarine school.  But at submarine school they train you, everybody has got to know how to operate the submarine so if something happens you bring it in.  But still, you train and they let you be an officer's cook or steward.  And that was a good job for me because at the school I go out two days at seven and come back at two, then I was off for six days.  And then you eat anything you want to, any time of the day, you--a submarine is privileged.  And you get 80 percent increased pay, hazardous duty.
Speaker 1: So, so where did the sub- when you got assigned to a sub, where did you go?
Speaker 2: I went to the Pacific, stationed in Hawaii.  And everywhere I went I was--I was assigned to the commanding officer, whether he was a commander or rear admiral, that was--I took care of him.
Speaker 1: Okay so, let me--let me get this straight.  Now, now you scored high on this test and they said you need to go to Officer Candidate School.  They actually sent you to a school where you serve officers, rather than you--you're not really the officer yourself, you're serving him?
Speaker 2: Right, because I had not been accepted Officer Candidate, they just wanted to talk with me and told me, said you--I made one of the highest scores that anybody had made.  Then they came, not those people, some other people came to me said, we'd like for you to go to submarine school.  I said yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you don't know if they would've sent you to Officer Candidate School, you would've probably been the only black person in Officer Candidate School I guess in the Navy?  Now the Navy has--do you--would you say that--you were in the Navy in those days, was it more segregated than the [U.S.] Army in those days?
Speaker 2: They told me when I went in the service, did I want to go in the Army or Navy?  And they said that Navy would be best for a black person.  You go--if you go in the Navy, your main profession will be officer's cook or steward.
Speaker 1: So that's how they sold it.  So it sounded like you're gonna get plenty to eat I guess.
Speaker 2: And when you got to left--was it St. Louis [Missouri], the pla- you had to go from a segregated part of the train and they automatically did that, it was just automatic.
Speaker 1: So, in Texas, was the train segregated in Tex- okay, all right (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, absolutely, absolutely.  Everything.  The accommodations, everything.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  Okay.  All right, so--
Speaker 2: So it was nothing new.
Story_ID: 620510
Speaker 1: How did they treat you during training?  I mean was--how were you treated overall during training?
Speaker 2: Was treated just fine.  Now, but the class, you had to--during the training it was in that class, there wasn't but three blacks and they were training you for to become an officer's steward or cook [in the U.S. Navy].  And then, when we went out on the ship--the boat, that's when they told us all about the submarine.  Are you following?  But my profession, everybody--I don't care whether you were an electrician or whether you were the fellow who kept the time, you all had to learn every part and operation of that submarine.  But then some people was in communication, some was in--I was officer's cook or steward and there was three of us.  And we got through, I don't know where they went, but I was picked for the commander, wherever it was.  See (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay, so you were a steward--
Speaker 2: I stayed at the school in training--on the training submarine.  When I would get back, I was off six days, go any anyplace I wanted to.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you were a steward to a commander, then, yeah, okay, all right.
Speaker 2: Yes, yes, yeah.  I once--the people on the boat, I wasn't serving them, I just took care of one person.
Speaker 1: Okay, when he got tired--
Speaker 2: He'd have two jeeps, I'd drive one, go anyplace I wanted to.  If I wanted to--food was rationed and if I wanted to take a sack full of steaks, I could take anything I wanted, get it for you (laughter).
Speaker 1: You're saying it wasn't so bad, huh?
Speaker 2: Eat anything I wanted.
Story_ID: 620511
Speaker 1: So you were stationed in Hawaii, and that's not too bad either, I guess right?
Speaker 2: Not at all.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, how did your parents [Beulah McCloud Wilson and Fred Wilson] feel, or your brothers and sisters--I mean the way your brothers feel when you wrote and told them you were in Hawaii?
Speaker 2: Submarine, all they do is go out, patrol and gamble.  I looked at them for about fifteen days, gambler lose all their money.  And I--after I studied it, I took fifteen dollars, went out that day and won $550.  I sent my mother $350.  I went out the next day and I won about five hundred.  Got up and I--that's the way my mother bought them farms.
Speaker 1: Now did you know something that other people didn't--
Speaker 2: No, they said beginner's luck.  And then I went to my brother, who's in the [U.S.] Coast Guard.  I went there--I'm eighteen years old and they sit down gambling, and I sat down there about an hour and a half and it was about two or three dollars easy.  He said, "What, what are you?"  And I catch on early.  And when I go to Las Vegas [Nevada], they don't want me to play at some of those places.
Speaker 1: They don't want me either, but for other--other reasons (laughter).
Speaker 2: My wife [Faye Gray Wilson]--my wife and I.  They cleaned me out once or twice--once.  I thought I could--and I sat down and fifteen minutes I took over fifteen dollars and turned it into about five thousand.  And they put two decks and stacked them, and took all of our money in one bite.  And I've had that three times to try to--but it never happened again.  We went to Las Vegas and almost stripped them a couple time.
Story_ID: 620512
Speaker 1: Now, well back to the war [World War II, WWII] and all, now.  Did you ever--we--did you ever engage in any action in the war (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, no, no.
Speaker 1: No, nothing?  Okay.
Speaker 2: No.  When you're on the commander's boat, he's in command (laughter).
Speaker 1: (Laughter) So he's not gonna get hit, right?  He's gonna try not to be.
Speaker 2: So I never was in any fighting.  Just took care of the admiral.  And he had two jeeps.  He couldn't drive both of them.  I'd go anyplace I wanted to.
Speaker 1: Okay, now that sounds like a pretty good tour of duty then.  So you're in for two years, from '44 [1944] to '46 [1946], and you got out you had a G.I. Bill [Servicemen's Readjustment Act of 1944] and all that, right?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: And so I read here in the material I have that you went to UCLA [University of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California] for a little while?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I went there.  And you know I didn't know that a negative one and a plus one was zero.  When I--because--I didn't--one teacher taught all the grades and I didn't pay, so I went to UCLA and led my classes.  But I just memorized the book.  And I took trigonometry and then I took algebra and found out I didn't have to.  So, I did real well at UCLA.  Then I got virus X, something like a flu.  And I was out for a semester and I came home that summer, recuperated and I went to Huston-Tillotson [Samuel Huston College; Huston-Tillotson University, Austin, Texas].  And I just went on and finished, and then I went to Texas Southern University [Houston, Texas], just opened it up and I got the first master's [degree] there and then University of Texas [University of Texas at Austin, Austin, Texas].  Sweatt [Heman Marion Sweatt] had opened that up.  So, he was having trouble.  I rode to school with him and I ended up getting the first Ph.D. from University of Texas, (unclear) school in Southwest.
Speaker 1: Now, so--so you knew Heman Sweatt?
Speaker 2: Yeah, he's from Houston [Texas], he was a mail carrier.  Went to Michigan [University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan] and--and had real good grades, all A's and Bs, but at UT [University of Texas at Austin School of Law, Austin, Texas], I think he had all Fs and maybe one D.
Speaker 1: In law school when he finally got in?  Okay.
Speaker 2: So he opened the doors and I kept them open.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So tell me now, how--you--it would be an understatement to say you're a gifted person, but why did you chose chemistry, you know, rather than some other profession?
Speaker 2: I'd never heard of the word chemistry, as I recall when I got of the [U.S. military] service.  I had a brother that went to Huston-Tillotson and took a course in chemistry.  And I said, "What are you gonna major in?"  He said, "Gonna major in chemistry."  I said, "What is chemistry?"  He said, "That's where you study beautiful colored compounds and solutions."  I said, "That's what I wanna study."
Speaker 1: Because of that description?
Speaker 2: I wanted to study agriculture.  That's what I was gonna study.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you were--
Speaker 2: That's all I knew anything about.
Speaker 1: So you were--you were at Tillotson fir-
Speaker 2: Huston-Tillotson.
Speaker 1: Yeah, how--when did you graduate from Huston-Tillotson?
Speaker 2: January '50 [1950].  Got my master's August of '51 [1951], my doctorate in May the 25th, 1953.  But I was through with my work about thirteen months after I got--I was through with my research and all my work.
Speaker 1: Now, so--I mean, you are studying science like you're picking cotton, basically, very fast.  And that's pretty quick to be, yeah, you know?
Speaker 2: They said I finished the University of Texas quicker than anybody ever finished (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you got--got the M.S. at the University of Texas?
Speaker 2: No, M.S. at Texas Southern University right here in Houston.
Speaker 1: Texas Southern, right TSU, okay, TSU.  And then the Ph.D. from University of Texas?
Speaker 2: University of Texas in Austin [Texas] (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay.
Story_ID: 620513
Speaker 1: Are there any special teachers or anything along the way in this process?
Speaker 2: Yes.  When I took my first exam--no first Dr. Walker [ph.], who was advisor, said, "We're not gonna give you anything."  And he said, "Sweatt [Heman Marion Sweatt].  We'll put him out.  He sued, we let him back in."  But he said, "We're not gonna let you--we're not gonna take anything from you, we're not gonna give you anything."  He said, "If we put you out, you're gonna be out and stay out."  I went there, led my classes, but my master's [degree], Texas Southern University [Houston, Texas] said I had finished, but when I got to UT [University of Texas at Austin, Austin, Texas] they said I needed one more course, so they didn't give me my master's.  And the registrar wrote me a letter and put me out of the University of Texas.
Speaker 1: Oh they were saying that the Texas Southern master's wasn't good enough for the University of Texas, is that it?
Speaker 2: No, no, no, no.  It was good enough for them.  But Texas Southern University had a limited number of courses.  Dr. Woods [L. Lloyd Woods] was the head of the department and they prescribed the course that'd I take.  I took the courses and was a senior course and it didn't say graduate too.  So, Texas Southern University says you need to come back and take another course.  And when UT, they wouldn't send my transcript to UT.  Edgar [ph.], who was the dir- educational head, I stopped by, he said what and he wrote a letter.  That was about nine o'clock, and they sent the highway patrolmen to Texas Southern University to get my transcripts.  Got it.  Because McGowan [ph.], who was the registrar had written me a letter said end of semester, put me out.  So they then created that course that I would take that summer and then go back.  And so McGowan, who's white, was on my side, you see.  And the teachers, they all wanted me to do research with them, so I wasn't having any trouble except that rape, they got that straight.
Speaker 1: And so, how were you treated generally at the University of Texas?
Speaker 2: Fine.
Speaker 1: I mean other than the--well the great thing all--
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, that's a good question you ask.  Dr. Ayres [G.H. Ayres] wanted me to do research for him, everybody did.  Maddin [Charles Maddin] was in the same class.  So Maddin--I made ninety-five on both of my first exams.  Maddin made forty-two on one and forty-three.  So he told his mother, his grandmother, we got a black fellow over there that he didn't have to look at his grade, he just looks at my grade and divides his--my grade by two and that's his grade.  She said, "No, nobody could beat her grandson doing anything but picking cotton."  So, he would kill his self laughing, he'd try to tell her.  She said no, there's something wrong.  And when they decided for the qualify--they would give--they wouldn't let me take my exam unless somebody else.  So Maddin, they had him to take his exam the same time I took mine.  Then this one fellow, Dr. Simonsen [Stanley H. Simonsen], said, "I've got a question for Ray [HistoryMaker Ray F. Wilson]."  Dr. Ayres got up and said, "We don't have no questions just for Ray, give it to both of them."  And it was a question that Maddin had graded the eight-twelve and nobody could work that problem.  But Maddin graded them, so he knew the problem.  And so Dr. Ayres said, "Yeah that's a problem nobody worked in eight-twelve and Maddin taught the course and graded the papers.  Let both of them work it."  I worked that problem in three minutes and had the correct answer.  And I hadn't studied that since I was at UCLA [University of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California] in the--in the first course.  I'd never heard the word chemistry in high school [Giddings Colored High School, Giddings, Texas].  After that, Maddin couldn't.  They got up and said, "You are Dr. Wilson now.  You walked across the burning sand.  We're gonna buy you a Coke [Coca-Cola], which we can do." They apol- and said, "Maddin you've got to take it over."  But then when Maddin went and got this job--big job he invited me in his company, and they're the velvet carpet.  And they gave me everything and he just wanted the people to see his fellow that he studied with.
Speaker 1: That's--
Speaker 2: And in that class, three persons, Ray Wilson, Chris [ph.] and Chen [ph.].  Chen, I was number one, Chris two, Chen three.  That Chinese fellow, didn't see me anymore and six--two months ago, he found me.  They invited and they called every week, just wanted people just to see me.  So it's been--hasn't been stuff to complain about or be sad about.
Story_ID: 620514
Speaker 1: Well it sounded like you really wanted to be at TSU [Texas Southern University, Houston, Texas]?
Speaker 2: (Nods head) I was offered jobs everywhere, (unclear).  It's the lowest paid job.  So everything, I don't have anything to complain about, you know.
Speaker 1: Okay, so they--so do you think that maybe the level of activity you were working with frightened the administration over there or what?
Speaker 2: Well, absolutely it did, but I was building the university, I wasn't--and when I left, I had a whole room just of publications and--
Speaker 1: In four years you made full professor, right, at TSU?  You were full professor?
Speaker 2: Yes, but they promised me a full professor in one year.  And so they--instead of giving me full professor, they fired me.  And--but then I didn't ask for it, but when Nabrit [Samuel M. Nabrit] came, he just automatically checked and gave me a full professorship.  Because I was involved in so many--I did my work, I did--see I published and refereed papers and I had published more papers then all of--at that time, I had published more papers then all of the people working at TSU.  Now we got other people publish--published a lot of papers.  But then, could you imagine if one person published more papers then about thirty--about a thousand people, so it was.
Story_ID: 620515
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And then I did so many things about investment and so forth.  I was a real estate broker, licensed real estate broker.  I'm a trained mediator.  I went and got a law degree with the highest average anybody's ever.
Speaker 2: Yeah, at TSU [Texas Southern University, Houston, Texas], right, at the TSU law school [Thurgood Marshall School of Law, Houston, Texas].
Speaker 1: And so, the State of Texas just--
Speaker 2: Give us some dates on some of these things so we don't get--lose them all.  Now you--
Speaker 1: I think the real estate commission just sent me a--as being one of the sixty-two leading realtors in Texas with more than fifty years' experience.  So I--I went to (unclear) just talking with them.  They gave me $5 million worth of bonding.  I did general contractor for the State of Texas, for City of Houston [Texas], for county, federal government.
Speaker 2: So you put together a contracting firm to do?
Speaker 1: Not put together, I owned one.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I mean, but you had to put it together (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I owned a real estate company.  I ow- I took care of all of the federal buildings in Harris County [Texas], Galveston County [Texas].  I put up the first ninety-nine shelters for Metro [Washington Metropolitan Area Transit Authority].  I did five libraries.  I did then twelve--
Speaker 2: What's the name of your contracting firm?
Speaker 1: (Unclear) it was Five Eleven Home Repair [Five Eleven Home Repair, Inc.], but I have dissolved it.
Story_ID: 620516
Speaker 1: How many years did you teach at TSU [Texas Southern University, Houston, Texas]?
Speaker 2: Fifty.
Speaker 1: Fifty years, really?
Speaker 2: Ah, now let me, you know, in law, you said constructively, I taught fifty years.  In terms of two years in the [U.S. military] service, your teacher's retirement you get credit for that.  So with my service time I taught fifty.  I think it might be one--
Speaker 1: Okay, so you were actually on campus teaching for forty-eight years, but you--
Speaker 2: Right.  But I get in my retirement.
Speaker 1: Well that's remarkable.
Speaker 2: (Laughter) So as a matter of law, I taught fifty years.  And actively I taught forty-eight.
Speaker 1: So--so you enjoy teaching I think?
Speaker 2: I enjoyed that and a lot of other.  I was involved in a lot of--I spent my full time, I worked weekends and nights.
Speaker 1: Let me ask you this now.  You are obviously especially gifted, but how does that translate into teaching students?  Many people who are really gifted can't teach people that aren't as gifted as they are.  They can't, they get frustrated.
Speaker 2: My students--my students loved my shadow.  So, I set up a research program amongst students.  Woods was a good researcher.
Speaker 1: This is--what's Woods?
Speaker 2: Researchers of--
Speaker 1: What's Woods' first name?
Speaker 2: L.L. Woods [L. Lloyd Woods].  See I'm Lloyd--I was Lloyd Woods Distinguished Professor [L. Lloyd Woods Distinguished Professor of Chemistry].  Bobby's [HistoryMaker Bobby L. Wilson]--
Speaker 1: Right, that's right, okay.
Speaker 2: Bobby is Lloyd Woods Distinguished Professor of Chemistry now.
Speaker 1: Right, that's right, you told me that in the beginning, I'm sorry, but it came out of the blue and I been asking?
Speaker 2: So, teaching--research and teaching are really inseparable, they're one and the same.  So a person, a good teacher at a university has to be amenable and able to transfer that to students so they can do the same thing.  You know, for you to do research but not be able to teach others to do it, you're very limited in your teaching capacity.  So my biggest achievement was not that I was so smart, but that I was able to transfer the know how to students so they could do the same.
Speaker 1: Yeah, that's a separate gift actually to be able to do that, because not everybody can do it (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That's right, right.
Story_ID: 620517
Speaker 1: In terms of your own, your--the chemistry papers and publications, what, what particular aspects of chemistry do you publish about and, and are excited about?
Speaker 2: Okay.  I started out in platinum element chemistry.  There are six platinum elements and you know, you've heard about platinum, so you'd have a gold ring, but if you had a--you gave your wife a platinum ring, then you're talking about giving one of the best rings that you could give.  Well platinum, because one of the platinum elements, you got palladium, ruthenium, platinum, iridium and rhodium.  And those are--and platinum is not the most expensive one of the platinum elements.  Iridium, so osmium and ruthenium.  So those are what I worked with on my doctorate.  And--but they are so inert that they were not amenable to electrical methods of study.  And so I thought about--I was a--in complex iron chemistry where you take a complex something else and react with it, and change it from some inert to something that's not completely inert, then you could work with it.  And so I was the first one to really do--make electrical methods amenable to platinum element chemistry.  And so--
Speaker 1: You were the first person in the country?
Speaker 2: To really--polarography, to apply those to the electrical methods to them.  The first paper, that was palladium, and so I complexed it with 1,2,3-Benzotriazole and did the polarography of it.  No one else had done that.  They had a couple little things they did this, but it didn't work out.  So--and then Kolthoff [Izaak Maurits Kolthoff] was a person that did--you could--showed how you complex iron chem- he was out to get the equilibrium constant.  I also showed that you could do--take the pH and do the same--and do a similar thing.  So he won the Nobel Prize but he forgot a thing that he missed and I picked that up.  So I didn't--I didn't--I--
Speaker 1: Who was this, now--who?  Who--who is this, I'm sorry?
Speaker 2: Kolthoff, the fella whose--
Speaker 1: How do you spell his name?
Speaker 2: Kolthoff, K-O-L-T-H-O-F-F.  And the way I got 1,2,3-Benzotriazole was in 1954, I was just out of school in '53 [1953].  In '54 [1954], I think it about page 1054 in Journal of Analytical--no, Journal of the American Chemical Society, he did a little study with silver, 1,2,3-Benzotriazole.  And I looked, the research that he published he missed 99 percent of the (laughter) research.  So I read the paper and I ordered some out of my own pocket, I ordered some 1,2,3-Benzotriazole and to send it to me immediately.  They got it to me the next day.  And I had--I did the work that afternoon.  I published two papers out of that, and I ended up publishing about thirty or forty papers out of that one thing by looking at what he missed.  So, with a person doing research, but really not understanding completely what he did and the importance of what he did and what--and not the periodic table or something simple, but relationships and so forth, understanding those.  And I went to University of Texas [University of Texas at Austin, Austin, Texas], took a course and didn't know my head from a hole--but I remembered the periodic table, and I went in there and tore that exam up with just making a ditty to--some kind of little repeating something so I could remember the whole table.
Speaker 1: How did it go--how did it go?
Speaker 2: I made some kind of little rhythmic expression.
Speaker 1: Do you still remember it?
Speaker 2: I'd have to--I'll use up too much of your time.  But if you look at that book there--
Speaker 1: No, go on and do it.  That--this is what this card is for.
Speaker 2: (Laughter) We--you--
Speaker 1: Maybe some youngster watching this would be able to do the same thing.
Speaker 2: You see, but in the field I would do that.  You know, some type of little--and--
Speaker 1: So you had a little rhyme that would help you remember the table and the relationships?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: You can't remember any of it?
Speaker 2: But we will--it would take me a little time to put the bits and parts together.  And I thought I'd been delaying you too much now already (laughter).  But that's just a part of me, the way I--always and I always tell them I'm the dullest person in my family.  I had smart brothers in my (laughter)--.
Story_ID: 620518
Speaker 1: Now slow down and just explain that.  So you--the most important work you've done has been about 1,2,3-Benzotriazole and platinum (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, platinum--a platinum element--
Speaker 1: Platinum elements.
Speaker 2: --platinum element and transition element chemistry.  The transition element, platinum elements are really special transition elements.  And they have certain electronic arrangements and similarities.  And if you catch it, you can understand them and before you start your work, you could guess fairly well how they may react.  You follow what I'm saying?
Speaker 1: I'm listening.
Speaker 2: You can become--it's kind of like becoming intimate with those elements or things, so you're not guessing at everything.  Then when somebody does something, if you look, they have a vertical relationship and also a horizontal relationship.  So sometimes people see the vertical relationship, but they don't see the horizontal relationship.  And then if you look farther, skipping over at some time a rhythmic relationship.  So people, you have to look at the extended relationship, whether it's diminishing or increasing and so forth.  And so (laughter) it's--let me show you, when it sounds crazy, I always say instinct.  I used to go and get the turkeys up every afternoon.  And eventually I said, "I'm gonna have to think like a turkey."  But a turkey doesn't think, he's got instinct, and I could find those.  Only one time I didn't find the turkeys in my whole life.  Turkeys are like grasshoppers, so I would think about what scenery and what environment the turkey would like in.  It worked just like a charm.
Speaker 1: Now what happened the one time that you didn't find them?  Wha- did the turkey really--turkeys trying to think like a human (laughter) or what?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) I went the next day and looked, and I think something got after them and they were up in the tree and scattered and so forth, you see.  And it's just amazing about animals.  I'd been gone almost a year and with when I got within a mile of the house, a dog caught my scent and came and met me.  And them dogs knew certain people.
Speaker 1: Now you're talking about when you were growing up or--recent?
Speaker 2: Talking about when I was in the [U.S. military] service.
Speaker 1: In the service?  Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: I'd been gone.  Animals, they say it's instinct, but animals sometimes got more sense than human beings.
Story_ID: 620519
Speaker 1: Now have you received many contracts from private business, you know, for your chemistry skills and talents or--
Speaker 2: I received--in all walks of life it'd just take about a day for me to go through all of the--I've been rewarded abundantly, privately, government wise, so TSU [Texas Southern University, Houston, Texas] didn't have to give me anything.  I--with so many other.  Let's take the civil rights legislation, what is it, 1964 [Civil Rights Act of 1964], whatever it was.  It was an act that said you could not base--you could not show preference based on race, religion and so forth, but there is also a little thing buried in there, a licensed realtor couldn't sell the first house in a white neighborhood to a black person.  If he did, he'd lose his license.  I respect that's the law.  But on the other side, I became a FHA [Federal Housing Administration] and a VA [Veterans Administration; U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs] broker for repossessed housing.  And you cannot segregate based on religion, color and all of that.  So I went then and sold houses in those neighborhoods, repossessed houses.  Then I had the first one established.  I sold about thirty neighborhoods, just swiped them.  Did all my work at TSU, leave 5:30, and I'd make five and ten thousand dollars and they never put me in jail because it would've been a criminal act had I gone procedurally one way--are you following me--by knowing the law, I always protected myself.
Speaker 1: Do you always read laws and contracts?  You seem like you get into the details of things.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, and I found that loophole.  And I did that.  And they wanted me to quit TSU and become an 8(a) [8(a) Business Development Program] contractor and if I had, it'd have been me and--what's the vice president, what's the company he's--
Speaker 1: Dick Cheney?
Speaker 2: Dick Cheney.
Speaker 1: Halliburton [Halliburton Company]?
Speaker 2: Halliburton.  It would've been Wilson [HistoryMaker Ray F. Wilson] and Halliburton up there had I done what they asked me to do.
Speaker 1: Well, those are the guys that asked you to--
Speaker 2: Well, it was Reagan [President Ronald Wilson Reagan] was in there, and there were only two black persons of the United States who went on to his desk.  And he was deciding, and I would not go for it.  They gave me everything I wanted.  If I'd have done that, I would've been the black Halliburton.  So I've had--for the church [Pilgrim Congregational United Church of Christ, Houston, Texas] I just got five and a half million [dollars], and I'm on my way out.  Everything I've been, I've been a trailblazer.
Story_ID: 620520
Speaker 1: When did you start getting involved with real estate, about what year was that?
Speaker 2: Fifty-four [1954], yeah '54 [1954], came here in '53 [1953], May the 25th.  I graduated May the 25th, came here May the 26th, '53 [1953].  I got involved in real estate first in '54 [1954].  Got a real estate license and I've been licensed ever since.  And made all the money I wanted to make, don't owe anybody a penny.  All my cars, everything, I buy them cash.  And I work because I have to--have to though.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And now when did you get involved in contracting?
Speaker 2: The day that I got my license, one day.  And day or two after that I was involved in contracts and then got in governmental contracts and so forth.  About two years I was in Washington, D.C.
Speaker 1: About what year, I mean, are we talking about?
Speaker 2: Say about '55 [1955].
Speaker 1: Nineteen fifty-five [1955].
Speaker 2: Fifty-five [1955], '57 [1957].
Speaker 1: And you had, you were telling me before we--in the last time that your firm was called?
Speaker 2: Five Eleven Home Repair [Five Eleven Home Repair, Inc.].
Speaker 1: Five Eleven Home Repair, okay.
Speaker 2: I did President Bush's [President George Walker Bush] office in the federal building.  I think I got keys to everything in the federal building except FBI [Federal Bureau of Investigation] and the credit union, yeah.
Speaker 1: So you did Bush's office in the federal building (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I did his--he's got a office here, I did it.  I did all the judges' offices.  I did the senior senator's office.  I did Internal Revenue [Internal Revenue Service], redid that whole office, did--built reciprocal walls, everything.  The first ninety-nine shelters for Metro [Washington Metropolitan Area Transit Authority], I did those with concrete, everything, fabrication, everything.
Story_ID: 620521
Speaker 1: Now when did you decide to go to law school [Thurgood Marshall School of Law, Houston, Texas], now that's a--
Speaker 2: While I was there and I graduated in '72 [1972].  I decided to go to law school and accounting, get an accounting degree.
Speaker 1: So you got both--you got both?
Speaker 2: No, I didn't--they didn't--they were slow about getting textbooks, marketing, and I decided I wasn't gonna take anymore accounting.  And virtually every paper I ever took I made one hundred.  I think one I made ninety-nine on.  And students were so glad, I thought they enjoyed my being in class.  They said, "We're so glad you're not taking the class."
Speaker 1: You think you drove up the curve or something?
Speaker 2: Well, when I--when I was in law school, administrative law, the easiest course I think I ever too.  I made a hundred on the first exam, the next highest grade was about forty.  And people, nobody could teach it, they got somebody from Chicago [Illinois] or somewhere to teach it.  And they all had the exam so she found out I didn't gave it over.  I didn't know they had it.  And I made ninety-nine on the next one, I think somebody made about fifty-seven.  It was like it was hard to find somebody to pass the course, as easy it was--I guess it was too easy.
Speaker 1: Gee whiz.  Okay, so, now--
Speaker 2: And I decided not to take any more accounting because I'd wait on the book and plus, you don't need to try to know everything.
Speaker 1: Well it seems like it took a long time for you to figure that out (laughter).
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: Now have you ever done anything in the arts?  Have you ever, you know, I mean do you draw or--or play an instrument or something?
Speaker 2: No.  That's what I've told my wife [Faye Gray Wilson], I think I'm gonna--I was gonna do that.  I'm a master gardener.  I'm also on the county's [Harris County, Texas] agricultural and natural resource committee.  And they wanna have a meeting, I said come and pick me up.  County agent comes and picks me up, they're all white, I'm the only black on there, and they argue, and he comes in, picks me up, brings me to the meeting and brings me back home.
Story_ID: 620522
Speaker 1: Let me just go back to the teaching for a minute here.  Forty-eight years you wrote--it says here you wrote eighty-three different articles and have appeared in national and international science journals.  Now one of your--we're gonna interview one of your students later on this afternoon, this is another Wilson [HistoryMaker Bobby L. Wilson], though not related to you.  What--who are some of your favorite students, if you have favorites?
Speaker 2: I got, Mr. Jesse James published about eight refereed papers.  Dr. Phillip Merchant who's retired now from Exxon [Exxon Mobil Corporation] and Dr.--Bobby's got Phillip Merchant's telephone number, Dr. Phillip Merchant, Bobby knows Dr. Phillip Merchant's telephone.  He did about eight papers.  Jesse James, who is in Knoxville, Tennessee, I think, retired, and he's kind of got real feeble if he's still--if he's still surviving.  Dr. Jesse James, Nashville, Tennessee [sic.], is one of my students who--the first paper to be published by--a refereed paper by any student from Texas Southern University [Houston, Texas] was Dr. Robert C. Daniels, was published in Journal of Analytical Chemistry.
Speaker 1: That was one of your, Robert C. Daniels?
Speaker 2: Yes.  But in terms of establishing a research program, centered around students, I was the first one to do that at Texas Southern University.  And Bobby is the--Bobby Wilson, who is no kin to me, is the person who continued to perpetuate that and carry it on in a first class way.  We're not kin, people think we (laughter)--we--that we know, and so far as I know.
Speaker 1: Okay, so they think he's your son or something, or cousin?
Speaker 2: Yeah (laughter).  They had me over that.  I guess he had--that's his father that got him up here (laughter).  I told them, we're not any kin in so far as I know.
Story_ID: 620523
Speaker 1: Well you know these families (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) You know, somebody way back--
Speaker 1: That's right.
Speaker 2: --many generation- might be from same plantation.
Speaker 1: Okay so, now, all right.  So when you got your J.D. from TSU [Texas Southern University, Houston, Texas] in '72 [1972], you graduated with the highest GPA [grade point average] in school history it says?
Speaker 2: Of the law school [Thurgood Marshall School of Law, Houston, Texas].
Speaker 1: In the law school, yeah.
Speaker 2: Now since then, one person has finished with a higher average then I have.  That's more recently.
Speaker 1: Okay, but had you known about them, you probably would've studied harder.
Speaker 2: (Laughter) It--law was easy, but my mother's [Beulah McCloud Wilson]--law is very--is a very easy course.  It's the mind, some people--it's not what the law says, it's what they think and believe what's logical.  And law is not based on logic.  It may be contrary to logic, it may be based on public policy instead of logic.
Speaker 1: Well, I guess an example would be the Jim Crow laws of the South?
Speaker 2: Yeah, (laughter) yeah, yeah.  And things change, attitudes and so forth.  Poverty is a state of mind.
Speaker 1: Now you were--wha- well, I should ask you what do you mean by that, poverty is a state of mind?  I mean isn't it actually a lack of some resources?
Speaker 2: What I'm saying more importantly, a person who presumably you would classify him as poverty and you'll say well I'm gonna give him money to get rid of the poverty.  And the money may create more poverty rather than release him from poverty.  It's not the amount of money that you make, it's the attitude and mind that you have in connection with and relationship to you--to money.  So at Texas Southern University, you don't believe I've ever been broke.  Bobby [HistoryMaker Bobby L. Wilson] has never been broke, you see.  He doesn't make money that I make, but he makes a good living, he and his wife, and he's not gonna steal from anybody, not gonna take from anybody and he wishes everybody, he wished everybody at Texas Southern University could make plenty of money, you know.  And you couldn't pay--you couldn't pay him money, that's the way I am.  But he doesn't hate people, anything like that, you know.  He can accept poor people, he can accept rich people.  You're like my wife [Faye Gray Wilson], you haven't met my real wife.  She hasn't been feeling well.
Story_ID: 620524
Speaker 1: When did you meet your wife [Faye Gray Wilson]?
Speaker 2: You ask one of the most beautiful questions, the most--the best question you've asked.  We got married in '86 [1986].  We worked in the business as long as we've been married, and we were partners, and we're also friend.  And then, she worked with me at Texas Southern University [Houston, Texas].  She's public school system full time, but she worked with me and did my papers and NASA [National Aeronautics and Space Administration] and everybody knew she was on the grant and was working with me.  And some people would call that nepotism.  But if you'd study the law sufficiently you would say it was not.  And so the university was gonna fire me one time because of nepotism.  I said, come on, and then you'll probably owe me about $30 million.  And so they got lost.  See, she was working with me before we ever got married.  And there's three exceptions, if they've been working for you ten years, number one.  Number two, absolute necessity, and the other one is--was working with you before you got married and was doing a good job.  Then the reason for firing her would be because she got married to me, and that would chill people getting married to the people where they had a mutual understanding and a need to get married.  And so that would be against public policy, against everything that we know.
Story_ID: 620525
Speaker 1: Sir, tell me about your relationship with Congressman Barbara Jordan, the late congressman and the late--
Speaker 2: Barbara Jordan?  I was the--I was Barbara Jordan's, what do you call it, committee--I guess you'd call it committee representative for Barbara Jordan during her [U.S.] Congress years.  Barbara Jordan.
Speaker 1: Oh we--you were like a committeeman they call it, was that right?
Speaker 2: I was--
Speaker 1: For a district?
Speaker 2: --I was a representative, committee representative for her dis- 18th Congressional District.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you were a committee representative?
Speaker 2: It's on my vitae, I think, whatever.
Speaker 1: For the 18th Congressional District in Texas?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I went to her office on many a day.  It's--a--she'd introduce everybody to me and take me around and meet some of the colleagues.  I've had dinner in the--where the senators eat, it's underground, you know and you can.  You see, I was on the National Science Foundation review grant committee.  So every year I'd have to go once or twice there.  Research and traveling, and I was to and fro.
Speaker 1: What was--what are some of your reflections about Barbara Jordan?
Speaker 2: She was a unique, one of a kind lady.  A smart, extemporaneous speaker, and she could take one word and make a talk on just one word.  Just take it apart, analyzing and putting it together and showing its relationships and so forth.  Very brilliant.
Speaker 1: Now, what about Mickey Leland, you--you had--
Speaker 2: Mickey Leland was a--studied pharmacy really in the school and Mickey Leland was a--
Speaker 1: Was he a student of yours?
Speaker 2: I don't know whether I taught him.  But he--see pharmacy had to take chemistry.  I don't know whether he's in one of my classes, but I knew him because he was also a civil rights advocate.  And he would sometime dress like an advocate.  He would--was dedicated to advocacy.
Speaker 1: Now, I have to ask you what that means.  He dressed like an advocate, what is that?
Speaker 2: He'd have a satchel on his back and some suspenders sometime, and he might just come and sit down at a certain place, just listened to people, just listened and observed them.  Was not mean or anything, and was not afraid.  Really a true advocate and a one of a kind in his respect.  See when he got killed on that--that was him going to see about--check on the people.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you were a counselor to him too or did you play an official role in his?
Speaker 2: I did not.  I was really under Barbara Jordan.  And Sue Smith in our church [Pilgrim Congregational United Church of Christ, Houston, Texas] had a lot--she was in his local office here.  And I was not intimately--when I go to Washington [D.C.], that's the first thing I go to Barbara Jordan's office.  I didn't necessarily do that with his office because I was so spread and just had a limited amount of time.  You know, you're just getting older and I was also, did my work, I didn't miss class, was there on time, but on my free time I used that to my advantage.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Still worked--always had a fiduciary relationship, I did my TSU [Texas Southern University, Houston, Texas] work first.
Story_ID: 620526
Speaker 1: This is--is remarkable to me that you found a lot of time to volunteer.  Now you--you've volunteered for Pilgrim Congregational Church [Pilgrim Congregational United Church of Christ, Houston, Texas], right?
Speaker 2: They thought it was hardly a day that I didn't go by there.  And when I went by there I always had a bank book, I had that with me.  People in church would give me this, do this, and so a lot of people see me downtown.  They'd call me Reverend Wilson [HistoryMaker Ray F. Wilson].  I said, "No I'm not Reverend Wilson," you know.  They saw me, like, give a banquet and would sell half--over half of the tickets for the whole banquet.  And then my wife [Faye Gray Wilson], even before we got married, she joined in with me and we'd sell two thirds of the banquet.  'Cause all these business places, I go and get--would be selling one ticket, I'd be getting ten here and there.  And so it wasn't much money, but we'd raise net ten or fifteen or twenty thousand [dollars] and most of that was through me and my wife.
Speaker 1: And you say and nowadays since you retired now--
Speaker 2: They work us.
Speaker 1: Yeah, the church really depends on you a lot, right?
Speaker 2: Yes.  Financially and we're not stingy or anything, but we do--we've both been brought up to manage money.  So we don't understand things sometimes.  We--she tells me to quit fussing.  I'll be fussing about them sometime.
Speaker 1: So, well, so you see part of the help that you give is to try to explain how to--money should be managed to people.
Speaker 2: Yeah, that's--leaders now don't--some leaders don't understand leadership, and don't understand the need for maybe not change and get new leaders, but change and get new leadership.  Not people, but leadership, way, procedure.
Story_ID: 620527
Speaker 1: Tell me about your home here, this is a remarkable home we're in, it's--and you said you designed it yourself and?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  See I owned this whole block here.  One, the house next to it, that is I built it, that is where my children grew up.  And then I kept this and my wife [Faye Gray Wilson] and I built this house.  It was my separate property before I owned the other house, but I said I would not take a wife in a house where another wife had lived.  And so I, this was my separate property, but I conveyed it and both of us sold it.  It wouldn't be my house, it would be our house.
Speaker 1: Okay.  This is, you said, like how many square feet?
Speaker 2: It's around actually nine thousand.  The garage, you see that--how many rooms it's got and I think 9500 if you take the garage into.  There's a bathroom in the garage and it's storage we need, hauled off about two or three truckloads of stuff.  And we give.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you do a lot of socializing here?
Speaker 2: Pardon?
Speaker 1: Is there a lot of socializing here in the house?
Speaker 2: We used to give, the 19th of June [Juneteenth] and then a New Year's or Christmas party and our whole house was opened up.  And we used to have a big tree out there in the yard and we'd have barbeque, hundreds and hundreds of pounds of barbeque, drinks, watermelon, wine, 'cause people liked the wine.  And then we'd have a big Christmas feast, sometime New Year's.  We don't do that much, but anybody who wants to eat, we'll take them out to anywhere they wanna go and the cost is--we don't care what it costs, we're gonna take them out.  And we travel a lot.  I haven't been traveling a whole lot the last year because we've working for the church [Pilgrim Congregational United Church of Christ, Houston, Texas].
Story_ID: 620528
Speaker 1: Now when you look back on everything that you've done to this point, is there anything that you would do differently, any major thing?
Speaker 2: No, I gave my children all a home free and clear and paid for.  I think sometime I haven't been as wise, and I give them sums of money, like four or five thousand [dollars], but I give each one that.  And we've done--I might would have set up some kind of trust for my sake, you know, you don't wanna manage your children.  They get grown, they're their own manager.  And I'm a little older than my wife [Faye Gray Wilson], and when I'm expired, she'll be in charge of everything.  You're just lucky to have somebody that's honest to take care of yesterday.
Speaker 1: Now, how many children do you have?
Speaker 2: Four and then she's got a nephew, but we call him, so I say five.
Story_ID: 620529
Speaker 1: Likewise when you look at everything you've done to this point, what today would you consider to be your legacy?
Speaker 2: My legacy is what I have done for the community in helping them to erase poverty and--and try to have a home, and try to have money so we can save something so for a rainy day and for a sick day.
Story_ID: 620530
Speaker 1: What are some of your hopes and concerns for the black community today?
Speaker 2: My concerns for the black community is to first try to think about we in a positive way and kind of forget about I.  And--and begin to work together in harmony, not just for the sake of harmony, and not just for the sake of what I believe, but try to get together some reasonable and rational goals, and also learn to follow ship.  For example, HUD [U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development] has certain rules and regulations.  They got money that's available.  But before you make out your application you ought first decide if you're gonna what--follow their rules and regulations.  If you're not gonna follow their rules and regulations, then you know not to even put in for it.  Now, it might not all be too rational according to the way you see it, but then you ought to do something legally to change that.  And then, because you subject yourself to lose everything.  You see, you're going to accept something and then be contrary to the existing rules and regulations.  Some of them think that they only subject to the rules, heavenly rules, the Bible rules.  But on earth, you are subject to the rules of the earth.  And you--when they're wrong, you just have to be honest enough, hope you'll be tactful enough to address them, to change them, and it has to be we in doing that, I can't do it alone.
Story_ID: 620531
Speaker 1: It's often been said that there are not enough black people involved in the hard sciences, and as a chemist, you know, I know you said you mentioned serving on the board of the National Science Foundation, one of the boards of the National Science Foundation.  A couple years ago we interviewed Dr. Samuel Massie [HistoryMaker Samuel Massie] and--
Speaker 2: Yeah, he died you know.
Speaker 1: Right, uh-huh.  He was in Maryland when we interviewed him.  He wasn't in that good of shape when we actually talked to him, actually.  But he's one of the giants.  And the other like black chemists and physicists, but there aren't too many of you.  Do you have any advice for young black people that are aspiring into science, or?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.  The first thing, is to realize that you got a responsibility, not to just yourself but to others.  And we must first--you can be the best scientist in the world and still, but more fundamental to that is we've got to learn to accept our responsibilities and learn to understand ourselves.  For example, you got young fellows now don't wanna pay child support.  And so our culture, Hispanics have come over here, work together and accumulate.  So we've got to--we can be the smartest person in the world, but if we don't have fundamental culture and relationship so that we can't get along with our family members, then we can't get along with our family members as a matter of law.  Then we do that.  That coupled with being a good scientist, then will give us good communities.
Story_ID: 620532
Speaker 1: Is there a way that--or do you have any recommendations about how to create a better atmosphere for the development of blacks, young black science students.  I know [HistoryMaker] Samuel Massie came out of a log cabin in Arkansas, and you just described you hadn't heard of chemistry in high school [Giddings Colored High School, Giddings, Texas], and yet you achieved.  Is there--is there a way that you can think of, I mean have you thought about ways to get more of young black people involved in science?  Or do you think that they are out there too?
Speaker 2: Yes.  I think whether we admit it or not, 50 percent of the problem is within the parents and upon their shoulders.  We sometime think our children are better than other children.  We say we're gonna give them all of these things.  Sometimes that's the thing that hurts the child.  You see, my children, I gave them all a home, gave them money.  My mother [Beulah McCloud Wilson] and dad [Fred Wilson] taught me that each person ought to try to run his business so he can acquire a home, buy one.  Save money for a sick day, a rainy day.  And if you earn something, you'll appreciate it so much better and your state of mind will be acquiring rather than give me.  My mother and dad, I'd drive and see about--I would go to see them.  Children nowadays, they think about I.  They forget about we.  The Hispanics, whether we criticize that or not, they'll come over here, get a job, build a big house.  You'll see one new Dodge.  Later on that year, you'll see three Dodges, and within two years, you'll see seven, eight Dodge pickups.  And before you know it, they'll be building a house in the community that will gradually be turning to Hispanic, you know.  It's not I, it's we.  And you have to do it in such a way, but we, you're talking about my child, he's this and you sometime cannot share all of it with your childr- you see my dad didn't want me to go to any high school.  The lady, when I was seven or nine, says, "He'll never be anything.  All of your--the brothers are so smart they didn't even have to look in the book.  He's gonna be the only one in the family that's going to be--that's not gonna be successful."  Sometime we get ang- I didn't angry.  Rape came up, I was innocent as Jesus Christ, you know.  I got a letter yesterday, three letters.  One, about the property.  Last year I had five legal cases, won them all.  One is with the commission of--Internal Revenue Commission [sic. Internal Revenue Service] of Washington, D.C., stuff is scattered, but I got records, I'm a hell of a record keeper.  You follow me.  They get most people on the records.  If you go up there and look, and knowing what kind of book and how to find the law, and it's always an exception.  And all of them I won, not on the law, I won on the exceptions to the law.  You got to have a record to build up to magnify that exception.  It's the first time they ever had a catastrophic loss resulting from opossum damage you know.  And then frost had burst the pipes and all of that in one night such a sudden catastrophic loss, I never had that.
Story_ID: 620533
Speaker 1: Maybe I should I ask you about this opossum before (laughter) we move on.  It intrigued me.  But, you know, well, we'll skip the opossum damage and go on to the next question.  Is there anything I have not asked you that we need to comment on before I ask my last question?
Speaker 2: I think and I'll give you a few of the articles I just hurriedly and not, I can send them to you.  I think we've done very well.
Speaker 1: Okay, some of the research papers we can put them in the archive for people that are interested in those.
Speaker 2: I can give you a sample of those.
Speaker 1: Okay.  My last question is similar to legacy, but a little bit different.  Sir, how would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: I'd like to be remembered how I have treated and respected others and tried to help others.
Speaker 1: That's a fine thing to be remembered for.  Thank you for spending the time with us.
Story_ID: 620534
Speaker 1: That's [HistoryMaker] Ray F. Wilson with a fish that I caught out of my lake.
Speaker 2: Here in Houston [Texas]?
Speaker 1: In Houston.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  When was this taken?
Speaker 1: That was taken in about 19--about 2000, about 2000.
Speaker 2: And that is my graduation from--hold it just a minute.  Could I have that closely what--what--master's degree, I think.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: Your master's from TSU [Texas Southern University, Houston, Texas].
Speaker 1: TSU, Texas Southern University.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: This is after the wedding--
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: This is just another fishing trip--fish that I caught.  That's about 2001.
Speaker 2: This is in my office here.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: That one is a picture of Ray F. Wilson after completing the book 'Don't Forget to Remember' [Faye D. Wilson and Ray F. Wilson].  It was published in 2002 [sic. 1997].
Speaker 1: This is Ray F. Wilson, the person being interviewed, on his tractor in 2003--no 2005, that's 2005 on the farm tractor.  And that is on our farm in Arcola, Texas about twenty miles south of Houston where we live.
Speaker 2: That's a picture of Ray F. Wilson in 1986 in his office at Texas Southern University.
Speaker 1: That's a picture of Ray F. Wilson in 1986 before the wedding reception in Jacksonville [Texas].
Speaker 2: This is a--that's a picture of Ray F. Wilson in about 1999 at Texas Southern University in the arched hallway.
Speaker 1: This is a picture--this is a picture of Ray F. Wilson and my--Faye [Faye Gray Wilson], and Ray F. Wilson's wife's relatives in Jacksonville at her--my sister-in-law, Miss Mayfield's [ph.] home, parked in her ga- driveway.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  What year?
Speaker 1: That is 1986.
Speaker 2: Here's a picture of--that's a picture of my great--[paternal] grand aunt, Maddie Wade and a picture of Ray F. Wilson when he was about a year and a half--about two years old.
Speaker 1: That's a picture of Dr. Chan [ph.] and Miss Chung [sic.], a post-doc student and a post-master student at Texas Southern University.  Miss Yu [Xiaotang Yu]--pardon me, correct that, Miss Yu on the left facing and Dr. Chan on the right, post-doc.
