Story_ID: 179926
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe.  I'm interviewer for The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Scott Stearns.  Sir, could you please state your name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: My name is Herbert Priestly Wilkins, W-I-L-K-I-N-S, Sr.
Speaker 1: How do you spell Priestly?
Speaker 2: P-R-I-E-S-T-L-Y.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: My date of birth is January 9, 1942; place of birth was Boston, Massachusetts.
Speaker 1: And what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: I'm a venture capitalist.
Speaker 1: All right, and you're the-- well you're the managing general partner of Syncom?
Speaker 2: Yes, the founder and managing general partner of Syncom.
Speaker 1: Now, what is today's date?
Speaker 2: Today is July 17, 2003.
Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: We're in the offices of Syndicated Communications [Syncom], my company.
Speaker 1: Here in Silver Spring, right?
Speaker 2: Silver Spring, Maryland.
Story_ID: 179927
Speaker 1: Now, before we go into depth, there are five, lightweight, People magazine-ish type questions that we always ask, and they just require a short answer.  Sir, the first one is, what is your favorite food?
Speaker 2: Probably chicken.
Speaker 1: And do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: No, I don't have a favorite color.
Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Late summer is my favorite time of the year.
Speaker 1: Okay, that's what people call the Dog Days of Summer.
Speaker 2: Yep.
Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: South Carolina, Charleston.
Speaker 1: And, sir, do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: No, I don't.
Story_ID: 179928
Speaker 1: Tell me something about your family.  Can you give us--I'm going to ask you about your mother and your father's side of the family and about them, but first, tell me about your mother.  Can you give me her full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: Her full name was Catherine Sheridan Wilkins.
Speaker 1: And what is her date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: I don't know her date of birth.  Her place of birth was Massachusetts.  It was a town, Cohasset, Mass [Massachusetts].
Speaker 1: Can you spell Cohasset for us?
Speaker 2: No, I cannot [laughter].
Speaker 1: Okay, well, what do you know about her side of the family?  How far back on her side can you go?
Speaker 2: Well, I can go back to my grandmother, spent quite a bit of time with my grandmother.  My grandmother was Kate Donaldson, and she was born in Portsmouth, Virginia.  And I don't know the year.
Speaker 1: Well, what was your grandmother like?  Did she tell you any stories of growing up in the South?
Speaker 2: My grandmother was an entrepreneur, and I think the entrepreneurship that I've developed over the years comes directly from my grandmother.  She actually started a camp in, in a Massachusetts and took care of kids during the summer.  That was her primary occupation.
Speaker 1: Now, where did she get the land for this camp and the resources for the camp?
Speaker 2: She had saved the money.  She actually ran a teahouse in Cambridge, Mass [Massachusetts] before she sought the camp.  And the teahouse was shut down for a whole host of bogus reasons, but nevertheless shut down.  So she went into the camp.
Speaker 1: Okay, did she buy the land herself or did she --
Speaker 2: No, it was in New Hampshire in -- I'm trying to remember the name of the town.  Sea, Sea Cemocka [ph.] was -- sounds like the name of the place.
Speaker 1: Okay, was this a camp for black children exclusively or --?
Speaker 2: No, it was anybody.  And it was primarily white.
Speaker 1: But she ran it.  That's interesting for those days that a black woman would run a camp that was primarily white.  Did they know that she was running it at the time?
Speaker 2: Oh, sure they knew.
Speaker 1: Okay, so it didn't make anybody any difference then?
Speaker 2: Un-un.
Speaker 1: So did you spend a lot of childhood years at camp?
Speaker 2: No, spent most of my time, after she had retired at her home with my step-grandfather, Herbert J. Donaldson.
Speaker 1: Would this be in Cambridge or in --
Speaker 2: This was in Roxbury [Boston], Massachusetts.
Speaker 1: Roxbury, okay, in Boston?
Speaker 2: In Boston.
Speaker 1: She never talked about her family origin or anything or tell any stories of what the family was doing prior to the Civil War?
Speaker 2: No, not that I know of.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Did she tell you any other--any stories about any of your other relatives in Virginia or--
Speaker 2: No, not really.
Story_ID: 179929
Speaker 1: What about your mother [Catherine Sheridan Wilkins]?  Your mother was born in another town in Massachusetts.  You said it was--what was that again?
Speaker 2: In Cohasset [Massachusetts].
Speaker 1: Cohasset, all right.  Is that near Boston [Massachusetts]?
Speaker 2: Yes, it is.
Speaker 1: Well, tell us about your mother.  What kind of person was she?  How much education did she get?  What was she like?  What was her personality like?
Speaker 2: My mother was an outgoing woman, and we had a large family.  There are eleven kids, and she managed to take the time to spend with each child, and a very caring person and always pushing us forward.  Every one of my brothers and sisters went to college, and I think she was the primary reason for that.
Speaker 1: That's quite an accomplishment.  Each and every one went to college?
Speaker 2: Each and every one.
Speaker 1: Now, did she go to college herself?
Speaker 2: No, she didn't.  She just completed high school.
Speaker 1: That's even more remarkable.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Now, is there a story about how she met your father [William Henry Wilkins]?  Is there a story about how they met?
Speaker 2: No, not that I know of.  There's probably a story.
Speaker 1: So what did your mother do for a living?
Speaker 2: My mother was a housewife.
Story_ID: 179930
Speaker 1: Tell us about your father then, too.  What was his full name and date and place of birth?
Speaker 2: William Henry Wilkins was my father's name.  And I'm not really sure of his place of birth.  I believe it was Putnam, Connecticut.  But he spent a considerable amount of time in North Carolina as a child, grew up in North Carolina.  He was a really hardworking, tough person.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, did he have stories from his side of the family about what his ancestors were doing in the 19th century or back in --
Speaker 2: Not really.
Speaker 1: Did you meet your grandparents on his side at all?
Speaker 2: My grandfather, I met once on my father's side; my grandfather on my mother's [Catherine Sheridan Wilkins] side, once also.
Speaker 1: But you didn't meet your father's mother at all?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Well, tell us about your father.  What was he like, and what did he do for a living?
Speaker 2: My father was a painter.  And as I said, he was an incredibly hard worker.  He worked literally day and night all the years that I can remember, and died at sixty-five, shortly after retiring.
Speaker 1: So he painted what, interiors and exteriors too?
Speaker 2: He was an interior painter.
Speaker 1: Interior painter, okay.  Did he have his own business or did he contract out?
Speaker 2: He did have his own business.
Speaker 1: So was he home enough or did you, was he always at work?
Speaker 2: He was primarily at work.
Speaker 1: So you were home a lot with your grandmother [Kate Donaldson] and your mother then, right?
Speaker 2: And I worked with my father, and my father actually taught me to be a painter.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So when did you start learning how to paint?
Speaker 2: When I was twelve.
Story_ID: 179931
Speaker 1: I want you to go back to when you were a little boy and tell us what were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up?
Speaker 2: Well, as a small child, I was always sick.  I was born with an enlarged heart, and it was a problem for me.  In fact, I was told that I would die by age twelve.  It didn't happen, of course (laughter).  And my mother [Catherine Sheridan Wilkins] spent most of her time trying to make sure that I had the food and the vitamins necessary to make me grow large so that the heart size would accommodated by my body.  And that was her gift actually to me because I actually did grow to the point where my heart was contained in a sizable way of my body.
Speaker 1: So, I mean did you know when you were coming up that you may not live?  I mean did you have --
Speaker 2: Yep.  Yeah, actually, as a kid I couldn't play with the other kids.  I was always in the house, and spent most of my youth in the house.  I remember the first time I really got out of my room was a day my mother put me out on the back porch of the house that we lived in, in Roxbury [Boston, Massachusetts], and I climbed down from the second floor porch and started playing with the kids.  And my mother was shocked when she found me out there.
Speaker 1: Was she upset with you?  Was she angry because you --
Speaker 2: She was really mad, but there was nothing she could do about it.
Speaker 1: Well, did you continue to get out after that?
Speaker 2: After that, I was out all the time.
Speaker 1: Okay, did she eventually think it was all right.  I mean did she eventually come to accept it as --
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, yeah.  I was out playing and played hard.
Speaker 1: So what age was it that you finally got out?
Speaker 2: I must have been eight or nine, somewhere around there.
Speaker 1: Now, in the year preceding that, what did you do all day?  Did you stay --
Speaker 2: Stayed in the house.  That was it.
Speaker 1: Did you do a lot of reading or listening to the radio or television?
Speaker 2: I didn't do a lot of reading initially.  I did in later years because I actually got kept back in the second grade because I couldn't read.  And my mother told me that she had no dumb children, and I wasn't gonna be the first.  And that's when I started reading, from the second grade on.
Speaker 1: In the, in the, in your group of siblings, where did you fall?
Speaker 2: Fourth from the top.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you're fourth from the top.  So there was a precedence set already as the proof for reading.
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.  Actually, my brother, Billy, my oldest brother, who's dead now, was one of the first black members of the Mensa Society [Mensa International].  He was really a smart guy.
Speaker 1: Yeah, the Mensa Society is the genius society, right?
Speaker 2: Exactly.
Story_ID: 179932
Speaker 1: So when you finally got out in the neighborhood, what kinds of things did you see and what were some of the sights and sounds and smells of the neighborhood?
Speaker 2: Well, we lived in a neighborhood that was changing from Jewish to black, and I had Jewish friends.  I had black friends.  The neighborhood was a great place to be.  It was a lot of fun.
Speaker 1: Well, what kinds of things would you do for fun?
Speaker 2: Make scooters, roller skate, bike riding, all of that until we moved into the projects, which was around -- when I was around twelve years old, we moved into the projects, the Mission Hill projects in Boston [Massachusetts].
Speaker 1: Now, at that time -- and the reason why I ask this question this way is because at a certain point, the projects were first constructed as a move up to get into the project.  And it was overcrowded conditions created by the Depression and the black migrations after World War II that people considered it better to be in the projects.  Now-a-days, it's stigmatized.  But in those days, was that considered a move up for you all or was there a stigma attached to it?
Speaker 2: There was a stigma.
Speaker 1: It was.  Okay.  So those projects were already kind of run down by that time?
Speaker 2: No, they were actually brand new.
Speaker 1: Okay, but it was still a stigma attached to it?
Speaker 2: Absolutely.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right. So what happened?  Was there a drop in income for the family or --
Speaker 2: No -- I know we got evicted from the home we lived in.  We didn't pay the rent, and we were evicted.  So we moved into the projects.
Speaker 1: This is despite your father [William Henry Wilkins] working so hard, right?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And that's really tough on people who are working hard and still can't make it.  At this time, were you helping your father paint?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I just -- around that time, I started.
Speaker 1: Well, how did you adjust to the projects?  Was it tough?
Speaker 2: No, the projects were -- they were actually a lot of fun.  I got to meet a lot of new people, to live in a totally different environment, and I actually enjoyed it.
Story_ID: 179933
Speaker 1: Tell me about school.  When you were in school, what--where did you go to grade school, first of all?
Speaker 2: I started off at the David Day Ellison School [ph.] which was on Longwood Ave. [Avenue] in Boston [Massachusetts].
Speaker 1: Okay, and --
Speaker 2: And went from there to the Martin School [ph.], when we moved to the projects.
Speaker 1: Okay. Now--
Speaker 2: And school was hell.
Speaker 1: So why do you say it was hell?  What was going on?
Speaker 2: There was constant tension between black students and the white students, and I had to go home through the Mission Hill project -- the White Mission Hill projects.  There was a white project and a black project in Boston.  And to get home through that white project was -- I got my butt kicked every day.
Speaker 1: When you say you got your butt kicked every day, what do you really mean?  Did they actually beat you up every day at that point?
Speaker 2: They beat me almost every day.  I actually -- I had a school bag that I carried with a brick in it, and that was my defense.  And if you came near me, and you weren't black, I swung the brick at you and still got my butt kicked.
Speaker 1: Didn't you have any brothers and sisters that could walk with you?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, we all got our butts kicked (laughter).
Speaker 1: Was there any way around going through those projects to get --
Speaker 2: No, nope.  There were constant gang wars, back and forth between the Emperors, which was a black gang, and the Rebels, which was a White gang.  The Rebels lived in the project.  The Emperors came from the South End of Boston, and it was this constant battle.  I mean I remember huge fights, waves of people, just charging into each other constantly.
Speaker 1: Now, did you have to become a member of a gang?
Speaker 2: Nope.
Story_ID: 179934
Speaker 1: Yeah, now what happened in Mission Hill [Boston, Massachusetts] where you could avoid being in gangs?
Speaker 2: I'm not sure how I managed to stay out of the Emperors [black gang].  I know the Emperors beat me up one day at a dance.  They tried to knock me down on the ground, and they couldn't get me down and came back and said, "good -- good show," and left me alone after that.  So, I never was asked to join and I never volunteered to join a gang.  I ran with a group.  We weren't a gang.  We were just a clique, but, no, I managed to stay out of gangs.
Speaker 1: Now, were you pretty big in --
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, yeah, I was six feet at age twelve, so I was a good size.
Speaker 1: At age twelve, that's a real good size for age twelve, six feet.
Speaker 2: Yep.
Speaker 1: How tall are you now?
Speaker 2: Six, two and a half [6'2 1/2"].
Speaker 1: Did you ever play sports or anything when you got older?
Speaker 2: I ran track; didn't have the coordination really to play basketball.
Speaker 1: But sometimes I know they leave athletes alone too.  Were you a musician or anything?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Well, it is remarkable that they left you alone.
Speaker 2: Well, the Emperors were a good gang.  They actually provided the protection that we needed to keep from being overrun by the kids in the Mission Hill projects, so, you know, they served their purpose.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, we often hear these days of gangs being the scourge of the community rather than the protection of the community.
Speaker 2: And the Emperors were our protection.
Story_ID: 179935
Speaker 1: When you were in grade school, were there any teachers that were particularly interested in you or took an interest in helping you?
Speaker 2: Not really, no.  The only teacher I really remember was Mr. Myer [ph.], who was an Irish teacher at the Martin School, who I ran into subsequently when I'd graduated from college -- I graduated from Boston University [Boston, Massachusetts] and had a degree in education, and took the exam for teacher in Boston [Massachusetts].  And one of the examiners happened to be Mr. Myer who recognized me.  It helped.
Speaker 1: So that was a good relationship.
Speaker 2: It was a good relationship, right.
Speaker 1: Were there any teachers in the school, in the David Day Ellison School?
Speaker 2: No, not really.  There was Ms. Murphy [ph.] at the Martin School who was a great teacher, I thought.
Speaker 1: So the Martin School was an integrated school, I take it?
Speaker 2: Yeah, all the schools were integrated.
Speaker 1: The reason why I ask is because Boston in the '70s [1970s] went through this big deal about busing in Roxbury [Boston, Massachusetts].  So, you were in Roxbury as Roxbury was going through a transition from Jewish to black?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Later on, it was all black.
Speaker 2: Later on it was all black, yep.
Speaker 1: Okay 'cause really it's known around the country now, it's the black section of Boston.
Speaker 2: Yep.
Speaker 1: Traditionally black section of Boston.
Story_ID: 179936
Speaker 1: When you went to high school, where did you go?
Speaker 2: I went to Boston Tech [Technical High School, later, John D. O'Bryant School of Mathematics & Science, Boston, Massachusetts].
Speaker 1: Okay, now was that in the neighborhood or was it sort of a magnet school?
Speaker 2: No, Boston Tech was like a magnet school.  You had to actually take an exam to get in, and took the exam, got into Tech.
Speaker 1: And were you a real good student in grade school?
Speaker 2: In grade school, I was a good student, yeah.
Speaker 1: And so you were qualified to get in Boston Tech.  You passed the test.
Speaker 2: Yep.
Speaker 1: And you got in, and was it a long way from where you lived?
Speaker 2: Not really, took a bus.
Speaker 1: Was it as dangerous as going to grade school?
Speaker 2: No, it was not, much easier.
Speaker 1: So, how did you like high school?  What did you pursue in high school?
Speaker 2: Well, I loved high school, had a good friend whose has died now, and actually died when we were in school.  And he went to Tech with me.  And the two of us were inseparable, and actually pursued our academic careers together and did well.
Speaker 1: And you said he died while you were in school?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: What happened?
Speaker 2: He had paint poisoning, lead poisoning from paint in his kidneys and died.
Speaker 1: Was he -- I mean how did he get that in the course of --
Speaker 2: Yeah, we used to go out to west Medford [Massachusetts] to his uncle's garage, and we were out there painting cars all summer, and he got lead poisoning.  Fortunately for me, my father [William Henry Wilkins] had told me that if you wanna paint with lead, leaded paint, that you had to drink a lot of milk.  And so that summer, I drank a lot of milk.  I did not get lead poisoning.
Speaker 1: That's interesting.  That's something that you don't -- lead poisoning is a real painful way to die (unclear)--
Speaker 2: Oh, yes.
Speaker 1: That's not a good thing.  So, how did you -- did that change your life any when that happened to you?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.  That was a big loss for me anyway.  He was a good friend, best friend.  And that -- I just going and --
Speaker 1: What was his name?
Speaker 2: Van Courtney DeSouz [ph.].
Speaker 1: How old were you?
Speaker 2: Probably thirteen, fourteen -- around fourteen, fifteen.
Speaker 1: So you were in your freshman year?
Speaker 2: Freshman, yeah.
Speaker 1: When you were at Boston Tech, were you looking at a particular career path at all?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I wanted to be an experimental machinist.  That's what I was pursuing.  And machine shop was the course that I loved the most.  It wasn't until I graduated and found out that they didn't take black people in the union, and therefore, I couldn't be an experimental machinist, that that dream just disappeared.  That's when I decided to go to college.
Speaker 1: Do you think you would have been better off becoming a machinist or going to college?
Speaker 2: Well, back in those days, machinists made much more money than a college graduate, much more money.
Speaker 1: Well, were you engaged in basic high school activities, you know, you had clubs in high school?
Speaker 2: No, in high school, the only thing I was involved in was track, started track in my freshman year.  I tried to go out for football, and the football coach wouldn't take me because I had a heart murmur.  But that was it.  That was the only sport, sport, athletic sport I went out for.
Story_ID: 179937
Speaker 1: Sir, when you were on the verge of graduating from high school [Boston Technical High School, later John D. O'Bryant School of Mathematics & Science, Boston, Massachusetts], I mean, did you have a good high school record and had you thought about going to college?  What did you--
Speaker 2: Well, actually, I had not just a good high school record, I had an excellent high school record.  My shop teacher, Mr. Spanning [ph.], recommended that I become a machinist, and he said he would back me to get into the union.  He contacted the people, and they said they just didn't take black people in the union.  So that was it.  I couldn't get a job any place if I couldn't belong to the union.  I actually applied at Polaroid and a couple of other big companies back then and ended up with a job in a machine shop that was owned by two Chinese brothers that had graduated from M.I.T. [Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts].  And they were in the process -- they had a contract then to make the shell for the first nuclear reactor in Massachusetts.  And so I ended up working on that nuclear reactor shell, making metal plates that lined the interior of the core.  But they were the only ones that would hire me.
Speaker 1: Did they pay you a fairly good wage?
Speaker 2: They paid me a good wage, yeah.
Story_ID: 179938
Speaker 1: But it was around then my brother, Ted, was a student at Central State [University, Wilberforce, Ohio] in Ohio.  And I started talking to him about going to school and decided that I would go to Central State, applied, and I went to Central State for two and a half years.  And it was actually one of the professors there, W. Lou Tandy, was an economics professor.  He recommended that I go to Boston University [Boston, Massachusetts].  He thought it was better school and would be a better option for me.  So, I applied to B.U. [Boston University] and was accepted, transferred in the first part of my junior year.
Speaker 2: Okay, did you are there any memories of Central State that you want to share with us?
Speaker 1: Central State is where I really -- I really grew up and became a part of the black world at Central State.  Central [State University] is a black university, and it was so different from Boston [Massachusetts].  And that's where I learned how to party, and I'm -- coming from Boston, people just didn't know how to party.  At Central, they knew how to party.  I learned how to party and --
Speaker 2: Unfortunately, that's one of the things that Central is known for (laughter).
Speaker 1: Yeah, well, it was great.  I had a great time at Central.
Speaker 2: Did you join a fraternity or anything?
Speaker 1: Not at Central.  I did when I went to B.U.  I pledged Kappa [Alpha Psi fraternity].  In fact, all my brothers are Kappa's.
Speaker 2: At Central State, I know Charles Weston was a president there, I guess, at Central.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: And some of the, did you know Dr. Arthur Thomas, Arthur A. Thomas at Central?
Speaker 1: He was a student there when I was there.  He was not president.
Speaker 2: Right, I know that, yeah.  He's just a few years older than you.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: James Hill, who's a accountant --
Speaker 1: Yeah, I know, Little Willie, yeah.  Yeah, and he was here in [Washington] D.C. for quite a while and went back to Chicago [Illinois].
Speaker 2: Yeah, he has a huge accounting firm in Chicago now--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --doing quite well.
Story_ID: 179939
Speaker 1: But you were told by your professor you would fare better if you went to Boston [University, Boston, Massachusetts]?
Speaker 2: Absolutely, yeah.
Speaker 1: Were you anxious to go back home to Boston [Massachusetts]?
Speaker 2: Well, I knew I could get a job there and make more money than I was making working on campus at Central [State University, Wilberforce, Ohio].  And that was another factor, just the inability to make money at Central was tough.  So I always ended every -- I ended every year owing the school money; spent the summer working to pay the school off.  Going to Boston, I got a job nights cleaning, and that allowed me to pay my tuition and pay my room and board.
Speaker 1: What degree were you pursuing at Boston finally?
Speaker 2: Education.  I started out at Central in the business education program and then went to B.U. [Boston University] and stayed in the same program.
Speaker 1: Okay. So you had an education degree when you graduated from Boston--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right.
Speaker 1: --University (unclear)?
Story_ID: 179940
Speaker 1: Did you teach high school afterwards?
Speaker 2: I taught school for about a month and realized that was something I just didn't wanna do for the rest of my life.  I thought that, you know, teaching was just a dead end.  And I've had this discussion with my daughter recently who -- she's a teacher, that you just couldn't make any money teaching school.  And I wanted to make money.  So I decided then I would go to Harvard Business School [Boston, Massachusetts], and that was in '67 [1967].  So I applied to H.B.S. [Harvard Business School] and was actually rejected the first time I applied.  So I called the school, and I asked if I could have a personal interview.  In fact, I was just talking about this with my wife recently.  And they let me come in, and I met with an assistant dean, Woody Flowers [ph.], at the business school.  And after having spent an entire afternoon with Flowers, they let me in.  They admitted me.  So I came into the first large class of blacks at Harvard Business School, and this was in 1968.  There were twenty-nine of us that were admitted, and it was an impressive group.  I always sat in awe because, you know, I was a guy who wasn't supposed to be there, and I think I did better than most of the guys who were supposed to be there.  Well, I knew I had to do well.  I was being watched carefully.  But that was a great experience.  I woul--I'd recommend that for everybody.
Story_ID: 179941
Speaker 1: You had twenty-eight other black students that went through business school with you?
Speaker 2: Yep.
Speaker 1: Did you all stick together?  Did you help one another?
Speaker 2: We were about as close a group as you could get.  We were all afraid that we weren't going--going to make it.  Harvard was an interesting place, and the way that they processed you -- and they literally processed the students that went through Harvard.  I mean you were torn down as an individual and then built back up, and it was part of the process of becoming a Harvard MBA [master's in business administration].  And if you didn't understand what they were doing to you, you weren't gonna make it.
Speaker 1: Now, what do you mean by you were "torn down"?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, the business school performs a psychological processing on you, and they really -- they break you down.  I mean from a person who might think that, you know, I can conquer the world on my own, they let you know that you can't.  And that's part of the breakdown process that I think you go through.
Speaker 1: Can you give us an example of like, the way they would break you down, if you were too big headed?
Speaker 2: Well, almost everybody thought that they were gonna fail.  I mean it didn't make any difference how smart you were.  I mean they put the fear of failure into you in that first year.  And I remember they had what they called the "dumb-dumb" list.  And they would post your name up on the wall in Baker-20.  And if you didn't make it, pass those exams, your name was up there on the "dumb-dumb list".  And I mean as a student, walking into school one day, seeing your name posted on the wall, I mean that can destroy you.  Fortunately, I didn't get posted up on dumb-dumb.
Speaker 1: Did you know individuals that were posted on the dumb-dumb?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And how did they react to that?
Speaker 2: They were -- they were destroyed, I mean broken down.
Speaker 1: Did they leave the business school?
Speaker 2: Some of them did, not all of them.  After that, they'd work on building you back up.
Speaker 1: What was the process of rebuilding you?
Speaker 2: Well, you went from dumb-dumb to remedial programs, and these remedial programs would help you strengthen your academic grounding.  And they worked.
Speaker 1: So they would label you first a "dumb-dumb" and then they would come back and try to fill in the missing pieces--
Speaker 2: Absolutely.
Speaker 1: --or gaps in knowledge?
Speaker 2: Yep.
Speaker 1: If you couldn't take it, you would leave and --
Speaker 2: You would leave, yep.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So did you ever think about leaving?  Did you ever think about doing that?
Speaker 2: Absolutely.  In fact, I remember having -- I was married then.  And I went home, and I told my wife, I said, "I'm quitting.  I'm leaving this place."  And she told me, "No, you're not" and actually talked me through.  The whole time I thought I was going down the tubes, she was assuring me that I was doing the right thing, and I wasn't going down the tubes.  I didn't go down the tubes.  Without her, I probably would not have made it through H.B.S.
Speaker 1: So when did you know you had it made at Harvard or were gonna make it?  How did you feel when you knew you had made it?
Speaker 2: I felt pretty good.  You never -- I was never really certain that I was going to make it until I had actually graduated.  The business school was probably the toughest place that I've ever been in my life.  Even the gangs in the Mission Hill projects weren't as tough as that whole H.B.S. process.  But I made it through, and in the beginning of my second year I knew that having made it to the second year--and everybody graduates who makes it to the second year.  Tough to punch out in the second year.
Speaker 1: But the first year is the year of jeopardy.
Speaker 2: Yep.
Story_ID: 179942
Speaker 1: Tell me about graduation.  Did your parents come to see you graduate from Harvard Business School [Boston, Massachusetts]?
Speaker 2: Yep.  My mother [Catherine Sheridan Wilkins] and father [William Henry Wilkins] were both there.  My father was overjoyed.  He couldn't believe it.  Even though we had lived not that far from the H.B.S. [Harvard Business School] campus, and he did an incredible amount of painting in Brookline [Boston, Massachusetts] and Allston [Boston, Massachusetts], which is not that far from the campus, he was, he was happy.  And I had a brother that was one year younger who graduated a year after me.  I think we were the -- I had another brother that was in the PMD program [Program for Management Development].  So at one time, there were three brothers, Wilkins, at H.B.S., which was most unusual.  I think that was a first, three black brothers.
Speaker 1: Yeah, it is something that's not-- that's unique.
Speaker 2: Yep.
Speaker 1: Did you support each other?  I mean were you all--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.
Speaker 1: --a good support to one another?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.
Story_ID: 179943
Speaker 1: When you graduated [from Harvard Business School, Boston, Massachusetts] what did you do?  What were your prospects?
Speaker 2: Well, when I graduated, I decided that I wanted to go into venture capital.  I had worked with two other guys, Dan [Daniel] Denison -- Dennis and Tyrone Dickerson to set up a venture capital fund.  And in the summer of '68 [1968], we worked on that fund with Charlie Cabot who was a lawyer at Sullivan and Worcester law firm in Boston [Massachusetts], and one of the Cabots.  And Charlie really had a feeling that venture capital was a way for black people to move from where they were into the main stream of business.  And so he was very supportive.  But that effort just didn't -- it didn't make it.  We just didn't have any big money -- moneyed person working with us to help us over the hump.  And there was another group that started that summer, a white group, that was working with Morgan Guaranty [Trust] and Morgan Stanley to do the same thing.  They actually got funding, Urban National [Corporation, Boston, Massachusetts].  And that's where I started work in 1973 at Urban National in the venture capital business.  So I'm glad that they were successful, although they had no idea what they were doing.  And they didn't really understand black people and black entrepreneurship.  It's interesting because I always felt that culturally, there was a difference between the way white people pursue the development of business opportunities and the way black people pursue the development of business opportunities.  And if you didn't understand that, you could end up in a wrong place.  U.N.C. or Urban National wanted to finance what they thought were the right people for business development, middle-class black people, who I felt didn't have the chutzpah to make it.  I felt that people who came out of the project and who had gone through the wars, fighting their way, were the right kind of people to finance.  These are the guys who are going to make it in society.  And the other guys would fall by the wayside.  I turned out to be right, I really believe, based upon the success Syncom has had and based upon the lack of success that Urban National has had.  I think that really is the proof in the pudding.
Story_ID: 179944
Speaker 1: People have speculated from time to time that the black middle class is very conservative very--sees itself in a very precarious situation and is concerned about preparation -- they see education as a preparation for jobs rather than business opportunities.  Is that basically what you're talking about in terms of --
Speaker 2: Just lack of a willingness to take risks.  You can't be successful in business unless you're willing to take risks, significant risks.  And when you come out of a project, you know what risks are.  You know how to avoid silly risks and to confront those risks that represent opportunities.
Speaker 1: But if you have, if you have something to lose and you're not really sure, you can be, you can be kind of stuck, you know, if you think you really have a lot to lose, and if a that your slippery hold and status quo quo might fall away from you.
Speaker 2: Well, you know, being a middle-class person, you believe that you have something that you should hold onto, that you can't risk.  And the day you decide that you can't risk something is the day you decide you're not a business person.  Everything is at risk to be successful in business, everything.
Speaker 1: For black people in this country, there's not a lot of inherited wealth or anything.  And there's there's not relatives normally to fall back on.  If a middle-class, black person decides to take a risk, he probably doesn't have anything -- he thinks he's gonna hit the bottom pretty much, if he doesn't make it.  So it has to be a well-considered risk, you would think, for a person want to be willing to make a move like that.  So do you think that plays a part of it?
Speaker 2: Absolutely.
Speaker 1: Would you agree that it's easier for white people to take a risk in business usually because of circumstances, financial circumstances, than it is for a black person or what do you think that--
Speaker 2: No, it's not easier.  The support system that white people have in this country allows them to hit bottom, feel it, and bounce back up.  If a black person hits bottom, you don't get back up.  You're there.  And we just don't--we don't have a support system that is strong enough to really support a fall.
Story_ID: 179945
Speaker 1: Tell us then how this impacts being a black venture capitalist.  You come from that pro- project background, and you say you're not afraid to take the risks, but how does that affect the projects that you choose to capitalize?
Speaker 2: I'm not really sure.  I really -- when I started in this business, I was at U.N.C. [Urban National Corporation, Boston, Massachusetts], and I was told, these are the kinds of people that we finance.  And I looked around, and I said, "Well, they're not the people that are successful".  And when I looked out and I saw, in communications back then, guys like Percy Sutton and [HM] Clarence Avant, Gene Jackson, they were guys that were doing things.  And they were making real headway.  And if you talk to them, you know, they'll tell you hard stories about how they came up and that nothing was given to them.  Everything they got, they got through hard, individual effort.  And I was convinced that you had to finance people and not businesses.  And so I started looking for people who were of the same ilk and worked with them.  And that's really how we made it at Syncom.  We financed people.
Speaker 1: So you looked for that toughness in --
Speaker 2: Absolutely.  If you don't see that, then you go the other way.  And a thing that a venture capitalist does is you are a coach to somebody.  And you're gonna spend five or more years with that person, coaching them from nowhere to something.  And you really have to believe that that person is going to make it with a little bit of coaching.  And if you don't believe that, don't get involved because it will be five years of misery and failure at the end.
Story_ID: 179946
Speaker 1: Can you give us an example of--and, you know, you don't have to use names, but if you want to, you can.  I don't know what the legality of that is, but if you could give us an example of somebody you took a risk on and actually made it, and then somebody that, you know, you kind of got stuck with, that didn't--and maybe you were typified by those two experiences?
Speaker 2: Well, if I was going to talk about somebody who made it--well, the person's dead so, yes, I can talk about them--a guy I financed in Oklahoma City [Oklahoma], Jimmy Miller.  He was looking to put a radio station on the air, needed just a little bit of money; had been working for a long time, and came to see me.  I listened to the story, and back then, I was hearing all stories.  And I said, you know, I think this guy will make it.  And so we put $175,000 into his company, and he got the station on the air.  I mean Oklahoma City was a tough place to be if you were black back then, selling radio to ad agencies that didn't wanna see you.  But he made it.  The sad part of all of that was, to get our money out, we talked to Jimmy about selling the station.  And so he sold the station.  And he sold it for three and a half million [dollars], and it was a lot of money.  But Jimmy Miller really needed that radio station to survive because he just went right downhill without that radio station.  In fact, lost most of his money, the money that he had made in the deal.
Speaker 1: How did he lose it?
Speaker 2: Bad investments, just -- you know, people get a million, two million dollars and they think it's a lot of money.  And a million or two million dollars is nothing.  And it was absolutely nothing, and you blow right through it.  You know, once you help your family and friends, you're broke.  So, you know, you've got to make a lot of money to be successful, mega millions.  And somebody who didn't make it, let's see.  I'm trying to think.  I put most of those people out of my mind who didn't make it.  Talk about another guy who's also dead.  The guy's name was Anthony Mason, Tony Mason, who brought a station in Albany, New York.  The problem with Tony was, he wouldn't listen to anybody.  He knew everything, but he really didn't know anything.  And it was straight downhill.  He never made that thing work.  And it was sold off.
Speaker 1: What kind of business was it?
Speaker 2: Radio station, AM radio station, and it just -- it didn't work.  I mean he just had no sense of what the community wanted, how to position the station, market it.  Those were alien concepts to him, and he wouldn't listen, so he lost out, and he lost his property.
Speaker 1: Now, what persuaded you to fund it in the first place?
Speaker 2: A mutual friend, a guy we'd both known for years convinced me that he could, he could make it.  He couldn't make it.
Story_ID: 179947
Speaker 1: How did you all get involved in communications as an expertise? Or why did you choose--
Speaker 2: Well, we realized that if we could finance start-ups in communications, we would be better off, and we would be following a curve up as opposed to a trend down.  We got into financing early on, FMs in urban markets where low-power FMs covered -- their signal covered primarily black and/or Hispanic communities.  And then we also decided to finance urban cable.  And so we got in, early on in some of the early cable start-ups.
Speaker 1: Now, now, there was a time when FM stations only played classical music and very few of the -- frequencies were used on the dial.  Is that true?
Speaker 2: There was a time, yeah.  The F.C.C. [Federal Communications Commission] had not licensed all of the FM station and so there was an opportunity to get new licenses.  And then the F.C.C. decided to cut the power of a number of stations so that they could increase the overall number of FM stations and that was a real -- the 80/90 docket, a real boom to black people who knew where the opportunities were and took advantage of them.  And so it--it turned out to be the right strategy to follow cable, AM/FM start-ups; we made a tremendous amount of money doing that.
Speaker 1: This transition took place basically during the late '60s [1960s], early '70s [1970s], right?
Speaker 2: Late '70s [1970s], early '80s [1980s].  It's not that long ago.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Tell me, like what kind of returns do you return on the investment?  I mean what would you consider a good return for your investment?
Speaker 2: Our returns over the years have been in the mid-twenties.  We average about twenty-four, 25 percent return on every dollar invested, which has been pretty good.
Speaker 1: Okay, and I've heard it said that some of these big venture capitalist, they won't accept less than a hundred-to-one (unclear) return.  You don't --
Speaker 2: No, I mean you can't -- I don't think you can do deals a hundred and one -- a hundred to one return, I mean unless you're talking about the Internet kind of investments that people were making back in the late '90s [1990s].  But only a few people got in on that.
Speaker 1: Okay, so what you're doing was pretty good in terms of returns?
Speaker 2: We are very happy with where we are.  We've done well as a venture fund and as individual investors.
Speaker 1: Okay.  What role does the growth of the business play in your decision to fund them?  I've heard that there are some funding groups that will not fund somebody satisfied in maintaining their present size and, you know, say if a guy has a health food store, and he's satisfied with that.  He goes to work every day, he goes home, he has his lifestyle.  He's not interested in growing the business.  Is that something that you look at?
Speaker 2: Very much so, I mean because that really says a lot about the individual.  If a person is satisfied with a small business and doesn't want to grow or doesn't want to get involved with the effort to make it grow, then that's not our kind of person.  That person doesn't need venture capital.  That person needs bank financing.  To support venture capital, you really need some element of growth, significant element of growth that's the only thing that works, that gives you the kind of return you're looking for.
Story_ID: 179948
Speaker 1: Now, you've been involved with BET [Black Entertainment Television], Radio One, which a lot of people don't realize is a black--was a black company or was or is a black company.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Is still, okay.  TMX [Interactive], Buena Vista television [sic, Buenavision]. What have been-- are these some of your most successful ventures?
Speaker 2: Yeah, although there have been a number of successes of people that aren't on that list.  South Chicago Cable TV.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: We were the original investor in that.  District Cable Television, which is District of Columbia Cable TV system, Newark Cable TV.  Those were some of the other deals that we were involved in that have been good deals for us.  We're into Iridium Satellite right now which is our biggest investment ever.
Speaker 1: Iridium is our largest investment to date.  We've got about sixty million dollars in that.
Speaker 2: And what is that now, Iridium Satellite?
Speaker 1: Iridium Satellite telephone company, satellite telephone system.
Speaker 2: Okay. So this, this satellite services cell phones and that sort of thing?
Speaker 1: Not cell phones, satellite phones.
Speaker 2: Satellite phones, okay.  Oh okay.  And how are they different from cell phones?
Speaker 1: Well, cell phones work on radio signals terrestrially on the ground and satellite phones work with an antenna that picks up a signal from satellite.  In fact, in the Gulf War, Iridium phones were used probably as a primary means of communication and we've done well in, in the Gulf War in fighting [Osama] Bin Laden in Afghanistan.
Speaker 2: Okay, so--all right, so this technology -- you're really at the forefront of this kind of technology then, able to--?
Speaker 1: Yeah, with the Iridium we are.  We brought Iridium out of bankruptcy.  We bought it from Motorola.  We paid twenty-five million dollars for $5.7 billion worth of investment that Motorola put into it.  And we're making it work, and they couldn't make it work.
Speaker 2: That's got to be considered quite a coup, you know.
Speaker 1: We think it is, yeah.
Story_ID: 179949
Speaker 1: What has been the most satisfying deal you've ever made or what would you--what would you consider the best deal you've ever made?
Speaker 2: The best deal I've ever made?  Probably the best deal I ever made was a deal I did with a guy named Ragan Henry.  Ragan came to us in the early '90s and was looking for working capital finance.  And we put money into his company.  He then owned radio stations in Detroit [Michigan], Kansas City [Missouri], and the south New Jersey area.  And we put in not that much money, and when we put our money in Henry decided that he wanted to sell the company, and we decided that it was too soon to sell.  So instead of selling when he sold, we split the assets of the company.  And we took the radio station in Detroit, the radio station in Kansas City, and he took other assets.  And he sold his assets.  We held on to our assets.  We ended up selling the Detroit station for twenty-eight million dollars to Radio One.  That was a great deal for us because we only put in $500,000.  So we put in $500,000 and we sold it for twenty-eight million, and we still own the Kansas City property which--hey, Tony [ph.], can I mention where we are with Kansas City?
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Yeah, we're in the process of selling, so yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah, we've just sold Kansas City for twenty-five million.  So that's really turned out to be our best investment.
Story_ID: 179950
Speaker 1: Does it matter to you when you're looking to invest, does it matter to you about where the person went to the school or what kind of degrees they have and that sort of thing?
Speaker 2: Not at all, nope.  I don't care where they go to school.  I'll just have to feel that they understand that there is a process to making money and that they're willing to live with that process.
Speaker 1: Now, what do you mean by that, that they're willing to live with that process?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, the toughest thing to do is to be in business and not be patient.  If you're not patient, you can't make money.  You have to be able to accept what comes down the road and know when the best time is to exit a, a, a deal.  And that's not easy.  And if you invest with people, and they don't know or understand that, then they won't make money.
Speaker 1: I see. How do you know the best time to exit a deal?
Speaker 2: I don't know.  You know.  It comes to you.  You're sitting there, and you say, we have a chance to get out.  Now is the time, I know it, and I feel it.
Speaker 1: Okay, so experience -- you've got --
Speaker 2: Absolutely, yep.
Speaker 1: -- to be able to decode the (unclear).  Tell me what--, sir, what advice would you have for young people or anybody trying to get involved in venture capital at this point?
Speaker 2: Well, the venture capital business is an apprenticeship.  You actually have to understudy with somebody.  So you've got to find somebody willing to take you on and train you.  I don't think you can learn this on your own.  There are probably people who have learned it on their own, but it's much tougher that way.  You need somebody who's experienced, knows what they're doing and who is willing to teach you.  And if he can do that, then he can get into this business.
Speaker 1: Do you see, as a trend, more black people getting involved in this or, or is it pretty weak in terms of black involvement?
Speaker 2: No, I see more black people getting involved.  What I don't see is a way for them to apprentice and become skilled at what they're doing.  That's the tough part right now.  There's plenty of capital around, but there, there are not plenty of people to manage that capital.  That's the toughest part of the business today for young people.
Story_ID: 179951
Speaker 1: What do you see as your next step as a--
Speaker 2: My next step is to make sure that the guys I have here have their heads screwed on right and to retire.  I'm ready to go.
Speaker 1: So, what are some of your hopes and concerns for the black community in general?
Speaker 2: My--what are my hope and concerns.  My real hope is that black people understand the political clout that they have in this country and exercise it to protect themselves from the people who I think are trying to constantly attack the position that black people have obtained.  And my feelings may come a little from a certain level of paranoia, but I don't think so.  I think that, for instance, the [President George W.] Bush administration right now, their -- to me, anyway, their primary goal is to take things back to where they were, although this has not been stated by anybody.  If you look very carefully at what Bush has done, Bush was actually able to stop the economy and reverse what Clinton [President Bill Clinton] had done.  Clinton had opened up the American economy to everybody.  Everybody participated and benefited in Clinton's economy.  You know, he and Robert Reuben knew exactly what they were doing and they grew this thing to the point where everybody participated.  Bush came in and immediately we started losing jobs, two and a half million jobs.  And you can't tell me he didn't do that intentionally to put black people out of work.  I believe that.  And Bush has been successful at what he's doing.  He's put black people out of work, but he's kept White people from panicking as they did in the depression.  And that was his job.  That's a real concern that I have.  I think black people should use their political clout to make sure that Bush does not get back into office.  I mean, to me, if Bush wins the next election, we're gone.  You know, our little jaunt here will end quickly.
Story_ID: 179952
Speaker 1: What would you see at this point as your legacy?
Speaker 2: My legacy, created a lot of good, entrepreneurs in the black community or worked with them, to help them create what they have.  I worked with [Robert] Bob Johnson, with [HM] Cathy Hughes at Radio One, with Moctesuma Esparza in Buenavision.  These are companies that will really have a significant impact on the future.  And the entrepreneurs understand what they have to do to make them work.
Story_ID: 179953
Speaker 1: One last question, sir, how would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: As a hard-driving venture capitalist; never satisfied with what's there today and always looking for more tomorrow.
Story_ID: 179954
Speaker 1: What do you think about Michael Powell and the current [2003] changes in F.C.C. [Federal Communications Commission] regulations putting ownership of print and broadcast media in the same market?
Speaker 2: Well, I think he's on the right track, but I think that what he's done will be reversed by Congress.  And it will be reversed because Powell has not put in place a plan which effectively allows entrepreneurs to participate in what's happening in the deregulation of the industry.  And if you don't include a place for entrepreneurs, then you will alienate, in my opinion, the Congress and the rest of America.  So Powell has not done enough.  He has not offered an entrepreneurial solution.
Speaker 1: And one last one.  Now, you were talking about Motorola's Iridium [Satellite] business.  Exactly what was wrong with their approach to the Iridium phone business?
Speaker 2: Motorola didn't have the patience to understand that the cell phone business was quickly grabbing huge areas that had, they thought, been an area of opportunity for satellite services, and they were trying to sell people satellite phone when people really wanted cell phones.  And as I said, they didn't have the patience to understand that that's what was happening.  So, they, they never got off the ground.
Story_ID: 179955
Speaker 1: My name is Julieanna Richardson.  I'm the interviewer and Matthew Hickey is the videographer, and Sheran Wilkins is the observer.  Sheran is spelled S-H-E-R-A-N.  And Herb [HM Herbert P. Wilkins, Sr.], I would like to, for the record say that this is -- with this interview, we're going to try to fill in some of the details that were missed when we interviewed you last time, which was July 17, 2003, so almost four years to the-- to the date.  So I wanna start out, I want to start out by asking you to state your name and spell it for us?  And give us, once again, your date of birth.
Speaker 2: My name is Herbert P. Wilkins, Sr.
Speaker 1: Okay, and your date of birth?
Speaker 2: I was born January 9, 1942.
Speaker 1: Okay, and today's date?
Speaker 2: Today's date is--
Speaker 1: (whisper) July 31--
Speaker 2: July 31-
Speaker 1: (whisper) 2000--
Speaker 2: --2007.
Speaker 1: And our location?
Speaker 2: We're in my office in Columbia, Maryland.
Speaker 1: And that's the office of Syndicated Communications?
Speaker 2: The office of Syndicated Communications, Inc.
Speaker 1: And can you state your occupation?
Speaker 2: I'm a venture capitalist.
Story_ID: 179956
Speaker 1: Now, I want to--we have down as your favorites that you like chicken, your color--you didn't have a favorite color.  I don't know if that's changed.  Time of year was late summer; vacation destination was Charleston, South Carolina and favorite phrase or saying, do you have one?
Speaker 2: Not really.
Story_ID: 179957
Speaker 1: Okay, I want to go back.  You know, you had talked about your mother, Catherine Sheridan Wilkins, and that she was born in Cohasset, Massachusetts.
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: Can you go back and talk more about what type of person she was?
Speaker 2: My mother was a great lady.  She passed away several years ago, and as a person, she really was the center of the family.  She provided the nurturing that all of my ten brothers and sisters, plus myself, needed.  And she was instrumental in allowing each of us to attend college.  In fact, my mother, when I was a kid, had a favorite saying.  It was, "People will always know what's in your head.  They'll never know what's in your stomach.  So don't worry about eating or not eating; just go to school and become educated."
Speaker 1: Now, did she ever share any stories with you about growing up Herb [HM Herbert P. Wilkins, Sr.]?
Speaker 2: Not really, no.
Speaker 1: So, she wasn't a talker, so to speak?
Speaker 2: She was not a talker.
Speaker 1: Are there any other stories that you remember about her though when you were growing up?
Speaker 2: Not really, no.
Speaker 1: Do you remember any other things that she told you, any other sayings that she had?
Speaker 2: Not really, no.
Story_ID: 179958
Speaker 1: You can--you said that she always encouraged all of you to go to--you know, get an education.  Can you give us your siblings in birth order.  I know it starts with Billy, but I'd like to have the names and I'd like to know where you fit in that birth order.
Speaker 2: Okay, William Wilkins, Jr. or Billy --
Speaker 1: And a little bit about each person.
Speaker 2: Billy was an incredibly smart kid.  He was one of the first black people to become a member of Mensa [International] Society.  And he graduated from B.U. [Boston University] Junior College [later, Boston University College of General Studies, Boston, Massachusetts] at age fifteen.  He was a very smart kid, incredibly smart.  The next was Theodore Wilkins, and Ted was a hard-working guy.  He was an [U.S.] Army man, and he became a captain in the Army and served with distinction in Vietnam [War].  He was wounded and returned home, and he died back in 2002.  Okay, the next was Virginia Wilkins, my sister, and Virginia was a very smart kid, not as smart Bill [William Wilkins, Jr.], but nevertheless, very smart.  The next in the family was me.
Speaker 1: So you were number four?
Speaker 2: I was number four.  And then came Richard Wilkins.  The interesting thing about Richard is he and I were among the first brothers to attend the Harvard Business School [Boston, Massachusetts] at the same time.  I was in the class of '70 [1970].  He was in the Class of '71 [1971]--'72 [1972], I'm sorry.
Speaker 1: And what did Richard end up doing?
Speaker 2: Richard worked for the Cabot Corporation in Boston [Massachusetts], and Johnson & Johnson, the drug manufacturer.  And he's now retired, living in Boston.
Story_ID: 179959
Speaker 1: The next one in the family is Charles Wilkins.  Charlie is living now in North Carolina, another hard worker.  And then after Charlie came Dorothy Wilkins, one of my sisters.  And Dorothy lives in Boston [Massachusetts], and I'm not really sure about what school she attended.  It was State Teachers in Massachusetts, and then next in the family was Warren Wilkins.  Warren now lives in California and has been out there for almost fifteen years now.  Okay, Warren went to Southern Illinois University [Carbondale, Illinois].  One thing I should say is that all of my brothers are members of the Kappa Alpha Psi fraternity.  And after Warren came Catherine Wilkins.  She was named after my mother, and she currently lives in Boston.
Speaker 2: Priscilla?
Speaker 1: Oh, I'm sorry.  That's out of order.  The next was Priscilla Wilkins, another one of my sisters, and she resides in Boston also.  And after Priscilla was Catherine, and then after Catherine came Joyce Wilkins.  Joyce also resides in Boston.  That's it.
Speaker 2: So all of you reside in Boston, but three-- now, Herb [HM Herbert P. Wilkins, Sr.], you're gonna have to look at me.  Sheran [Wilkins], you can move over close here because I don't want to have you looking off camera.  So, is there -- that would mean that, one, two, three, four, five, six, there would be seven or six of you -- are there six brothers?
Speaker 1: Yes, including me.
Speaker 2: So, would that be the largest single group of, of, of family brothers that are in the Kappa, Kappa [Alpha Psi Fraternity]?
Speaker 1: I don't know.
Speaker 2: Okay, that would sort of be interesting to explore.
Story_ID: 179960
Speaker 1: Let me ask you, you know, you spoke a lot about growing up, and the gangs, and, you know, having to sort of fight your way through.  But I want to know what was--if we look back on your childhood, if you could take yourself back, can you do you--can you tell me what sights, smells and sounds remind you of growing up?
Speaker 2: The sights would be of the project in Boston [Massachusetts], Mission Hill extension, where I grew up. The smells would be the hallways, the smell of urine was always there.  And --
Speaker 1: Sounds?
Speaker 2: The sound was of the train tracks which was next to the project and hearing the engine, the diesel engine roaring by.
Speaker 1: Now, you said the thing that you liked about the Mission Hill projects, besides the, you know, the issue with the gangs and, you know, daily fighting, was that you said for you, it was somewhat fun.  There were a lot of kids there.  Is that what made it fun, were the kids?
Speaker 2: That's exactly what made it fun.  It was a closeness amongst all of the kids that lived in the project.  We kind of realized that we were the ones that were left behind, and that we were not quite equal to the kids that grew up on the hill, which was Roxbury [Boston, Massachusetts].  And that made us a group, and we felt like we were all part of the group.
Speaker 1: The group that was excluded, that was different?
Speaker 2: That was different, yes.
Story_ID: 179961
Speaker 1: Let me ask about some childhood memories.  I mean was there--I'm just trying to understand about family life.  Did everyone--in large families they say that sometimes you're grouped, like you spoke of you and Richard.  You know, you were sort of in there in the middle.  I'm told that sometimes you group yourselves together, you know--
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: --in close age range.  But I'm just trying to get a sense of what daily activities were, you know, how things were managed.  I know you said your father [William Henry Wilkins] worked an awful lot.
Speaker 2: He did.  On a daily basis, I worked most of my life.  When I was a little kid -- not a little kid, but when I was a teenager, I had a job from twelve to five a.m. and worked every day of the week cleaning at the Sheraton [ph.] Hotel in Boston [Massachusetts].  And when I was in high school, I remember being incredibly tired most of the time from having worked all the night before.  And I got used to that, and as a result, required very little sleep.  So I could get by on an average day with about four hours of sleep a night.
Speaker 1: Now, why did you take that job--how old were you in high school and what were you doing at the Sheridan?
Speaker 2: I started--I was cleaning, mainly toilets, offices and the hotel lobby.
Speaker 1: Do you remember how you got the job?
Speaker 2: I got the job through a guy named Max Collins [ph.] who was the crew leader that managed the group of cleaning people at the hotel.  Max was a pretty good guy and was most helpful.
Speaker 1: Now, had you known him before?
Speaker 2: No, I hadn--I did not know Max before.
Speaker 1: Now I want--how old were you when you had that job at the Sheridan?  You said you were in high school.
Speaker 2: I think I started when I was fifteen years old.
Story_ID: 179962
Speaker 1: Now, what year was--how old were you when your family moved into the projects?
Speaker 2: I was roughly twelve years old when we moved into the project.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, up to that point, where did you live?
Speaker 2: We lived 75 Holworthy in Roxbury [Boston, Massachusetts], and the family was evicted from that address and we moved to the project then.
Speaker 1: So do you remember circumstances when you found out you were moving or hearing your brothers or your parents [William Henry Wilkins and Katherine Sheridan Wilkins] talk about the circumstances of your moving into the projects?
Speaker 2: No, just that we were going to move and my mother told us that the project was a place where we could survive, but we wouldn't thrive there.
Speaker 1: Was that true?
Speaker 2: That was very true.
Speaker 1: So really being in the projects became about survival?
Speaker 2: It did.
Speaker 1: On a daily basis.
Speaker 2: Almost on a daily basis, yes.
Speaker 1: So you paint a picture of liking the kids or the company of kids even though you had plenty of kids yourself, you know, amongst you, but a daily basis of fighting, you know, that being part.  So where did you fit in the whole scheme of things.  I'm trying really to understand, Herb [HM Herbert P. Wilkins, Sr.], because you had talked about being sickly, that you had an enlarged heart.  But I'm just trying to understand what type of child you were and what was happening inside your head?
Speaker 2: As a kid, I always thought about working.  I had a newspaper route and I was also a jump boy on a news truck.  I would jump off the truck and deliver the bundle of newspapers to the stores, and did that for a number of years; was paid five dollars a week, and I put that money in a bank, the Lincoln Savings Bank on Columbus Ave.
Speaker 1: And why do you think you liked working?
Speaker 2: Just because I could do it.  And I got paid for it.
Speaker 1: Did you see it as a way--as any other significance, you know, to it?
Speaker 2: No, not really.
Story_ID: 179963
Speaker 1: Now, you saw your father [William Henry Wilkins] working though all the time.  Do you think you were motivated by the fact that he worked all the time, or do you think you liked the fact that you were getting rewarded?
Speaker 2: Well, I worked with my father for a number of years, and that, to me, was always fun because I used to like to listen to my father.  And he was a good teacher.
Speaker 1: And what are some of the things he taught you, Herb [HM Herbert P. Wilkins, Sr.]?
Speaker 2: He taught me how to be a master painter, and as a kid, twelve and thirteen, I could paint as well as any man.
Speaker 1: So what does a master painter -- just explain that to me?
Speaker 2: A master painter knows how to mix colors, knows how to stroke the brush to get the right paint texture on the wall, and pretty much has the strength to paint ceilings.  It takes an incredible amount of energy to paint a ceiling.  Your muscles get tired of holding the brush, and my muscles were as hard as a rock, and I had no trouble holding the brush.
Speaker 1: So your father was a master painter?
Speaker 2: He was.
Speaker 1: Okay, so what kind of jobs was he working, for whom?  Do you know?
Speaker 2: My father worked for a guy named Harold Zuker [ph.] who was a real estate man in Boston [Massachusetts], and he worked for Zuker for many years, and after that worked for himself, painting in mainly Brookline [Massachusetts], the Jewish community in Boston.
Speaker 1: So did your father seem like he was a content and happy person or do you think he felt burdened with all the children?
Speaker 2: No, my father was a pretty content person.  He just worked.  He had no particular agenda.  He just worked.  He worked several jobs, night and day or day and night.
Speaker 1: So when you saw -- were you the one -- like of your siblings, who do you think is most like your father?
Speaker 2: Probably my older brother.
Speaker 1: Which one? You have--
Speaker 2: Bill [William Wilkins, Jr.].
Speaker 1: Okay, the oldest.  And why do you say that?
Speaker 2: Well, he looked like my father, and he was a disciplinarian as my father was.  And that was primarily it.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And your father's name was William Henry Wilkins.
Speaker 2: Right.
Story_ID: 179964
Speaker 1: Now, it was his [Wilkins' father, William Henry Wilkins] mother who owned the camp.
Speaker 2: No, that was my grandmother [Kate Donaldson].
Speaker 1: Your grandmother.  That's what I'm saying, on which side, your mother's [Katherine Sheridan Wilkins] side or your father's side?
Speaker 2: My mother's side.
Speaker 1: Oh, on your mother's side.  Okay.  And you were saying--I just wanna clarify this.  You said you didn't know how she had gotten the camp?
Speaker 2: Un-un.
Speaker 1: You don't know any of that background?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay, how often did you spend at the camp?  How often were you at the camp yourself?
Speaker 2: I never went to the camp.
Speaker 1: Oh, you never went to the camp?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, do you know why?
Speaker 2: No one asked me to go.
Speaker 1: Okay, and none of your brothers or sisters ever went?
Speaker 2: Not that I know of.
Story_ID: 179965
Speaker 1: Can you tell me, Herb [HM Herbert P. Wilkins, Sr.], what your earliest memory of growing up is?
Speaker 2: Going to school.
Speaker 1: And tell me what you remember about going to school?
Speaker 2: School was very difficult.  I had a lot of issues that developed early on in going to school.  I was deaf and was told that I couldn't hear, wouldn't hear.  And that followed me for a couple of years, mainly because I had earaches that were really painful.  And I remember that the pain was excruciating.  Nights with an earache were not fun.
Speaker 1: What other problems did you have?
Speaker 2: Well, as I mentioned, I had an enlarged heart which kept me from playing with the other kids, the way I wanted to.  So I was not a roughneck where I wanted to be because of that heart problem, enlarged heart with a heart murmur.
Speaker 1: And do you remember ever the doctors saying what the causes were?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: And no other history of heart disease in your -- on either side of the family?
Speaker 2: On my mother's [Catherine Sheridan Wilkins] side, there was, and my two older brothers died from heart failure.
Speaker 1: You mean both Ted [Theodore Wilkins] and Billy [William Wilkins, Jr.]?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: I see.  At what ages did they die?
Speaker 2: Billy was -- was he fifty-four when he died or sixty-four?  I believe he was fifty-four when he died.
Speaker 1: And what about Ted?
Speaker 2: Ted was sixty-two or sixty-three when he died.
Speaker 1: So that-- so your earliest memory was really school, going to school.  Now, were you always a good student back then?
Speaker 2: I was not always a good student.  I was up and down, depending upon how I felt about teachers in the school.
Speaker 1: So what kind of teachers made you -- did you relate to or could reach you as a young person?
Speaker 2: Teachers who were sympathetic to people of my color.
Speaker 1: Otherwise, what would happen?  You would clam up?
Speaker 2: Very much so.
Speaker 1: So, did that affect your grades, Herb?
Speaker 2: I think it did in high school.
Speaker 1: So wasn't Tech -- didn't it take good grades to get into Boston Tech [Technical High School, later, John D. O'Bryant School of Mathematics and Science]?
Speaker 2: It took very good grades.
Speaker 1: So what were your grades going in?
Speaker 2: Well, I was probably a solid "C" student when I started in at Boston Tech.  I managed to pass the test to get in, and I'd followed behind, when my brother, Ted, who also went to Boston Tech.
Speaker 1: And this is like, what?  1953 -- 1952?
Speaker 2: No, 1955, 1956.
Speaker 1: Okay, you went to Boston Tech?
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: Okay, and tell me what that experience was like because that took you -- where was Boston Tech located?
Speaker 2: Boston Tech initially was in the old mechanics art high school, and it was on -- what's the name of the street?  It was down in the Back Bay [Boston, Massachusetts].
Speaker 1: Not Tremont?
Speaker 2: No, off of Huntington Ave.
Speaker 1: And what was that experience like because those were students from different parts of the city, right?
Speaker 2: Yep.
Speaker 1: Okay, so how many blacks, how many whites?
Speaker 2: There were very few blacks.  In my class, there were five or six blacks.
Speaker 1: Do you remember their names?
Speaker 2: Not really.
Speaker 1: And so what were you thinking you -- what subjects were you gravitating to when you were in high school?
Speaker 2: I was really interested in history. In fact, I loved history and that was probably the best subject.
Speaker 1: And what did you like about history?
Speaker 2: I just liked being where the events that had taken place in the past, and remembering the dates and all of that kind of thing.
Speaker 1: So what was your favorite period of history that you liked studying?
Speaker 2: The Civil War.
Speaker 1: Why did that resonate with you?
Speaker 2: Because that's when blacks were freed.
Story_ID: 179966
Speaker 1: I want you to describe your experience at Boston Tech [Boston Technical High School, later, John D. O'Bryant School of Mathematics and Science, Boston, Massachusetts].
Speaker 2: I had a great time at Boston Tech.  As I said, my favorite subject was history, and I did fairly well at [Boston] Tech.
Speaker 1: What does that mean?
Speaker 2: Well, I was in the top 10 percent of my class when I graduated, and that was a good accomplishment.
Speaker 1: Now, where does math come in, Herb [HM Herbert P. Wilkins, Sr.], because you said more History.  Sometimes people are left brain, right brain, but were you active in any organizations, you know --
Speaker 2: No, I was not a participant in anything.  Well, to some extent I did participate in a few things, but they weren't significant.
Speaker 1: And what were they?
Speaker 2: I ran track in high school for several years and realized that I wasn't that good.  And so I quit.  I tried to go out for the football team, but the coach wouldn't let me join because of my heart.  And I was really disappointed because I wanted to play football.
Speaker 1: What else about your high school experience?  Who were your friends?
Speaker 2: I had one friend that stands out in my mind, Van Courtney DeSouze [ph.].  He was a friend of mine who died back then when we were in high school.  He passed away from a kidney problem, and after that, I was pretty much alone because I really didn't have anyone to talk to.
Story_ID: 179967
Speaker 1: Now, tell me the whole story behind his [Wilkins' friend, Van Courtney DeSouze (ph.)] death because you had worked at his relative's car body repair shop.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: And can you tell the story?
Speaker 2: Yeah, well--
Speaker 1: And what year was it?  Do you remember the year?
Speaker 2: No, I don't remember the year?
Speaker 1: Was it-- were you in your junior year?
Speaker 2: I was in my sophomore year in high school.
Speaker 1: And so it was in that summer, you were working with him.
Speaker 2: Yeah, we were working in a body shop, painting cars.  And I remember telling Courtney that he should be drinking milk because the milk flushed the fumes from the paint out of his kidney.  And that was the only way you could keep from getting kidney failure.  And he didn't drink the milk.  And sure enough, he got or had a problem with his kidney.
Speaker 1: Now, what was the period--so you worked the whole summer on these cars?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Was it just the summer or did you work into fall?  Did you continue working there?
Speaker 2: It was just the summer.
Speaker 1: And your father [William Henry Wilkins] had told you to drink milk which you had followed him on.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: When you told this to your friend, did he scoff at it?  Did he say that wasn't -- what did he say about it?
Speaker 2: I can't remember what he said.
Speaker 1: From the time that you worked on the cars to the time he passed away, what was the period of time that passed?
Speaker 2: He passed at the end of the summer.  It wasn't long -- it was no more ninety days from when we started.
Speaker 1: So can you describe what happened?  I mean when did he get sick; how long was he sick?
Speaker 2: He got sick about sixty days into the summer, and he was sick for about thirty days, and in and out of the hospital, and succumbed at the end of the summer.
Speaker 1: And did you know at the very beginning that it was because it was from the lead poisoning?
Speaker 2: Not from the very beginning, no.
Speaker 1: Okay, so what, tell me how -- because this is your best friend.  What impact does that have on you?
Speaker 2: It was devastating.  As I said, I lost the person that I had talked to, communicated with most, and that was really a sad thing to go through.
Speaker 1: And do you remember the circumstances around his death and whether you visited him or talked to him much?  Those are the types of things I'm trying to have some understanding about.
Speaker 2: I think I went to the hospital once during the time he was in there.  And that was primarily it.  I saw him just before he died.  I went to his house, and he was in pretty bad shape.
Speaker 1: What did you learn from that?
Speaker 2: I learned that I had to be more forceful in telling people what I thought were significant points of interest, and that they should take heed.
Speaker 1: Of the direction 'cause you lost your best friend.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Had you been more insistent, maybe he would have listened to you?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Story_ID: 179968
Speaker 1: How do you end up going to Central State [University, Wilberforce, Ohio]?
Speaker 2: My brother, Ted [Theodore Wilkins], went to Central [State University], and when I decided to go to college, I decided I would go where he went to school, and so I went to Central.  I remember on my trip to Central, my mother [Katherine Sheridan Wilkins] had given me a safety pin so I could pin my money for tuition payment inside my jacket pocket.  And that's what I did.  And I traveled all the way up to Central with my money pinned in my pocket, and I was able to pay my tuition when I got there.
Speaker 1: So what was the campus that you found like?  What was that like?
Speaker 2: Central was really the place where I grew up.  I learned how to party at Central, and I learned how to drink at Central, and it was a great experience.  And then the most, the--what we call Funky Butts, was a dance every Friday on campus, and it was fun.  Central was the place to be.
Speaker 1: But you came back because you couldn't make enough money?  You were supporting yourself.
Speaker 2: I was supporting--well, I didn't have enough money for tuition, and I felt I could--if I went to school in Boston [Massachusetts], I could work nights and go to school.  And I would have no tuition bills or loans outstanding.  And so I transferred from Central State to Boston University [Boston, Massachusetts].  Fortunately, BU [Boston University] took all of my grades from Central in the school transfer.
Speaker 1: So, were you one year at Central State?
Speaker 2: I was two years at Central and two years at BU.
Speaker 1: And did Ted stay--did Ted stay at Central?
Speaker 2: Ted graduated from Central, I believe in 1957.
Story_ID: 179969
Speaker 1: So you're back in Boston [Massachusetts] and you're going to Boston University [Boston, Massachusetts].  What is that experience like 'cause you said that was a smart move for you?
Speaker 2: Well, it was a smart move because I was able to pay for my tuition from the job I had cleaning nights.  And it was a smooth transition.  BU is a good school, and I got involved with the Kappa's [Alpha Psi Fraternity] when I moved back to Boston and pledged Kappa in Boston, the Chi chapter, which is the Boston chapter.
Speaker 1: Can you talk about your pledge experience?
Speaker 2: Pledge experience was incredible, and to me it was one of the toughest things I'd ever done, paddling.  I remember being paddled, and I was paddled so hard that my behind turned hard.  The skin on my behind hardened from the beatings, and it got to the point where I couldn't feel the paddling any more.  It was just a long, drawn-out experience.
Speaker 1: But why did you take--talk Kappas as a fraternity and some of its history and why, you know, you and your brothers gravitated, but--
Speaker 2: Kappa is a great fraternity, and the camaraderie is tremendous between the brothers, and that was one of the things that got me involved and the fact that my two older brothers were a member of the Kappas.  And I knew some of the alumni chapter people in Boston from their friendships with my brothers, my older brothers.  So it was a relatively easy transfer, transferring to Boston.  And Kappa was the greatest thing that ever happened to me.  I mean pledging Kappa and being a Kappa, I had the girls, the booze.  I could into the great parties.  It was just a tremendous experience.
Speaker 1: And can you talk a little bit about the history of the Kappa organization and who was a Kappa?
Speaker 2: I, I don't really remember the the history--
Speaker 1: Okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: --of Kappa.
Story_ID: 179970
Speaker 1: You, you graduate from Boston University [Boston, Massachusetts] in 1960--
Speaker 2: Five [1965].
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Five [1965].  And, and at that point, you're looking at--what were you looking to do, join the--you taught, right?
Speaker 2: I majored in education, and I started out teaching school in Boston [Massachusetts] and taught for about four or five months and realized that teaching was not what I wanted to do, that you just couldn't make much money teaching.  I think I started at about $6,800 a year or $6,200 a year, and that, to me, wasn't a lot of money.  So I left teaching and went to work for General Electric in Lynn, Massachusetts at the Small Aircraft Engine division and found that to be a more satisfactory career, and stayed at Lynn all the way up until the time I started the Harvard Business School [Boston, Massachusetts].
Speaker 1: Now, why did you decide you wanted to go to Harvard Business School and why-- I mean there are other business schools.  Why did you choose that one?
Speaker 2: I chose it because it was in Boston, not that far from my home, and I felt that I could continue working and it would help in paying tuition.  Those were the primary factors influencing my decision to apply at HBS [Harvard Business School].
Speaker 1: So you got turned down the first time you applied?
Speaker 2: I did.
Speaker 1: And then you convinced--you asked for an informational interview?
Speaker 2: Yep.
Story_ID: 179971
Speaker 1: Now, that first class [of Harvard Business School, Boston, Massachusetts] that you got accepted in, could you describe who was--there were twenty--was it twenty?
Speaker 2: Twenty-nine blacks.
Speaker 1: So, can you talk about who some of them were and what that class was like, and even the school was structured.
Speaker 2: The school was structured into sections, and each section was somewhat different.  I was in Section B in the Class of '70, and most of us, the twenty-nine, were in the Class of '70.  Harvard Business School is a two-year school, and you get extensive training in business.  It's like a business boot camp.  It's really tough.  It's a tough place.
Speaker 1: Describe some of your experiences there that would describe "tough"?
Speaker 2: Well, I remember not wanting to be a student that was on "dumb-dumb" list.  And that was for people who were not doing well at the school.  And to be on the "dumb-dumb" list was to be a failure.  And I just didn't want to be there.
Speaker 1: So who were some of the people who came in with you that were in your class?
Speaker 2: My friends were Dan [Daniel] Dennis and Tyrone Dickerson who I knew from Central State [University, Wilberforce, Ohio] and Len [Leonard] Fuller and also my old girlfriend from Boston University, Evelyn Delaware [ph.], Rich Lawry [ph.], who was a friend and pledged Kappa [Alpha Psi fraternity] with me in Boston [Massachusetts] before we got to the business school and a bunch of other people who --
Speaker 1: Did all of the twenty-nine finish?
Speaker 2: Not all of us, no.  There were a few that dropped out after the first year.
Speaker 1: And Herb [HM Herbert P. Wilkins, Sr.], let's talk about the education that you received there.  How is it different from many of the other types of education?  I know you would describe it as a business boot camp, but can you go into a little more detail besides the "dumb-dumb" list?
Speaker 2: Yeah, they used to post the dumb-dumb list in the--it was called Baker 20, and that was a center where you picked up your case information, and you put your WACs, written analysis of cases, into Baker 20 when you finished Saturday night.  And HBS [Harvard Business School] was just a tough place to be.
Speaker 1: And okay, can you give some other examples, some of the professors you liked?
Speaker 2: I liked most of the professors that were there and had very few problems with any of the professors that the business school.
Speaker 1: So your first class was twenty-nine.  Did that number increase the next class?
Speaker 2: It increased every year after that until the present word is the group of blacks is about 10 percent of the class coming into the school.
Speaker 1: And what was it back when you were there?
Speaker 2: It was twenty-nine out of roughly seven hundred, whatever the percentage is.  I'm not sure, less than a half percent, I guess--
Story_ID: 179972
Speaker 1: What were you thinking, Herb [HM Herbert P. Wilkins, Sr.], that you wanted to do at that point, because we're in 19--let's see, you entered in 1967.  You left in 1969.
Speaker 2: 1970.
Speaker 1: 1970, I'm sorry.  1970.  And what are you thinking that you want to do because this is a period that blacks were just sort of moving into corporate America.  I think Black Enterprise magazine got started a little, maybe in 1972 [sic, 1970].  You know, the Urban League is very active.  Black advertising agencies are just getting started, so tell-- can you talk about what your thoughts were and what you were eyeing sort of as opportunities?
Speaker 2: Well, I realized that I didn't want to go into corporate America.  I just thought that the glass ceiling was keeping blacks back in corporate America and so I decided I wanted to spend my time in minority small business because that's where I saw the future.  And so when I got out of school, and I ended up going to work for Urban National Corporation which was a venture capital in Boston [Massachusetts].  And Urban was a great experience for me.  There was a guy there, [R.] Courtney Whitin [Jr.], who kind of mentored me in my progress in venture capital.  And he did a good job.  That was the story.
Speaker 1: Can you tell about his background?
Speaker 2: Whitin had worked for General [Georges Frederic] Doriot at American Research and-- American Research and Development Corporation in Boston which was a very large venture capital firm.  And that's where he got his grounding.  I'm not sure about the rest of his background.
Speaker 1: Okay, Urban National, now, tell us about that company and how it got started and who the principals were and how you even came to work there?
Speaker 2: Yeah, Urban National had gotten started in 1970.  It was actually an idea that was germinated amongst myself, Dan [Daniel] Dennis and Tyrone Dickerson because we tried to start our own venture capital firm prior to that, Urbanic [ph.].  And the guys that started Urban National, Tull Gearreald and Ken [Kenneth] Miller, were the principals in Urban.  And they're the ones that hired me.
Speaker 1: And how long had Urban National been around when they hired you?
Speaker 2: Oh, it's still around.  It's not as active--
Speaker 1: I know, but when you joined it?
Speaker 2: It had been in business for about three or four years.
Story_ID: 179973
Speaker 1: And what kind of deals were they [Urban National Corporation, Boston, Massachusetts] doing?
Speaker 2: They were doing, what I call, middle-class, black deals.  They financed people who they assumed were primarily middle-class blacks, kind of smooth around the edges, and less willing to challenge the system.  And I thought that that was being wrong-headed, that the people that were gonna make it were the tough people who came out of the projects, like myself.  And that they wouldn't make it because they weren't financing the really tough people.
Speaker 1: Do you remember what kind of deals that you worked on while you were there with them?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I worked on a deal, Progress Industries in L.A. [Los Angeles, California], which was a macaroni company, a company that made macaroni primarily for the military and large institutions.  I worked on a radio station that was owned by [HM] Clarence Avant in L.A. and today is -- I can't remember the call letters, KFJ [sic, KAGB-FM]?  Several others.
Speaker 1: So was it an organization that was thin, you know, thin in terms of its structure?  How many people were working there totally?
Speaker 2: It was very thin.  There were, what?  Five professionals.  It was me and Bob [Robert C.] Davidson who lives in Memphis, Tennessee, [R. Courtney] Court Whitin [Jr.], Tull Gearreald and [Kenneth] Ken Miller.  That was the professional staff.
Speaker 1: And who was heading it though at that point?
Speaker 2: Court Whitin was the president, and he stepped down and Tull Gearreald took over as president.
Speaker 1: Now, at the time of -- and that was during the time you were there then.  Okay.  During that time, was Urban National one of the largest, what we call -- it's called a MESBIC [Minority Enterprise Small Business Investment Company], right?
Speaker 2: No, it wasn't on MESBIC.  It was a private --
Speaker 1: Private, okay.
Speaker 2: Private venture capital firm.  It had ten million dollars in capital, which is no money today, but they had ten million dollars.
Speaker 1: Well, that was a lot of money back then, right?
Speaker 2: Ten million back then, yes, it was a lot of money.
Speaker 1: And what was the concept, the investment concept of Urban National?  What were they wanting to do?  What did they say--you know what kinds of investments, you know, were they looking to go after?
Speaker 2: They were looking to do primarily mergers and acquisitions with corporate America where large corporations would spin off a unit, and they would be able to acquire it and bring in a management team to run it.  That's what they were doing.
Speaker 1: And so how many deals were they doing at any given time, and what was the usual lead time for a deal?
Speaker 2: They were doing, or working on roughly three deals at a time, and the timeframe was quite long.  To do the initial due diligence took Urban four or five months, at least and the subsequent due diligence, another four or five months.  Then there was the documentation which took at least two months.  So it was the better part of a year or more before Urban would close on a deal.
Speaker 1: Well, that's a long lead time.  You could waste a whole year if the deal went--
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, you could.  And if anything happened during that process of due diligence, there was no deal.
Story_ID: 179974
Speaker 1: --You were saying it was taking a year to close a deal.  Now, what were you--and you also seemed to indicate, Herb [HM Herbert P. Wilkins, Sr.], that the strategy of investment that UNC [Urban National Corporation, Boston, Massachusetts] was--Urban National, sorry, was going after was not consistent with where you wanted to go.
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: So what was your vision?
Speaker 2: As I said, I wanted to invest in younger, tough, hardened blacks, who I thought could really challenge the system of business and do better than the group that they were selecting to fund who were primarily middle-class guys who didn't have that hard edge, that were smoother, but not convincing in a in a business environment.
Speaker 1: So what did you then set out?  Where did you go from Urban National?
Speaker 2: I left Urban National and ended up at Syncom, my present company in 1977.  I actually left Urban National in '76 [1976].
Story_ID: 179975
Speaker 1: Before Urban National [Corporation, Boston, Massachusetts], you went to Lucas, Lucas and Tucker [sic, Lucas, Tucker, & Co.].
Speaker 2: Lucas and Tucker.
Speaker 1: And what were they?
Speaker 2: Lucas and Tucker was a CPA [certified public accountant] firm in New York [New York].  It was the oldest black CPA firm in America.  And I went to Lucas and Tucker and Company, and I did consulting on the management services of small businesses and primarily in Harlem [New York, New York] and Brooklyn [New York, New York] where L.T. [Lucas, Tucker, & Co.] serves.
Speaker 1: So, did you like that experience?  How long were you there?
Speaker 2: I was with Lucas, Tucker and Company from 1970 until I started my own business in '76, Wilkins & Company.
Speaker 1: Wait, okay, Lucas and Company, then Urban National?
Speaker 2: Lucas, Tucker and Company, and then Wilkins & Company which was my own--
Speaker 1: Then when were you with Urban National?
Speaker 2: After Wilkins & Company.
Speaker 1: I see.  Okay, wait, I just want to get this chronology straight.  You go to business school [Harvard Business School, Boston, Massachusetts].  You get out in 1970.  You go 1970 to Lucas and--
Speaker 2: --and Tucker, yep.
Speaker 1: And you stayed there two years?
Speaker 2: Stayed about three years.
Speaker 1: Three years.  So that would take us to '73.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: And then from '73 to '75 you did--
Speaker 2: Wilkins & Company.
Speaker 1: Wilkins.  And what was Wilkins & Company doing?
Speaker 2: It was a consulting firm.  I continued doing consulting for the Ford Foundation and primarily Robert Wood Johnson Foundation and the Cleveland Foundation.  They were my three biggest accounts.
Speaker 1: Now, what were you doing for them, and what were they doing in the business space?
Speaker 2: I did a lot of health consulting for Ford and [Robert Wood] Johnson Foundations.  For Ford, I helped when they invested money in the Harvard Community Health Plan, and I subsequently joined the board at the University of Pennsylvania [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania].  The HMO [health maintenance organization] training program was started out of the University of Pennsylvania, and I joined the board of the program and served on that for several years.
Speaker 1: Now, Herb [HM Herbert P. Wilkins, Sr.], if you did that, that was really--wasn't that the early stages of HMOs?
Speaker 2: Very early stages of HMOs.  There was a lot of concern as to whether they would survive on that period of time.
Speaker 1: And why were they started?
Speaker 2: They were started to facilitate the development of a health maintenance program for individuals with the belief that instead of responding to an illness, they should develop a strategy to help prevent illness and thereby reduce the overall cost of healthcare.
Speaker 1: And this was the result of studies that had been done, coming out of the foundation?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you did--did you like that work that you were doing?
Speaker 2: I loved that work.
Speaker 1: Now, why?  Who resonated and why did you not end up still in the medical space?
Speaker 2: It was, it was just--it was fun analyzing what the HMO's were doing.  And I was on the board of the Harvard Community Health Plan as it was in its early years as it was developing and was fascinated by how successful it had become.
Story_ID: 179976
Speaker 1: Why did you end Wilkins & Company?  Is it because the offer came from Urban National [Corporation, Boston, Massachusetts]?
Speaker 2: The offer came from Urban National, and I had moved back from New York [New York] to Boston [Massachusetts], and so I took the job at Urban National, and we were ending my consultancy.
Speaker 1: And you were at Urban National two years.
Speaker 2: Two years.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So we're in 1977 that you're in Urban--'77 [1977] to '75 [1975]?
Speaker 2: '75 [1975] to '77 [1977].
Speaker 1: '75 [1975] to '77 [1977], okay.  I got you.  Okay, so that experience -- you know, I just want to--so then you decide you're going to open up Syncom or is it Syndicated Communications? (simultaneous)
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I was recruited by Jack Gloster through a head hunter to run Syncom.  And that was the beginning of my present career.
Speaker 1: So what did the recruiter say in terms of the opportunity that was presented?
Speaker 2: That Opportunity Funding Corporation in Washington, D.C. wanted to set up a venture capital firm to serve minorities who were interested in going into telecommunications.  And they were looking for a manager who they thought could make a difference.  And since I'd been at Urban National and had invested, they felt that I could make a difference at Syncom.
Speaker 1: You know, it's interesting now because you and Syncom seem to be one and the same.  But how long had it been around?  Had it been newly formed?  Or how long had it been around when you were recruited?
Speaker 2: It had not been formed.  It was being formatted at that time.
Speaker 1: Okay, and Hugh--you said his name was Hugh --
Speaker 2: Jack Glass- Jack Gloster.
Speaker 1: Jack Gloster.
Speaker 2: Gloster.
Speaker 1: Okay, Gloster.  What, who--can you talk about who he was and his background?
Speaker 2: Yeah, Jack was the president of Opportunity Funding Corporation.  And he had graduated from the Harvard Business School [Boston, Massachusetts] in, I believe, 1958 or so.  And Jack was a pretty good guy.  He knew a lot of people and was committed to developing minority business, particularly in communications.
Story_ID: 179977
Speaker 1: Now, can you also address what was happening at the Federal Communications Commission [FCC] at this time and why there was a push along these lines?  Why he got involved and why there was a push?
Speaker 2: The FCC had been, up to that point, holding hearings on why there weren't more black-owned media properties.  And they concluded that there was a lack of capital to assist blacks in getting into the business.  And they set up procedures internally to help process applications for blacks who were interested in the media.  And that's what was happening.
Speaker 1: Now, you worked--you mentioned [HM] Clarence Avant.  Had you worked on that radio station deal when you were at Urban National?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I did.
Speaker 1: And did that deal sort of--you know, I could ask you how did that deal sort of whet your appetite?
Speaker 2: Well, I--in watching that deal and reading through some of the papers, realized that radio had sustained a year-to-year growth rate in about the 20 percent range for a number of years, a significant number of years, and it looked like with FM developing, that it would continue that streak and thereby provide tremendous value for anyone who owned a media property.
Speaker 1: And so it was really the key thing at this point in opening the doors.
Speaker 2: It was a key thing.
Speaker 1: Right.  So, I'd like you to talk about the task that you were presented with when you came to be hired.  I mean because it's sort of like you had a clean slate, but there are a lot of different aspects to it.
Speaker 2: Well, when I started Syncom, I had roughly a million dollars in the bank with the task of helping to create a media industry for blacks.  And clearly, a million dollars was not going to do it.  We were well undercapitalized for the task that we had been presented.  So I started out with a business plan that said essentially that we should focus on high growth media, FM radio, UHF television and VHF if we could get into it.  But back then, a VHF television station in a major market was selling for around a hundred million dollars and with the money we had, we just -- we couldn't even buy one station, let alone several.  So, we focused on FM and FM that just been licensed where we could get the appreciation in value from those FM properties.  And that's what we did.
Speaker 1: Now, in that, just historically, since we're trying to create a historical record, AM was the king, right?
Speaker 2: AM was it.
Speaker 1: And FM was the new player--the new kid on the block.
Speaker 2: A very new thing.
Speaker 1: So tell me what, when you get in there now.  You move from Boston [Massachusetts] to [Washington] D.C., is that what happened?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  I wanna know who the key players were, like the key players on the [Capitol] Hill, the key players, you know, sort of--you know, you mentioned Opportunity--
Speaker 2: Funding.
Speaker 1: Right, Funding (unclear).
Speaker 2: The key players at the FCC back then was the first black commissioner at the FC. [HM Reverend Benjamin L. Hooks].  And I can't remember his name.
Speaker 1: I am drawing a total blank, and I know him.
Speaker 2: And also [HM] Tyrone Brown who was the second FCC commissioner and is a good friend today of mine.  Those two were instrumental in helping to formulate a plan for the development of black media.
Speaker 1: So what was the plan that you--that was formulated at that point?
Speaker 2: To just push forward, doing as many properties as we could, with the commission's help, and the licensing of new stations.
Story_ID: 179978
Speaker 1: So how would it work?  You would get word that stations were gonna be licensed and then--I'm just trying to understand how it worked because this was all new ground, you know, or was it mainly done through lottery?
Speaker 2: No, the lottery didn't come until substantially later.  The granting of a license was done through a hearing process where the applicant spent or could spend years competing with other applicants to find out who would be the best broadcaster for that property.  And blacks were given an edge in competing in the hearing process and that allowed many of the applicants to win their hearing.  As a result of that, the FCC [Federal Communications Commission] granted many new licenses for FM properties around the country.  And most of them were weak FMs, Class A, which is a low-power FM property, low-powered FM property.
Speaker 1: And how many of these were being licensed over what period of time?  Do you remember?
Speaker 2: There were about forty or fifty of them that were licensed, and I know we financed about ten of them, perhaps more.  In total, we financed a lot of FMs.
Speaker 1: So you really focused--you came in at a time and focused on FM, not AM, at the time.  AM came a little later when they were a little distressed, is that it?  When they were selling?
Speaker 2: Well, AMs were losing audience and over time it was projected that they would lose a significant audience to FM.  And so a lot of AM broadcasters decided to sell stations.  We stayed away from the financing of AM stations because we just thought that there wouldn't be any significant appreciation in value.  Initially, we had a plan to finance AM stations up and down the East Coast of the United States because they were relatively cheap.  But that plan failed.  We started and we financed stations in [Washington] D.C., Richmond [Virginia], Charlotte [North Carolina], and Tampa [Florida].  And that was it.
Speaker 1: So how were you deciding which ones that you were gonna finance and what were you learning in those early years about what to do and what not to do?
Speaker 2: With respect to each kind of broadcast property, we had a different way of analyzing the potential success of each.  If we had an AM property, it had to have been successful in its market and capable of competing with any significant FM that came to the market.  That meant it had to be a full-powered AM station and not operate sunup to sundown, which is what many black-owned stations were doing.  We wanted something that operated twenty-four hours a day, had significant power to cover the market that it was serving and compete directly because of its heritage through or compete with FM.
Story_ID: 179979
Speaker 1: So, Herb [HM Herbert P. Wilkins, Sr.], were you getting a return on your investments at that point in time in these early years?
Speaker 2: Yes, we were.
Speaker 1: Okay, so what were some of the successful deals that you did?
Speaker 2: Well, we did a deal in Oklahoma City [Oklahoma], All-American Broadcasting, which operated KAZ in Oklahoma City.  We --
Speaker 1: Is that (unclear) Davis?
Speaker 2: No, that was Jimmy Miller.
Speaker 1: Okay.  That's fine, go on.
Speaker 2: We did a number of stations all across the country that were successful.  We financed [HM] Cathy Hughes in [Washington] D.C.  She purchased WAOL-AM, and we got involved when she purchased the station that became WMMJ, her FM station.  We bought that from Bruce Sundlun.  And that turned out to be Radio One, which was a very successful company, extremely successful.
Speaker 1: But Radio One wasn't in those early years, was it?
Speaker 2: Yeah, it was Almic Broadcasting in the early years when it owned -- when it purchased WAOL.
Speaker 1: Okay, but in that -- we're talking about, what years are these?  I just wanna keep --
Speaker 2: It was 1982 or '83 [1983].
Speaker 1: Okay, but I was still in that 1977 to 1980 period, you know.  Jeremy Miller was in that period.
Speaker 2: Jimmy Miller, yeah.  That was a, a good deal.  (Unclear) We had purchased a station directly -- actually, we had a foreclosure.  We had foreclosed on a property in Phoenix, Arizona, and that company owned a station in Las Vegas [Nevada].  We took over that station in [Las] Vegas, put in a new manager and that manager took that station to number one in the markets.  We had the number one FM in Las Vegas.
Speaker 1: And who was this name?
Speaker 2: Bill DeMalio [ph.] was the general manager.
Story_ID: 179980
Speaker 1: So, Herb [HM Herbert P. Wilkins, Sr.], when you were doing these, this is when--I'm trying to get your sense about what you were learning because each deal was a learning experience, you know.  You said, I wanted to stay away from sort of middle-class blacks.  I wanted to have people who had fire in their belly and felt that they would have staying power.  But how were you identifying your people and what was--you know, and you also had mentioned that you saw yourself as a coach.  So what are you learning in these years, and you know, how are you sort of building?
Speaker 2: What we learned was that the licenses that the black--that black folks owned were primarily in AM, and AM, if you didn't cover the market with your signal, then you weren't gonna have a good station.  So we looked for complete market coverage of a signal, and if it covered the market, we were in.  We were an aggressive investor.  And most of the stations that we invested in were like that.  They developed from weak FM properties and took the market that they were in.
Speaker 1: And did you ever go in--because some venture capital--did you ever go in and run any of your properties, put management, you know, take over or anything like that during those early years?
Speaker 2: Just Las Vegas, Nevada and Phoenix, Arizona.
Speaker 1: Okay, can you describe what happened there and why you did that?
Speaker 2: Well, in Phoenix, we didn't do any better than the initial operator.  In Las Vegas, Nevada, we made a significant difference.  The reason why we didn't do well in Phoenix is because the signal for that station was not a full market signal.  And we thought that it covered sufficiently the black section of Phoenix so that we would have a strong listening audience, but it was not strong in that market.  And so we never developed a strong position in Phoenix.
Speaker 1: Now, Phoenix, what, what year are you in Phoenix or what's the station's name and who is the owner you took over from?
Speaker 2: What year, oh, I can't remember the year.
Speaker 1: Do you remember the station?
Speaker 2: KMJK, Magic was the station in Phoenix.  And the operator was Art Mobley, and I just don't remember the year that we took over.
Speaker 1: And so you were able in taking that over to go from what revenue base to what revenue base?
Speaker 2: Well, as I mentioned, we didn't do much with that property.  We increased the revenue insignificantly.  It never worked.  So we ultimately sold the station.  I can't remember exactly what the price was, but I think it was around ten million that we sold the station for.  I'm not sure.
Story_ID: 179981
Speaker 1: Let's talk about the [HM] Cathy Hughes, you know, the Cathy Hughes Radio One deal.  That, that was in what year?
Speaker 2: As I understand, we invested in 1982 [sic, 1980] in WOL[-AM].
Speaker 1: Okay, let's talk about how that deal came about.
Speaker 2: Well, Cathy and Dewey Hughes brought the deal to Syncom and convinced us that they could make a go of the property.  And so we financed it.  And we financed their first FM acquisition, which was the purchase of WMMJ[-FM] from Sundlun Broadcasting [sic, Outlet Communications].  And that was a fairly successful acquisition for the company.  [W]MMJ went up to number two or three position in the market and was a very strong competitor because it covered the black section of [Washington] D.C. and still does to this day.
Speaker 1: And what about the programming because Cathy says that she, you know, considers herself very good with the programming.
Speaker 2: The programming for [W]OL[-AM] was excellent.  OL became the top station and did very well in the D.C. market.  Both Dewey and Cathy were assisting with the programming of the station.  When Dewey was there, he formatted a format that I called beautiful black music.  And it's a great format.  The format he developed had no significant, negative tunes in it.  So it was very smooth, silky kind of format.  And the station thrived on that.
Story_ID: 179982
Speaker 1: [HM] Cathy Hughes called one day and said that she wasn't gonna meet her payroll and asked if she could borrow some money.  And I said, "Yeah, you can borrow money, but I want some equity for it."  And she said, "Well, can't you just lend me the money for an interest rate?"  And I said, "No, I can't do that."  And I said, "If you want money, Cathy, why don't you go get it from your customers and collect your accounts receivable.  That's how you run your business."  And the phone went silent.  And Cathy came back and said, "I'll see you later."  And she called the next day and said she had collected her receivables or some of them and she made payroll.  I said, "Great, now you see what I'm talking about."  She said, "Yeah."  And that was a lesson she learned, that the money has to come from your business, not from your venture capitalist because we take equity.
Speaker 2: Now, at what different stages of financing did you do with Radio One?
Speaker 1: Well, we were always financing Radio One.  Radio One was always acquiring something.
Speaker 2: So each time they acquired, you participated?
Speaker 1: Oh, yeah.
Speaker 2: And so tell how that works.  You get your money back each time, is that it?  And then you re --
Speaker 1: Not each time, no.  We didn't get any money back for many years with Radio One.  In fact, Cathy brought in her son, [HM] Alfred Liggins [III], to run the company, and Alfred did a heck of a job.  Alfred, when he came on board, didn't know how to read budgets or financial statements.  And we told Alfred that if he was gonna stay with the company, he had to go to school.  And so he got into the MBA [master's business administration] program at the Wharton School [University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] and got his MBA from Wharton and it really made a difference in how he sought opportunities, how he sought financing and how he negotiated deals.  And we thought that his going to school was very important and critical for the company.  And it turned out to be just that.
Speaker 2: So your suggestion is what really helped?
Speaker 1: Oh, yeah.
Speaker 2: Now, once he did that, can you just sort of trace what happened with Radio One and, you know --
Speaker 1: Well, after he got out of school, he came back and got fully involved in the company and hired a guy named Scott Royster and between he and Scott, they managed to create a company that was, and still is, one of the best managed radio companies in the country.  The two of them are a great team.
Speaker 2: Now, what what things did they put in place that makes you say that and how did they go about identifying and acquiring properties and, you know, what role did Syncom play in all of that?  And what years are we talking about?  Let's go back to years first.
Speaker 1: I don't remember the years.
Speaker 2: It's in the '80s [1980s].  This is all in the '80s [1980s].
Speaker 1: Oh, yeah.  I remember -- and this was in the '90s [1990s], Alfred called one day, and he said, "Hey, what do you think about buying an FM station in L.A. [Los Angeles, California]?"  And I said, "How much?"  Alfred said, "$450 million," and I said, "No, I wouldn't spend $450 million for an FM in L.A."  I said, "How are you gonna get that money back?"  And Alfred said, "Well, I figure if I got the property I could take it up to a significant position in the market and because it's L.A., it would just generate tremendous cash flow."  And I said, "Okay, but I'm not gonna advise you on this.  My advice to you is don't do that deal."  And he went ahead and did the deal, and it became a very successful deal.  The L.A. station just pulled the money in.  He put Steve Harvey on in the morning, and it was an instant success.  So, I learned not to advise Alfred on anything because he knows radio better than I do.  And he's he's shown it.
Story_ID: 179983
Speaker 1: Wasn't it shortly after L.A. [Los Angeles, California] followed, what deal followed L.A. in the Radio One scenario?  Didn't they go public?
Speaker 2: They went public, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And a very successful public offering.
Speaker 1: Can you talk about how that whole thing even came about?  Was that at your suggestion, his suggestion?
Speaker 2: No, that was his suggestion.  When [HM] Alfred [Liggins, III] actually took--and Scott [Royster] took the company public, Scott did the projection which suggested that they were at the point in time where they could go public and do very well in a public market.  Alfred took that to the investment bankers and they agreed, and they went public.
Speaker 1: And wasn't that the first black radio sort of syndicate to go public?
Speaker 2: They were the first black company to go--black radio company to go public, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, and you were--what did that mean to your organization, to Syncom?
Speaker 2: Well, shortly after they went public, the value of our stock had increased to the point where our stock was valued at about a hundred million and it fell back -- the stock price fell back from there, but in that deal Syncom realized on an initial and subsequent investment of about two or three millions dollars, we realized about forty million dollars on the Radio One investment.  It was a very good deal for us.
Speaker 1: And this, this had really justified all of your years of believing and investing in them.
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, yeah, yep.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 179984
Speaker 1: Let's go back to--is it Jeremy Miller?
Speaker 2: Jimmy Miller.
Speaker 1: Jimmy Miller.  Let's talk about him because he was also one of your early investments.
Speaker 2: Yeah, Jimmy was a country boy from Oklahoma City [Oklahoma].  And Oklahoma City is a tough place to do business.  It was, at the time when we got into the deal, back in '78 [1978] or '79 [1979], it was a very racist city.  And I remember calling, after some really hard times, calling Jimmy's lawyer, a guy by the name of John Mee [ph.].  And I said, "John, is there anything you can do to help the company make sales in the Oklahoma market," I said, "Because we're being killed."  And Mee said, "Oh, I talked to a couple of people at the agencies and I will see what we can do."  That made all the difference in the world because after that we got an immediate increase in business.  And the station started getting the black share of advertising dollars that were coming into the market.
Speaker 1: So Jimmy ended up doing well?
Speaker 2: Well, the station never did incredibly well, but it was sold, the station was sold for, I believe, eight or nine million.
Speaker 1: Okay, I thought you had said $3.5 [million].  Is that possible?
Speaker 2: It's possible, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, and when that station--but you said afterwards, I think I had heard this story, that he didn't know what to do with the money?
Speaker 2: No, Jimmy loaned a friend of his about a third of the money and he did a number of things that were unorthodox and ended up having spent all the money.
Speaker 1: So that went against your whole grain, right, because you were trying to create people who would have wealth?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Story_ID: 179985
Speaker 1: --Let's talk about your getting involved.  So that's all in the radio space, which is what you have really primarily--you know, the focus had been from the FCC [Federal Communications Commission].  But then there was a new thing called cable television.
Speaker 2: Cable was an interesting area of investment, and we had seen all these companies come into cable and successfully develop cable systems.  And there were no blacks.  And so we called some people that we knew over at the Booker T. Washington Foundation and asked what they knew about what was going on.  And they have a list of all of the black-owned franchises in America, and there were a number of them.  And we started calling people on the list.  We called [William] Bill Johnson in Columbus, Ohio and a couple of other people that were in Cleveland [Ohio] and East St. Louis [Illinois], Chicago [Illinois] and in L.A. [Los Angeles, California]  We went to all of the major markets and talked to people about cable and the opportunity that was there to make money.  Cable was a significant investment area.  If you were able to get subscribers, people were paying as much as twenty-three hundred dollars per subscriber for any cable system that had subscribers.  And we were very successful in doing that.
Speaker 1: So where were you--so where were your cable investments?  You had Chicago?
Speaker 2: We had Chicago and we had Washington, D.C.  We had East Cleveland, Ohio and Columbus, Ohio and East L.A., which is primarily Hispanic area of L.A.  Where else were we?  We were in Newark [New Jersey].  We did the City of Newark.
Speaker 1: Sacramento [California]?
Speaker 2: Sacramento, not cable.
Speaker 1: Not cable.
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: New York [New York], did you try to go into New York with cable?  Was that difficult?
Speaker 2: Very difficult.
Speaker 1: Can you talk about that because that was Percy Sutton and there was a hard a hard--a fight between two entities, right?  Can you talk about that, Herb [HM Herbert P. Wilkins, Sr.]?
Speaker 2: Yeah, Percy was with Gene Jackson.  We were competing for the franchise in New York City.  They were not asking for financing from us.  And I guess Percy had enough money to do it himself.  And they competed for the franchise, and they won.  And they did a deal, a development deal with Time-Warner.  It worked out very well for them.  They ultimately sold the system to Time-Warner at a very good price, after they ran it for a few years.
Story_ID: 179986
Speaker 1: Now, how did that differ from Chicago [Illinois]?  Tell the Chicago story.
Speaker 2: It didn't differ much at all.  In fact, it was patented after Chicago.  Chicago was developed by a group of business people from the City of Chicago, with [HM] John [H.] Johnson in the lead.  And John organized the group and the group put up five million dollars and we did a deal with -- ghee, I can't even remember the name of the company.
Speaker 1: TCI, South Chicago Cable.
Speaker 2: No, there was another company before them, before TCI.
Speaker 1: Continental.
Speaker 2: Continental Cable, exactly.  We did a joint venture with Continental Cable that was a horrible deal.
Speaker 1: Because it was fifty-fifty.
Speaker 2: It was fifty-fifty and Continental shut the blacks in Chicago out of the system.  And they were gonna develop it all on their own.  And we waged a war on them and ultimately, we agreed to a partnership with TCI out of Denver [Colorado].  TCI came in and we helped develop the system.  It was a very successful cable system.  And it turned out to be the best area in the City of Chicago.  We ultimately sold the system back to TCI and ended up a significant investment in TCI stock.
Speaker 1: Now, when you say it was successful, you gave some indication on the Radio One side of what success meant when, you know, Radio One went public.  What was success in the cable arena?
Speaker 2: I think -- well, in Chicago, I can't remember exactly, but I think we made somewhere around thirty million dollars on Chicago.
Speaker 1: So from a five million investment to a thirty million return.
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: So would you say Chicago was the best of, you know, the East Cleveland's [Ohio], you know, the different cable systems?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It was just the size of it.
Speaker 1: That Area One, having that Area One worked too, not just Area Five, but Area One, and then you end up having the whole city, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 179987
Speaker 1: How did cable differ from radio?  Was there differences that you, you know, found that made it--was the franchising process a little different than radio?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.  In cable, the franchise process was totally political.  If you had good contacts with the politicians, you could beat out most competitors.  The politicians made the difference.
Speaker 1: So as a business person, how did you find that whole process because I'd like to talk about [Washington] D.C., you know, and its process because D.C.--I can't remember the story about D.C., but can you talk about that?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Because Percy [Sutton]--wasn't he also wanting to come into D.C.?  Percy Sutton.
Speaker 2: D.C., yes.  We competed with Percy in D.C. and Chicago [Illinois].
Speaker 1: And when you say "we", who is "we"?
Speaker 2: The team that was put together in each city.  In D.C., Percy had some political connection, not as good as Bob [Robert L.] Johnson who was a principal in the D.C. system.  And I believe we had the significant influence that was necessary to be awarded the franchise because our group won in a competition and was awarded the franchise for the District of Columbia [Washington, D.C.].  We partnered with TCI just as we had in Chicago, in a deal, and it turned out to be a very successful deal.  We sold the system to AT&T and received stock for it.
Speaker 1: Now, what was the return on the investment in the D.C. deal?
Speaker 2: I can't remember --
Speaker 1: That was earlier though than your returns on the sale with the Chicago deal ultimately, right?  D.C. happened afterwards?
Speaker 2: Around the same time.
Speaker 1: Around the time.
Story_ID: 179988
Speaker 1: Now, Herb [HM Herbert P. Wilkins, Sr.], in the '80s [1980s], are you focusing--you're focusing on radio and cable television, and that's how your company is changing.
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: Now, what I want to know is, can we talk some about the team that you assembled, and when Syndicated Communication became Syncom?
Speaker 2: Okay. When did it become Syncom or --
Speaker 1: Yeah, let's talk about the team you assembled first.
Speaker 2: Okay, the first person that I brought into the company was [HM] Terry Jones who is now the President of Syndicated Communications, Inc.  And Terry -- and the second person who we brought in was Duane McKnight.  Duane came from Alliance Enterprises out of Philadelphia [Pennsylvania].  They were our partner in a number of deals, and we had known Duane because of the partnership arrangement, and when he indicated that he would like to come down to [Washington] D.C., we talked to him about coming on board at Syncom.  And he did ultimately join us.
Speaker 1: Now, where did Terry come from?
Speaker 2: Terry was at the Booker T. Washington Foundation, which was a media, non-profit media consulting firm in [Washington] D.C.  And we got Terry from them.
Speaker 1: You have been -- those were in the '70s [1970s] -- late '70s [1970s] or early '80s [1980s] that you --
Speaker 2: Terry came on board in 1977 or '78 [1978], just around the time we founded the company.  And Duane came on much later in 1985 or '86 [1986].
Speaker 1: Okay, so this group has been the nucleus for --
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.
Speaker 1: -- what was Syndicated Communications and then Syncom, and I want -- can you speak a little bit to why that nucleus was successful because we're talking what, thirty years, thirty-something years?
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: And, you know, I look at that compared to Urban National [Corporation, Boston, Massachusetts] that you've described.  There've been a lot of turnover at Urban National --
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.
Speaker 1: -- and, you know, even though it's still in existence, so I wanna -- what did you first identify in those two, first Terry and then, you know, and Duane?  And then what really helped in the forming of this, in the stability of the group that you created?
Speaker 2: What really helped was that we made a lot of money, and I had a philosophy that everybody who worked for me should become a millionaire, and I believe that's true with both Terry and Duane.  They became millionaires, and that kept them committed to the company and moving forward with it.
Speaker 1: Would you talk a lot about that with them?
Speaker 2: No, we didn't talk a lot about that.
Speaker 1: Didn't, okay.
Story_ID: 179989
Speaker 1: The other thing, before we go on, I wanted to know why you decided to--because there were lots of deals that would come your way that wouldn't necessarily fit in the radio and cable television space or other telecommunications because I know you also did a merge.  Was it a merge?
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  So I'm just wondering how did you maintain your consistent focus and, you know, not get a little bit here, a little manufacturing, a little food, you know, which sometimes, you know, like when you look at Urban National [Corporation, Boston, Massachusetts], the things you described, you know, there was a radio station here, and it was a manufacturing there, what made you sort of stay in that space and stay true it?
Speaker 2: We stayed in that space because of our success in that space.  We made a lot of money in radio and cable, and decided that that's where we should stick.
Speaker 1: Now, Herb [HM Herbert P. Wilkins, Sr.], how long did it take you to start making money though because you came in 1977 --
Speaker 2: A long time.
Speaker 1: How long was a long time?
Speaker 2: Till at least -- almost twenty years, yeah, almost twenty years to make money.
Speaker 1: And when you say that, you're talking -- and what was your first deal that made money, more money for you?
Speaker 2: I think KAZ with Jimmy Miller.
Speaker 1: So that was him selling for $3.5 million?
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 358468
Speaker 1: --Met Bob [Robert L. Johnson] in 1978 at a cable convention in Las Vegas [Nevada].  Bob was there representing NCTA [National Cable and Telecommunications Association] for whom he worked, and I was there representing Syncom.  In fact, when we were out there, I also met [HM] Pluria Marshall [Sr.] at the same time.  It was Pluria's idea to form an association for the cable industry among blacks.  And as a result of the joint effort between a bunch of people, including [J.] Barry Washington from Newark [New Jersey] -- I'm trying to think if Bill [William] Johnson was involved.  I'm not sure, Bill Johnson from Columbus [Ohio], Moctesuma Esparza from L.A. [Los Angeles, California], and a group of other people who were involved in cable.  We put together an association called minori-- NAMIC, National Association of Minorities in Cable [sic, National Association for Multi-Ethnicity in Communications] which still exists and is still in the cable industry as a strong influence.  We, we joined up and we were not sure how best to represent the interests of minorities in cable.  And I know Bob, Pluria and I thought a lot alike.  And we were in direct opposition with Percy Sutton and Gene Jackson out of New York [New York] because they had a different approach that they wanted to take.  Our approach was a set one, and we were involved with bringing in a leader.  And that happened, I can't remember who the person was, but we were successful in pursuing our interests in cable as a result of forming the association of NAMIC.
Speaker 2: Now, you say -- first of all, you're referring to Bob Johnson.  But what was the difference in the philosophies.  You said, you know, "Bob Johnson and I and Pluria Marshall have one philosophy and Percy Sutton and Gene Jackson had another."  What were the philosophies?
Speaker 1: Boy, that's tough to remember exactly what was going on back then.  I believe that our approach was to separate ourselves from any one specific company and Percy and Gene wanted to link up with a company, Time-Warner, and work through them.  We, we suggested that that wasn't going to work, and that we needed to be independent of any company and work on our own.  That was the difference in the two philosophies that were being pursued at the time.
Story_ID: 358469
Speaker 1: When you came and met Bob [Robert L.] Johnson, he was with NCTA [National Cable and Telecommunications Association], and what was he doing for NCTA?  He was head of public rel--
Speaker 2: Lobbying, he was doing primarily lobbying for NCTA, National Cable Television Association [later, National Cable and Telecommunications Association] here in [Washington] D.C.  And he talked to me about the creation of BET [Black Entertainment Television], and I just thought it was a harebrained idea, the way he was proposing to do it.  And I told him, no.  And he went on and, through the contacts that he had in the cable industry, he was successful in setting it up, and getting distribution of, of the signal, which was very important at the time.  But he partnered with John [C.] Malone, who was the right person at that time to partner with, and the rest is history.  He became very successful.
Speaker 1: But when he said he had the idea for BET, Black Entertainment Television, what was his idea at that time?
Speaker 2: He wanted to put black programming on TV and cater exclusively to the black audience through a liaison arrangement with the Madison Square Garden Company and he would use their equipment to put a signal up.  And they were gonna give him time on Saturday and Sunday to do that.  So he got evening hours around eleven to one AM on Saturday and Sunday to launch BET.  And he did just that.
Speaker 1: So John Malone puts up money, plus distribution, is that what he does?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And then he has the deal with Madison Square Garden?
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: And then did he talk at that time--did he talk at that time about music videos as par--?
Speaker 2: He was interested in music videos, yeah, a lot of people were.
Speaker 1: Because it was easy pro - well there, music videos were new too.
Speaker 2: They were new, and they were very cheap.  They were distributed by the record companies for zero, and they helped assist with his profitability.
Speaker 1: Now, the Bob Johnson that you met back then, what was he like?
Speaker 2: Bob was incredibly smart and committed to his idea.  He was BET all the way.
Story_ID: 358470
Speaker 1: Now what about [HM] Pluria Marshall [Sr.]?  Can you talk about his role in it besides just his name?
Speaker 2: Pluria was instrumental in getting, in lobbying the F.C.C. [Federal Communications Commission] and a member of other Congressional committees to commit to minorities in broadcasting.  And he did a great job.
Speaker 1: Now, of the group, did Pluria ever make money because, you know, Bob Johnson made a lot of money, you made a lot of money.  Did Pluria, because he--did he ever end up making much money?
Speaker 2: I don't know.
Speaker 1: Is he still around, Herb [HM Herbert P. Wilkins, Sr.]?
Speaker 2: I, I have no idea.
Speaker 1: I have not heard his name in a long time, but he was very prominent as a voice--
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.
Speaker 1: --you know, as a conscience, to make sure the F.C.C. was doing the right thing, right?
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: Right so, he prob--he knew deals--
Story_ID: 358471
Speaker 1: When did the lottery system start happening with radio?
Speaker 2: The lottery system was started in the mid-'90s [1990s] when the F.C.C. [Federal Communications Commission] realized that the hearing process was just too slow and it would take too long to complete the hearings that were scheduled at that time.  And it cost money to hold those hearings.  The lottery system was a cheap, efficient way of issuing licenses.
Speaker 1: Okay. And at that time, in the mid-90s [1990s], what became hot in radio then?  Was it--because--was it FM?
Speaker 2: Nothing.
Speaker 1: No, nothing.
Speaker 2: Nothing was hot in radio.
Speaker 1: Nothing was hot.  Cable was hot.
Speaker 2: Cable was very hot.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, let's look -- so, I want to go back to ask because you didn't answer this.  When did Syndicated Communications become Syncom?
Speaker 2: Probably in the early '80s and Jack Gloster actually coined the acronym, Syncom, which stands for Syndicated Communications.
Speaker 1: But Jack Glass -- so he's the one who first did it.  So that was almost immediate after the beginning of Syndicated Communications?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, when you -- so, Erb, Herb [HM Herbert P. Wilkins, Sr.], so you built this team, you say it took twenty years to, you know, to be successful.  What even kept that team together in those twenty years?
Speaker 2: Just the commitment to do what the mission of the firm was, on the part of each of us.
Speaker 1: Now, I remember that you did some partnering with other, you know, venture -- I wanna say MESBICs [Minority Enterprise Small Business Investment Company], but other --
Speaker 2: Venture funds.
Speaker 1: -- venture funds, like there was Patrick [Jones] who had his venture fund, a small one.
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: Who else around the country were you participating with?
Speaker 2: MECCO [Minority Equity Capital Corporation] in New York [New York] and Alliance Ventures in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania].
Speaker 1: Who ran MECCO in New York?
Speaker 2: Don Green, I believe ran MECCO.
Speaker 1: Okay, and who ran Alliance?
Speaker 2: Rick Cummings [ph.] was the general manager at Alliance, and Patrick, what was his last name?
Speaker 1: I'm forgetting Patrick's name.
Speaker 2: Patrick Jones out of Chicago [Illinois].
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Rick -- I can't think of his name either - Valdez [ph.] out of -- I believe it was Valdez, out of L.A. [Los Angeles, California] and John -- I can't remember his name, out of Phoenix [Arizona].  And out of Dallas [Texas], Don Longhorn [ph.] out of Dallas.  Yeah-
Speaker 1: So--
Speaker 2: --those were our syndicate partners.
Speaker 1: So those were--so how often would you come together on deals?
Speaker 2: Oh, maybe five times a year.
Story_ID: 358472
Speaker 1: Now, on the raising money side for your funds because to invest money, you had to raise money.  Who were you raising money from and was there any competition amongst the group of you, you know, in the raising the money because, you know, you're all black, and sometimes, you know, the places to raise things can be difficult.
Speaker 2: Well, it was in the beginning of 1990 that I realized that we just didn't have enough money to compete.  And so I decided that I would go out to the major pension funds in the traditional venture capital investors, corporate pension funds, and seek capital.  So I set up Syndicated Communa-- Communications Partners, number one, and we went out and Syncom too actually, it was (unclear).  We went out and went to the major pension funds and got commitments.  And we had our first pension fund, which I believe was eighteen or twenty million dollars, I can't remember which -- exactly eighteen million is what we raised.
Speaker 1: So that put you in a whole different place.
Speaker 2: It allowed us to fund a lot of things that we'd been able to fund up to that point, yeah.
Speaker 1: Now, what about your other, you know, the other black funds?  Were they doing things similarly?
Speaker 2: Yes, they were.  They were out at the same time I was out trying to raise funds as well.
Speaker 1: So this was sort of historic in the area of venture funds, you know, going outside--
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.
Speaker 1: -- the traditional because before it had been more government-focused funding, you know, coming --
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay, and so this was saying, we're gonna play on an equal field with others?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 358473
Speaker 1: Now, Herb [HM Herbert P. Wilkins, Sr.], would you consider yourself a race man?
Speaker 2: What do you mean by "race man?"
Speaker 1: Race man, those are people who believe in the race.  That was always a term of art used before, even before--
Speaker 2: Absolutely.  I developed that position in grad school, that blacks were equal competitively to whites in any area and still believe that and took that approach throughout my time in venture capital.
Speaker 1: Now, I wanna go back to cable -- I'm sorry to be skipping around, but I wanna go back to cable television and really the -- because up to this point, up to the point that -- oh, no, that's not true.  Okay. [Washington] D.C., when you became involved in the cable system here in D.C., you were involved as an investor?  No, you were involved in radio?  You were (laughter) involved -- you had a strong presence in this city.
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: So between your Radio One and then you had an investment in B -- had you invested in BET [Black Entertainment Television] at that point?
Speaker 2: Un-un.
Speaker 1: No, no investment.  Okay, and you had an investment, I'm sorry, in D.C. television.  Now, what starts happening at that point?  Is it then at Emerge magazine comes into -- I'm just trying to trace the history at that point.
Speaker 2: I can't remember exactly when Emerge came on the scene.  It was in the '90s [1990s].  That's all I remember.
Speaker 1: Okay, then what other significant -- what about Buena Vista television [sic, Buenavision Telecommunications]?  Can you talk about that?
Speaker 2: Buenavision was a deal --
Speaker 1: Buenavision, I'm sorry.
Speaker 2: -- that we're still investing in after all these years.  Moctesuma Esparza who runs Buena -- who ran Buenavision has been doing well since then.
Speaker 1: Can you talk about it (unclear)?
Speaker 2: Yeah, he's in the process of building a chain of cinemas called Mya Cinema that serve the Hispanic community across the country.  And he's put cinemas in a number of places, and I believe his principal theater is in Bakersfield, California.
Speaker 1: But is that how he started out, was with cinemas?
Speaker 2: No, he started out in cable.
Speaker 1: Right.  Can you talk about that?
Speaker 2: Yeah, we invested in Buenavision back in 1983.  It was a long haul.  It was problem after problem with the investment.  The cable boxes that Buenavision initially purchased turned out to be bad and it was an odd lot, and most of those failed.  And the company lost money as a result of that.  They had problems maintaining relationships, financial relationships with the cable programming companies, and were turned off by HBO [Home Box Office] and Showtime and generally had problems all the time.  Ultimately, we sold the cable system for, I believe, eleven or twelve million dollars--
Story_ID: 358474
Speaker 1: Can we talk about your relationship with [Robert L.] Bob Johnson?  And, you know, we talked about how you met him and that you passed on, you know, when he was talking BET [Black Entertainment Television], you didn't think so, but you've been -- he's been -- would you consider him a confidant and friend or what --
Speaker 2: Yep.
Speaker 1: And can you talk about what has -- how that relationship has sort of evolved or can you tell us some of your favorite Bob Johnson stories?
Speaker 2: I don't have any real stories.  The thing that sticks out most plainly was a trip that we made to Denver [Colorado] one time, and we got out in Denver and we were meeting with some guy, Sparkman --
Speaker 1: J. C. Sparkman.
Speaker 2: J. C. Sparkman.  I remember Sparkman was just digging Bob mightily, and Bob turned around, and he said, "J.C., I don't care what you do, I'm not gonna shuffle."  And J.C. was stunned.  He was beside himself.  But Bob wouldn't take any stuff from him.  And that's Bob.
Speaker 1: Do you know the circumstances of that meeting, what the subject was?
Speaker 2: Yeah, the contract with TCI.
Speaker 1: This, this contract, affiliate contract?
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, from having BET on the different cable systems because that's really critical, can you talk about the dynamics though, in terms of the business relationship? Both from his side, the programming side, what were the critical things to making that business work?
Speaker 2: Critical things were keeping the costs low and serving the community that it was intended to serve. Those were the issues.
Speaker 1: But it's also getting distribution, right?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.
Speaker 1: Isn't that -- because that meeting was essentially about distribution.
Speaker 2: It was.
Speaker 1: Now, tell me some other of your favorite Bob Johnson stories, you know, if you can sort of think about them.  You had plenty of meetings and plenty of encounters over the years.
Speaker 2: I just, I just don't like to talk about other people's business--
Speaker 1: I see, okay.
Speaker 2: --and--
Speaker 1: I got you, okay.
Story_ID: 358475
Speaker 1: Let's talk about Emerge magazine, can you talk about what Emerge magazine was, who was involved at the time?
Speaker 2: Emerge was headed by Wilmer Ames, the founder and publisher of the magazine.  Emerge turned out to be a very difficult investment, and primarily because we just weren't getting ads at the rate we needed to be profitable.  And, in fact, I think as long as we were an investor, it did not achieve any profitability.
Speaker 1: But who was involved?  Whose idea was Emerge and what was the concept behind Emerge Magazine?
Speaker 2: Emerge was an idea that Wilmer had.  He worked for Time-Warner.  And I believe that Time-Warner was thinking primarily about a People magazine, the way People is today.  And Wilmer wanted to concentrate primarily on blacks, and, of course, Time-Warner wasn't interested in a black magazine.  So there was a conflict there.  But we were co-investors with BET [Black Entertainment Communications].  I don't know if Time-Warner was an investor?  They were an advisor.  They may have had a small amount of money in the company, but it was primarily Syncom and BET.
Speaker 1: And what, what was Emerge wanting to be in the magazine space?
Speaker 2: It wanted to be the leader in focusing on entertainment and news in the black community.  I don't think it got anywhere near there.
Speaker 1: What do you think was ill conceived about that?
Speaker 2: The toughness of collecting information for a magazine and it just never was a success in that.
Speaker 1: So was that the only time that you ventured into the publishing arena?
Speaker 2: That was the only time, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, and how much did you lose on that deal?
Speaker 2: We may have lost a million.
Story_ID: 358476
Speaker 1: Can we talk in cable television though about John [C.] Malone and you think his role or the role of TCI [Tele-Communications Inc.], but I mention John Malone because, you know, it wasn't just the ownership of properties, but there were the programming services.  But can you tell us any, you know, like John Malone story?  Are you willing to do that?
Speaker 2: I don't have any stories about John Malone.
Speaker 1: No stories about John.  J. C. Sparkman, you told the one story.  Any Peter [R.] Barton stories?
Speaker 2: No.  Peter Barton was very good at what he did, as is John Malone, really smart people.
Story_ID: 179999
Speaker 1: The hardest deal I've ever done was a company called Con Sig, Consolidated Signal Corporation.  Con Sig was a cable system serving Southgate and Almonte, California, two different franchise areas.  It was a company that Syncom purchased directly, and we owned it outright, a hundred percent of it.  I purchased the company, and [Desilva and] Phillips [Investment Bank] credit in New York [New York] had the senior loan.  And I failed to realize that if I didn't pay off the senior loan, that I could lose the cable system.  And ultimately, that's exactly what happened.  I lost the system in a foreclosure for failure to pay the senior debt.  And --
Speaker 2: Now, --
Speaker 1: -- I could have, had I been thinking about it, financed it or co-invested with the companies I always work with because that cable system turned out to be a very profitable cable system.  The company that purchased them from Phillips Credit, which was a vulture firm in New York, ultimately, foreclosed on me and sold the cable system to Adelphia [Communications Corporation] for thirty-two million dollars.  So they made the money, and I didn't because they were aggressive, and I wasn't.  I was not looking.  And I got ran right into the wall.
Speaker 2: Now, what year was this?
Speaker 1: Probably 1996 to '97 [1997].
Speaker 2: And why do you think you weren't paying attention?
Speaker 1: Because I was cavalier, and not really responsive to the financial interests of the company.
Speaker 2: Herb, that doesn't sound like you.  That doesn't sound like you.
Speaker 1: But that's what I did.
Speaker 2: Why do you think that happened at that time?
Speaker 1: I don't know --
Speaker 2: You think because you had other deals going on?
Speaker 1: No, I had other deals, but they should not have distracted me from solving the problem.  As I said, I was cavalier, and I never thought that those guys would foreclose on me.  I thought we'd be able to negotiate a reasonable settlement where they would take an ownership position in the company, but I wouldn't lose it all.
Speaker 2: Did you have many other deals like that?
Speaker 1: Nope.
Speaker 2: So that's why you described that as a bad decision on your part.
Story_ID: 180000
Speaker 1: Let me have you review with us--is there anything else about the '90s [1990s] that, you know, was very important for the history of Syncom?
Speaker 2: Yeah, we had a company in the portfolio called World Space.  World Space was an interesting company because it was owned by an Arab who was from Ethiopia.  And he was a very smart man, and as an Arab, he was able to raise a lot of money.  He raised about a billion five [$1.5 billion] from his Arab brethren, and he launched satellites that covered Europe and the Middle East and Asia and South America and part of Africa.  And he also bid on and was successful in winning the XM satellite license from the F.C.C. [Federal Communications Commission].  And we ultimately sold the satellite license to the group that owns it now.  And we sold it to them because we couldn't raise the money necessary to really make the company a success.  And the group that purchased it clearly had the capital, and that group included General Motors and a number of other venture funds.  But they purchased it, and XM is now the largest satellite signal company in the country.  They have recently purchased Sirius, which was their competitor in that space.  And so they own a hundred percent now of satellite interests.
Speaker 1: So you're saying that deal started with you?
Speaker 2: No with me, with-
Speaker 1: With--
Speaker 2: --the entrepreneur.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: In (unclear).
Speaker 1: Now, was that -- what did you -- but were you an interim step financing for him?  Is that what you're saying?
Speaker 2: We were, yes.  Noah Samara is the name of the principal in that deal.
Speaker 1: And he still owns the company or he got -- he was brought out by G --
Speaker 2: No Noah went public about a year and a half ago.  World Space, I'm not sure how he's doing right now, but we have stock in the World Space company.
Speaker 1: I see.  So let me just understand this.  He came here.  He had raised a lot of money.  He wanted to -- he got into satellite radio.  You were an interim step investor.  He wanted to take it to the next level.  You didn't have the sufficient funding.  He had to go and, you know, got more institutional funding --
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: And then what happened at that point?  He went public?
Speaker 2: He went public.  Right.
Speaker 1: And, let's Herb [HM Herbert P. Wilkins, Sr.]--you know, there was also -- while we were talking off camera, the whole situation with the satellite radio.  And that's when -- can you talk about that?
Speaker 2: Yeah, Noah [Samara] was instrumental in bidding to get one of the two licenses that the FCC was auctioning off.  And I think Noah paid seventy million dollars for the company that is now XM Satellite.  In fact, Noah came up with the name, XM Satellite.  All of the systems and everything else that were in XM were designed by World Space, Noah's company.  And that's why they have clobbered Sirius which was the other competitor in the marketplace, and have now purchased Sirius and own a hundred percent of the satellite licenses in the United States.
Story_ID: 180001
Speaker 1: I guess what I was asking, more was, because we had talked about XM, was the satellite phone.
Speaker 2: Oh, that's Iridium.
Speaker 1: Iridium, I'm sorry.
Speaker 2: When the Wall Street Journal started carrying stories about Iridium, I was sitting in my office at lunchtime everyday reading the stories about Iridium and what it was trying to do.  And I started thinking about what the other options would be for the use of Iridium, and it dawned on me that Iridium would be an incredible source of infrastructure for the African countries which didn't have wired telephone systems at the time.  And thought about acquiring Iridium out of bankruptcy.  And asked Bob [Robert L.] Johnson if he would contact the Motorola people and see if we could talk to them about buying the system.  Bob did just that, and he contacted Motorola for us and the Motorola people liked the concept that we put forward.  And they made an offer to sell the company, and that offer was for twenty-five million [dollars] cash.  And so we came up with a group that put up the twenty-five million cash, and we purchased from Motorola and Iridium is now running as a very profitable company.  Motorola, when they ran the company, tried to focus on the mass market.  And satellite telephones are not a mass market item.  They are targeted to very specific users who have a, a critical need for telecommunications but can't do it over the wire line.  And we have been serving that market and developing it since we acquired Iridium in 2000.  And, as I said, the company has done extremely well.
Speaker 1: Now, Herb [HM Herbert P. Wilkins, Sr.], when you read about Iridium -- and I'm wondering, this is the first thing I've heard you talk about where you were reading something and you did the sourcing, and I'm not saying you know as opposed to deals coming to you.  But what was it, what were the newspapers saying about Iridium, and what did what was the concept that you put forth?
Speaker 2: The newspapers were, excuse me-- were suggesting that perhaps Motorola had miscalculated in its business plan.  And it focused on how the company was spending its money.  Iridium actually cost Motorola five billion dollars and they ended up selling it for twenty-five million dollars.  That was a significant investment, but incredibly cheap, I mean pennies on the dollar.
Speaker 1: But what was Motorola -- what was Iridium anyway?  What was the technology?  I mean you --
Speaker 2: Iridium was to have been a low-earth orbit satellite company.  Iridium has seventy satellites which circle the earth, providing instant communications to every part of the world.  And so with Iridium, you can call anywhere.  I mean on every single square inch of this earth, there's an Iridium satellite somewhere and it covers that territory.  And so you can be on a ship in the middle of the Indian Ocean and call somebody on a ship in the middle of the Atlantic Ocean or call any land-based system, telephone system in the world.  And that's what it does (yawn) excuse me.
Speaker 1: And Motorola made that investment thinking that it would eclipse or be a viable competitor to cellular phones?
Speaker 2: It did.
Story_ID: 180002
Speaker 1: So in this recent instance, you know, you've talked about, you know, both satellite phones and satellite radio and both of them have done well.  I want to go back--there're just a few other things I'd like to discuss.  One is about the last thirty-something years, and the Federal Communications Commission and its role, you know, and how you see things going forward in the future.  Clearly, I'd like you to sort of lay out what you would say has been the different steps along the way, you know, in these last thirty-something, plus, years?
Speaker 2: The different steps in securing a license or--
Speaker 1: Well, I mean just in the licenses that were offered, you know, in the -- what you may have seen as things that may have been good, but they were, you know, failed attempts, like, you know, the low wattage you know stations, the other things that have been offered up that may have held great promise.  So, I just want you, if you would, take us on a history lesson sort of?
Speaker 2: Well, the F.C.C. [Federal Communications Commission] has brought a significant amount of technology to the marketplace.  In fact, a company that I invested in as a result of conversations with [HM] Ty [Tyrone] Brown back in the early '80s [1980s], called Private Networks--and I'm not sure I'm supposed to be saying this--just entered in a contract to be sold to Sprint for eighty million.  Private Networks owns a member of MDS [Multipoint Distribution Service] licenses across the country.  And I guess Sprint, to serve its cellular business, needs the spectrum space that Private Networks offers.  And so it's made the bid to acquire the company.  Syncom owns roughly twenty-seven percent of the company.  And so we'll get our part of the eighty million.
Speaker 1: That's great.  Now, MDS is multi-distribution.  What does that stand for?
Speaker 2: Multipoint Distribution Systems [sic, service].
Speaker 1: Systems, okay.  And that describes where the signal is relayed from point to point to point, right?
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: Whereas--it's different from a satellite that goes up and down.
Speaker 2: Absolutely.
Speaker 1: Or cable that's done through, you know, hardwire.
Story_ID: 180003
Speaker 1: That's why I want you--let's take a look at this, like in the radio sphere, let's take industry by industry.  Where do you see the real growth opportunity, and what do you want in radio?
Speaker 2: Radio has just become a significant business.  It is very profitable.  It hasn't been as profitable in the last couple of years.  A number of advertising have switched over to cable from radio because cable offers local delivery capability for ads.  That's not true with all radio properties right now.  So radio is losing out to cable, and they've got to overcome that deficiency or they'll be out of business.
Speaker 1: Now, what about cable?  Where do you see the cable because cable has become in the interim, a mature business.  It was, you know, at the time that you got involved a scrappy sort of, you know, young, sort of toddling, toddler.  But it's now a mature business.  Where do you see its growth?
Speaker 2: Well, I think the growth in cable comes primarily from telephone revenue, and its competition with the phone company.  And I think that it's being successfully offered across the country.  And they're competing well with the phone companies.  That's the real revenue growth that's gonna come about in cable over the next ten years.
Speaker 1: Now, do you when you mention that, are you talking specifically in the broadband space?
Speaker 2: That is the broadband space, right.  Cable is the largest broadband service offered nationally.
Speaker 1: So people --
Speaker 2: Other than satellite.
Speaker 1: Right.  So really cable has in many ways added, right, to the growth of the Internet indirectly?
Speaker 2: Cable really has because it's offering a faster means of connecting to the Internet, and right now, with companies like Vonage, it offers the capability to expand the service it delivers by delivering fast telephone service, comparable telephone service across the country.
Speaker 1: So where do you see the growth areas, like if you were -- not in your because you're sixty-five now, and as you told me earlier, at retirement age.  But if you were just coming out of HBS [Harvard Business School, Boston, Massachusetts] now, what would be -- and still choosing the same space to operate on, what would you be looking at and where at and where do you see the growth opportunities?
Speaker 2: That's a hard one.  Growth, as I mentioned, will come about in cable because of the offering of telephone service and also satellite will continue to grow and be successful in most arenas.  I think that the future is really tied up in delivery over cell phones video services and better connected cellular-type telephony.  I think that those will continue to expand for a number of years.  I think the development of PDA's [personal digital assistant] will continue until somebody comes up with something that will displace the PDA, personal data systems or personal data --
Speaker 1: It's not personal data assistant, isn't it, PDA?
Speaker 2: PDA, I don't remember what the "A" stands for.
Speaker 1: Is it "Assistant"?  No?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay. So, so you think something will come to make even that a different place?
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: Okay, more automated, more intuitive?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 180004
Speaker 1: You talked about the bad investment.  Were there other opportunities that you passed or things that you think that the minority community did not get involved in and sort of looked--you know, let pass their way?
Speaker 2: No, I think over the last fifteen years or so, minorities have aggressively pursued every aspect of communications.
Speaker 1: And so, and when you look back over your life and the role that Syncom has played, what if there had been on Syncom?  What do you think would have happened?
Speaker 2: If there had been no Syncom, I just don't believe that the industry would have been aggressively pursued by anybody else.  So number of the properties that are owned by minorities, wouldn't be owned.
Speaker 1: And, Herb, what else would you want others to sort of like--can you just sort of make a statement about, maybe something that people don't really readily know about you?
Speaker 2: About me?  I really don't know.
Story_ID: 180005
Speaker 1: To raise money, and it's been that way ever since I started thirty years ago.  Not much has changed in that thirty years in raising capital.  The capital markets really require that you have a game plan, a business plan that is achievable, and that you're not going to change your direction down the line.  You have to be able to stick with small investments, if that's what you did in the past.  You can't jump over the large investments.  Just to tell you a short story, when I went after Iridium, the people that were working with me, to raise capital, said, that's the wrong thing to do because Iridium is a large company, and they will not be happy with that investment.  And I said, the hell with them.  I'm going to do Iridium no matter what they want.  And so I invested in Iridium, and I put money into, initially Syncom IV, and realized, once I got into the deal, that Syncom IV just didn't have the capital to sustain investing in Iridium.  And so I put Syncom I, which had capital, in the form of stock in Radio One, into the company, and we saw -- we ended up with Syndicated Communications, Inc. having a larger investment in Iridium than Syncom IV which was the fund with roughly $125 million in capital.
Speaker 2: So did that create a fight with your investors?
Speaker 1: No, we co-invested on equal terms.  And there was no conflict.
Speaker 2: So that was a new phase in Syncom's development?
Speaker 1: Yep.
Speaker 2: But the fights that Sharan [Wilkins], what were those fights that you had?
Speaker 1: The biggest was with the SBA, Small Business Administration, which had licensed Syncom Capital Corporation, one of our funds.  The SBA is perhaps the most racist organization in the U.S. government, and everybody should know that.  The SBA, for no reason, had withheld capital from Syncom, back in the early -- back in the late '80s, requiring a so-called, plan of investment, that was, in my opinion, ridiculous.  They were constantly coming up with ridiculous suggestions that the SBIC [Small Business Investment Company] industry had to follow.  Minority investment companies [MESBICs, Minority Enterprise Investment Companies] were called irregular SBICs because we didn't do what the SBICs were doing, but the minority companies ended up making more money than the larger, white-oriented SBICs.
Story_ID: 180006
Speaker 1: Fund two, Syncom II.
Speaker 2: Now, what year was this?
Speaker 1: This was back in 1992.  We were having problems with all the investors because they wanted to cut our fees.  And I remember being at Teachers Insurance [and Annuity Association of America] in New York [New York].  And they came in, and they said, "We're in, but you have to cut your fees."  And I said, "If I have to cut my fees, you can't come in."  I said, "I'm not cutting my fees."  They said, "Well, you have to."  I said, "No."  I said, "I'm doing it at the same price that the other guys do.  And it won't, it won't be for less.  It'll be the same thing."  And I said, "If that's your position, and you won't change it," I said, "We'll leave."  And [HM] Terry [Jones] looked at me.  He was stunned.  He couldn't believe I was gonna walk out, and I was, I was read-- and I stood up, and they said, "Okay, okay, okay, you can keep the fees at the level that you propose."  And I said, "Oh, okay," and we concluded the investment.  And they were the smallest investor in the fund.
Speaker 2: And they were gonna tip the scale and benefit of everyone else except you?
Speaker 1: Oh, yeah.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Were they the ones that were gonna close the loop?  Were they the last entity in?
Speaker 1: They were the last ones.
Speaker 2: Okay, so that was it, and then you would have your deal closed?
Speaker 1: Um-hum.
Speaker 2: Any other stories like that, Herb [HM Herbert P. Wilkins, Sr.]?
Speaker 1: No, not really.
Speaker 2: You got me all excited (laughter).  That was a good story.
Story_ID: 180007
Speaker 1: Any other things about building the business or keeping things together?
Speaker 2: It was a constant process; stayed up many a night working on the company stuff, until middle of the morning.
Speaker 1: What would you be working on?
Speaker 2: Paperwork, with the SBA [Small Business Administration] and I had to write a position paper defending the position we took on everything.  And they questioned every valuation and there wasn't a single valuation that was on our list where we ever made less money than what we had valued the company at.  We always made more.  We always undervalued investments to our own detriment, but it was the position we took.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA COMMENT)  They were critical.  Can you explain their role, like if you had been a white-owned company, you might not have been, relied on the SBA, right?
Speaker 2: Un-un.
Speaker 1: So can you explain the role, because I don't think people will necessarily understand it, you know, the challenge for venture funding, where you had to be creative in getting your venture funds?
Speaker 2: Yeah, because we didn't have much money, we had to rely on the SBA to fund a lot of the company's activities.  We were, as a licensee of the SBA, and we were what is called the MESBIC [Minority Enterprise Small Business Investment Company]. We were able to raise or get from the SBA theoretically, four times the capital that was in the company.  The SBA never went past two times for any-- for anybody.  And I believe it was because the SBA just wanted to limit what minorities could do.  And so they reduced the capital flow to the minority community by eliminating what MESBICs could draw down from the SBA.
Speaker 1: Can you talk about the whole history of MESBICs and what even--if you could explain what MESBIC stands for?
Speaker 2: Okay, the MESBICs were started in 1958 [sic, 1968] when President [Richard] Nixon signed an executive order directing the SBA to invest in minority funds.  The industry got started with companies that -- or funds they were called, Minority Enterprise, Small Business Investment Companies.  These funds typically started with about a hundred and twenty five to $150,000 that was invested by some corporation.  The largest fund was Equico Capital Corporation in New York [New York].  Equico was capitalized initially, I believe, with about six million dollars from the Equitable Insurance Company.  And they were the largest fund.  They were co-investor with the other co-investors that we had, and they were a very strong partner.
Speaker 1: Now, why would Equitable set up a fund like that?  Why would they do that?  Were they under pressure from the federal government?  I mean why did they--
Speaker 2: No, the Equitable just set up the fund.
Speaker 1: Was it to help in community investments?
Speaker 2: It was to help in small business investment, yes.
Story_ID: 180008
Speaker 1: Now, talk about, you know, you said it got started in 1958 [sic, 1968], but what was the sort of the live trajectory of the MESBIC [Minority Enterprise Small Business Investment Company] and where does it stand today?
Speaker 2: Well, MESBICs were, as I said, capitalized with around a hundred and fifty to--$125,000 to $150,000, and they can get four--theoretically, four times that amount from the SBA [Small Business Administration].  But the SBA never gave, as far as I know, they may have done it with one or two companies, but I'll just say they never gave anybody that kind of leverage.  The industry was slow in developing because capital did not flow quickly to the minority enterprise, small business and customer companies.  But the people in the industry were learning the venture capital business, and the MESBICs were, I think, the key source of the talent that's been developed over the years.  We got our license when we started the company, Syncom, in 1978.  And we turned our license in two years ago because we just got tired of the nonsense that we were getting from the SBA.  The agony of having your valuations questioned and everything you did questioned was just too much of a pain, so we turned the license in and the company operates now without any connection to the SBA.
Speaker 1: So, in many ways, that's somewhat of a tortuous success story in that you graduated to be able to be mainstream?
Speaker 2: Yep.
Speaker 1: Now, tell me the theory behind the MESBICs, what was the theory, Herb [HM Herbert P. Wilkins, Sr.]?  Was it to allow--what was the theory?  I know--
Speaker 2: To integrate minority business into the American system.
Speaker 1: But it's investment by blacks in black companies or in companies?
Speaker 2: Minorities in companies, yeah--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --in minority companies--
Story_ID: 180009
Speaker 1: Now, where do you see Syncom's future in going forward?
Speaker 2: Well, as I said, I have retired from the main Syncom group.
Speaker 1: Now, why did you make the decision to do that?
Speaker 2: I just got tired of hassling with travel, and actually, running the company was becoming tougher and tougher.  And the environment is a tough environment for venture funds right now.
Speaker 1: Now why is that?
Speaker 2: Because it's a lot of competition, and, you know, you have to make sure that you're putting your money in the right place where there will be appreciation.  And that's tough.
Speaker 1: And so you got tired of sort of that day-to-day grind that had been your existence?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.
Speaker 1: And so what decision then did you make?
Speaker 2: I decided to retire.  I'm much older than I was, and age is really a factor in my whole decision.
Speaker 1: So you've retired, but you're sitting in an office.
Speaker 2: I'm sitting in an office, and I'm still working because this is the only thing I know, and I love, love doing it.  It's just part of me.
Story_ID: 180010
Speaker 1: So, Herb [HM Herbert P. Wilkins, Sr.], when you look back over your time from, you know, growing up, you know, you had a father [William Henry Wilkins] who literally, sort of worked himself to death in some respects.  You had a mother [Catherine Sheridan Wilkins] who really, you know, provided for kids and got people on the right track because that's a success story in and of itself, that everyone went to college.  So when you look over, you know, your sort of -- you know, you could have stayed at Central State [University, Wilberforce, Ohio], may have had a similar fate or not, what do you -- how would you assess your path, the path that you've taken.  And in that, can you address the issue of what you consider your legacy?
Speaker 2: In fact, about two weeks ago I started thinking about just that, you know, what have I done in my life.  And I tried to evaluate most of the decisions that I've made.  And I can't think of a wrong decision that I've made in my life.  I've just been very lucky, made the right decision at the right time for most things that were coming down the track and moving off into the future.  What is my legacy?  My legacy is actually the people who I've financed over the years and in the telecommunications business and the successes that they've had as a group.  That's the legacy.
Story_ID: 180011
Speaker 1: What when you look where we are today, what are your hopes and concerns for the black community?
Speaker 2: My hope for the black community is that we're able to raise the capital necessary to finance all of our business activities.  And I see a very bright future.  The thing to me that's most surprising is how white people have managed to get over their problems with blacks and help integrate us into the society that we have.  I think that's my hope.
Speaker 1: And you see that it's possible, is what you're saying--
Speaker 2: I see that it's very possible.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 180012
Speaker 1: Now, Herb [HM Herbert P. Wilkins, Sr.], when you look--your son is in the business. Sheran [Wilkins] has been very helpful to you.  What, when you look at your family, what are your hopes and aspirations there in terms of your own legacy?
Speaker 2: As I told my daughter and she got very upset with me, what bothers me most is that none of my kids has married a black American.  And that's most unfortunate.  Two of my kids are married to a white and the third is married to a Haitian, immigrant to this country.  So, to them, American blacks were not acceptable.  That's the way I see it.  And what is my hope?  My hope is that my kids turn out okay--my grandkids.  I now have three grandsons, and we're expecting another in December [2007].  And it is a boy.  And so I'll have four grandsons, and I think about them often.  And I want to leave them with enough money so they can do whatever they want in life.  And that is, that is my hope.
