Story_ID: 526893
Speaker 1: So, I'll begin by saying that I'm [HistoryMaker] Harriette Cole, I'm the interviewer for The HistoryMakers today, and we have Scott Stearns who is our videographer.  Today is October 3rd, 2016.  We are in Queens, New York at the studio of [HistoryMaker] Jack Whitten.  I would like for you to say and spell your name for me, and tell me your birthdate?
Speaker 2: Okay, Jack Whitten, W-H-I-T-T-E-N, Whitten.
Speaker 1: And your birthdate?
Speaker 2: Fifth of December, '39 [1939].
Speaker 1: And what do you do, Mr. Whitten?
Speaker 2: I'm a painter.
Story_ID: 526894
Speaker 1: So we're gonna start with what we call People magazine type questions.  What is your favorite food?
Speaker 2: Oh, fish, anything from the sea.
Speaker 1: Your favorite color?
Speaker 2: Blue.
Speaker 1: Time of year?
Speaker 2: Time of year?  Oh god, the summer.
Speaker 1: Vacation destination?
Speaker 2: The island of Crete in Greece.
Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite saying or phrase?
Speaker 2: Oh, being a child of the '60s [1960s], shit happens.
Story_ID: 526895
Speaker 1: Now we're gonna go into your family history.  And you mentioned how important family is in honoring the ancestors.  I wanna start--we'll talk about your mother's family and your father's [Mose Whitten] family.  Let's start with your mother, if you would say her name and the year of her birth, you know, her birthdate and where she's from, and tell me about your mother?
Speaker 2: Annie B.--Annie B. Whitten [Annie Cunningham Whitten], the B is Bell, B-E-L-L.
Speaker 1: And where was she born?
Speaker 2: She was born in Bessemer, Alabama.
Speaker 1: Do you know--do you know--
Speaker 2: Oh the year, I have all that written down.  You know, I can't keep all those figures in my head.
Speaker 1: That's okay.  And did she have siblings?
Speaker 2: Yes.  She had a brother and a sister.
Speaker 1: What are their names?
Speaker 2: Thomas Cunningham and Selina [Selina Cunningham], my aunt and uncle (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Where does she fit--your mother fit in the birth order?
Speaker 2: Oh you mean her kids, I'm sorry, I misunderstood you.
Speaker 1: No, no, no, no, no, no.  I meant, you were right, I'm saying, but was your mother the first born or, in her siblings, when was she, what's the birth order?
Speaker 2: Oh you mean her--
Speaker 1: Was your mother the first born (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Older, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: 'Cause my Uncle Tom was the youngest kid.
Speaker 1: Okay and what did your mother--she grew up in Bessemer?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: So what--can you describe Bessemer, was it a small town?
Speaker 2: Small town, next to Birmingham [Alabama].  Most people know Birmingham.  Ore, it's the center of coal mining, ore mining, steel mill country.  A small town.  I mean when I grew up in Bessemer, I think the population was about forty thousand.
Speaker 1: Okay, and so it's primarily steel mills.  What did your--what was your mother's work?
Speaker 2: She was a seamstress.  And later she opened up the Annie B. Whitten Kindergarten [Bessemer, Alabama].  But all, when I was a kid growing up, she was a seamstress.  She did dresses for the local ladies.
Speaker 1: And who were her parents, your grandparents?
Speaker 2: That would be Etta.  Snyder was her maiden name, and Cunningham, that would be my grandmother, Etta [Etta Snyder Cunningham].  I remember her.
Speaker 1: Yeah, what do you remember about her?
Speaker 2: Oh, she worked the hell out of me.  Seriously (laughter).
Speaker 1: What did she make you do?
Speaker 2: Well her house was located not too far from ours, on the other side of town.  And she had a empty lot next to her and she always kept a big garden.  She grew everything, corn, sweet potatoes, peppers, tomatoes, a host of flowers and fruit trees, fig trees, a lot of different fruit trees.  But I always had to work for her.
Speaker 1: To--you had to work in the garden?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, whatever, digging, cleaning.  She was a tough lady.  At times could be rather cruel.
Speaker 1: Yeah?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.  She's famous for what we call a backhanded slap.  The sort of a thing if she felt that you were acting up, you never knew it was coming.  Next thing you know, you got bopped in the face, we called it the backhanded slap (laughter).
Speaker 1: And you had no idea you were doing wrong?
Speaker 2: No, but evidently she did.
Speaker 1: And so was her--was she a homemaker or did she?
Speaker 2: Homemaker, yes.  Her husband had died years before, I didn't even remember him.
Speaker 1: Do you know what his name was?
Speaker 2: Asbury [Asbury Cunningham].
Speaker 1: Asbury.  But he died before you were born?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  'Cause I have no memory of him (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So did she remarry?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: So and--and she didn't work.  How did she have money?
Speaker 2: Well, she might've had a pension.  He was a coal miner, he had worked in the mines.
Speaker 1: Is that how he died?
Speaker 2: I don't know how he died.  I don't think I was ever told.
Speaker 1: So, your mother--what--your mother was a seamstress you said--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --and then later kindergarten, she had her own kindergarten?
Speaker 2: She had her own kindergarten.  She was well-known in Bessemer for the Annie B. Whitten Kindergarten.
Speaker 1: Do you--how far back can you trace your mother's family?  Can you go back to slavery?
Speaker 2: No.  I mean, my younger brother looked into it, but frankly I've never looked into it.
Speaker 1: And they didn't talk about that (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And today it's always possible, you know.  Now today you got so many companies that do that, but frankly I've never done it.
Speaker 1: And they didn't talk about that kind of thing?
Speaker 2: No.
Story_ID: 526896
Speaker 1: Did they talk at all about segregation?
Speaker 2: Well you had to (laughter), everybody talked about segregation growing up when I did in Bessemer, Alabama.  Bessemer, Alabama was a total segregated, I grew up--you have to understand, I grew up in Jim Crow.
Speaker 1: And so what did Jim Crow--can you describe it, what did that mean for you?
Speaker 2: Oh absolutely.  Well when I give talks, I don't even use the word Jim Crow anymore.  I say, "I grew up with American apartheid."  That's what I say.  I know the South Africans call you on it, they tend to own the trademark on that word.  But the truth about it, I grew up in American apartheid.  What we mean by that, I grew up with separate schools, separate transportation, separate neighborhoods.  We didn't mix with white folks at all, not at all, only in the working subservient positions.  But other than that, we had no contact with them.
Speaker 1: You didn't see each other?
Speaker 2: Oh, no.  Better off you didn't.
Speaker 1: Were you aware of the danger that--
Speaker 2: Oh the older folks made sure that you knew, they instructed you on how to handle yourself.  So it was something that was drummed in you since you were a little kid and older.
Speaker 1: And what were they--what were the instructions?
Speaker 2: Stay away from white folks as much as you can.  That was the main one.  Just don't engage them.  I grew up in horrible times, there's no other way to put it.  You know I just, I have memories of the Ku Klux Klan [KKK] parading down our streets, burning their damn crosses down on our baseball field.
Speaker 1: And how old were you when--you remember that?
Speaker 2: Oh through early childhood, more than once.  You're talking six, seven, eight years old.
Speaker 1: What did you all do when they came?
Speaker 2: You couldn't do nothing.  Pull your shades down and don't open your door, keep your door locked.  Peered at them out of the window from the inside.  There's nothing you could do.
Story_ID: 526897
Speaker 1: Tell me about your father.
Speaker 2: My father was a coal miner.
Speaker 1: What's his name?
Speaker 2: Mose [Mose Whitten], M-O-S-E.
Speaker 1: And he was born, you know what year?
Speaker 2: I never knew when my father was born or the date of his death.  I was never told that.
Speaker 1: Did you know him?
Speaker 2: I have some memory of him.  My father passed when I was about, probably about five, close to five years old.
Speaker 1: Really?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I don't have that much memory, but I do have some.
Speaker 1: But he was a coal miner?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Do you know how he and your mother [Annie Cunningham Whitten] met?
Speaker 2: I think through the church.  That's what I had heard.  But he was not a religious person.  He didn't go to church really.
Speaker 1: But somehow they met through the church?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And what church did your mother go to?
Speaker 2: Oh, the Church of God, 28th Street Church of God [Bessemer, Alabama].
Speaker 1: And was she active in church?
Speaker 2: Yeah, very.
Speaker 1: Did she sing on the choir or how--how was she active?
Speaker 2: She was active in organizing plays, Sunday schools, different activities.  She was never a choir member though.  And church was required, we had to go to church whether you liked it or not, every, every Sunday, and during the week sometime.  Our church even had a church bus so you didn't have no excuse not to go (laughter).  They would pick you up at home, take you to Sunday school.
Speaker 1: So you were at Sunday school every Sunday (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, we grew up in Sunday school every, every Sunday.  Not sometimes, all the time.
Speaker 1: And who's we?  Who's we?
Speaker 2: My brothers and I, and family members.
Speaker 1: And actually we'll get to your siblings in a second.  Let me--let's go back to your father's family.  So your father was Mose, he died when you were five?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I was about five years old, close as I can remember.
Speaker 1: Do you know why he died?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I know.
Speaker 1: He was a young man, right?
Speaker 2: I don't know his age.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I was never told his age.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: I never speak of my father's death.  We had a tragedy in the family, can we just leave it at that?
Speaker 1: Yes, we can.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, do you remember his parents, your grandparents?
Speaker 2: I have a faint remembrance of the grandfather, his name was Frank [Frank Whitten], looked just like a white man.
Speaker 1: And was he?
Speaker 2: Well, his father was white, I remember that.
Speaker 1: Did you know his father?
Speaker 2: Oh briefly, vague, vague, vague.  And his wife was a very dark black lady.  I remember her.
Speaker 1: What's her name?
Speaker 2: Oh god.  I don't remember.  We lost track of those people after my father's death.
Speaker 1: Do you know what they did, what their work was?
Speaker 2: Farmers.
Speaker 1: Okay, in Bessemer [Alabama]?
Speaker 2: No in Mississippi.  My father was from Mississippi.
Speaker 1: What part?
Speaker 2: I think it was McLeod [Mississippi], right across the border from--I remember going there as a kid once.
Speaker 1: Across the border from?
Speaker 2: From Alabama.
Speaker 1: And when you say your Grandfather Frank's father was white, was he a slave owner?
Speaker 2: No.  The background was slave (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) 'Cause he wouldn't have been that old.
Speaker 2: They still lived on--they came through sharecropping.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: The name Whitten were plantation owners.
Speaker 1: Okay, in Mississippi?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And to your knowledge, did Frank's father claim him?
Speaker 2: I don't know.
Speaker 1: Did your father's family ever talk about those times and the fact that, you know, you know that your--the Whitten family were slave owners.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Do you know anything about the family at that time?
Speaker 2: No, and frankly I haven't looked into it.
Story_ID: 526898
Speaker 1: Your parents [Annie Cunningham Whitten and Mose Whitten]--did your parents marry?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And they--and how many children did they have?
Speaker 2: Well with my father, my mother had three boys.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: My mother was married previously, and she had four kids with her previous husband.
Speaker 1: So your mother--so her previous husband, what was his name?
Speaker 2: James Monroe Cross.
Speaker 1: And she had four children with James Monroe Cross?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And did he die?
Speaker 2: Yes.  He died under, (makes sound), strange circumstances, very strange.  He was a sign painter, a professional sign painter which was unheard of in the South.  He actually owned his own business and he was a professional sign painter, and he used to get threats.  I grew up with these stories that the Ku Klux Klan [KKK] threatened him.  He would be up doing his work on scaffolds and always came down with a note, "Watch your back nigger, we don't want niggers doing this kind of work."  And the story goes that my mom tells is that he got a call that a dear friend of his was in the hospital and he should go to the hospital to see him.  He went to see his friend in the hospital, and next thing we know, my mom gets a phone call saying that James became ill while he was in the hospital, and they operated on him without any family consent, and by time my mom got there he was dead.  That's the story.  So it was very mysterious circumstances.  My mom always believed that the white folks killed him because of who he was.  He was an interesting fellow.  He--not only he--was he a professional sign painter, he was one of the founding members of The Dixie Hummingbirds.  Yeah, there's photographs of him.
Speaker 1: So, do you have any idea how old he was when he died?
Speaker 2: I don't know, my brother James [James Cross, Jr.] would know.
Story_ID: 526899
Speaker 1: They had four children.
Speaker 2: Yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Who--tell me the names of those children.
Speaker 2: Well the oldest kid, be my sister, we call her Toots, Martha, Martha Tunson [Martha Cross Tunson] would be the oldest.  And Laverne, Laverne Sykes [Laverne Cross Sykes].  Then James, James Monroe [James Cross, Jr.] was named after his father, James Monroe Cross.  And my brother Tommy [Tommy Cross], who was named after his Uncle Thomas [Thomas Cunningham].
Speaker 1: And Tommy was a jazz musician?
Speaker 2: Jazz musician, yeah.
Speaker 1: And then with your father, with Mose Whitten, your mother [Annie Cunningham Whitten] had--
Speaker 2: Three kids.
Speaker 1: Three kids.
Speaker 2: There were seven of us all together.
Speaker 1: Okay, and tell me her--who Mose's children are?
Speaker 2: Mose's children--I was the oldest, Jack [HistoryMaker Jack Whitten], then Jesse [Jesse Whitten] and Billy [Bill Whitten].  Three boys.
Speaker 1: And is Jesse still living?
Speaker 2: Jesse's still alive.  He's--he just moved from Chicago [Illinois] to Georgia to be with his--one of his daughters.  So he lives down in Georgia outside of Atlanta [Georgia].
Speaker 1: And Billy is your brother who passed?
Speaker 2: Billy passed, yes.
Story_ID: 526900
Speaker 1: Can you tell me about Billy [Bill Whitten]?
Speaker 2: Whoa, Billy was the famous one (laughter).  He was our--
Speaker 1: Before you.
Speaker 2: --a fashion designer.  Oh yeah.  And my older brother James [James Cross, Jr.] had gone to California, and Billy went to California after graduating high school in Bessemer [Alabama] to go into a trade school for fashion design.
Speaker 1: So he knew from a young age that that's what he wanted to do?
Speaker 2: Oh he knew.  He--
Speaker 1: And your mother [Annie Cunningham Whitten] was--
Speaker 2: A seamstress, yeah.
Speaker 1: --was a seamstress so he was exposed to.
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, now Billy was more than exposed, he made things.  I mean I just had to write an article about Billy for Bruce Weber.  Bruce Weber is doing an article on Bill in his magazine and he asked me to write an essay for the magazine.
Speaker 1: So he was a fashion designer.  He moved to L.A. [Los Angeles, California].
Speaker 2: Yes, moved to L.A.
Speaker 1: And who were some of his clients?
Speaker 2: Oh god, the list is so long.  But some of the most important clients of his would be Michael Jackson, he's the man behind the Michael Jackson look, the Michael Jackson glove.  Oh Sheena Easton, all of Neil Diamond, Lionel Richie.  He worked for so many different people.  Cicely Tyson, Billy Dee Williams (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So he did male and female costumes?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  But he--as he explained to me, he was an image maker.  People would come to him and say, "Hey Bill look, I need an image, can you help me out here?"  And he would create an image for them.  In the process of creating an image, he designed all their clothes and made them.  He had his own shop, Workroom 27.
Speaker 1: Where was Workroom 27?
Speaker 2: Workroom 27 was in L.A.
Speaker 1: And he passed in 2006?
Speaker 2: Two thousand six [2006], that sounds right.
Speaker 1: And you were telling me he passed of AIDS [acquired immunodeficiency syndrome]?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So he was part of that wave of so many?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: How did your family handle that?
Speaker 2: Oh my god (laughter).  He suffered.
Speaker 1: (Pause) Was your older brother out there with him?
Speaker 2: Yes, and I went out, I went out to L.A.  But he knew.  He knew he was dying.  In truth, he had known for years, he didn't tell anybody, but he knew.
Speaker 1: But he had a full career?
Speaker 2: Oh he had a full career.  Like I say, Bill was well known.  I just met [HistoryMaker] Berry Gordy last week, Berry Gordy also received the Medal of Honor [sic. National Medal of Arts] from--and he remembered Bill 'cause he worked with Diana Ross.  Yeah, Berry remembered him.  He did--do you remember when 'The Redd Foxx Show' was on TV, he did all of that.
Speaker 1: He did the costumes for that?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah.  And Redd Foxx did something quite nice.  He--on one session Billy called us all excited.  He said, "Turn on the TV, turn on the TV."  He acknowledged, he had him to come out on stage and says, "You know, you don't see what's going on behind the scenes here, but I want you to know here is the man who's responsible for all of this."  It was very exciting.
Speaker 1: That's great.
Speaker 2: Very exciting.
Speaker 1: It's wonderful to be acknowledged (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Richard Pryor, he did so much for Richard Pryor.  He had a lot of people pass through his shop.  Workroom 27 was a known, happening place in L.A.
Story_ID: 526901
Speaker 1: Remind me of when you were born?
Speaker 2: Thirty-nine [1939].
Speaker 1: In '39 [1939], in Bessemer [Alabama]?
Speaker 2: In Bessemer, yes.
Speaker 1: So your parents [Annie Cunningham Whitten and Mose Whitten] got married and were living in Bessemer.  Your father was a coal miner, your mother is a seamstress.
Speaker 2: Seamstress.
Speaker 1: And the four kids before you were in the house too, correct?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Yeah so you were kid number five?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Can you describe your house?
Speaker 2: A wood frame house, one master bedroom, two other bedrooms, a dining room, kitchen.  I remember when we got our indoor toilet because we had outhouses before.  We probably got indoor toilet when I was about eight years old.  I remember--I remember when they put the sewer lines down, that was a big event, big event.  For black people in Bessemer to be connected to the city sewer system was a big deal.
Speaker 1: And when your family got a toilet, did the other neighbors--did it all happen at one time?
Speaker 2: Pretty much.  Yeah I think they did one side of the street and then the other.  But before that it was all outhouses.
Speaker 1: And so there're five of you, what were the sleeping arrangements?
Speaker 2: Well, the three boys, we were in one bedroom and the girls were in another.  It was tight, very tight, wasn't enough space for everybody, but--but we managed.
Speaker 1: Did you have a backyard?
Speaker 2: We had a backyard.  That was good.  We used it as a garden.  We grew--we always had a garden.  In truth, everybody that I knew kept a garden.  We grew all kinds of vegetables, green vegetables.  We grew chickens.  My brothers and I, we grew rabbits to make extra money.  Sometimes we had as many as fifty rabbits, that we would sell, you know, for food for the family, but you could always make an extra buck [dollar].  We grew ducks.  Again occasionally, we could sell ducks to make a little profit.
Speaker 1: And so you worked in your garden and in your [maternal] grandmother's [Etta Snyder Cunningham] garden?
Speaker 2: Absolutely (laughter).
Speaker 1: Did your other siblings help out with your grandmother's garden?
Speaker 2: Yeah, Jesse [Jesse Whitten], the oldest boy, Jesse.  I being an older one, I think they got more work out of me than anybody (simultaneous).
Story_ID: 526902
Speaker 1: When you think of growing up there in that home [in Bessemer, Alabama], when you look back, what's the earliest memory that you have?
Speaker 2: Of anything specifically?
Speaker 1: Just anything.  What's your earliest memory?
Speaker 2: Well I remember once we almost burned the house down (laughter).
Speaker 1: How?
Speaker 2: We heated with coal and wood.  It was much later before we got gas into the house with a gas furnace.  But first--and we used to get a load of wood and we would have to go out and cut it, you know, to make kindling and split logs.  And it was cold outside and my brother and I was out cutting kindling and we started a fire outside to get warm while we were cutting wood.  And damn fire got out of control and lit the house, and we set the house on fire (laughter).
Speaker 1: How did you put it out?
Speaker 2: Oh we didn't, we had to call the fire department.
Speaker 1: Oh, it was a big fire?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, oh it got out of control before we knew it.
Speaker 1: And how much damage?
Speaker 2: Oh quite a bit.  Quite a bit.  One section of the kitchen was burned out.  Fire department came and put it out.  We were out there with buckets of water and a hose pipe, but it got out of control.
Speaker 1: What was your punishment?
Speaker 2: A lot of scolding and so forth.
Speaker 1: Were your parents at home?  Was your fath--
Speaker 2: My mom [Annie Cunningham Whitten] was at home, yes.
Speaker 1: Your father [Mose Whitten] was already gone?
Speaker 2: My father was long dead.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: How old were you when this happened?
Speaker 2: Oh I had to be at least about ten years old.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: At least.
Story_ID: 526903
Speaker 1: When you think of growing up, what are the sights, sounds and smells that you remember?
Speaker 2: Growing up in the South and like a small town [Bessemer, Alabama] like that--I used to work for a man called Cary, C-A-R-Y.  Cary lived across the tracks, we lived right next to the railroad tracks.  Cary lived across the track, and Cary did farming.  He had a mule.  So if it went down to smells, I think the thing that impressed me the most would be the smell of Cary's mule when he taught me to plow.  And when you're plowing and the earth opens up, there's a particular smell that comes out of the earth.  And you have to keep in mind that you're in back of a mule and the mule is always farting on you, so (laughter).  But it was that kind of a thing.  And my [maternal] grandmother's [Etta Snyder Cunningham] house. Probably the earliest smell memory would be my grandmother's house.  My grandmother suffered from rheumatoid arthritis and she had all kinds of homemade remedies.  And her major one was camphor.  You know camphor?
Speaker 1: Sure, it stunk.
Speaker 2: She would soak it.  Now none of these peoples drink, they were all teetotalers, but she kept a little bottle of whiskey that she would soak, the camphor would dissolve in whiskey, bourbon, and she would rub that on her.  So the whole house smelled of camphor.  And after working, she would always appease you by giving you a lump of peppermint candy.  She always kept peppermint candy.  So you can imagine the smell of peppermint candy--
Speaker 1: And camphor.
Speaker 2: --and camphor, oh yuck.  It would get in your clothes, you couldn't get away from it.  You would go back home smelling like camphor.
Speaker 1: Did it provide her any relief?
Speaker 2: Well she said that you know, all this kind of stuff is all mental, you know.  And then later on she got into, people were taking pennies and soaking it in water.  They claimed that the copper from the pennies helped, and they were rubbing themselves with that and wearing copper bracelets.
Speaker 1: People still do that.
Speaker 2: They still do it?
Speaker 1: Uh-huh.
Speaker 2: You know, they did all kinds of things to try to get relief 'cause it--it's painful.  And it runs in my family a lot.  Everybody had it.
Speaker 1: What do you remember seeing?
Speaker 2: There's a lot of things in smell that's associated with food as I--as you--
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: --I never thought of this that you're bringing this up--I never thought of it (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yes, like what kinds of food?
Speaker 2: Molasses.  I remember we had a space in McCalla [Alabama] that a mule driven grinder went around in circles and they would put the sugarcane in there and squeeze it out and cook it.  That smell I'll never forget.  The smokehouses.  We went to Marion, Alabama my cousins there on my mother's [Annie Cunningham Whitten] side had smokehouses, where you walk into these smokehouses they had pork hanging--whole sides of pork, hams hanging.  They kept the fires going day and night, smoking.  Those kinds of things.  Always associated with food, with the land, primarily with the land though.  The cutting down of pine trees, the sap that comes out of the pine tree, that kind of a thing.
Speaker 1: Very specific.
Speaker 2: Very, very specific.  As you, again I never thought of this, but smells were very specific, very much so.
Story_ID: 526904
Speaker 1: Your mother's [Annie Cunningham Whitten] side of the family, they had the smokehouse or smokehouses?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.  And also the odors from people.  You know, people didn't have running water and shit, they didn't bathe that much.  So truth about it, people stunk.
Speaker 1: And they had all their--?
Speaker 2: But we're the kids, we only bathe on Saturday, the night.  We used to make a joke out of it.  We used to call it the national Negro bath night (laughter).
Speaker 1: Just gen- not just your family, just in general?
Speaker 2: In general, yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) People bathed on Saturday night.
Speaker 2: Yeah, national Negro bath night.
Speaker 1: National Negro bath night.
Speaker 2: That's what we called it, which was Saturday night.
Speaker 1: And did--
Speaker 2: Galvanized tub, heating water up on the stove with kettles.  Homemade brown soap, lye.
Speaker 1: I was gonna ask you about the soap.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  And every house smelled of bacon.  Everybody had fried fatback and they--growing up in the South, you didn't throw nothing away.  Survival was so severe that nothing was thrown away.  Everybody kept a pot of bacon fat for cooking and for soap making.  We made soap outside in a big black kettle.  I think the one smell, even earlier, would probably be the smell of my father's [Mose Whitten] clothes.  He brought his clothes home once a week from the mines.  And we had this large black cast iron pot outside that I would help my mom start a fire.  And we would heat that pot with lye soap and my mom washed his clothes.  Now that's a smell I'll never forget.
Speaker 1: Because it's the coal--
Speaker 2: Yeah, the coal, the sweat, the blood.
Speaker 1: Blood because he was injured?
Speaker 2: Oh they always got hurt, all those miners always got hurt.  They were always bleeding from something.  But the clothes would come in soaked with sweat, stiff, I mean stiff.  'Cause they only--they wore them all week.
Speaker 1: The same clothes?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 526905
Speaker 1: To the extent that you remember, I mean you just described your father [Mose Whitten] bringing home the clothes once a week from the coal mines, did he ever talk about working in the coal mines, do you remember?
Speaker 2: I wouldn't remember that, like I say I was three, four years old.  But he didn't have to talk about it.  I mean all those guys, his buddies, they drinked a lot to forget.  Consumed a lot of moonshine whiskey.
Speaker 1: In the week, they would be in the mine all week?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.
Speaker 1: So they just came home on the weekends?
Speaker 2: Oh no, they came home, yeah.
Speaker 1: They came home--
Speaker 2: No, no, they came home.
Speaker 1: They came out, they came out?
Speaker 2: Sure, yeah.  My mom [Annie Cunningham Whitten] had to make a dinner that he took.  He had a metal box, that I remember.  Sort of a rectangular metal lunch box, had a round top, that I remember, round top it opened up.  And when we say lunch, we're talking about a whole meal, ham hocks, collard greens, cornbread, black-eyed peas, and it was a full meal (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) A substantial meal.  And typically what time would they get off from work, the coal miners?  Was it dark?
Speaker 2: Oh they worked eight, nine, ten hours.  Yeah, they had different shifts though. The mine never stopped.  They would rotate them.  Sometimes the night shift, sometimes the day shift.
Speaker 1: Where--do you remember any accidents in the coal mine when you were growing up?
Speaker 2: I remember people talking about things that had happened.  Muscoda--Muscoda Mines was the name of it.
Speaker 1: How do you spell that?
Speaker 2: M-U-S-C-O-D-A, Muscoda.  TCI [Tennessee Coal, Iron and Railroad Company] mines.
Speaker 1: So, did any of your siblings work in the coal mines?
Speaker 2: No.  I think my uncle worked in the st- well one of my uncles worked in a steel mill, Jesse [Jesse Cunningham], worked in a steel mill.
Speaker 1: 'Cause those were the two, coal mine or steel mill that was the two (unclear)--
Speaker 2: Oh let me go back, you asked about the siblings.
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: I had two uncles, Jesse and Thomas [Thomas Cunningham], and Selina [Selina Cunningham] my aunt, so it was four kids, right.  Jesse worked in the steel mills.  He lived across the street from us [in Bessemer, Alabama], my Uncle Jesse.
Story_ID: 526906
Speaker 1: When you were growing up, what kind of a kid were you?
Speaker 2: Well I always did art, art and music.
Speaker 1: From?
Speaker 2: Oh from a little boy, I was drawing, doing sketches.  I even made an easel set up doing family portraits, landscapes from an early age.
Speaker 1: Like what?
Speaker 2: And music.
Speaker 1: Like--when you say early age?
Speaker 2: Oh I'm talking junior high school.  Yeah, I was painting from junior high school, and music, I played tenor saxophone.
Speaker 1: And do you remember when you started playing the sax?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.  I started playing sax would be at Carver Junior High [George Washington Carver Junior High School, Bessemer, Alabama], in the marching band.
Speaker 1: How long did you play?
Speaker 2: Oh I played all through junior high school and at Dunbar High School [Paul William Dunbar High School, Bessemer, Alabama].  Played in--we formed a dance band.  We had a Dunbar Blue Devils marching band and I was a member of the dance band.  And even when I went to college, I still played a little bit.
Speaker 1: Who taught you to play?
Speaker 2: Oh we had an instructor--music instructor at Carver.  And our music instructor at Dunbar.  The person's name at Carver was Jones [ph.].  The band leader at Dunbar was from New Orleans [Louisiana], Lionel, L-I-O-N-E-L.  Lionel Garnier [ph.], Lionel Garnier, yes.
Speaker 1: New Orleans one of those French names.
Speaker 2: One of those French, yeah, yeah, yeah.  He was the band instructor at Dunbar High School.  Learned a lot from him, a lot.  He was the one who encouraged us to start the dance band.  That was the first time I had heard real jazz records, 'cause he played them for us.  He would play Miles (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) In your class?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, he would play Miles Davis.  He would play Charlie Parker, all the jazz thing of the month.  So I heard those sounds before I came to New York [New York] because of this man, Lionel Garnier, Dunbar High School band instructor.
Speaker 1: And did you learn how to play their music?
Speaker 2: Shit, we did the best we could, we'd listen and copy it (laughter) note by note.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) You tried.
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.  I mean, we learned to read music of course.  I can read music 'cause in the marching band, you had to learn to read music.
Speaker 1: Yeah, how large was the marching band (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That's funny you would ask that--you know my good buddy is a bass player, Ron Carter.  And I'd say, "Ron," I'd say, "can you imagine we had a dance band and the bass player was a tuba and I played sax and we had a trumpet?"  And Ron said, "I can't imagine that band," (laughter).  No, I can't imagine that (laughter).
Speaker 1: But you had it.  (Unclear).
Speaker 2: Yeah, we had it.  Shit, we did gigs man, we did dance gigs, we even did a commercial.
Speaker 1: Really?
Speaker 2: We did more than one commercial for the local radio stations.
Speaker 1: Did you get paid for them?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I think we got five bucks [dollars] a piece.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: Hell, I can even remember one of the commercials.  I'm ashamed to say it (laughter).
Speaker 1: Those were the first commercials you did, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, we did a commercial once and I don't know why it sticks in my head.  We did a commercial for a used car salesman in Bessemer, Alabama.  He hired us to do this commercial that was on the radios.
Speaker 1: How did it go?
Speaker 2: I--my god how can I remember that?  I remember the jingle.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: He was a used car salesman and it went (singing), "Oh you don't--you don't have to ride them buses, you don't have to ride them buses, you don't have to ride them buses, see WDR [ph.] today."  And then I would come in with my sax, dub, dub, dop, dop ditty-bop-bop-bop-bop.  "Ride them buses," (laughter).  God damn I don't know how I remember that (laughter).
Speaker 1: And that was when you were in junior high school?
Speaker 2: That was high school, yeah.
Speaker 1: High school, high school.
Speaker 2: Yeah, we played for dances and we even had a big gig once, we went to Auburn University [Alabama Polytechnic Institute; Auburn University, Auburn, Alabama] and played for a big white fraternity dance band.  For a dance, fraternity dance down at Auburn once.  We did quite a few gigs.
Story_ID: 526907
Speaker 1: You were into music, you were into art, when did you make the decision that art was gonna be what you would follow, pursue (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, I wasn't encouraged, you know.  The logic was you cannot make a living from the arts.  So no one encouraged you.  And I don't regret that today.  I mean--I mean, I had a high school art instructor, his name was John B. Hall, John B. Hall.  But, limited because John B. Hall was not only the art instructor, he was the social studies teacher, he was the, for learning how to drive--driving instructor, he was the coach.  But you know, we learned a few things.  We used to do little still lifes and things he would set up.  I think the best thing he taught me was how to do store card painting.  You see in those days, the department stores didn't do silk screening, you painted those signs.  And John B. Hall had the accounts there in Bessemer [Alabama], one in particular I remember, a big place called the manufacturer's warehouse outlet.  And he taught me how to do that.  John left Dunbar High School [Paul William Dunbar High School, Bessemer, Alabama] to go to Alabama State [Alabama State College; Alabama State University, Montgomery, Alabama] to become a football coach.  And he gave me all of his accounts.
Speaker 1: So what did that mean for you?
Speaker 2: Oh that meant that I would take an order, they would have a sales day, the manufacturer's outlet had a sales day where everything was a dollar.  Now that I think back, that was probably my first experiences doing large scale work because the store owner, an old Jewish fellow, he said, "Now Jack [HistoryMaker Jack Whitten], people got to see this from a block away."  So I would paint, I would use butcher paper, white butcher paper and paint a dollar sign that would cover eight, nine, ten feet that he would put on the front of the building.  And I did all of the school projects.  I never participated in sports because I never had time.  I had to go to gym class because it was required, but I never did sports because every time I went to class, the principal, his name was Abrams [Jackson Solomon Abrams], would call me that there was some artwork that had to be done, and I was the school artist.
Speaker 1: So even though you weren't officially encouraged, you were used (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh they worked the hell out of me (laughter).
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: My sister--my sister belonged to a social club there at Madison--what was it called, Madison Night Spot [Bessemer, Alabama], and every year they had a big social club, right.  And every year they had a theme, dance, big dance every year.  One year would be the Caribbean theme, the next year it might be a European theme, and of course they had to decorate the whole Madison Night Spot.  I did it.  I've done palm trees, I never saw a palm tree in my fucking life (laughter).  But I--coconuts (laughter).
Speaker 1: You did it all.
Speaker 2: Did it all.
Speaker 1: And did you ever get paid for these things?
Speaker 2: Ah with my sister, I may have got fifty cents, seventy-five cents or something.  At school, hell no, they'd just work you.  But I didn't have to go to gym class, I always got a grade but I never participated (laughter).
Speaker 1: You were excused.  So, you had John B. Hall--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --but did you have any other formal art training as a kid?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: And was there anybody else in your family who painted or did any artwork?
Speaker 2: The story is, my mother's first husband [James Monroe Cross], the sign painter, did painting on the side.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: The guy did some painting.  The old folks in the community claimed that out of my mother's grieving for her first husband, they said I was a marked baby.  That's the word they used, that kid--they would say, "That kid is marked, Annie Bell [Annie Cunningham Whitten]."
Speaker 1: What did that mean to them?
Speaker 2: That mean that this man's trait was transferred to me.  I mean, the South is filled with superstitions, you know that.
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Even--they even claimed I looked like him.  And there was one woman, a Miss Sis [ph.], I remember her, a weird woman, she use--she used to tease my mother, and she used to tell my mother, she'd say, "Annie Bell, if I didn't know that boy's daddy, I would have sweared you lied," (laughter).  That kind of a thing, you know.  But I grew up with people, I grew up with conjurers and there were people in the community that were root people, a lot of that in the South.
Story_ID: 526908
Speaker 1: And root people, alongside your mother [Annie Cunningham Whitten] who is quite religious and strict about you guys going to church and everything (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh yeah, oh yeah.
Speaker 1: So it all blended together.
Speaker 2: All blended together.  I guess one of the good things that happened growing up was we had access to the woods.  We could walk two or three miles, we'd go hunting and fishing.  So I grew up with a fishing pole in one hand and a .22-caliber rifle in the next.  And I was a good shot, squirrel hunting, shot squirrels, quails, rabbits.
Speaker 1: Who taught you how to hunt?
Speaker 2: My Uncle Jesse [Jesse Cunningham] a little bit.  There was one or two older people in the neighborhood since we didn't have a father that took pity and would take us out hunting and fishing.
Speaker 1: And were you little when you learned how to shoot?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Like what?
Speaker 2: Oh I probably shot my first gun, pistol, eight or nine.  But I was known as a good shot.  I went squirrel hunting with a .22 rifle, not a shotgun.  'Cause you know a shotgun you'd tear the shit out of them--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --filled with lead.  But a .22, hit 'em fuck in the head, you got clean meat.
Speaker 1: So that's what you were taught to do.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And how long did it take you to become a clean shot?
Speaker 2: And then there was a man that my mother married afterwards.  My mother married again--
Speaker 1: (Unclear).
Speaker 2: --yes.  His name was Wesley [Wesley Sims].  And Wesley had a farm.  He owned property down in a place called McCalla [Alabama], down in where Thornton Dial lives, down near Thornton's place.  And we would go hunting.  Now he was a real--he knew a lot about herbs and stuff.  He had a rep.  But he taught me a lot about hunting.  A lot about hunting, woods, how to pick certain wild greens for eating, medicines.  He knew a lot I must admit.
Speaker 1: And so back then when kids, young kids are learning how to use guns, did anybody--any kids hurt each other with guns?
Speaker 2: Yeah, we had a few acci- incidents, sure.  But first guns we had were just BB rifles that we hunted birds, and we shot birds by the hundreds, for food.  Oh yeah.  Hell, I've made--I had never heard the word souvlaki, but we made bird souvlaki.
Speaker 1: Any birds?
Speaker 2: Oh everything that flew we killed it.  We didn't care what it was, blue jays, cardinals, sparrows, blackbirds, whatever.  We would take a--you know, the sassafras tree, have you heard that?  We'd take a nice twig from the sassafras, 'cause it has that beautiful flavor in the sassafras.  We would take the bark off, skew forty, fifty birds on a stick, put it over a charcoal fire and turn it, fantastic.  Very good eating.  Very good eating.  I thought we were the only people in the world who did that until I went to Europe for the first time.  I'll never forget being in Rome [Italy] in the '60s [1960s], and there in the market I saw birds hanging.  Italians ate them, French eat them.  Americans turn up their nose.  Fucking Europeans, one thing I've found out about the Europeans, shit these people know how to eat.  All over Europe, people ate the same thing we ate in the South, chitlins, hog maws, all the organ meats, which I grew up with.
Speaker 1: And as you said, nothing was wasted.
Speaker 2: Nothing was wasted.  My aunt married a man named Andy Hall [ph.], and he owned Hall's Cafe [ph.] in Bessemer [Alabama].  If you speak to anybody from Bessemer, they would know Hall's Cafe over on 1st Avenue.  First Avenue was the equivalent of what we have--125th Street [New York, New York].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Where you have all your black businesses, restaurant, bars, and he owned the Andy Hall bar restaurant.  And there I worked for him, learned to cook.  We sold--we didn't call it soul food then, but that's what it was.  I didn't hear that term really until I came to New York [New York].
Story_ID: 526909
Speaker 1: How old were you then?
Speaker 2: Oh I worked in high school.  Friday nights, Saturday, Friday and Saturday.
Speaker 1: So as you were growing up, you know maturing in high school, who did you date?
Speaker 2: I would think the first young lady that I knew was probably junior high school [George Washington Carver Junior High School, Bessemer, Alabama], Joanne Bennett [ph.], the Bennett family.  Then in high school, off and on nothing too serious though.  I had a weird experience, like in the past three, four years.  My brother Jesse [Jesse Whitten] called me to say that he had been in touch with Joanne Bennett, which was my--
Speaker 1: Junior high school.
Speaker 2: --junior high school sweetheart.  And that she was very ill.  I think she suffered from, I think it was kidney failure or something.  And she wanted to speak with me and would I call her.  I said, "Jesse, you're talking about something--what am I supposed to say," (laughter).  But he demanded that I really speak to her.  'Cause he, I didn't know at the time, the woman was on her deathbed.  So I agreed to call.  And I did speak with her.  I think she took pleasure in my calling, but she died right after.
Speaker 1: So, what made you leave Bessemer [Alabama]?
Speaker 2: I left right after high school.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Right, I graduated high school.  Now I came from a poor background, I'm not a product of the middle class, I'm not--not by a long stretch.  The only reason I got into Tuskegee Institute [Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, Alabama] is because I was good in the sciences, chemistry, biology, math, that kind of a thing.  And Tuskegee gave me a work scholarship to Tuskegee.  So I'm, yeah, I'm the first in the family that went directly from high school into college because of that fellow--because of that program that Tuskegee Institute had.
Speaker 1: And so being the first, who was mentoring you to even know where to apply or what to do?
Speaker 2: Well, you know believe it or not, in the black community at that time, my memory is we had--oh god, we had dedicated black teachers.  We really did.  I mean we had nothing to work with. Dunbar was a big rambling building, horrible really.  But the instructors there really, they were dedicated people, I have to say that.
Speaker 1: And who saw in you the potential to--
Speaker 2: Oh man, one woman that I remember in particular, someone that I loved deeply, she was my civics teacher in high school at Dunbar [Paul William Dunbar High School, Bessemer, Alabama].  I was on the debate team with her.  Loved that lady.  Her name was Arnold [ph.], Mrs. Arnold.  She was very encouraging.
Story_ID: 526910
Speaker 1: So you applied to Tuskegee [Tuskegee Institute; Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, Alabama] in the sciences program (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, and I was accepted as a work scholarship now, which meant that when I got to Tuskegee I was a janitor.  I mopped floors and toilets, that was the deal--
Speaker 1: From day one?
Speaker 2: --from day one.  From day one.  'Cause again, we had no help.  I had a little scholarship from the local--what's the name of that organization, Urban League.  I think I got, I think it was about two hundred dollars or two hundred fifty dollars from the local Urban League.
Speaker 1: And that helped?
Speaker 2: That helped, that helped a lot.
Speaker 1: And so you left--
Speaker 2: Went to Tuskegee.
Speaker 1: You went to Tuskegee.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And what was your experience like there?
Speaker 2: Oh I loved it.  I was a Air Force ROTC [Reserve Officers' Training Corps] cadet and a pre-med student.  And my older brother James [James Cross, Jr.] had come back from the Korean War, he was in the Korean War, and he got to school on the G.I. Bill [Servicemen's Readjustment Act of 1944].  So he was there.  And he was in the Army ROTC in the advanced section working toward his lieutenant commission, first lieutenant.
Speaker 1: This is Jesse [Jesse Whitten]?
Speaker 2: No James, my older brother.
Speaker 1: Excuse me. Right.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  So he was there at Tuskegee when I was there.
Speaker 1: And you had had interest in music and in art, recognized for your science ability and you become a pre-med major.  We- so were you intent upon becoming a doctor at that point?
Speaker 2: Well the plan was I would be a pilot in the U.S. Air Force and a doctor.  That was the plan.
Speaker 1: That's a big plan.
Speaker 2: Yeah, it was a good plan for a black kid in the South, right, with the possibility of studying medicine.  Now you have to remember, in those days there were not that many black people in the U.S. Air Force.  Like my brother, Tommy [Tommy Cross], was the first kid from Bessemer, Alabama who went into the U.S. Air Force.  You didn't do that, we had a lot of people who went into the [U.S.] Army, but I remember as a kid when Tommy came back with his blue uniform on, it caused problems.  He had run-ins with white folks on the street.  And my brother Tommy, he was tall, he was a big dude.  He was like 6'4", 6'5", right, he didn't take no shit.  And one of the first times he came back home on furlough with his blue uniform on, a white man downtown asked him, "Boy, what you doing with that damn blue uniform on?"  Because of that incident, my mom [Annie Cunningham Whitten] freaked out.  "Tom, we--you got to go back now."  Because I remember an incident when kids were chased out of Bessemer because of incidents.  More than once, and people, if something happened or you've been accused or something, best thing to get your ass out of Bessemer as fast as possible.
Speaker 1: What did they fear would happen?
Speaker 2: Well they feared that he would be attacked if he were to wear that uniform.
Speaker 1: Even though he was representing the country?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  But they wasn't used to seeing black people in an Air Force uniform, Army they saw, but not Air Force.  Like, my Uncle Thomas [Thomas Cunningham] was in the [U.S.] Navy during World War II [WWII] in the Pacific.  He was a member of the Seabees [U.S. Naval Construction Battalions], that's an engineering group.  In truth, they were laborers, built roads.  But when he came back to Bessemer with his uniform on, you know, people looked twice, you didn't take this lightly.
Speaker 1: So now it's your turn?  So you're in--
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, I followed, my two brothers were in the [U.S.] military and it was just logical that I would follow them in the military.  That was a logical way, that's what everybody expected.
Story_ID: 526911
Speaker 1: So you joined the ROTC [Reserve Officers' Training Corps]?
Speaker 2: The [U.S.] Air Force ROTC.
Speaker 1: And the Air Force ROTC--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --is still different from [U.S.] Army.  So you're still in that?
Speaker 2: Well Air Force ROTC was very serious at Tuskegee [Tuskegee Institute; Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, Alabama].  This is the home of the Tuskegee Airmen, you see that photograph up there?
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: That's the Stearman [Boeing-Stearman Model 75], this was the training plane for the Tuskegee Airmen, that's the P-51 [North American Aviation P-51 Mustang], that's the plane that they flew.  That's an exact model of the Tuskegee Airmen plane.  That's an exact model.  It was made for me by craft people over in the Philippines, I ordered it.
Speaker 1: So you joined, and did you stay in the Air Force ROTC?
Speaker 2: I was there for two years and then--oh my.  I was doing fine until one morning I remember standing out of my seat and the base colonel was leading the class that morning.  We went to class in full uniform.  And I, [HistoryMaker] Jack Whitten, stood up out of my seat in a daze.  And I remember saying, "What am I doing here?"  And my god, the base colonel went ape shit (laughter).  He screamed, "Cadet Whitten, Cadet Whitten, attention, attention Cadet Whitten."  And I was in a daze, I repeated it.  I'll never forget, a best friend of mine at that time, also in ROTC, his name was Carl Alexander, I remember his pulling me on my leg like (whispering), "Cool it man, cool it, sit, sit down man."  I had no idea what had happened, but I knew I had to leave Tuskegee.
Speaker 1: In that moment?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Well I got through the semester.  My older brother attacked me, gonna knock some sense into me.
Speaker 1: James [James Cross, Jr.]?
Speaker 2: That I was throwing my life away, opportunity, and you're blowing it.  But I knew I had to leave Tuskegee.  There was one person I could confide in, he was head of--Tuskegee had an architecture department.  And it was he who told me about Cooper Union [Cooper Union for the Advancement of Science and Art, New York, New York].
Story_ID: 526912
Speaker 1: Before we change schools and go to Cooper Union [Cooper Union for the Advancement of Science and Art, New York, New York], let's go backwards for a minute.  When you first started at Tuskegee [Tuskegee Institute; Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, Alabama], you--shortly after you got there you met Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.]?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: What were--what were the circumstances?
Speaker 2: Tuskegee was playing Alabama State [Alabama State College; Alabama State University, Montgomery, Alabama], I was in the marching band.
Speaker 1: This is 1957?
Speaker 2: Yeah, the fall.  And I had heard that King was speaking at the church down in Montgomery [Alabama].  That's--Alabama State's in Montgomery.  So I took it on myself before having my responsibilities with the band, that I needed to go hear him.  See we were following--in Bessemer [Alabama], we were following the bus boycott [Montgomery Bus Boycott] every day.
Speaker 1: On the radio?
Speaker 2: On the local radios, and the local papers also had it.  And my being with the debate--I was on the debate team for current events.
Speaker 1: (Unclear).
Speaker 2: So we had to keep up with in high school [Paul William Dunbar High School, Bessemer, Alabama] with that, so we knew all about the--what was going on with King.  And we had activists in Bessemer.  Reverend Shuttlesworth [HistoryMaker Reverend Fred Shuttlesworth], a local lawyer, very active.  Oh god, Asbury Howard, how could I bring that up, Howard, H-O-W-A-R-D, Asbury.  Probably the first time that somebody paid me to do a commissioned art work.  He came to me and he said, "Jack [HistoryMaker Jack Whitten] they tell me you can draw anything," and I told him, "Yes, sir."  And he was planning a demonstration at the courthouse in Bessemer.  And Asbury said, "Well I want you to draw me--make me this poster."  He told me about how big he wanted it. That he was gonna hold it, of a black man with his hands tied behind him and he printed a sign, which just said vote.  He gave me fifty cents, I'll never forget it (laughter).  Asbury gave me fifty cents to do that painting, it was a poster.  He and his followers used it down at the county courthouse in Bessemer and he got beat up with it because of that demonstration.  Beat the shit out of him.
Speaker 1: And did you know that that had happened?
Speaker 2: Well later we found out what had happened.  Yeah, but it was with my poster, yeah.
Speaker 1: Right.  So what effect did that have on you knowing that your artwork representing what this meant?
Speaker 2: At that time I didn't think that much of it.  It was years later when I really just understood the significance of that.  I was thinking about, you know, he gave me fifty cents to do it (laughter).  We--my mom [Annie Cunningham Whitten] was active in organizing voter registration.  At that time Alabama had made this very difficult test that you had to pass that test before you could vote.  You believe that?
Speaker 1: Yeah that was--I believe it (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Plus we had what is called poll tax.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: You had to pay that before you could vote.  Everything they could do to prevent people from voting.  So my mom was active.  We used to have sessions at home where they would help people in the neighborhood, where she would teach them how to pass this test.  She was active in doing that, both at home and at church, that I remember.
Speaker 1: So as a child, you grew up very aware (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah I grew up in it, I mean we were very much aware.  In the black community, we were very much aware of what was going on.  But King spoke at the church and I went, that's when I first met him.  And I was--I wasn't in his presence again until I went to Washington [D.C.] for the March on Washington.
Speaker 1: But when you were in his presence then, you actually physically met him, didn't you?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, yeah.  Yeah.
Speaker 1: So how was it that you were able to walk up to him, was it a small group, or?
Speaker 2: It was a small group, it was a church.
Speaker 1: Uh-huh.
Speaker 2: Right after the church.
Speaker 1: And what impression did he make on you?
Speaker 2: The first thing he made on me was the way he presented himself.  Okay, I'm familiar coming out of the South with the preacher and the preacher dialect, but he had added another dimension to it.  It wasn't just the Bible, it had in it the political.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: And then that's what was touching me.  Plus the man, when he opened up his mouth, and truly when I think about meeting Obama [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama] the other day, I couldn't help but going back to meeting Martin Luther King.  They both had that same presence about them.
Story_ID: 526913
Speaker 1: And this is 1957, so it's early (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Fifty-seven [1957], yeah.
Speaker 1: --in his ascent.
Speaker 2: Early.  Right, well he was down there being active with the boycott.
Speaker 1: Um-hm, with the bus boycott [Montgomery Bus Boycott]?
Speaker 2: You know, the bus--the black people stopped riding the buses totally.  Which taught us in the community that one way to get back at these people is to hit them in their pocket.  Businesses op- businesses went down because of that.  Broken businesses went down.
Speaker 1: And it lasted, the boycott lasted for a long time?
Speaker 2: Yeah, oh for months, months.  I can't tell you the exact number of days that it lasted, but it proved to be successful.  See when I grew up, the buses--you got on the bus, there was a sign, it said, bold black letters, in front, white, and on the back of the sign was colored.  Each seat had holes around the top of the railing that the sign could be moved.  The only person who had the right to move that was the bus driver and other white people.
Speaker 1: Oh, other white people could move it?
Speaker 2: Local people, white public people could move it without a hassle, if they wanted a seat.  I have memories of getting on the bus, black people would be standing up in the back and the seats were available up front.  More than once, all the time, that was normal.  We had one incident that I remember.  A young serviceman who was a friend of my sister Toots [Martha Cross Tunson], came home from the [U.S.] Army on furlough with his Army uniform on.  Got on the bus, there wasn't a seat.  He moved the sign and sat down.  You didn't do that.  It was against the law for you to do that.
Speaker 1: What happened to him?
Speaker 2: Oh my god, bus driver stopped the bus, ordered him to get out, ended up shooting him.  He struggled to free himself.  The story goes that he managed to get away after the guy had shot him.
Speaker 1: The bus driver shot him?
Speaker 2: Yeah, that's not the end of the story.  He ran into a house trying to find coverage.  By that time they had called the police.  Police came, forced him out of the house and shot him again, killed him.
Speaker 1: And what year is this?
Speaker 2: I had to be--I remember--I remember very clearly--I remember very clearly the funeral procession.  The elder people had the funeral procession to pass through all the black neighborhoods.  So I remember the funeral procession.  And I remember peering through the hearse at a flag draped coffin.  That kid's name was--he was one of the Hoods [Timothy Hood].
Speaker 1: And so this is--that you were there and you saw it was before you went to college [Tuskegee Institute; Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, Alabama]?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, oh this happened when I was--I had to be I think before junior high school [George Washington Carver Junior High School, Bessemer, Alabama].  I probably had to be like still just getting ready to go into junior high school.  But I remember that.
Speaker 1: So having seen that, knowing you know, the power of protest (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And that wasn't the only fir- that was not just the first time this ever happened.
Speaker 1: (Unclear).  I--I'm wondering with the various things that you saw--
Speaker 2: And you have to remember now, this young man was on furlough from the U.S. Army--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --wearing his Army uniform.
Speaker 1: And they killed him?
Speaker 2: I grew up with horrible shit, I don't--
Story_ID: 526914
Speaker 1: I tell the story about, you know, everything was separate, separate, right.  There was a swimming pool.  Well first of all, there was a big lake called West Lake [Bessemer, Alabama], big lake, beautiful.  The highway ran right through it, bridge.  We could stop on the bridge, and we had to watch the white folks, the white kids enjoying themselves swimming.  They had all kinds of slides and diving boards in the lake, West Lake.  The fish, the lake was stocked with fish.  My good buddy J.D., oh god--we would sit on that bridge and look at those kids having fun swimming and we would see fish, but we couldn't go down, we couldn't fish for 'em.
Speaker 2: Because you couldn't swim--you couldn't (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) But J.D. and I--J.D. and I used to sneak in in the evening in the back and fish for bluegill.  They had big fucking bluegills like that in West Lake.  More than once we were shot at.
Speaker 2: By who?
Speaker 1: I had to tell somebody, some- a Vietnam [Vietnam War] veteran was giving me hell about not being in the war and not going.  I said, "Shit man, I know what a bullet sounds like when it comes close to your head."  I was shot at more than once.  The local swimming pool, white only.  City ran with city taxes, we couldn't go.  The older boys, including my older brother, dammed up Parsons' creek, Parsons was the name of the guy who owned that land.  He ran a local sawmill in Bessemer [Alabama] and made us a swimming pool.  It was a lot of fun, lot of fun.
Speaker 2: This is when you're a little kid?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Elementary school?
Speaker 1: Little, I remember that.  We even had a car tire.  They had tied a--or taken an old tire and tied a rope on it and we would swing from the tree down into the water.  They had built a dam, right.  Earthen dam with logs and twigs and rocks and shit, and made a big swimming pool, a lot of fun.  All the black kids in our neighborhood would go there.  One morning, the first kid that jumped in the swimming pool came out screaming.  His feet was bloody.  White folks had came in during the night and threw bushels of broken bottles in the pool.  That's right.  Niggers having too much fun.
Speaker 2: (Pause) Was anyone able to use that again?
Speaker 1: No, they broke the dam apart and cleaned it out.  And old man Parsons from all I could find, he wasn't a--I met him later because my father [Mose Whitten], if the mines were on strike he used to work for old man Parsons 'cause Parsons had a local sawmill and he would work in the sawmill like when the mines were on strike or something.
Story_ID: 526915
Speaker 1: You've had all these experiences growing up, you get to the point when you're at Tuskegee [Tuskegee Institute; Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, Alabama] and you meet King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] and you hear what he's talking about, does it inspire you to join the movement?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.  Oh shit, I had a chance to test--I had a chance to test it on one of the--on one of the students at Southern University [Southern University and Agricultural and Mechanical College, Baton Rouge, Louisiana] who closed down the university.  Shit, we led a big march, downtown Baton Rouge [Louisiana] (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) How did you get to Southern?
Speaker 2: Hm?
Speaker 1: How did you get to Southern?
Speaker 2: Well because Tuskegee didn't have an art program and I knew I had to leave Tuskegee, and I had made up my mind to study art.  I didn't care what nobody said.  My mother [Annie Cunningham Whitten] cried.  My mother, oh my god, I hurt my mom so much.  She cried, cried, cried (makes sound).  (Pause) So I went to Southern University to study art, they had an art program.  I probably would've stayed at Tuskegee if they had an art program, but I went to Southern and I got involved.  It was--did okay down there, but there was a big student demonstration that started with the fact that this was a state school, that segregated all black.  Southern University, all black.  That this--we were not getting equal funding from the states.  We had a big protest that became larger and larger to the point that we actually closed the university down.  Very emotional week, very emotional.  And we organized this march.  The local clergymen, there--there's a community outside of Baton Rouge called Scotlandville, it's right across the tracks.  It's an all-black community called Scotlandville.  That's where I lived when I was a student.  I rented a little room from a reverend, a preacher.  I think he gave me that room for like, I think it was about fifteen dollars a month.
Speaker 1: And how were you paying for tuition?
Speaker 2: I would come to New York [New York] in the summertime and work.
Speaker 1: Doing what?
Speaker 2: Oh boy, let me go back.  The first year, I came to New York.  My Uncle Thomas [Thomas Cunningham], who was a New York City policeman, was married with two kids and lived out in Springfield Gardens, Jamaica, Queens [New York].  And I called--I told Tom I had from--we had jobs placed on the bulletin board at Tuskegee, summer jobs.  And one job was in Upstate New York [sic.], Woodridge, New York.  Place called the Almanac Hotel [Almanac Hotel and Country Club], kitchen helper.  And since of all my experience in working in the restaurant, I would go there for the summer.
Speaker 1: So wait, I don't remember you telling me what restaurant that it was?
Speaker 2: My uncle's cafe, Hall's Cafe [ph.] (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) The Hall's right, Andy Hall's [ph.] cafe.
Speaker 2: Yeah, Andy Hall's cafe.
Speaker 1: Okay--
Story_ID: 526916
Speaker 1: Right (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So that experience made you ready for Woodridge [New York]?
Speaker 1: Yeah, right so this job placement at Tuskegee [Tuskegee Institute; Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, Alabama] for summer jobs.  All the kids would get jobs--some kids went to the tobacco farms in Virginia, but I went Upstate New York [sic.] to Woodridge.  That was my first summer job.  And I would go there and make enough money, come back to go to school.  That was the first year.  That would be the summer of 1958.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: The summer of 1959, I came back to New York.  My uncle, Thomas Cunningham, was a New York City policeman and he worked on the corner of Tillary Street and the Flatbush Avenue in Brooklyn [New York], yeah Brooklyn.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: And I wrote Tom to say, "I'm looking for summer work."  There was a big construction going on, on the subway system.  They were building the Flatbush Avenue extension.  Tom controlled that corner of Tillary and Flatbush Avenue.  He went to the owner, the company was called Porter McLane [ph.], how do I remember that (laughter), big, big, big construction company.  I think they were from Yonkers [New York].  They had the contract.  Tom went to the head guy there who was--what do you call that, the person who--
Speaker 2: Foreman?
Speaker 1: Foreman, yes.  Italian fellow and told him--Tom told him, says, "My nephew is coming to New York looking for work for the summer to go back to college, and it would be in your best interest to hire him," (laughter).
Speaker 2: (Unclear).
Speaker 1: Oh he had him by the balls.  My uncle was like a big New York City policeman, again, big motherfucker.  6'6", two hundred some pounds, you didn't fuck with Tom (laughter), plus he had a gun on him (laughter).  That's what he told the man.  "My nephew is coming to town looking for work and it would be in your best interest to hire him."  Boy, I took a Greyhound bus, came to New York.  Tom had set up a cot in his basement for me to sleep.  I'll never forget the first day (laughter).  This rough, tough, Italian dude, man, there was no blacks on that job.  He took one look at me, he says, "Tom you sent me this little skinny boy up here to work, you got to be kidding, that motherfucker can't work."  (Laughter) And I was spunky, I told him--I said, I told him, "Sir," I said, "sir I've worked all my life, I'm a worker.  I'll do whatever you got."  And I was skinny, I was a skinny kid.  I wasn't like a big athletic kid.  And I'll never forget it, he practically threw a crowbar at me and a hammer (laughter).  He said, "You see that pile of lumber over--," he didn't say that, he said, "You see that pile of fucking lumber," they were doing cement work, poured cement work and all the forms were made from wood.  And after you took those wood forms off, they all had to be cleaned, the nails pulled out 'cause they would reuse them.  So he threw that crowbar at me and he said, "You see that fucking pile of lumber, you go over there and clean those fucking nails out of the fucking--," he was cursing a mile a minute.  He was so fucking angry.  But he had no fucking choice (laughter).
Speaker 2: Did you--how did you fare on that job?
Speaker 1: Oh man, I mean for me it was work, I'm used to work.  I did labor, worked all my life.  It didn't faze me.  It was exhausting work, but my god I had never made that much money in my life.  They started me off at like five dollars and something an hour.
Speaker 2: And what year was that that you went (simultaneous)--?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Alabama, shit I was used to working for fifty cents an hour.
Speaker 2: Was this in the 1960s?
Speaker 1: Five dollars and fifty cents an hour, yep that would be--no, no that was before.  I was at Tuskegee.  That would be '58 [1958].
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Yeah, '58 [1958].
Story_ID: 526917
Speaker 1: As we say (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And why New York?
Speaker 1: --to make a long story short, okay.  A bunch of Portuguese, I think they had one Puerto Rican, labor--I'm talking labor.  Mostly Italian, all Italian practically.  Toward the end of the summer, foreman came to me, he said, "Boy, you a good worker."  Said, "What are you going back to that school for," he said, "you stick with me and work, I'll have you--I'll make you foreman in two years, I promise you."  He said, "I promise you.  I need good workers," he said, "you, you're a worker.  What are you going back to that school for?"  I told him, "Sir, I got--it's my dream, sir, I have to go back to school."  Saved up all my money, went back to Tuskegee [Tuskegee Institute; Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, Alabama].  The next year I worked that summer work.  Lundy's, Lundy's Restaurant, Sheepshead Bay [Brooklyn, New York].  They only hired black guys for waiters out there, big restaurant.  At that time they advertised themselves as the largest restaurant in the world, two stories.  I did her--I was a waiter, first time and the last time I've ever been a waiter (laughter).  That was a trip.  That was really.  All these slick Harlem [New York, New York] dudes worked there, older guys.  Oh god, all of them was into the numbers rackets.  Boy, boy, boy, boy, they treated us, the young college kids working during the summer, oh god.  They gave us a run for all of our money.  Man, they were tough, tough Harlem dudes.  Slick, came into work with their fancy shoes and their diamond rings on, their conked back hair.  Man those guys--you would be busting your ass trying to get your tray together, they would steal your shit off before you'd get--you would go out there and you would be embarrassed you didn't have your stuff on your tray, all kinds of shit.  Slick.  But it was an amazing comradeship, it was a big kind of a neat experience really.  But I never--I swear I'd never do that kind of work again.
Speaker 2: What made you go to New York each year?  Why was it New York?
Speaker 1: Because their--they got it through job placements--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --right, and they--you make comparisons, you figure the money is better doing that than that.  Like that year I worked with Porter McLane [ph.], that was good money.  I mean for a young kid making that kind of money for the summer, (makes sound).
Story_ID: 526918
Speaker 1: Your third year is when you went to--when you went to Southern [Southern University; Southern University and Agricultural and Mechanical College, Baton Rouge, Louisiana]?
Speaker 2: When I went to Southern, we did that demonstration right.  I--
Speaker 1: And the demonstration was a sit-in?
Speaker 2: Well, no it wasn't a sit-in.  It (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Well what was it?
Speaker 2: --it was a--we closed down the university.  And we organized a march, a civil rights march in downtown Baton Rouge [Louisiana].  I mean Baton Rouge was a hell hole then.  I just saw this shit that happened in Baton Rouge recently, the past year.  And I'm thinking my god, can you remember 1959 Baton Rouge, (makes sounds).  Really, horrible.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: I was in charge of all the art stuff.  I organized a crew of students and we did all the posters and the signs that we were using in the march.  We stayed up all night painting all these signs, hundreds of them.
Speaker 1: And what was the specific purpose of the march?
Speaker 2: The specific purpose, it started off for more money from the state for Southern University.  It was a state school so they gave out--now LSU [Louisiana State University, Baton Rouge, Louisiana] was the big white school.  They were getting all the money.  And Southern, at that time, was a rambles, even our art department was like really one bi- rundown wooden-framed building and so forth.  That's how it started.  But it morphed into a larger civil rights thing.  Going back to your--my meeting Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] and believing in him and what they were doing in Montgomery [Alabama], which was nonviolence, which King impressed me and I took the oath to do that.
Speaker 1: While you were in that church?
Speaker 2: Well no, when we started on the march.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: You had to make agreement or just--you're not--whatever happened you were not to fight back.
Speaker 1: Okay, so the students at Southern were following King's principles?
Speaker 2: Yeah, exactly.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Nonviolent march, right.
Speaker 1: Uh-huh.
Speaker 2: Local preachers.  Well let me tell you, by the time we hit downtown Baton Rouge on our way to the state office building, shit hit the fan, big time.  Nasty, nasty, nasty.  People attacking you with sticks and shit, throwing rocks, throwing shit at you, piss at you.  The preacher who was leading us was praying.  We made it to the steps of the state office building.  They were throwing shit out the window on you.  I kept my cool, but I knew that I couldn't do that again.  I took everything I had and I--on Southern University there's a big lake there on campus, we're on the banks of the Mississippi [Mississippi River].  I threw everything I had in that fucking lake.
Speaker 1: What do you mean, all--
Speaker 2: All my clothing, everything, fuck it.  I knew that I could not do that again and if I had stayed in the South either somebody was gonna kill me or I was gonna kill somebody, so I left.  I took a Greyhound bus from New Orleans [Louisiana] to New York [New York].
Speaker 1: So this is in the middle of the semester?
Speaker 2: Oh no, we had just ended up a semester, right at the end.
Speaker 1: Okay, so school was finished.
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, well we had to close the school down.  They fucked with the whole educational system.  We closed down the university.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Nobody could go to school.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: But I knew behind that march that I could no longer stay in the South.
Story_ID: 526919
Speaker 1: I took a Greyhound bus--I hung out in New Orleans [Louisiana] for a few days.  Best thing happened to me hanging out in New Orleans, I was still playing my horn a little bit then.  We were hanging out one night at a restaurant bar and we didn't know it but Fats Domino was in the bar with some people.  And the bartender told him that--that's those kids who was on TV.  'Cause all the TV and all the newspapers had it.  Fats Domino came over to us, and he said, "I want you boys to know that we're mighty proud of you, what you did," (laughter).  He said, "Why don't you all come over here and join us?"  So he invited us over to his table.  Food, drinks, I hung out with Fats Domino for two days in New Orleans.  That, he had--he had this amazing Cadillac.  Top of the line, cream colored champagne like color, white walled tires, big long Fleetwood [Cadillac Fleetwood] thing.  Boy you walk--
Speaker 2: What color was the exterior?
Speaker 1: Exterior was sort of a champagne color.
Speaker 2: Oh okay.
Speaker 1: Real slick.  Those beautiful white walled tires, I'll never forget it.  Big flat open thing, convertible.  Boy when you walked out with Fats Domino on the scene, and what I learned down there at that time, white and black people loved him.  You would go down the street with Fats in that car and people would, "Hey, baby Fats!"  It was a hell of an experience.  They loved him down there.  So I stayed down there for a few days.
Speaker 2: Did you talk to him about what had happened?
Speaker 1: Oh yeah, well at the table that night he wanted to know.  He had a group of people he was with, there must've been six or seven people there.  I think, I'm not sure I remember the name of that--I think it was Mule's [Mule's Restaurant and Bar, New Orleans, Louisiana], M-U-L-E, I think that's what it was. I haven't been back down there since.  Haven't been down there since.  But that was fun.  Then I got to New York [New York].
Story_ID: 526920
Speaker 1: So after the reprieve with Fats Domino, you get on a Greyhound bus--
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.
Speaker 1: --to go to New York [New York].  Now you had heard--you were telling me you'd heard about Cooper Union [Cooper Union for the Advancement of Science and Art, New York, New York]?  Which was free (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I had heard about it at--well I had heard about it at Tuskegee [Tuskegee Institute; Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, Alabama] from an architectural professor--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --at Tuskegee, and he told me that it was tuition free.  There was a test you had to take.  If you passed the test, you could go to school tuition free.
Speaker 1: That sounded great.
Speaker 2: Yeah, no, that sounded great (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And of course he told you about the curriculum being--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, he knew about it, being an architecture professor.
Speaker 1: And so, when did you apply?
Speaker 2: Oh, I--
Speaker 1: Did you just go to New York or (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) no, no, I got in contact with them immediately for information, that's what it was.  And there was a deadline on that test.  I had to be in New York to take the test.  At that time, you had to go to the school to take the test.
Speaker 1: And so you got on the bus and went to take the test.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Again, my Uncle Tom [Thomas Cunningham] allowed me to stay at his house, had this cot set up in the basement.
Speaker 1: And you got in?
Speaker 2: See without my Uncle Thomas being liaison person, I'd never could've done that.  He and his wife Mamie [ph.].
Speaker 1: Now where did your Uncle Tom live, what borough?
Speaker 2: They lived out in Jamaica, Queens [New York].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: There was a beautiful, at that time, beautiful black neighborhood called Springfield Gardens [Queens, New York].  Now I hear that that neighborhood has changed for the worse.  But at that time it was like, you know, working class, blue collar people neighborhood.  All the white folks had moved out of that neighborhood and the blacks came in and bought those homes out there.  It was very nice when I was there in the '50s [1950s] (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And also it was kind of far, I mean you had to take a bus to--
Speaker 2: It was way out.  Oh to get to Cooper Union, you had to get a bus, subway.
Speaker 1: Right, and what was it, about an hour trip?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Yeah at least, minimum.
Speaker 1: Um-hm, but that didn't matter?
Speaker 2: Well it didn't matter, and I passed the test and they accepted me, right.  Because I had no backup financially, Cooper Union at that time had an evening school.  I went to school in the evenings.  I would work all day and go to school at night.
Speaker 1: So what work were you doing at this point?
Speaker 2: I got jobs through the school again.  School placement.  I worked for display houses, houses that--window displays for all the department stores here in New York.  I worked for them.  And I did handiwork, you know, like repair, carpentry and all that kind of stuff.  But that's how I made a living.  I supported myself throughout the '60s [1960s] doing that.
Speaker 1: And so you're at Cooper Union in what '66 [sic.] to '61 [1961] (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Sixty [1960] to '64 [1964].
Speaker 1: Okay, so you went for four years?
Speaker 2: Well, because it was even--it was five years, but because I had so many credits, Cooper Union accepted all of my credits.  So I was able to do it in four years.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But ordinarily going to the evening school that took five years.
Speaker 1: And what were you studying?
Speaker 2: Oh, I studied art.  Specialized in painting (simultaneous).
Story_ID: 526921
Speaker 1: So what were the highlights of your experience at Cooper Union [Cooper Union for the Advancement of Science and Art, New York, New York]?
Speaker 2: Cooper Union was very good for me, very good.  I was the only black kid there.  There was one other black kid in architecture, but in the fine arts department I was the only black kid.  There was one black instructor (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So how many--
Speaker 2: --all my instructors was white, but there was one black person who worked in the printmaking workshop and his name was Robert Blackburn, Bob Blackburn.  And it was Bob Blackburn seeing a black kid in the class, the only one, who reached out.  And it was because of him, as Bob said, "You got to meet Romare Bearden."  So he dragged me down to meet Romare Bearden.
Speaker 1: When you were in college?
Speaker 2: I was at Cooper Union, sure, 1960.  And then from there, "You got to meet Jacob Lawrence," and then, "You got to meet Norman Lewis," (laughter).
Speaker 1: So, Bob Blackburn who, you know, world famous painter.
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, he was well known.  But it was he who introduced me to the black community.
Speaker 1: The black community of artists or?
Speaker 2: Of artists, yeah.
Speaker 1: Yes.  And at this time, so--I mean these names that you've just mentioned, Romare Bearden, Jacob Lawrence, Norman Lewis, are revered artists today.  What was their stature in 1960?
Speaker 2: Jake had more of a reputation than anybody.  He was the one who'd shown.  He was known.  He had a gallery representation.  Bearden was just starting to have a little representation.  By the time I met Norman, his gallery representation was winding down.  He was with the Willard Gallery [New York, New York] and he was like at the tail end of that.  But he wasn't making any money.  Bearden wasn't making any money.  None of them was making any serious money at that time, because it was much later that Bearden started making a little money.  Norman wasn't making any money at all.  Jake was doing okay, but Jake was teaching.  Norman was teaching.
Speaker 1: And Blackburn?
Speaker 2: Oh, Blackburn was teaching and Bearden was teaching, but he was a math teacher in high school.
Speaker 1: And as a young artist seeing these black male artists--
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.
Speaker 1: --doing their work, what did that do to you?
Speaker 2: It was my introduction into what I was getting involved with 'cause I ha- I didn't have a clue.  All I knew is I had to study art.  But as far as the notion of survival, I didn't have a clue.  But it was these people who gave me the straight poop.  And then later I met a lot of other different people, Bill Rivers, Bill Haywood Rivers [Haywood "Bill" Rivers], black painter.  And then we had the younger group too, I started meeting other people, young people.  Joe Overstreet, Emilio Cruz, Bob Thompson, William White [William A. White], Lawrence Compton [William Lawrence Compton Kolawole].  The community, I started widening the circle of people.
Speaker 1: (Unclear).
Speaker 2: 'Cause all of us was on the Lower East Side [New York, New York].
Speaker 1: Were there any women?
Speaker 2: One or two, not that many.  Vivian Browne [Vivian E. Browne] was around.  That one woman (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Was [HistoryMaker] Elizabeth Catlett around then?
Speaker 2: Yeah, but she wasn't in New York [New York] that much.
Speaker 1: Even--even that--
Speaker 2: Yeah, she--no she spent most of her time down in Mexico and in California.
Speaker 1: I didn't realize--I didn't realize it was that early on that she was in Mexico?
Speaker 2: But she didn't have like a real New York presence then.  Not like Bearden, them and all.
Speaker 1: Right, 'cause I would imagine that it just for time sake, probably then--
Speaker 2: Hale Woodruff was around at that time (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) She was yeah--she was with Charles White [Charles Wilbert White].
Speaker 2: Spinky, Spinky Alston [Charles Alston].
Speaker 1: And so you--you're seeing a lot of black males--
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.
Speaker 1: --who are choosing--pursuing their passion (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh yeah.  Doing art, doing their thing, yeah.
Speaker 1: --and in one way or another making a living out of it?
Speaker 2: Zell, Zell Ingram, painter.
Speaker 1: Were most of these artists also having other jobs?
Speaker 2: Oh, all of them.  All of them.  If they weren't teaching, they were doing something else, but primarily teaching.  Nobody was making any money.
Speaker 1: And that didn't deter you?
Speaker 2: I had made up my mind at that point, so that didn't deter me.  And I was meeting a lot of other artists who were in a better position in the white community.  People like Bill de Kooning [Willem de Kooning], Franz Kline that I was in touch with (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay, so you met these people who were--
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.  Already had more of a name in art and just starting to make some money.
Story_ID: 526922
Speaker 1: Bill was just started making some money.
Speaker 2: Bill de Kooning [Willem de Kooning]?
Speaker 1: Yeah, and Kline [Franz Kline] was just starting to make a little money.
Speaker 2: And where did you meet them?
Speaker 1: Primarily through the Cedar bar [Cedar Tavern, New York, New York].
Speaker 2: Okay, tell me about that?
Speaker 1: I would leave Cooper Union [Cooper Union for the Advancement of Science and Art, New York, New York], like I said I was in the evening, and go straight to the Cedar bar.
Speaker 2: And so what was the Cedar bar to the artists?
Speaker 1: The Cedar bar was an old establishment of the abstract expressionist painters.  This was their meeting place.  Right, all of these people were older than I was. I was just a kid.  In truth, the bartenders would hassle me, especially if I came in with a young lady, you know.  "Where's your ID card," (laughter) that kind of thing.
Speaker 2: Even though they knew you?
Speaker 1: Yeah, hassle you anyway.  But by that time, you know, I had an ID card, I could go in and order a beer.  Even Bill de Kooning, one night told them, "Leave the kid alone."  You know, they would hassle you.  Well rightly so, you know, here in New York, strict laws about serving minors.  Take your license from you.
Speaker 2: So you, this Cedar bar--Cedar Tavern--
Speaker 1: Cedar Tavern, yes.
Speaker 2: Cedar Tavern is a--
Speaker 1: University Place.
Speaker 2: --is a--
Speaker 1: That's where you met people.
Speaker 2: That's where the abstract expressionists came.  And so as you're there, what are they talking about?
Speaker 1: I couldn't talk to them about painting, because I'm a fucking student.  But I listened.  I would be quiet and listen, you know.  For me just to hear what they were saying in terms of painting, and a lot of it wasn't painting all the time.  Sometimes about money.  Most of the time it was about who's fucking who.  That's the truth.  But no one bothered me, you know, I wasn't hassled, so.
Speaker 2: What did you learn?
Speaker 1: Oh, I learned a lot about--and I realized that even the white artists, they were going through the same shit.  How do you survive and make money (laughter).  They really were.  I learned very quickly that surviving in the arts affected both white and black.  It's just that we must say the blacks had--the whites had more opportunities open, that was a given.  But I learned enough to know that--what I was up against.  And a lot of the old timers, they wouldn't even wanna--if you started asking questions about paintings and stuff, they would ask you, were you in it for the duration or not?  Otherwise, they didn't wanna be bothered with you.
Speaker 2: Right, unless you were serious?
Speaker 1: Yeah, they didn't feel like you were serious, you know, I'm not gonna waste my time on this kid.
Speaker 2: What did you learn from de Kooning?
Speaker 1: I learned a lot from de Kooning.  But I think the best thing that I learned from him was--he handled himself in a down-to-earth manner, like--like a street person, the way he spoke.  It was never some highfalutin philosophical thing.  It always was like down-to-earth.  He had a way of speaking that was like--sometime it was like coded, but you could figure out what he was talking about.  See I'm getting education from two sides.  I'm at Cooper Union with my Cooper Union professors, I'm getting one set of instruction and I'm getting a set of instructions from the other people, both black and white.  So, my education was across the board, which in retrospect was fantastic, fantastic.  It was the best thing that could've happened to me.  And people would talk to you.  It wasn't like one--another thing I learned too, I didn't feel any racial animosity from these people.  It wasn't like being down south.  People--Franz Kline would speak to you.  Ask, "How you doing kid, work today?" Or if you had something--help you out with something.  I love to tell the story, once Franz Kline was asking me, "Well how you doing," you know.  I said, "Well the truth about it, I'm out of canvas, I don't have any money."  He says, "Oh, you go see--," this person.  Wrote down on a piece of paper, his name was Antonelli.  It was a company was called Astrup Company, downtown, the Lower West Side [New York, New York] on Walker Street--White Street.  He says, "You go see this man, tell him Franz Kline sent you, he'll take care of you."  I went there.  Astrup was a big warehouse company for canvas products.  They ship wholesale bolts of cotton, and the end of the rolls they would sell to artists.  This is where Franz Kline bought all of his stuff from.  So I went there with my note from Franz Kline.  And I walked in the door, I'll never forget, a really neat fellow, an old Italian fellow.  He says, "Well I guess you want some canvas, right?"  I said, "Yes sir," (laughter).
Speaker 2: And he gave it to you?
Speaker 1: No, he says, "How much money you got?"  And I rummaged through my pocket and I came up with ten bucks [dollars].  And he says, "Come on back here."  And everything I could carry under my arms, all these end rolls, number ten cotton duck.  Damn right, that kind of a thing--
Story_ID: 526923
Speaker 1: You had had such a different experience in the South--well not even (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Totally different with white people.
Speaker 1: --not even having conversations with white people.
Speaker 2: Oh no, no you kept your distance.  But coming to New York [New York], going to Cooper Union [Cooper Union for the Advancement of Science and Art, New York, New York], that was the first time that I sat into a classroom with white students.  First time I had sat next to a white kid in school.  And of course, the first time I had white instructors.  But my experience--
Speaker 1: (Unclear).
Speaker 2: --my experience.  Well the worst thing was, nobody understood me.  I mean I'm talking with this southern dialect and it was difficult to make myself--people to understand what I was trying to say 'cause my southern accent was so thick.  But I had one professor at Cooper Union, his name was Robert Gwathmey.  He was my first year drawing instructor, who was a southern white man.  Gwathmey was a painter.  His paintings--he did paintings of black people in the South.  And Gwathmey loved me, boy he took me under his wing.  The two of us would start talking in all the southern talk and the rest of the kids would just lay back, like whoa (laughter).  And that helped.  Gwathmey was a big help.
Speaker 1: How do you spell Gwathmey?
Speaker 2: Gwathmey, G-W-A-T-H-M-E-Y.  He is the father to Charles Gwathmey, the great architect.  I knew Charles too.  But Charles was not like his father.  His father was an old time leftist Socialist.  The son was very different.
Speaker 1: So you were being exposed to a completely different type of relationship with art and with whites?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, totally different.  Totally different from anything I had ever experienced in the South.  Not a little bit, totally.
Speaker 1: And then de Kooning [Willem de Kooning], where was he from?
Speaker 2: Oh he's Dutch.
Speaker 1: Well see so, it's also that he was not American.
Speaker 2: Oh no, he--it was hard to understand him.  He still spoke with a thick Dutch accent.  You know, de Kooning came to this country illegally.  He was a stowaway on a boat and jumped ship.  That's how he came here.  Worked as a house painter.
Speaker 1: And by the time you met him, he was a very established--
Speaker 2: Oh by the time I met him he was known.  He was showing in the galleries.  I used to go to his opening of his shows here in New York, whenever he had a show.
Speaker 1: The art that you had been making, at least the utilitarian art had been signs and posters, and this kind of thing.  When do you discover that--what your art is?
Speaker 2: Oh that became much later.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I would say--well not too much later 'cause I was a--I'm a fast learner.  I would say about the second year at Cooper Union I started getting there, picture of what this stuff was about.  And another thing that I learned from the Cedar bar [Cedar Tavern, New York, New York] and the abstract expressionists, and I think it's very important, these people didn't take no shit.  Like nothing stopped them.  They spoke boldly about what they were and what they wanted to do.  And they had this amazing degree of freedom about them.  And that struck me as being, whoa, I've made the right decision.  Like whatever this art thing is, that's what I wanna do.  That convinced me.  And that's from meeting people across the board both black and white.  Like when you start seeing the commitment that people had who were much older than you, you started getting the picture, right, of what to expect and what it was about.
Speaker 1: And as you're figuring out what style of art is working for you, you're taking classes--are you learning each--like what are you learning?
Speaker 2: I'm learning primarily gestural abstraction.  I'm taking from Bill de Kooning, I'm taking from Norman Lewis.  Romare Bearden, I used to go to his studio.  He had just started his collages with the black faces and black subject matter.  So I'm learning about the notion of theme and style.  I'm learning a lot from Bearden about the nature of collage.  All Bill's work was about collage.  Which is what I'm doing today, but I do it with paint.  My--the paintings I do today are acrylic collages.  They're not taken from media, they're just paint that's used as collage.
Story_ID: 526924
Speaker 1: The artists with whom you are engaging are showing you what they're doing and their work is, is (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, I had a close relationship with Joe Overstreet, Bob Thompson, Emilio Cruz, William White [William A. White], young artists, my--more or less my age.
Speaker 1: Right, and they're all--
Speaker 2: Lawrence Compton [William Lawrence Compton Kolawole].
Speaker 1: Who?
Speaker 2: Lawrence, he's still alive, Lawrence Compton is still alive, out in California somewhere.  He's changed his name though.  He now calls himself Kolawole.
Speaker 1: So are all of these artists abstractionists?
Speaker 2: No.  Cruz were more into figure.  Bob Thompson was into figure.  Figure expressionism (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) (Unclear).  Yeah, 'cause it was still dif--
Speaker 2: Figurative expressionism.
Speaker 1: Figurative express- okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Especially Bob Thompson came right out of Jan Muller.  And then the German expressionists, you know, he wa- Bob Thompson is a real American figurative expressionist painter.
Speaker 1: And what are you becoming during this time?
Speaker 2: Well, I'm starting off the best--my best description is, would be abstract expressionism.  I'm coming in--I'm coming into New York at the tail end of abstract expressionism.  I'm highly influenced by gestural abstraction.
Speaker 1: And what type of work are you making--
Speaker 2: And surrealism.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But at Cooper Union [Cooper Union for the Advancement of Science and Art, New York, New York], I had a background in German Bauhaus.
Speaker 1: Okay, so that other side of your education?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.  So out--again my education is across the board.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Not only from expressionism but also strict confines of German Bauhaus, which was what Cooper Union was at that time.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: The professors that I had, we had--they had, they were people who leaned toward expressionist work and Bauhaus work.  That's my background.
Speaker 1: In '64 [1964] is when you earn your B.F.A.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And did you have to do--what was your completion work, what was your thesis, your master's [degree] thesis?
Speaker 2: Well at that time it wasn't a master's thesis in terms of written, you had to present your work at the end of the semester before you could get your degree.  And my degree, because I was in the evening school, my diploma is certificate of fine arts.  Because it was a five year program in the evening school.  And again, I had to do that because I had to work all day to support myself in order to go to school.
Speaker 1: Well it (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Even though it was tuition free, I still had to live.
Story_ID: 526925
Speaker 1: Didn't you also perform a bit during this time?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Weren't you--you weren't out playing music?
Speaker 2: Oh a little bit, but nothing to speak of.  By 1963, '64 [1964] I sold my horn.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And the reason for that is that I was spending all my free time that I could and when I had the money hanging out in the jazz clubs.  I actually knew Kenny Dorham, knew Miles Davis, knew Thelonious Monk.  Knew all the young guys that were in the--used to go up to Birdland [New York, New York] a lot on Monday night.  Young [HistoryMaker] Wayne Shorter, all of the young jazz musicians I knew.  But, I got the message quick, the sounds I heard when I came to New York in the early '60s [1960s], I knew that there was no way I could participate (laughter).
Speaker 1: You could listen (laughter)?
Speaker 2: I love it, but my skills as a musician coming out of Bessemer, Alabama, even through New Orleans [Louisiana], when I came to New York [New York] I said, "Fuck this."  There's no way (laughter).  Not possible (laughter).  So I sold the horn.
Speaker 1: So then it was a single focus for art (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah.  I mean my young--my older brother Tommy [Tommy Cross] was playing quite a bit, but you know, he did most of his work in Europe.  He lived in Holland [the Netherlands].  He was on that Copenhagen [Denmark]; Amsterdam [the Netherlands]; Munich, Germany; Paris [France] circuit, you know, doing gigs.  And he never really made it, he never did.  He was just like one of those guys who sat in, you know.  He just--the truth is that he had the talent, but he didn't have the discipline.  That's the truth.  So he never made a go of it.
Speaker 1: (Cough) But you met all these--I mean you were in New York at a time--I guess New York is always--
Speaker 2: Oh, Ornette Coleman was here.  Wayne Shorter, Archie Shepp--
Speaker 1: And you're meeting all of these people?
Speaker 2: --Cecil Taylor, I'm meeting all these people.  Archie Shepp, fantastic at that period.
Speaker 1: John Coltrane?
Speaker 2: John Coltrane, whom I adored and still do today.  That man got tired of looking at me (laughter).
Speaker 1: How did these musicians influence your work?
Speaker 2: My god, is that a good one.  I was in a good position because I had come from a musical background playing the horn, right.  So I identified with a lot, not that I can do it to the skill that these people were doing, but I had an understanding of what was going on.  And when I had made the commitment to go totally into painting, it was only natural that music would be the major influence.  I mean I see it as really a natural occurrence myself.  It's not that I conceptually said, "Oh I'm gonna make jazz my thing."  That was my background, that's what I came out of.  You know, I grew up, my sisters [Martha Cross Tunson and Laverne Cross Sykes] played--we had a piano in the house, my sisters played piano.  I mean I could've learned piano, but they made the mistake of sending me to a local teacher who was a beautiful young girl who was like a piano prodigy.  And I went to take lessons, but I could never keep my hand on the keyboard so that ended that.  I never learned to play piano because of that.  That's the truth.
Story_ID: 526926
Speaker 1: Naturally, this--your love of music and then meeting these great musicians--
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.
Speaker 1: --and great artists at the same time.
Speaker 2: I used to hang out at the Five Spot [Five Spot Cafe, Brooklyn, New York].  Between sessions when Monk [Thelonious Monk] would come out.  See I knew LeRoi Jones, and LeRoi Jones was close to all these people.  And often Roi was there in the ev- you know, I'm using the word LeRoi Jones because he was LeRoi Jones when I knew him, later we say Amiri Baraka of course, but that came much later.  I'm talking 1960, '61 [1961], '62 [1962], that period.  And Miles Davis, you know, that's how I was introduced to them, and was able to talk with them between sets.  The music was a way of me defining myself.  I couldn't do it with the horn, so I figured I could deal with it in paint.  I mean I love to tell the story about John Coltrane, you know.  I used to go down to Brooklyn [New York].  He used to play at a club called--it was called the Club Coronet [sic. Blue Coronet Club, Brooklyn, New York].  And there was a whole week session there with Eric Dolphy.  I knew Eric Dolphy.  And every chance I'd get I would speak with Coltrane.  And one night, I think he was just tired of me.  He says, "Don't you get it, it's like a wave, it's like a wave," and his saying that, something just went off in my head.  And my early concepts of energy fill paintings came out of that John Coltrane talk.
Speaker 1: Did he know that?
Speaker 2: What people call sheets of sound.  That--that's where it came from.  My second show at Allan Stone [Allan Stone Gallery; Allan Stone Projects, New York, New York], that was the title of the show, 'Sheets of Sound.'  The paintings were made without stretchers.  I had a cell maker down the street from me on Lispenard [Street], he would sew the canvas for me.  And we tacked them flat to the wall.  So they hit the wall like this.  Concepts that I use and develop at that period, planar light, light operating as a plane, came directly out of John Coltrane.  So jazz for me is not just the narrative content, it's the conceptual side of jazz and the philosophical underpinnings of it.  That's where I come in.
Speaker 1: And then math is important in your work.
Speaker 2: Science in general.
Speaker 1: Science, sorry.
Speaker 2: Yeah, science, particle physics.  I read everything I can get my hand on.  There's a lot of--fortunately for us, all of us in society.  There are a lot of scientists today that's making it their business to write in such a way that they can connect to the public.  There are people doing that.  People like Brian Greene, people like Karen Barad.  Even Mr. Hawking, Stephen [Stephen Hawking], right.
Speaker 1: Um-hm, true.
Speaker 2: They've made it their business that because they understand and we the public know we don't understand the equations.  It has become so technical that it's a language that only few people know and understand.  We don't have access to those equations.  I mean the amount of training and mathematics that you would have to have, as far as I got in math was calculus.  But the minute you get off into quantum mechanics, we have no access to that, we don't.  So these people are useful in that they explain things to you in a manner that will help you to penetrate what they're doing.  I believe--my belief and the concepts that I work with, I believe that painting in particular, in painting there's an equivalent in painting to what particle physicists have done.  That's what I work with.  That's why I have concepts.  One of my major concepts is what I call molecular perception.  But it's rooted in what is happening in particle physics.
Story_ID: 526927
Speaker 1: Let's talk about your work in the '60s [1960s].  So this is, you know, you come to New York [New York], you've gone to Cooper Union [Cooper Union for the Advancement of Science and Art, New York, New York], you finish school.  What is the work that you're creating in the '60s [1960s]?
Speaker 2: In the '60s [1960s].  It's--well first of all plastically, it's rooted in abstract expressionism, it's rooted in surrealism, primarily.  What's driving it though is what was happening in society at that time, okay.  We got the height of the Vietnam War, we have the height of the Civil Rights Movement.  We've had three, four political assassinations.  We've had the rise of feminism, which from a man's point of view upset the apple cart (laughter).  All I'm saying is that to be a young man here in New York, and to be a young black man on top of it, to be young man, white or black, you had a lot of shit to deal with.  There was a lot on your plate.
Speaker 1: And then, excuse me, it's the '60s [1960s] and this is also--so with the rise of women, there's free love, there's the pill, there's drugs (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh yeah, I experienced all of that.  Drugs was a major part of it.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: The music had changed, jazz.  You got Pharoah Sanders, you've got Eric Dolphy, you've got--oh my good buddy, Marion Brown, wow Marion Brown I miss him, Archie Shepp.  It's funny, you know, when I was in school down at Carver [George Washington Carver Junior High School, Bessemer, Alabama], my first music lessons, the music teacher gave us a definition of music.  She said, "Music is pleasing sound."  That's what the lady said, that was her definition of music.  Okay, that stayed with me for years.  I'm learning how to read music, we're doing some classical stuff, we're doing pop tunes, and it was all--had this pleasing quality about it.  Then I get to New York, I'm hanging out with Archie Shepp, I'm hearing shit like, (makes sounds) I'm seeing Cecil [ph.], (makes sounds).  Shit's not pleasing, not pleasing, my ears is like whoa, they're making me--I'm sitting in my seat (gesture).  So something else had happened.  The politics had gotten into the music, had gotten into the music.  People were reacting to the scene, what was happening.  This had an effect on us as painters.  Again, music comes in and puts it on your plate, you know, the notion of protest.  I'm doing political inspired paintings, I'm doing savagery, New York battleground, right.  People cutting people's balls off and cutting--gouging each other's eyes out and shit.  In the air are like helicopters you'll see in Vietnam, you know.  Horrible, horrible nightmares.  I had a--
Speaker 1: Were you physically having nightmares?
Speaker 2: I was going through some rough times with that and the drugs--whoa.
Speaker 1: So, like psychedelic drugs?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.  Yeah, we were heavy into LSD, cocaine, everything that was out there we took (simultaneous --
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) That's twisting you?
Speaker 2: --everything that was out there, we--we did it.
Speaker 1: And who's we?
Speaker 2: Oh I mean all of my buddies I was hanging out with, Bob Thompson of course, you know, William White [William A. White].  It hit them heavy, they were actual addicts.  But it was everybody.  If you were on the Lower East Side [New York, New York] in 1960, '61 [1961] and '62 [1962], you were trying everything that hit the street.
Speaker 1: And when you were home, were there any drugs when you were at home in Bessemer [Alabama]?
Speaker 2: No.  None whatsoever.
Speaker 1: There was moonshine?
Speaker 2: The thing was alcohol--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --moonshine liquor.  Even at Tuskegee [Tuskegee Institute; Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, Alabama], Tuskegee was a dry county, Macon County [Alabama] was dry.  To get a drink of beer at Tuskegee you had to go across the state line--the county line.  We had bars, like Last Chance Bar [ph.] was one called where you could buy a beer.  Moonshine was sold in a little Mason Dixon jar [sic. Mason jar], pint or quart, smuggled.
Speaker 1: So, so all the stuff that you are learning in New York, includes this exposure to drugs that you'd never even--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: --didn't know anything about before?
Speaker 2: I had no experience with that.  No.  Had heard of it, but I--no.
Speaker 1: And the influence on your work with this nightmarish kind of expression (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh yeah.  I mean all--again, we were heavy into drugs and it was affecting how you saw things.  You know, the drug experience, there's always a heightening of the experience.  When you're on LSD, it becomes like--the most ordinary thing becomes tenfold, twentyfold.
Story_ID: 526928
Speaker 1: And what media are you using now in your art pieces?
Speaker 2: Oil on canvas.  I'm starting off with oil painting.  I didn't switch to acrylic until late, late '60s [1960s], '69 [1969], 1970, I made a total switch to acrylics in 1970.
Speaker 1: So oil on canvas, this is a medium that you have to use carefully though, there's th- I mean as this explosion is happening, what are you doing, what are you physically doing as you're making your work when all this is happening?
Speaker 2: Well, the first thing was survival.  You were working your ass off just to buy paint, pay the rent, pay the telephone bill, trying to prevent ConEd [Consolidated Edison, Inc., New York, New York] from turning the lights out.  Feeding yourself (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And so what was your--what were you doing?
Speaker 2: I was working for the display houses.
Speaker 1: You're still doing that?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I was doing that in the '60s [1960s].  I was doing handiwork.  As a matter of fact, Joe Overstreet and I did a lot of handiwork together.  We used to advertise in the Village Voice for handiwork.  We ran an ad in the Village Voice, it was called "Your Right Hand" [ph.].  Now you can imagine in the '60s [1960s] running an ad in the Village Voice under the title, "Your Right Hand."  We got some funny requests (laughter).  I mean funny, absurd shit (laughter).  But you could make a buck [dollar].
Speaker 1: And you lived on the Lower East Side [New York, New York], why did you choose that neighborhood?
Speaker 2: That's where everybody was.  That's where the--all the young artists was over there.  It was a big young art scene over there.  Ports, I mean at that time I'm meeting [HistoryMaker] Ishmael Reed, David Henderson, the Johnson [ph.] brothers, Calvin Hernton [Calvin C. Hernton].  They were all over there on the East Side, all of us.  All the young painters, sculptors, filmmakers, everybody was there.  It was a healthy, vibrant, young arts scene on the Lower East Side in the 1960s.  And one of the first scenes that black and white young artists were mixing.
Speaker 1: Yeah, it was a good (unclear) (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) We had a favorite bar, the bar where all of us met was called Stanley's [New York, New York].  Stanley's was at Avenue B and 12th Street, a Polish fellow, Stanley, who knew Charlie Parker.  I used to be--Stanley would tell stories.  Charlie Parker lived on the Lower East Side, used to come in Stanley's bar and I said--asked him about Charlie Parker.  He said, "Jack [HistoryMaker Jack Whitten], all he did was play the jukebox."  "Play the jukebox, Polish bar?"  "Yeah he played polkas over and over and over, polkas."  Charlie Parker playing polkas on Stanley's jukebox (laughter).  It makes sense though.
Speaker 1: So it was a--why does it make sense?
Speaker 2: Because of the bebop.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: If you think about Polish polkas and bebop, there's a connection.
Speaker 1: So at this time, the '60s [1960s], there's a thriving artistic scene on the Lower East Side?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.
Speaker 1: You're there and all these other people you mentioned, the people you mentioned are black, but there're lots of white folks there too.  This is an integrated arts neighborhood?
Speaker 2: Pretty much, pretty much.  But then that came--when the politics became there was a separation of the races.  The black poets stayed by themselves.  The black painters pretty much stayed by themselves.  But there were some intermixing.
Story_ID: 526929
Speaker 1: You know, during this period Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] is killed.  What happened--do you remember that day?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: Where were you?
Speaker 2: I was in my studio working.
Speaker 1: And is this on Lispenard Street, were you there already?
Speaker 2: I was at Lispenard.  I moved to Lispenard in '62 [1962].  I was working.  That's when I did that painting for King.  All right, before King's assassination, I was doing a whole group of paintings for Martin Luther King.  I said there's a group of those paintings.  'King's Garden' ['Martin Luther King's Garden,' Jack Whitten], 'King's Wish, King's Dream' ['King's Wish (Martin Luther's Dream),' Jack Whitten], leading up to the assassination.  I even did a painting that I call 'USA Oracle' ['USA Oracle (Assassination of M.L. King),' Jack Whitten], which definitely tells the story of the assassination.  I still have the painting.  But at the time of the assassination, I immediately did a painting in the studio.  That painting has been shown several times, it was shown at that big Museum of Modern Art show.  Dedication to Martin Luther King by all the artists that took part in, black and white artists, at the Museum of Modern Art [New York, New York].
Speaker 1: And so--why did you chose to do the series of paintings about Dr. King?
Speaker 2: King, oh King, when I met King that time, he left a big mark on me.  The man really got under me.  No, he meant a lot.  And that's when, theme wise, I was just getting involved with doing subject matter that related to black subject matter.
Speaker 1: Okay, black subject matter?
Speaker 2: Sure, because Romare Bearden was already participating in that.  You know, I had learned from Bearden what he was doing, and Norman [Norman Lewis] too, Norman had started doing more black subject matter as an abstract painter.  Ernie Crichlow [Ernest Crichlow].  So there was precedents of people doing things related to the community, black community.
Story_ID: 526930
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Plus I was working out my own personal shit, right.  Autobiographical, identity issues.
Speaker 2: And so what was that work, the autobiographical, identity issues?  What are some of those pieces?
Speaker 1: Oh man, there's a lot of those paintings.  I speak about that period as [HistoryMaker] Jack Whitten putting Jack Whitten on the couch (laughter).  That's how I described it.  You have to pick yourself apart, deconstruct the self sexually, politically, aesthetically, and I still believe in that today.  My years of teaching, always insisted that the students go through--I used to give problems that dealt with autobiographical.  Like the ancient sayings.  First know thyself, ancient, ancient, ancient statement, right.  Which remains true today.  That's basic--one of the basic--the basic thing in being human, know thyself.
Speaker 2: And--
Speaker 1: And I did that, ten years of it.
Speaker 2: And what would a highlight painting be of Jack Whitten putting Jack Whitten on the couch?
Speaker 1: Oh things like, from a sexual point of view.  A little painting I remember particular, 'The Valley of Thighs' [ph.].  (Laughter) That was the title of the painting from the 1960s, 'The Valley of Thighs.'
Speaker 2: So you were having fun?
Speaker 1: Oh god yes.  In 1960, we fucked everything that moved (laughter).  We had a saying amongst the guys, you hold it down, I'll fuck it (laughter).  But that was the 1960s.
Story_ID: 526931
Speaker 1: Did you get married during that period?
Speaker 2: Yeah, my first marriage--
Speaker 1: So--
Speaker 2: --which ended in divorce.  Didn't last that long (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Right.  But you, when did you get married?
Speaker 2: That would be, what, 19--about '63 [1963] maybe.
Speaker 1: So in the middle of this sexual exploration, you were compelled to get married?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Oh I'll never forget it.  I was at Cooper Union [Cooper Union for the Advancement of Science and Art, New York, New York] at a figure drawing class and I walked into class doing figure drawing.  The class was, Charles Cajori was his name, good guy, nice painter, was teaching that class.  We all drew from live models.  And up to that point, every model we had was white, white women, white men.  This particular night I walked in the class and there was a black woman [Florence Squires] on the stand.  I mean with a body that I went, bam (laughter).  Charles Cajori saw me and he understood immediately.  I couldn't draw.  I was trying to do something, but I just couldn't, couldn't draw.  All I saw was a hunk of chocolate with curves (laughter).  I had to get up and leave the class.  Boy, Charles Cajori cracked up.  He teased me, he teased me to death (laughter).
Speaker 1: And that's who you married?
Speaker 2: Absolutely.
Speaker 1: And you had a child?
Speaker 2: Um-hm, yeah, first daughter [Keita Whitten].
Speaker 1: How long were you married?
Speaker 2: Oh it didn't last long.  Two years, two or three years, very briefly.
Story_ID: 526932
Speaker 1: At the same time as you are doing this exploration through your work, you start teaching early on?
Speaker 2: I started teaching, damn Mel Edwards [Melvin Edwards] called me.  The year had to be what--about 1969--
Speaker 1: Sixty-eight [1968].  (Unclear), right (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) Mel was teaching at Queens College [Queens, New York].  They had a little program there called the SEEK program [Search for Education, Elevation and Knowledge].  Mel Edwards was teaching out there.  He was leaving because he were accepting a full position--time job, this was like adjunct teaching.  I've always done just adjunct teaching, I never did full-time teaching.  And he called me to say, you know, "You should take this class."  And I remember cursing him.  "I'm not doing no fucking teaching." I mean I was cursing my ass off.  He says, "Come on man, it's easy.  You know, you--besides, you go there once a week, you do this, you get a paycheck."  So he convinced me to take this class.  I didn't have idea what I was doing.  So I followed a program that he had laid out that he was using.  And I went to Queens College.  Hell of a trip, subway, buses, way the hell out.  And I did that and I got interested in it.  It was an interesting program.  SEEK program was designed to get kids from the inner city from the lower incomes into college.  And you had mostly black, Hispanic, but a lot of white kids too 'cause it was cheap, right.  A special program, the SEEK program.  And I had some decent experiences working with those kids.  I must admit.  So it sort of sucked me in, right.  And I found out that in teaching you learn a lot about yourself.  So I was probably sort of sucked into it, but I blame Mel Edwards.
Speaker 1: And the next year you began to teach at Pratt [Pratt Institute, New York, New York]?
Speaker 2: I did a class at Pratt, figure drawing class.  I didn't like Pratt that much.
Speaker 1: Why not?
Speaker 2: The setup, the program, there was just something about the whole tone of it, the academic nature of it that did not appeal to me.  I think I did that for a semester, maybe two semesters (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) A year?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 526933
Speaker 1: And then you have your first solo exhibition through Allan Stone Gallery [Allan Stone Projects, New York, New York]?
Speaker 2: Allan Stone Gallery, 1968 was the first one man show.  Allan put me in a group show in 1965.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you had a long term relationship with him?
Speaker 2: Yes, all through the late '60s [1960s].
Speaker 1: And so who was he in the art world at this time?
Speaker 2: Allan Stone?
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: Oh, Allan Stone at that time was one of the most successful dealers in New York [New York].  Very well known New York dealer.  Nice gallery, Madison Avenue and 85th Street.  For a young black artist doing abstract work, very unusual.  Very unusual.  But Allan gave me that show.  And it was good for me.  He saw me as a painter, but being so heavily influenced by Bill de Kooning [Willem de Kooning].  Allan owned a lot of de Koonings.  He invested a lot in Bill de Kooning, and he loved gestural abstraction.  He saw that in my work, that's why he put me in the gallery.  It wasn't just this poor black kid.  He saw me as a painter.
Speaker 1: (Unclear).  And did he sell?
Speaker 2: Yeah, the first year we sold, not for a lot of money.  I often dis-
Speaker 1: Do you remember what the first piece that you sold for?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, I remember Allan's instructions.  He says, "Now look."  He had a theory.  Allan had a theory about marketing artists' work.  He explained it to me.  He says, "It's a pyramid."  He would take his hands like this (gesture).  It's like a pyramid, the pyramid has a base.  He says, "The first show, we wanna sell these paintings and we wanna establish that base.  We're gonna sell them for like a $1,000, $1,200."  He said, "The second year, we're gonna build that base up, $2,000, hopefully $2,500."  This was his theory.  That's how he ran his gallery, whoever.  That was the program.
Speaker 1: But in the '60s [1960s], a thousand dollars is?
Speaker 2: Oh great.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah, but you got to remember now at that time gallery dealers took 33 percent.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Thirty-three percent, that's what gallery dealers took for their commission.  Okay so you figure 33 percent from a thousand dollars, okay.  Today, that percentage is fifty cent--
Speaker 1: That's what I thought, yeah.
Speaker 2: --fifty percent (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) (Unclear).
Speaker 2: Yeah and some galleries it's even more, and still expect the artist to pay for your own moving, pay for your own photography.  So, you know, do the math.  Unless the artist is selling for six figures, seven figures--
Speaker 1: It's hard to make.
Speaker 2: --I have to tell people, you know.
Story_ID: 526934
Speaker 1: Let's say I sell a painting for a hundred thousand dollars, which we do.  Immediately, the gallery dealer is taking fifty thousand, okay.  Then, after giving the gallery dealer 50 percent, the next person I have to pay is the federal government.  They're gonna get their share out of that.  The next person is the state government, they're gonna get their share out of that.  The next person is the city government, they get their share.  Then I have an unincorporated business tax, they gonna get a cut.  Then we have in New York [New York], we have what is called the MTA Tax [Metropolitan Commuter Transportation Mobility Tax], now this is true, I'm not bullshitting you, I'm not exaggerating, okay.  So if the artist says, you can sell--you sold a painting for a hundred thousand dollars on the open market, you are lucky if you can put in your pocket ten thousand dollars.  You understand?  That's not an exaggeration.  And the more money you make, the more the government takes.  They get their money off the top.
Speaker 2: They literally get their money off the top.  The gallery (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Oh yeah.  Well okay, the advantage of being the artist, okay I can deduct, I can deduct my materials, I can deduct the cost of my labor, the cost of my--whatever it takes to rent a place, my insurance, all of that, right.  The artist can deduct that legally.  All right?  If you're not making money though through the system, after five years, if your tax man says, "Well we're not making any money, we're not making any money," the government comes in and says, "Well why should you be getting these deductions if you call yourself an artist, you're not making any money?"  Creates problems.  Most artists do not make a living from their work.  Most of us teach to make--I'm one of the rare artists who can say a hundred percent of my income comes from my sales, but I couldn't say that all those forty years when I was teaching, I couldn't say that.  Most artists have to work to make a living.  Out of the whole picture, the number of artists who can genuinely say that they make a living from their work without having to teach or to do some other kind of work, I would assume you're probably talking about 4 percent, if that.
Speaker 2: And, I mean you've had a very long career, how many years have you been able to be independently selling your work to support yourself and your family?
Speaker 1: Oh I would say past ten years.  And for a while there it was like fifty/fifty from teaching, like fifty, but in the past ten years I can say yeah, sure.
Story_ID: 526935
Speaker 1: Was it in the '60s [1960s] that you remarried?  That you remarried?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.  The year would be, oh boy, everybody's mad at me when I can't remember dates, '68 [1968].
Speaker 1: And who's your wife?
Speaker 2: Mary Whitten, Mary Staikos Whitten.
Speaker 1: And she's from Greece?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: No.
Speaker 2: No, no.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: She was born here in New York [New York].  Her background from her father and mother's side was from Greece.  But she was born in New York.
Speaker 1: And how did you meet her?
Speaker 2: Cooper Union [Cooper Union for the Advancement of Science and Art, New York, New York].
Speaker 1: She was at school?
Speaker 2: Student, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, she's an artist as well?
Speaker 2: She was an artist, started off, but she later moved into art restoration.  She went into business with another woman, Winifred Bendiner, Whitten Bendiner company [Bendiner and Whitten Corporation; Bendiner and Company, New York, New York].  They are known in New York for paper restoration.  But she is retired from that, she no longer does that.
Speaker 1: So--
Speaker 2: So at that time, as far as making a living, Mary was working at art restoration and I was teaching.  That's how we made a living.
Speaker 1: Okay and then you had your daughter, Mirsini [Mirsini Amidon]?
Speaker 2: Mirsini.
Speaker 1: Mirsini.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Also in the '60s [1960s], or was she born in the '70s [1970s]?
Speaker 2: Seventies [1970s].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Early '70s [1970s], '72 [1972].
Speaker 1: Okay so before we leave the '60s [1960s], I mean just for context, you are clearly searching.  I mean you describe all the things that are going on culturally.  You describe the exploration sexually, but still you obviously believe in marriage 'cause you tried marriage once and now you get married again (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, my first marriage was a total failure.
Speaker 1: Right, but then you get married again still in this decade of all this confusion, so there's something you needed that says this is--?
Speaker 2: Well I found out that because of my nature being like, little explosive and like all the experimentation and shit, I found that my work was better if I had more of a stable everyday life.  Because in the 1960s, there was nothing stable about that.  Nothing.  You know, 1960s for all of us was like chaotic.  So for what I do as I'm getting older and I'm finding more out about what I had to do as a painter, I need--I need peace and quiet.  I can't function if it's not quiet.  My work depends upon contemplation.  I can't have a lot of people around me.  That's one thing I used to (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And you knew that?
Speaker 2: Oh well I--I found out later, but that's one thing I could never understood about Bob Thompson.  Bob Thompson could have a party going on, he'd still be painting.  You know, people would be fun, getting high, dancing, drinking, eating, he'd be painting.  (Laughter) I couldn't do that.  But you see that's a difference in temperaments too, you know.  Everybody's got their--everybody has to learn.  When I was teaching that's one of the thing I told teachers--told students that there is no one way of doing this thing called the artist.  Be a devil, you can be a saint.  There's no one way.
Story_ID: 526936
Speaker 1: It's a family photo and it's at my home in Bessemer, Alabama, family home in Bessemer, Alabama.  The occasion is after the funeral of my brother Tommy [Tommy Cross], the jazz musician.  Tommy was killed here in New York [New York], his apartment caught fire.  He was smoking in bed, probably high, his apartment caught fire, he was badly burned and he lived for twenty-eight days in intensive care at the Saint Vincent Hospital [Saint Vincent Catholic Medical Centers] here in New York.  We took the body back home to Bessemer, Alabama for burial, it was a church funeral.  And after the funeral, we all met at home, the family who all came for the funeral.  And starting at the left, that's one of my cousins from my mother's side, the woman in black there.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Right there?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay.
Speaker 1: And then the next would be my brother Jesse [Jesse Whitten].  The next person is also one of the cousins.  And there, and that would be me, Jack [HistoryMaker Jack Whitten], yeah.  That's my mom [Annie Cunningham Whitten], that's Williams [ph.], we call him uncle, Uncle Williams really, he was also a member of that family from my mother's side.  That's my older brother James [James Cross, Jr.].  The woman there is my sister Toots [Martha Cross Tunson] on the left, Martha.  Next to her is Aunt Cloud--Claude not Cloud, Claude [ph.].  And that's my Aunt Lina [Selina Cunningham], my brother James.  Going back to the left, that would be, we call him Flippy [Ernest "Flip" Sykes], that's my sister's, Laverne's [Laverne Cross Sykes] oldest boy, she had two boys, Flip and Don [Don Sykes].  The next figure is my brother Billy [Bill Whitten], my younger brother Billy.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Um-hm. Right there.
Speaker 1: Yeah. Then the next figure is Jerry [Jerry Whitten], he is the child to Jesse, my brother Jesse, and the next figure is the kid sitting on the floor, that would be Don, my youngest kid to my sister Laverne.  So that's in the family home after Tommy's burial.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Excellent, thank you.
Speaker 1: That's one of the few shots--photos I have of my father, that's Mose Whitten.  I only have maybe three, four photos of him.
Speaker 2: And about when was that?
Speaker 1: Whoa, I don't know.  It would have to be, like I say, he died when I was barely five years old.  I was born in 1939, that could be '41 [1941], '42 [1942].  Mose Whitten, the coal miner.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay, next.
Speaker 1: That's my oldest sister Martha, we call her Toots.  She was a registered nurse.  She retired from that position.  That's Toots my oldest sister (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And this is about, what time?
Speaker 1: That would have to be in the '50s [1950s], most likely right after graduation.  She went to Grady Memorial Hospital, that's where she studied, in Atlanta, Georgia, Martha.
Speaker 2: That's from the '80s [1980s].  The photographer's name is--he did an essay, oh it's on the back there.  Peter Bellamy.
Speaker 1: Oh.
Speaker 2: I can see it written.
Speaker 1: Same person?
Speaker 2: Yeah. About eighty--'84 [1984] maybe.  Peter Bellamy.
Speaker 1: Now where are you?
Speaker 2: In my Lispernard Street studio.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now what is this piece?
Speaker 2: That's one of those pieces of--that was oil and acrylic on canvas.
Speaker 1: That's a huge piece?
Speaker 2: Yeah, it's a big, it's a big tundra, probably I think is a little over nine feet in diameter.
Speaker 1: And this is a black and white picture, but what colors?
Speaker 2: Art's in color, but very muted, except for those lines that are cut out that has a bright color.
Speaker 1: Photographer is Fern Logan.  That photo was used in my Studio Museum [Studio Museum in Harlem, New York, New York] catalog.  There's a piece of my sculpture shown, that would also be at Lispenard Street.  The year would have to be--does it say?
Speaker 2: Eighty-three [1983].
Speaker 1: Yeah, that's about right, yeah.
Speaker 2: That's me and Bill Williams, [HistoryMaker] William T. Williams.  It's a--either a Christmas party or a birthday party.  That's his son Aaron [Aaron Williams] and that's my daughter Mirsini [Mirsini Amidon].  William T. Williams.  We used to do Christmas parties at Lispenard.
Speaker 1: That's Annie Bell Whitten, my mother, in front of the family home holding her bouquet of flowers.  She had a great flower garden.  She was a lover of flowers.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay.
Speaker 1: Melvin Edwards.  I had just come back from Greece and we met for lunch at a restaurant up in the Village [Greenwich Village, New York, New York] somewhere.
Speaker 2: And this is about what time?
Speaker 1: That would be in the '90s [1990s].
Speaker 2: And now we're going back.
Speaker 1: Oh my, that's a picture from, whoa, Carver Junior--elementary school.  I'm probably wearing a jacket that my mom made.  We went to school with homemade clothes.  Yep, 1947, right.  Yeah, it's from Carver Junior [George Washington Carver Junior High School, Bessemer, Alabama].
Speaker 2: Now that's a photograph that I adore.  That's me in my tree house that I built.  I built a tree house.
Speaker 1: And this is in Bessemer?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I used to love that damn thing.  I'd go up in that tree, and it was a thorn tree.  I remember getting thorns in my legs more than once.  Makeshift tree house.
Speaker 1: That's a classic.  That's me, my brother Jesse, and my brother Billy.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay.
Speaker 1: And this is around (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Probably shot by a local, a local photographer in Bessemer, Alabama.  His name was, oh what, it'll come to me, I knew his name.  Is it on the back of that--Bennett, Bennett Studios [ph.].
Speaker 1: About what year?
Speaker 2: Oh that would have to be late '40s [1940s], '50s [1950s].
Speaker 1: That's my brother Billy when he came to visit me in Greece.  We're at a house that I rented.  Before I, before I bought land and built a house, I used to rent houses there on the island of Crete [Greece], the village of Agia Galini [Greece].  That's me--that's Billy, myself, my daughter Mirsini and my wife Mary [Mary Whitten].  So depending on Mary's or Mirsini's age, had to be late '70s [1970s].
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, the Greeks.  My dear friend to the left, Despina [ph.].  She's an artist in Athens [Greece].  The guy with the undershirt on is Merkakis [ph.].  He's a local artist in Crete from the village of Tympaki [Greece].  That's me in the blue shirt and on the right is my friend, another Greek-American artist, Steve Gianakos, who lives between Greece and New York.  Steve Gianakos (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And this was taken about when?
Speaker 2: Oh that had to be 2000 at least.
Speaker 1: That's Keita [Keita Whitten], my first daughter.  In the studio.
Speaker 2: And this is about when?
Speaker 1: That would have to be probably around 1970.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay.
Speaker 1: She was born in '64 [1964].
Speaker 2: Ah ha.  Alexandros.  Alexandros is from the village of Nithafri in Crete [Greece].  He was my guide.  We have the highest mountain in Crete, Psiloritis [Mount Ida] where Zeus was born, and I wanted to climb to the top, and I had to get a guide.  So they took me to the village of Nithafri, that was my guide.  Mikhaili Alexandros [ph.], and he's from the village of Nithafri on Crete.  That's at the top of Mount Ida.
Speaker 1: My sister Laverne, we call her Sister.
Speaker 2: And when is that?
Speaker 1: That had to be in the '90s [1990s] I would say, early '90s [1990s].
Story_ID: 526937
Speaker 1: I have to stop here because this is a long story, long story.  This is how I ended up on the island of Crete [Greece].  In 1969, my wife Mary [Mary Whitten] whose father [Andrew Staikos] is from the mainland of Greece up in the Peloponnesus, was born in New York [New York], and she had never been to Greece, and she wanted to go.  We planned a trip in 1969 to go to Europe.  It would be my--it would be our first time in Europe period.  Three nights before leaving, I had a powerful dream where I saw a tree standing, rooted in the earth, and the dream was a command that when I go to Greece I were to take my carving tools with me, and I'm to find this tree, it didn't say where.  And when I found it, I was to make it into a totem.  We found it in the village of Agia Galini [Greece], just as I saw it in the dream.  And that's me starting to make it, the first start (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And this is what year now?
Speaker 1: Oh that would be 1969.
Speaker 2: Okay, the first time you went.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Is it still there in the village?
Speaker 2: Oh it's still there in the village.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Oh excellent.
Speaker 2: That's my first landlord, the lady in the middle, Kidi Ilene [ph.].  Ilene truly knew with her daughter, Tasula [ph.] on the left.  That's my wife Mary and Mirsini [Mirsini Amidon].  So you had to be talking early '70s [1970s], '75 [1975], '76 [1976].
Speaker 1: My mom came to visit, that's with Mirsini when she was a kid--baby, so she had to be what, three, four years old.
Speaker 2: And what's your mom's name again?
Speaker 1: Annie B. Whitten [Annie Cunningham Whitten].
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: That's Mirsini and I at the Acropolis [Athens, Greece].
Speaker 2: About when?
Speaker 1: Probably in the ei- late '80s [1980s].
Speaker 2: Oh my.  I'm a spear fisherman.  In Greece, I fell in love with spear fishing and that's one of--that's a beautiful catch.  We call it (unclear), that's the name of that fish, they are fantastic eating.  We take the head off and make soup and the body we tend to bake it in the oven.  And I had just pulled him out of the water.  I'll never forget that day.  I've caught plenty of those fish, but a buddy of mine who was fishing with me had a camera that day and took a photo when I came out of the water.  We do underwater spear fishing.  I had to crawl down on a cave with a light to find that fucker and pull him up.  He came from (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And this is about what year?
Speaker 2: That fish came from fifteen meters deep.  The year would have to be late '80s [1980s].
Speaker 1: Oh, there's the tree, finished.  It still stands there now in Agia Galini.  All these years, the Greeks take care of it.
Speaker 2: Oh that's me and my Uncle Tom [Thomas Cunningham].  We're out at a restaurant.
Speaker 1: Now, even the--
Speaker 2: That's the Uncle Tom that I speak of who had the cot ready for me when I came to New York.
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: That's my Uncle Thomas, he was the policeman.
Speaker 1: Now, even though you're gonna send me the picture, I just wanna hear you tell about this piece, so you take a picture just so we have it.
Speaker 2: The 9/11 [September 11, 2001] painting.
Speaker 1: Yes, this is it.
Speaker 2: Yes.  The day of 9/11 I was at my studio, Lispenard [Lispenard Street] and Church [Church Street] downtown, lower Manhattan [New York, New York].  We had just come back from Greece.  We were upstairs having breakfast and I heard the fire engines.  And I always had a rule whenever the fire engines came on the block, I would go down and see what was going on.  So that particular day, very bright, clear sky day in Manhattan that day, super bright.  Someone had reported a gas leak and the fire department came to check out the gas leak.  The firemen were working down in the manhole cover on the corner of Church and Lispenard.  There was a Frenchman who was doing a documentary for the fire department, was filming the fireman as they were down in their hole.  I was down there talking to the fire captain, when all of a sudden, a sound came up over our heads, the type of sound, Scott [Scott Stearns], your flesh crawled.  You actually felt your flesh moving on your body, it was that sound, that loud.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Wow.
Speaker 2: And we all looked up right under the belly of this airplane that was making a beeline for downtown.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  That had to be just seconds before it hit.
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Did you hear it when it hit?
Speaker 2: Oh, we saw the whole thing, of course (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  (Simultaneous) Oh man, oh.
Speaker 2: The young Frenchman who was doing the documentary automatically raised his camera up in time to get that first video shot of the plane hitting the North Tower [World Trade Center, New York, New York].  And on that first video when you hear the voice, "Holy shit," that was me (laughter).  It's recorded in history now.  Holy shit.
Story_ID: 526938
Speaker 1: This is a continuation interview.  And I'm [HistoryMaker] Harriette Cole, the interviewer.  Scott Stearns is our videographer.  Today is October 27th, 2016.  And we're at the studio of Mr. Jack Whitten [HistoryMaker Jack Whitten].  We wanna pick up in the decade of the 1970s.  And we've been looking at your work in terms of--from decade to decade, and things changed a bit at that time.  The biggest being that you began working with acrylic seriously, right?  Can you tell me about that?
Speaker 2: Ah, that would be 1970.
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  There's a few examples of acrylic from the '60s [1960s], but it's just not that many.  But the big change, all through the '60s [1960s] I worked primarily with oil paint, oil on canvas, but in the '70s [1970s] I made a big switch to acrylic paint and there were--there was reasons for doing that.  Reasons being that after surviving the 1960s with all the emotional turmoil and stuff I went through, and the type of painting I was doing, I saw that I had to find out something else about painting.  Something that deals with the--what we call in painting the materiality of paint.  And the big change occurred.  The studio became more of a laboratory as opposed to, you know, going into the studio like the '60s [1960s] going through all these big emotional upheavals following abstract expressionist tendencies.  Studio became more of a laboratory, switched to acrylic paint, and the amount of paint changed.  When I switched to acrylic I was using huge amounts of paint, I mean gallons.  Each experiment with paint took place on a drawing board that I made.  I made a big heavy-duty drawing board.  The drawing board was twenty feet by oh I would say about fifteen feet--ten--yeah more than ten feet wide, about twenty feet, heavy though, built out of two by fours, construction-grade lumber, honeycomb on sixteen-inch centers covered with a three-quarter-inch construction grade plywood and on top of that was industrial linoleum.  It was built heavy, built perfectly square, perfectly level to the floor, raised from the floor and that was an arena to experiment with.  It was a big drawing board.  The paintings were tacked directly down to this drawing board and I used--started using tools that I called developer.
Speaker 1: Is this something you created?
Speaker 2: I created it, yeah, I created this tool, I made the tool of my design.  The analogy was to photography.  I knew what was influencing me the most was how photography operates.  I'm very much intrigued about--with the camera.  That small little aperture, a little light comes in, you capture light, put it onto a sensitive film.  I wanted something like that but in painting.  Not photographic processes, but using photography as analogy.  So I started a whole series of things.  The first thing I wanted to do was to lay down a slab of acrylic paint.  I wanted something measurable, so I found a way to put down a slab of acrylic paint, quarter of an inch thick, three-eighths of an inch thick.
Speaker 1: And so what, what are you containing it in?
Speaker 2: Well I wasn't containing anything at that time.  I would just lay it down or I would tape off the edge.  I had a system where I could locate the edge of the painting just by putting nails (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) This is on a canvas, this is on a canvas?
Speaker 2: On the canvas.  I would tack the canvas down straight to the drawing board.  I would take strings and nails and measure them parallel from the outer edge of the drawing board.  And that way I could locate the edge of the plane.  And when the stuff got really messy, I always knew where the edge was, I could always take that string and stretch it out between two nails and I knew exactly where it was.  It was laid out as a square, as a rectangle, or sometimes as a triangle, or at times it was circles.  So I was successful in laying down this slab of paint.  One day, I had a decent Afro, and I took my Afro pick and started combing through one of these slabs, that was intriguing.  When I started combing through the slab the light came through and revealed what was down underneath and that--I liked that.
Speaker 1: And the slab, was this layers of acrylic paint (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Just a layer of paint.
Speaker 1: It was a layer.
Speaker 2: Or sometimes, yeah, depending.
Story_ID: 526939
Speaker 1: Just in terms of the difference between--you had been working with oil paint, now you're working with acrylic.  What are you--what's the difference for you as an artist in working with these two media?
Speaker 2: Oh it's the same for all artists, in the sense that acrylic dries faster.  I'm starting to work fairly large scale, ten foot, fifteen foot and larger, and thick.  There's no way in hell you can do that with oil paint.
Speaker 1: It takes too long to dry (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well you could if you had an enormous place that you could move it out of the way but my studio at that time was 2,500 square feet.  I had--when I did one of these experiments, I wanted to move it out of the way within a week or two.  And the acrylic allowed me to do that.  The acrylic moves faster too.
Speaker 1: Physically moves faster on the canvas (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, right, you can pour it.  You can pour it and you can throw it out, again you can't do that with oil paint.  You can, you can mix oil paint in such a way that you can throw it, but I was using a lot of acrylic polymer AC-32, and I was buying it directly from Rohm and Haas [Rohm and Haas Company; Dow Chemical Company].  That was the company that was manufacturing acrylic polymer.  Acrylic polymer is the binder for all acrylic paints.  All paints, whether it's oil paint, casings or whatever, is a pigment plus a binder.  What qualifies oil paint as paint is that its oil that is used as the binder with a pigment.  And in the case of oil paint, it's ground into the oil.  With acrylics, the polymer is the binder.  You have more lead way though with acrylic.  You can use acrylic to make a suspension, and what we mean by that as opposed to grinding, and pigment is not ground into the binder, it is simply mixed into the binder and dispersed so you can use it as a dispersal.  Or you can sit and grind it into paint, into an actual paint then.  I do both.  I use it as paint, also use it as suspensions.  You can also use acrylic as coating, meaning that you can put down a layer of acrylic medium, allow it to gri- dry until it becomes tack, and you can use acrylic--you can use pigment as if it's a gilding process, and you can coat it.  So you got three possibilities with acrylic.  Again, you don't have that with oil.
Speaker 1: So you buy acrylic, the raw materials--
Speaker 2: The raw material.
Speaker 1: --so that you can manipulate the way that you want (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Anyway I want to.  I was making most of my own pigment.  I was using--in paint, I was using a lot of Bocour paint [Bocour Artist Colors], Bocour pigments.  I knew Mr. Bocour, Lenny Bocour [Leonard Bocour].  And Lenny and I had a deal where I would trade him a painting for paint.  So I would get gallons of paint straight from Lenny Bocour as a trade.  And I was not the only artist doing that in the early '70s [1970s].  Lenny was trading with quite a few artists downtown.  One of the great advantages with Lenny is that he would come to the studio.  He would sit and we would have long discussions about what are you trying to do, what do you need, what materials do you need, and we would talk, you know.  And lo and behold, next thing you know, out of those talks things would appear on the market.  Like different gels for example.
Speaker 1: So he was influenced by your process (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well with all the artists.  He--we talked with all the artists.  You know, he would come to your studio, "What do you guys want, what are you doing?"  But it helped in his developing new products.  Because acrylic is new, you know, acrylic didn't come to the market until post World War II [WWII].  We didn't have acrylics before.  It's a recent.
Story_ID: 526940
Speaker 1: And so your embrace of it in 1970 was--were most artists still using oil or watercolor?
Speaker 2: Oh, a lot of artists were still using oil.  But most of the people I knew working downtown and so forth in Tribeca [New York, New York] most of us was using acrylics, most of us.
Speaker 1: And so you were--you mentioned pulling your Afro pick through--
Speaker 2: Through the slab.
Speaker 1: --through the slab and seeing what lay beneath.  It--was it from there that you created the developer?  'Cause the developer looks like it does what an Afro pick does, right?
Speaker 2: Well the developer at first was just a piece of wood.
Speaker 1: Oh, okay.
Speaker 2: It was a two by four attached to a long pole, like a one by four with a brace.  It was a big T, and I would use it to pull the paint across.  And then I would take the Afro comb and start cutting through it.  But the Afro comb was so intriguing and I liked what was happening, the next experiment was done with a carpenter's saw.  I took a carpenter's saw, took the handle off, attached it to the developer and I would use that to pull the paint.  So the carpenter's saw works well.  There's a long history to the developer.  It has evolved through the years.  What started off as a two by four piece of wood, then a saw blade, after that it was a piece of sixteen-gauge galvanized metal attached to the wood.  It became a huge squeegee, where I took three-eighth to a half-inch neoprene rubber and I attached to the wood which made it into a large squeegee.  Another development of the developer was to notch the galvanized metal into notches, and I did a whole range of experiments with that, notches half-inch, quarter of an inch, sometime mixing up until finally it arrived at notches of eighth of an inch, increments of eighth of an inch over a twelve-foot span.  So developer went through a series of changes.
Speaker 1: And as it went through these changes, how was it affecting the canvas?
Speaker 2: Oh it affected the imagery tremendously.  For example, when the squeegee, the rubber, was placed onto the two by four, it became a huge squeegee which allowed me to work very thin, like watery acrylic, which created problems because it takes longer to dry.  The more moisture you put into acrylic the longer it takes to dry.  That was a bit of a hassle, but I got some interesting stuff out of that.  I have a series of cut acrylic paintings where mounds of acrylic paint, thick, three-quarters of an inch was built up.  Then the squeegee pulling very liquid acrylic on top of those mounds of dried paint.  This would be 1973.  When that was left to dry, I would take my carpenter's blade, a little jack plane, extremely sharp, and I would cut through the layers of acrylic, revealing what was in there color wise.  Those slivers of paint became the first example of paint as collage.  That dates back to 1973.
Speaker 1: In how so, bec- what you're pulling off?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  What I cut off, I cut through the layers of acrylic and got thin layers of paint and I did collages with those paints.  That was the first example historically of paint as collage.
Speaker 1: Because prior to that, there were other materials, paper or--
Speaker 2: Paper, rags.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Artists would use wood, whatever.  Mostly paper.  Bearden [Romare Bearden], for example, became well known for his collages that were done with paper, familiar, magazines, or in his case faxes that he had reproduced from images.
Speaker 1: And so yours is--the collage pieces are literally--
Speaker 2: Paint.
Speaker 1: --pieces of paint, cut--cut pieces of paint (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, right.
Story_ID: 526941
Speaker 1: Now when you first started doing this, so 1973 is when this--you made this creation, this discovery within your work (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah.
Speaker 1: Was--were the pieces--did they have layers in them like now you see--
Speaker 2: Oh you could see the different colors in there (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Within each?
Speaker 2: In--yeah, within each little sliver of paint you could see it.  And it was a very surprising way to work because when I build up those mounds of paint, you know over a period of time you got to wait until they dry to go to the next step.  You would forget what's under there.  So every time you hit it with your jack plane it would be a surprise, you'd see something that you had--you got no way of knowing what was under there.
Speaker 1: Now did collage--as you're making this discovery, you find the piece, tell me about the inspiration to turn it into collage, do you remember?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, ver- quite clearly.  Collage is one of the great conceptual acts of modernism.  That's when we first started seeing collage in painting.  I mean, I like to date it back to Picasso [Pablo Picasso] myself, when he took that little painting he has with the wicker chair ['Still Life with Chair Caning,' Pablo Picasso].  He took a piece of wicker and put into the paint.  Now we know that in the history of art there're other examples of collage on a two-dimensional plane, we know that.  We can point that out.  What's different though in modernist thinking, this was the first time in the history of abstract painting in the modernist tradition, that's the one that used collage.  So collage is like a bedrock part of modernism, fragmentation.  People like Schwitters [Kurt Schwitters] who was using media, data, information, but all that was paper.  Artists that was using rags, straw, any number of materials.  Dubuffet [Jean Dubuffet], a lot of examples.  So, it's one of the bedrocks of modernist of thinking, collage.  So when I saw that paint could be used as this collage, I immediately recognized, my god, this is a fantastic breakthrough with a lot of potential.  And I continued to develop this up until today.  What I'm doing right now is paint as collage.  I take paint now, and that is used as a skin, and it's laminated to the canvas.
Speaker 1: Well and you have described that acrylic does a lot of things, and it acts as a glue as well?
Speaker 2: Very versatile, extremely versatile material.
Speaker 1: And so when you first started using it, what was the experience like discovering all these things that it could do?
Speaker 2: Very exciting, very exciting.  Each time you do something you're like a kid in a toy shop, you know.  Your excitement would build up.  The more you do you start realizing what's the potential of it.  Like anything is possible with this stuff.  The battle cry was to make acrylic do anything possible, show all the possibilities of it.  And I continue to explore it, you know.
Speaker 1: And was this a conversation that you're also having with your artist friends about how you're using the material, or is it more an inner conversation?
Speaker 2: More of an inner conversation.  One thing I have learned over the years, I mean I hang out at the bars a lot, all through the '60s [1960s] and the '70s [1970s].  My great social life was the bars here in New York [New York], artist bar where people gather and drink.  But I found out earlier, I remember there was a saying from World War II [WWII], it used to be posters and they used to post them all over town, right.  The poster said, "Loose lips sink ships."  So early on I found like when you're out in the bars yapping and yapping and talking about shit that you were doing and so forth, it wouldn't be long that you'd see it showing up in the galleries.  So I learned to keep my mouth shut.
Speaker 1: So the inner dialogue that's expressing itself on canvas, how is paint as collage developing through the '70s [1970s] for you?
Speaker 2: All through the '70s [1970s].  I was using it, cutting it, building it into the surfaces, building what I call a specific ground with it.  You know, every painting has a ground.  I developed something in the '70s [1970s] that I call a specific ground, which meant that the ground was more than just putting down a layer of gesso.  The (unclear) became like events that was built into the ground.  The reason for that was--especially you can see evidence of this in what is called a Greek alphabet paintings through the late '70s [1970s].  When the developer passed over this specific ground, it revealed what was put down before.  So there's a lot of examples of how the acrylic collage was used.
Speaker 1: So it's almost like an excavation within the painting?
Speaker 2: In a way, it's sort of archeological really.
Speaker 1: Uh-huh.
Story_ID: 526942
Speaker 1: Until 1990, when I discovered that it could be used as tesserae, which started a whole series of tessellation, tessellated paintings.
Speaker 2: And, and what is tesserae and how do you spell that (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Tesserae, T-E-S-S-A-R-A-E.  It is--I've studied ancient mosaics.  I mean I've lived in the Mediterranean area since the late '60s [1960s].  Traveled a lot throughout the Mediterranean.  And I love ancient mosaics and I use the word ancient mosaics as opposed to what most people are familiar with here in New York [New York] with what we call smalts, which is the mosaics you see in the subway stations.  I have no interest in that.  My interest is in direct method ancient mosaic.  The ancients had a tool, the anvil and a hammer, where each piece of stone was hand cut.  You had to learn to hold it and strike it, I have the tools.  I've taught myself how to cut original tesserae.  It's a cubic, four-sided cubic of stone.  Of precious stones, glass, marble, granite.  I've made them with marbles with granite, with glass.  At my house in Greece I've made outdoor floor mosaics using this method.  You take the tesserae and you put it into wet mortar, a combination of cement lime, and it holds up forever if it's done right.
Speaker 2: So that you developed in the '90s [1990s], right?
Speaker 1: Yes, the tesserae, first tesserae paintings happened in 1990.
Speaker 2: So, so I wanna go back to the '70s [1970s].  Is the main thrust of your work is learning how to work with acrylic--experimenting with acrylic and working with the developer?
Speaker 1: If you look at it purely in a material way, yes.
Speaker 2: And in a content, the storytelling way, what are you doing?
Speaker 1: The storytelling, the narrative, the content is where materiality comes in.  I maintain that through materiality--anything you want, anything the artist desires, can be compressed into the paint.  It has to be in the paint.  I don't do narrative paintings, literal narrations, I don't do that.  I mean, there have been some fine narrative paintings for damn sure.  One of my great mentors, Jacob Lawrence was a narrative painter.  Romare Bearden was a narrative painter.  People whom I've admired a lot.  So we--here in America, both black and white, we have a long history.  And indeed the whole history of art, we've had narrations.  I deal with it though purely through materiality.
Speaker 2: And what, what does materiality mean?
Speaker 1: It means to take substance, manifest it in the material.  It has to be in the material.  It's not something that we illustrate.  It's not an illustration of something.  It's within the thing itself.
Speaker 2: So this is why working with the paint and making it a three-dimensional object?
Speaker 1: It allows me, through compression, to do anything I wanna do.
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: I can tell a story with it.  I can build the narrative into it.  If I want, if I see abstraction is a matter of choice, well at least for me speaking, right.  But with my methods that I work with, if I wanted to I could do a portrait of you if that would please you with the processes that I use.  I'm not interested, but it is possible.
Speaker 2: But it's possible to do that?
Speaker 1: Yeah.  Well I've made the test more than once.  I have self-portraits that I've done with the tesserae that's a direct likeness of me.
Speaker 2: But that is not where (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Not something I'm interested in, no.
Speaker 2: --that's--right, that's not your interest.
Story_ID: 526943
Speaker 1: As an abstract artist, you just described that it's through materiality that you're finding--creating content.  You know as I look at some of the works, there's a lot of subtlety in the works of the '70s [1970s].  You know, there's a canvas that looks largely one color, then there's just a bit of color coming through.  What are you expressing as you are working with the developer and creating this new type of work?
Speaker 2: Depending on a particular period of the '70s [1970s], if we go back to the Greek alphabet series.  All of that was a limited pallet, just black and white.  I eliminated all spectrum color.  No red, no yellow, no blue, and I did that purposely.  The psychological factors that are a part of spectrum color, red, yellow, blue, greens, you know, it carries a lot of psychological meaning, and I wanted to avoid that.  I had worked ten years with heavy-duty psychological packed in emotionality.  I was tired of that shit (laughter).
Speaker 1: So you were looking at (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, I was tired of it, really.  And so I eliminated all spectrum color, I got rid of it.  I just reduced it down to black and white.  And I started making my blacks and whites, you know.  They wasn't so much store bought.  Like all the Greek alphabet paintings are made with graphite and silica that are dispersed in AC-32.
Speaker 1: So again it's the content within--
Speaker 2: Yeah, down inside of it.
Speaker 1: Inside of it.
Speaker 2: It's extremely translucent.  All those paintings are very translucent.  But to my surprise, I found that in working with black and white, it expanded my sense of spectrum color.
Speaker 1: How so?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.  The way I was using the black and white, the grays, it became extremely optical, and I found out that opticality can generate spectrum.
Speaker 1: Even without you actually putting it--
Speaker 2: Without my actually putting red, yellow, blue in there.  You would sense it in your brain.  You could see it.  Even now, if you stand before those paintings and allow yourself to go into them, you can sense the spectrum.  So my sense of color expanded with those gray paintings, which I didn't know.  That was a total surprise, I didn't--I had no idea.
Speaker 1: And did you discover that over time? As you were creating them (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Over time, yes.
Speaker 1: How many pieces are in the Greek alphabet?
Speaker 2: Oh it's more than--my daughter's [Mirsini Amidon] not here today, but we go through the database it's got to be over thirty some odd, sure.  I did a letter--I did a painting for each alphabet in the Greek alphabet.  Sometimes two, three paintings for each alphabet.  I was studying Greek at that time and the first thing in studying Greek, we were taught the alphabet.  And then it occurred to me that I had been looking for something to attach myself to without having to deal with titles and storytelling.  So I said, you know, the Greek alphabet, that's a pretty good convenient place to start.
Speaker 1: (Unclear).
Speaker 2: So I started with alpha and worked my all up through--through omega (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) To zeta.
Story_ID: 526944
Speaker 1: You were describing the discovery of color?
Speaker 2: Yes, yeah.  We're talking about those gray paintings, Greek alphabet paintings.  What I discovered and which--it was an extra bonus, I discovered that due to the opticality, those paintings are extremely optical, and I learned how to control the opticality, there're different degrees of opticality in those paintings.  There's one up now at the Metropolitan Museum [Metropolitan Museum of Art, New York, New York] earlier and just for an example, the optical content is about oh 50, 60 percent.  But you go to the Museum of Modern Art [New York, New York], they have one from like '78 [1978], the opticality ranges up to over 90 percent.  It moves.  That was an extra bonus.  Not only that I discovered that those grays, due to opticality, could generate spectrum, I also discovered that they generate sound.
Speaker 1: How so?
Speaker 2: Oh you can hear the shit.  Oh you hear it, seriously.  You can hear it.  You hear like a high humming, very celestial.  I think it's connected to the music of the spheres.  Ancient people claimed that the movement of the planets on their orbits generated sound, that's where the music of the spheres came from.  And immediately I saw that this was the connection that I had been looking for in terms of jazz.  So that was an extra bonus.
Speaker 1: In what year are you making them (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Something that I was not counting on.
Speaker 1: In what years were you making these paintings?
Speaker 2: Oh, '78 [1978], '77 [1977].
Speaker 1: Okay, end of the '70s [1970s].
Speaker 2: That--that period, '76 [1976].
Speaker 1: Prior to the Greek pieces, you were working with color?
Speaker 2: The Whitney Museum [Whitney Museum of American Art, New York, New York] show done with the developers--
Speaker 1: Which was in '74 [1974]?
Speaker 2: Yeah, we had much more color.  But more of a muted color, it wasn't bright, bright high value.  Muted grays (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now how did the Whitney show--
Story_ID: 526945
Speaker 1: Muted grays (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Now how did the Whitney [Whitney Museum of American Art, New York, New York] show come to be?
Speaker 1: The Whitney show--well first we have to go back to the beginning.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: There was a lot of complaining and protest, like artist coalition, and people who were arguing that the museums were not active enough in dealing with minorities and women.  That's how it really started.  Marcia Tucker was curator at the Whitney Museum.  Marcia Tucker convinced the museum board at the Whitney that they should use the ground floor gallery at the Whitney Museum to show artists that are not connected with commercial galleries.  That was her idea.  A lot of black artists qualified for that.  It wasn't just black artists, people like to think that was only black artists who did, but it wasn't.  It was set aside for people who were not connected with commercial galleries.  No representation (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So this gave you an opportunity to be seen?
Speaker 1: Right.  So a number of women showed there, and from the black community we had myself, Al Loving [Alvin D. Loving], Frank Bowling, Melvin Edwards, Omar Thomas.  We all had shows on the ground floor gallery.
Speaker 2: How many pieces did you show in that?
Speaker 1: Oh that's a big show, I must've had at least ten paintings or so, yeah, at least.
Speaker 2: And were you selling art from?
Speaker 1: Oh I was selling very little.  I did not have gallery representation at that time.  My early representation with Allan Stone had sort of petered out.  My work had changed so it wasn't like what Allan was interested in.  So that was a period for me I didn't show with galleries.
Story_ID: 526946
Speaker 1: So how were you making money?
Speaker 2: I was teaching at Cooper Union [The Cooper Union for the Advancement of Science and Art, New York, New York].  I was professor of art at Cooper Union in advanced painting for twenty-six years.  I taught at School of Visual Arts [New York, New York], I taught at Manhattan Community College [Borough of Manhattan Community College, New York, New York], I taught at Queens College [Queens College, City University of New York, Queens, New York], I taught at Pratt [Pratt Institute, Brooklyn, New York], all adjunct positions.  Sometimes I would have two at one point, I even had three adjunct positions at once.  Plus I was doing cabinetry, fine art cabinetry.
Speaker 1: Fine art cabinetry, what is that (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah.  Meaning I'm a trained cabinet maker.  I made my living through the '60s [1960s] and late '60s [1960s] cabinet making, but at a high level.  Not just banging some boards together.  I mean we did very fine cabinetry.
Speaker 1: Where did you learn this?
Speaker 2: I learned with a man who took me on in his shop.  His name was Jeffrey Waite, W-A-I-T-E.  It was Jeffrey Waite who taught me cabinet making.
Speaker 1: And you learned that here in New York [New York]?
Speaker 2: In New York.
Speaker 1: So we can also ask you with the, the teaching as an adjunct professor, that gives you flexibility to move around-
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --but it's also--it's not a full-time job (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Not a full-time job.
Speaker 1: So you have to piece those together in order to make a--
Speaker 2: No, you don't get nothing.  You're at their disposal whenever they want.  A lot of the institutions, especially in New York area are getting away with murder with adjunct teachers, you know.  They don't owe you shit, but at the same time, you don't owe them shit.  You do one class, two class.  Contracts last for one year.  No benefits, no pensions, nothing.  But I found for me personally, it was good for me 'cause the idea of the full-time position I never accepted nor did I ever seek it, because it was psychologically--I immediately saw that it was not good for my head.  I prefer risk.
Speaker 1: And also space to create, right?
Speaker 2: Well, time.  I mean I kept that job at Cooper, it was not out of town.  I would take my bike and go to class.  Shit, fifteen minutes I'd be back in the studio.  So there was some--a lot of advantages in the part-time teaching, a lot of advantages.
Speaker 1: And the cabinetry, when would you do that?
Speaker 2: I did everything pretty much at the same time for a while.  It was a hustle.  A big time hustle.  Piecing it together.  But I taught, you have to remember that I taught for forty, forty-two years.
Speaker 1: At all--at this assortment of--from different institutions.  But Cooper Union being the one that was most (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, Cooper was my main place throughout the early '70s [1970s].  Like I say, I was there for twenty-six years.  They even gave me a gold pin after twenty-six years.
Speaker 1: Why did you leave?
Speaker 2: It came to the point we had no health insurance, nothing and Jeanne Siegel--Jeanne Siegel called me, Jeanne Siegel is someone I had known since the '60s [1960s] and she was chairperson at School of Visual Arts.  And she called me one day and she says, "Jack [HistoryMaker Jack Whitten], I really would like to have you come over to SVA and do two or three classes."  And the first thing I said is, "Well do you have--we don't have any insurance whatsoever, health insurance, hospitalization."  She says, "Well I can make that happen."  So I said, you know, this is a good thing because as all of us know and that beat still goes on what's happening in America with health insurance is a disaster.  I hate to use that word, Donald Trump [President Donald John Trump] uses it.
Speaker 1: Well, you don't sound quite like him (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) But it's true.  It's--we are funding it--for a rich industrial country, we are nowhere where we should be in terms of health insurance.
Speaker 1: So you went to--you left?
Speaker 2: Well I did Cooper and SVA at the same time, overlapped.  I would do a class, two classes at Cooper and go over to SVA and do another two classes.
Speaker 1: Was your wife working at this time?
Speaker 2: My wife [Mary Whitten] was a paper restorer.  She was in business with another woman, Winnie Bendiner, and they had the Whitten Bendiner Conservation [sic. Bendiner and Whitten Corporation; Bendiner and Company, New York, New York].  They're well-known here in New York for paper restoration, specialists with paper.
Speaker 1: So this was their own business (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, it was their own business.
Speaker 1: So for both of you have insurance meant you had to just buy it if you didn't have it provided by--?
Speaker 2: Well yeah, the insurance came through me, my teaching at school, yeah.
Story_ID: 526947
Speaker 1: As we get to the end of the '70s [1970s], this is when you're doing your Greek alphabet, right?
Speaker 2: Yes, the Greek alphabet extended up to like late '78 [1978].
Speaker 1: And what are you doing just at the end of that decade?
Speaker 2: Or '79 [1979], oh I was still extending the sort of a rake thing.  There's a group of paintings from that period that are done with our tools.  I was making tools.  I was taking pieces of brass, eighth inch brass rods, sandwiching them between wood and Plexiglas and making them into cones and I was doing basket weaves, like interlocking basket weaves-
Speaker 1: With brass?
Speaker 2: --pattern.
Speaker 1: With brass?
Speaker 2: With the brass pin, that was the tool.  I made these tools from brass pins.
Speaker 1: Oh, I see.
Speaker 2: Still using acrylic paint, but laying it out in more of a rigid grid structure, one going this way, going one that way, it looked like herringbone pattern.  There's a series of those and that lead me into the 1980s.
Speaker 1: And as you enter--well before you enter the '80s [1980s], was your work in the '70s [1970s] affected by what's going on in the social environment?  Because you had certainly said in the '60s [1960s] it was?
Speaker 2: Certainly in the '60s [1960s] it was.
Speaker 1: What--how is your work reflective or not of what's going on around you?
Speaker 2: What was going on around me politically became more compressed.  Even those gray paintings, Greek alphabet, and all those gray paintings.  I mean gray comes as an addition of black and white.  Let's face it, that's where it comes from, right.  So there's a lot of compression going on in those paintings.  And they became much more abstract, not referencing nature or outside activity.
Story_ID: 526948
Speaker 1: The abstraction, I'm curious because the decade before you were very--you were more directly reacting to what was happening around you.  As you say, you think this work became more and more abstracted, more and more compressed.  What is that saying about your relationship to what's happening around you?
Speaker 2: You have to understand, the 1960s was what I call my autobiographical period.  It was [HistoryMaker] Jack Whitten trying to find out who Jack Whitten was.  I like to explain the 1960s by saying that I put myself on the couch, sort of self-analyzing myself.  And I picked myself apart sexually, I picked myself apart, you know, what do like, you like, you fucking men, you like fucking girls, you like fucking donkeys, what do you like?  You have to take care of that, sexually.  The political, I went and tore that apart in terms of my beliefs, the experiences I had down in Baton Rouge, Louisiana with the--with the civil right marches that we did in Baton Rouge, Louisiana.  Meaning I had to deal with all of that.  The hatred, and growing up in Alabama, all of that stuff.  All nature of things that I grew up with in Alabama.  I'm a true southerner.  And what I mean about that is I did--I was not just born in the South, I actually grew up in the South.  I mean I can go out, and I've caught possums with my bare hand, burned the fur off of them, cleaned them, cooked them with sweet potatoes.  A great dish in the South.  I've gone noodling for catfish where as we walk the muddy creeks, feel along the banks until we feel the catfish and you subdue them and you grab them by hand.  I've caught snapping turtles by hand.  I've plowed fields, I've picked cotton, I've hunted rabbits, squirrels.  I mean I actually grew up in the South, I'm a southerner.  I mean I have a lot of skills that I learned directly from growing up in the South.  And all of that stuff enforces who I am and what kind of a sensibility.  You know, in the South is a distinct sensibility.  I keep telling people, the South is distinct in terms of sensibility, different from the East Coast, West Coast, Midwest.  The black sensibility in the South is extremely distinct from anything else that I've encountered.  I had to deal with all of that in the 1960s.  That was ten years it took me to do that.  All--everything I learned from the 1960s, when I speak of compression, I learned to compress all that stuff into the materiality.  That's what I mean by--that's how you have to do it.  And even today when I have to give talks and advise young artists.  I say, everybody has to have or should have and ought to have an autobiographical period.  But for me, my advice is, the autobiographical and a search for identity is something that one goes through.  You shouldn't wallow in that shit.  You go through it, you find out what you want and then you make decisions and you move on, right.  I hate it when people talk about identity and autobiographical and they just sit and wallow in it, I don't see the point of it.  So I say it's something you do, you go through it, you get it and you find out how to use it.  It's valuable stuff and only way you can find out about it is to deconstruct the self.
Speaker 1: And then after you do that?
Speaker 2: After you do that, then you got all this valuable information that you can use.  It's like rich data.  You can't get it no other way.  You don't get it by reading it, you don't get it in about some shit your mama told you or your daddy told you or your priest or your preacher or whoever.  It's stuff you have to discover yourself.
Speaker 1: And when you discover it, that's when it goes into the work?
Speaker 2: It becomes raw material to be used.  But what makes me angry is when so many people that I call it they wear it on your cuff--
Speaker 1: Yes (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) they want you to know it.  Ah, enough already, get up off of it.  Shit or get off the pot I say.
Story_ID: 526949
Speaker 1: So in the '80s [1980s], how is it shown?
Speaker 2: The '80s [1980s]--
Speaker 1: How are you using the raw material?
Speaker 2: See, the '80s [1980s] was a big break.  The painting that's on the cover of the Studio Museum catalogue, 'Dead Reckoning' ['Dead Reckoning I,' Jack Whitten], that was 1980.  That painting was the first time after ten years that I could really stand up and do something (laughter).
Speaker 1: 'Dead Reckoning.'
Speaker 2: 'Dead Reckoning,' it's at the Studio Museum.  My brother Billy [Bill Whitten] bought that painting, paid me for it and donated it to the Studio Museum in Harlem [New York, New York].  That's how they got it.
Speaker 1: And tell me about the painting?
Speaker 2: The painting is 'Dead Reckoning.'  Dead reckoning is a term I had first heard when I was at Tuskegee [Tuskegee Institute; Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, Alabama], when I was with the [U.S.] Air Force ROTC [Reserve Officers' Training Corps], or--deals with navigation.  I remember the instructor explaining, using that term.  He says, "At a certain point," there--something happens--as he put it, "as some shit happens" (laughter), he says, "You have to make a decision, which is your best chance for survival?  Do you continue on your present course, go forward, or do you have a best chance of survival to turn around and go back?"  That was the first time I'd heard that term, dead reckoning.  And then later I heard it in terms of celestial navigation in terms of how to plot by the stars.  And it was my buddies in Crete [Greece], the fish captains who were good friends of mine in Crete that I learned that.  At night when we are out on the sea and blue water fishing, or if you don't--if it's your first time you don't know where you are, you can't see nothing (laughter).  But one--the great revelation for me though in blue water was that, whoa, I'm in the middle of a huge circle.  It's amazing, in blue water you turn around you realize you're in the middle of a big circle and the circle's center is always changing.  That's amazing.  That is truly amazing.  Now my buddies, the fish captains, Captain Yonni, in particular, Captain Yonni Baganakos [ph.] good, good buddy of mine.  He knew exactly where he was, but Captain Yonni, father was a fisherman, his grandfather was a fisherman.  The kid grew up on the boat since he was four, five years old, and he's still fishing today.
Speaker 1: See he had a sense of--he knew exactly where he was?
Speaker 2: He knew exactly where he was, always (laughter).  So that was--I found that to be a sense of comfort.
Speaker 1: Of recognizing?
Speaker 2: So dead reckoning is a rich term, right.  Another version is that you throw away all your navigational tools, get rid of all your tools, learn to plot, to navigate.  No tools, just go by your heart, go by your feeling.  It's a rich term, very complex, loaded.
Speaker 1: And this piece has a lot of circles in it, a lot of math in it?
Speaker 2: Yeah, those circles is gun sights, so that's like a targeting system, navigational gun sights, you know.  It was by that time, I had located the target.
Speaker 1: And it was?
Speaker 2: Oh I knew where--what I had to hit.  I had, I was going, I was pulled down into deeper into what I call the unit.  This is where my theory of molecular perception comes from.  I had narrowed it down to molecular perception, to go down deep into something.  To go to a place where the naked eye cannot see.  And for the painter, we can only do that through our mind.  We feel our way by hard intuition, go through the mind.  So at that point, we're talking about a combination of conceptual skills, intuitiveness, you know, the perceptual plus the conceptual I call it.
Story_ID: 526950
Speaker 1: Is there also the experiential?  You're going in Greece in the water, fishing with these guys, being in the space where you recognize you have the experience of dead reckoning again, just as looking at this piece, so there's that experiential part too?
Speaker 2: Of course, of course.
Speaker 1: And--well for people who are looking at abstract art who aren't artists, it's a hard, very difficult to imagine what's in your--what the artist's mind or experiences you're creating (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I realize that, that's why I used the word compression a lot.  You know, I say to people, "Take everything you have ever felt, everything you have ever smelled, every sound you have ever heard, every sensation you have ever had that you have felt through your fingertips.  Take all of that and compress it."  You would get an understanding of abstraction.  Another way I describe it to people when they find it difficult to understand.  I say, "Well, it's like an essence."  You know, I was in Germany giving a talk--where was I, Karlsruhe [Germany], and I say, "You know you people here in Germany got some good schnapps.  I had some other day, it's very nice."  You know what schnapps is, right?  I said, "You know, I was down in Italy two or three years back and they have a good schnapps, they call it grappa, right."  I said, "I was up north there in Switzerland and hanging out with some buddies of mine and they was drinking some shit they called aquavit."  Again, it's a distillation, right.  Down in Mexico in the '60s [1960s] when I had some travel down there, man I was drinking some rough stuff called mezcal, made from the agave plant, aloe.  I said, "Down in my village in Crete [Greece], we drink raki, which is made from--we distill it from--after we do the wine pressing, whatever is left we take it and make raki, clear, brilliant."  I said, "But where I'm from in Alabama, we call it white lightning (laughter).  We make it from corn."  Boy, people cracked up (laughter).  "We call it white lightning."  So it's essence.  Here is your distillation, here is your compression, all the (makes fireworks sound).  And when you--when you have these things and when you taste and it hits your tongue it goes all through your senses.  It's that kind of a thing.
Story_ID: 526951
Speaker 1: How did or does math figure into your creative process?
Speaker 2: Well science as a whole.
Speaker 1: Okay, science.
Speaker 2: My background is in the sciences.  When I got to school at Tuskegee Institute [Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, Alabama].  I entered Tuskegee in 1957, right out of high school [Paul William Dunbar High School, Bessemer, Alabama] through scholarships, work schol- Tuskegee offered a work scholarship plan.  And I was good in the sciences.  I was acing biology, chemistry, physics, that kind of a thing.  And this is how I got into school, I had good grades and Tuskegee accepted me.
Speaker 1: So that began your foundation (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It's always been an interest of mine.  Always been there.  But when I got to Tuskegee and had a chance to study at a higher level, the sciences, I mean that's still with me, but that--that's where it started, and Tuskegee you have to realize is the home of Dr. George Washington Carver, whom is someone I had known since I was a kid in grade school.
Speaker 1: Really?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, they would keep--see that's one thing about the black schools down south, those people had photographs of all of the black figures of importance on the wall.  Big photographs, reproductions.  So you knew who Dr. George Washington Carver was.  You knew who Laurence Dunbar [Paul Laurence Dunbar] was.  They kept them all there.  That--that was a good thing.  All these black monoliths I do, it starts back down at Carver Junior High School [George Washington Carver Junior High School, Bessemer, Alabama].  (Laughter) That was the black--original black monoliths, that's when I first saw them.
Speaker 1: Seeing those paintings?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  History, history, long history there.
Story_ID: 526952
Speaker 1: Your theory of molecular--what is it--perception (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Molecular perception.
Speaker 1: Tell me more about that.
Speaker 2: Yes, again out of science right.  See we as humans, we're sort of caught in the middle.  That's where we are.  But you got to realize we have a whole world that goes down into the microscopic dimensions and we have another whole world that goes over in the micro dimensions.  We're sort of in between.  Everything that governs our lives through science today you can't see it, it's invisible to our eye.  Without the aid of tools you can't see none of this stuff, you can't.  It's not available to us.  In abstraction I deal with things I can't see, I can't see it.  Molecular perception goes right down to the heart of the issue.  I believe in what I call the unit.  The unit is the basic component part of seeing.  Throughout the history of painting, I can show you evidence of the unit.  It's just that through abstraction in particular it manifested itself more so, more clearly than in figurative painting.  Now, I'm gonna get a lot of flak for saying that from a lot of figurative painters, but it's true.  It was abstraction that chased the unit.  What I have done is taken that unit and I've pushed it down into the molecular world.  I'm dealing with the manipulating shit that exits down at the nano scale, but I can't see it.  I know it's there.  This is why I say what we are doing in abstraction, I use the word we, hopefully there's somebody else out there.  We're doing something that's running parallel to what the scientists are doing, the particle physicists to be exact.  What's happening in quantum mechanics is happening in painting today.  That's where molecular perception takes us.
Speaker 1: And so do you continue to study science as you're--
Speaker 2: Well, I read a lot. I--a lot of my reading is along in terms of science and in terms of philosophy.  Read--science and philosophy is the main, my main reading material.  And luckily today, there's a lot of scientists out there that write and they write in such a way that they write it so the public can comprehend.  We're not scientists, we don't have access to their equations, we don't.  Me--a few people who have studied higher mathematics, I haven't, I don't have access to that.
Speaker 1: But it fascinates you (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I know it's there--I know it's there in art.  There's a direct equivalent to that in the arts.  But people who claim that they know that, and I think most of them are bullshitting.  It has become--that's one of the big problems with science today.  We the public, the majority of us, we don't have an idea of how to understand what's going on.  It's not possible.  Extremely esoteric material.  Unless you have been trained in higher mathematics, quantum mechanics, you can't read those equations.  Very few people can.  But all I'm saying to you, in all truthfulness, there's an equivalent to that in painting.  That's where my molecular perception comes in.
Story_ID: 526953
Speaker 1: You had a solo exhibition ['Ten Years, 1970-1980'] at the Studio Museum in Harlem [New York, New York] that was kind of looking back on ten years from '70 [1970] to '80 [1980] (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right. Yes.
Speaker 1: Now at this point, give me a sense of, in the early '80s [1980s], how important is the Studio Museum in the art world?
Speaker 2: The Studio Museum was the first time that black artists started having documentation.  They were making catalogues, they were collecting, they were devel- archival materials.  So the importance, right, is giving all of us a voice, and it's important that shit's written down, that it's documented.  Those catalogues, it's documented.  That's what it was, you'd have a show there.  So that show who--president then, [HistoryMaker] Mary Schmidt Campbell, invited me to that show.  And she invited an outside curator, Henry Geldzahler, who is a close friend of mine.  She invited him to curate the show.  And we thought that was an appropriate period to pick from, 1970--was just ten years, 1970 to 1980.
Speaker 1: How was the show received?
Speaker 2: I got some pretty good reviews from that show.  I got some damn good reviews.  So when you have a show, that means that it's out in the public, that means that there are people, the art critics and art historians got something to reference.
Speaker 1: The Studio Museum, to my recollection, then--Harlem [New York, New York] was in a precarious position in the early, mid, mid-'80s [1980s].  There was a lot of drugs, really, in Harlem--a lot of challenge in Harlem, but the Studio Museum stood out as continuing with its mission that it had started in '68 [1968] I think when they got started.  No matter what was happening in the neighborhood, the Studio Museum has continued to showcase artists?
Speaker 2: Well even today, we have to say it's a place of refuge.
Speaker 1: Uh-huh, exactly.
Speaker 2: Yeah, it's like a little--you go up on 125th Street [Martin Luther King, Jr. Boulevard] it's a sanctuary (laughter).
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Right.  And Mary Schmidt Campbell did a lot to grow the museum?
Speaker 2: Well of course.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.  And you were working at Cooper Union [The Cooper Union for the Advancement of Science and Art, New York, New York], was her husband [HistoryMaker George Campbell, Jr.] president at that time (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) At that time, yeah--no, no, no, this was before, no.  No, it's much years later when he became president.
Speaker 1: So-
Speaker 2: A student of mine though was working at the museum at that time.  His name was George Mingo.  And I keep saying that I've always thought that it was George Mingo who put the bug in Mary Schmidt Campbell's ear.  I've never asked her that (laughter).  But I've said to myself, damn it, I bet it was George kept telling her that--
Speaker 1: Didn't he go on to have an advertising agency?
Speaker 2: Hm?
Speaker 1: Didn't he go on to have an advertising agency?  Is that the same person (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) ) No, no, no, no.
Speaker 1: Different Mingo?
Speaker 2: No that's a different Mingo [Norman Mingo], I know who you're speaking of.  No we lost George.  George passed.  I think had had a condition, I think it was diabetes, but he was a good artist.  Studied with me at Cooper Union.
Speaker 1: So, it--what do the mid to late '80s [1980s] look like, what did your work look like at that time?
Speaker 2: The show we did at the Studio Museum with that painting 'Dead Reckoning' ['Dead Reckoning I,' Jack Whitten] that was ten years, from the '70s [1970s] to 1980.
Story_ID: 526954
Speaker 1: Then 1980, that's when I had the big fire disaster.  That knocked me out of business for three years, putting my life back together (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Your studio?
Speaker 1: Yeah.  The building that I lived in down on Lispenard Street [New York, New York], 36 Lispenard Street caught fire, that was 1980.  It took me three years to put that building back together.  So it wasn't--there was no painting between 1981 to '82 [1982].  I started a little bit at '83 [1983].  And then another ex-student of mine, his name was Frank Stewart, he's a photographer now, a well-known photographer.  Became involved with a gallery by the name of Onyx [Onyx Art Gallery, New York, New York] that was located in--what do you call the park down Irving Place--
Speaker 2: Gramercy [Gramercy Park, New York, New York]?
Speaker 1: Gramercy, yeah.  Beautiful townhouse, the Onyx Gallery.  And Stewart invited me to do the inaugural show at the Onyx Gallery.
Speaker 2: When was this?
Speaker 1: Oh that had to be--I have a catalogue, a beautiful catalogue to that show, or it's a beautiful printout really, it wasn't a catalog as such.  But it--you could say that, [HistoryMaker] David Driskell wrote the essay for it, oh '83 [1983], '84 [1984] maybe, I'll have to check to make the exact date.  So, I wasn't doing that much showing then.  Right, we did the thing at Onyx, then I did some group shows in between, but not that much.  I didn't have like a regular commercial gallery representation.
Speaker 2: And was all of your work destroyed in the fire?
Speaker 1: No.
Speaker 2: Oh, good.
Speaker 1: I had two studios at that time.  I was--at that time we were living on Lispenard and my wife [Mary Whitten] had her business there, the conservation business.  And I had another paint studio over on Broome Street.  Oh, not Broome Street, I had moved out of Broome Street, Crosby Street.  And living--everything in the living got destroyed, lost a lot.  Luckily I didn't lose too much in the way of artwork because we didn't have too much art stored there.  But we lost a lot.  I mean a whole--serious, whole top of the building burned off.
Speaker 2: Do you know why?
Speaker 1: There was an inspection from the fire department [New York City Fire Department] and they claimed it was old wires overheated, they think the fire started that way, electrical.
Story_ID: 526955
Speaker 1: The best thing that happened out of that fire though, I was in business with a fellow named Paul Binder.  Paul Binder, you would know him today, he was the founder of the Big Apple Circus, here in New York [New York].  He was my partner.  And Paul lived on the top floor.  The landlord had approached us to buy the building.  Paul and I found a, founded a partnership, put money together to buy the building.  And a week before going to contract, the building catches fire.  Paul was just starting his circus and he came to me, he said, "Jack [HistoryMaker Jack Whitten], this circus is my dream, this is what I wanted to do all my life."  He says, "I'm sorry to say I cannot get involved with this building any longer."  I had to make a decision, because what am I gonna do?  By that time, SoHo [New York, New York], Tribeca [New York, New York], the rents were soaring.
Speaker 2: Right, this is mid-'80s (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) You know, you have to remember my first rent at Tribeca was eighty-five dollars a month.  But by 1980, eighty-five dollars easy became two thousand dollars per month.  There's no way in hell I could pay rent like that.  Even the place on Broome Street, a hundred and forty dollars a month we were paying for the whole floor.  So we had to make a decision.  The landlord was on his deathbed in the hospital, came down ill with cancer.  I went to the sons and told his sons that I'm gonna buy Paul Binder out, and I would buy the building as is, they don't have to do nothing.  Of course with a reduction in the price.  So the old man agreed and on his deathbed he told his sons that he wanted Jack--whatever they could do to help, he wanted Jack to have the building.  The old man died, his name was Manny Sindell, a Jewish landlord in that area downtown, well-known landlord.  And his sons honored what their father said.  He wanted Jack to have the building.  Because at that time, property in Tribeca by 1980, there were vultures down there.  Anything came up, people were buying it right and left.  So I bought a burned out building.  Took me three years to put it back together.  But what that did was, it gave me a piece of real estate and all of my skills in the construction street and cabinetry making came to good use, right.
Speaker 2: You rebuilt it (simultaneous)
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I put it back together.  Borrowed money here, dollar here, dollar here, dollar here, sold paintings wherever I could, got money together, put that building back together.  But I had a prime piece of Tribeca real estate that I owned, a five-story building.  And for years I had the use of the whole five-story building.  It was a gorgeous place.  I mean a lot of people will tell you who knew that place knew it was really something special for New York.  Did all the work myself, all the cabinet making.  We had a big duplex apartment on the top floor, and fifth and fourth floor duplex.  Studio on the--that would be the second floor, and I had another studio on the first floor.  Plus I had a rental downstairs that paid most of the bills, taxes, insurance, utilities.  Nice setup.  And I stayed there for years, it went well, very well.  I got a lot of good paintings in that building.
Story_ID: 526956
Speaker 1: We're nearing the end of the '80s [1980s] now, how is your work changing as we end this decade?
Speaker 2: What's happening, I'm running into more severe geometry, like what was happening in 'Dead Reckoning' ['Dead Reckoning I,' Jack Whitten] and the show at Onyx [Onyx Art Gallery, New York, New York].  There was a clash between different geometries.  I call it a clash between the Euclidean geometry and the fractal geometry, that's the way I describe it.  You know, fractal geometry is a fract- is a geometry of nature, it deals with all the irregularities.  There's a geometry to all that stuff.  The Swedish fellow, Mr. Benoit Mandelbrot discovered fractals.  And when I read his book in the early '70s [1970s], I realized this was something I've been looking for.  We didn't know about fractal geometry.  It was he who developed those equations.  I read all of his stuff.
Speaker 1: And so you read it in the '70s [1970s], do you reread it now in the '80s [1980s], when (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Sure.  He's the man who wrote the major book on it.
Speaker 1: As you decide to do this--what did you call it, between Euclidean and fractal?
Speaker 2: Yeah, Euclidean, right.  Euclidean I knew about.  I mean Euclidean is basically plain old geometry.  I mean I learned that in high school.
Speaker 1: So you're contrasting the two?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Now I see--now I deal with structures purely in terms of geometry.  I've learned to (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So what do your tools become?
Speaker 2: But during the '80s [1980s] it was all psychological, you know, it was like schizophrenic, you know.  Like things clashing.  Heavy psychological shit.  But when I learned that it was geometry, which gave me another out, it just wasn't psychological stuff, it gave me more freedom and it took--eased my head a little bit.  Because I was acquainting it with political stuff.
Speaker 1: Beforehand?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  You know, clashing of the races and clashing politically, and violence, that kind of stuff.
Speaker 1: So in the '80s (1980s) when you--when you started looking at this (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I started looking closer and I saw that there were other options, I like options.  I don't like the notion of what I call either/or.  I don't like that, I prefer neither/nor.  And going in middle '80s [1980s], late '80s [1980s], I found out, hey this stuff, it's just geometry.  There's another option there, it's not just the clash of political wills and psychological shit.  But when I discovered that it was more about geometry and then more and more I read I found out that there's plenty different types of geometry, plenty.  It's not one or two, all kids of different geometries.
Speaker 1: So how does the work change as you're making these discoveries about geometry?
Speaker 2: I got much more freedom in dealing with organic stuff and manmade industrial stuff.  I started doing things which had all these fractal dimensions to them, right.  And doing things that had all the Euclidean dimensions to them.  So they started to sit side-by-side like in these great fantastical mixtures.  Things like 'Garden in Bessemer' [Jack Whitten] from the '80s [1980s] would be an example of that.  One of the paintings that's out in L.A. [Los Angeles, California] at Hauser Wirth [Hauser and Wirth] now, the 'Big Shocker Five' [ph.] painting, has that.  So I'm getting much more freedom and much more ease in working with all these different geometries.
Speaker 1: Are you still using the tools that you had developed that--
Speaker 2: I'm still using them, but I don't depend on no one tool anymore.  I have a bit (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What kind of tools are you using as you're exploring geometry?
Speaker 2: Oh, I use all kinds of tools that I've made.  I use a lot more in a way of scrapers and squares and levels.  The tool thing has expanded.  You see that box over there, that black plastic--that damn thing is filled with--most of my tools now comes from the cooking trade, bakery.  All kinds of things associated with cooking.
Speaker 1: There's a lot of math in cooking.
Speaker 2: So it's has expanded the tool thing, has expanded.  I believe the artist, you know, you should make your own tool, not--don't just depend upon the brush, that's why I don't even use the word to paint anymore, I use the word to make, I say I make a painting, I don't paint a painting.  I've changed the verb, I've changed the verb from to paint and I've changed it to make.
Speaker 1: So you're making these geometrical paintings with a greater level of awareness towards an--toward geometry (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Toward geometry.  Dealing with geometry.
Story_ID: 526957
Speaker 1: And as you cross over into the '90s [1990s], what's happening in your work?
Speaker 2: It--what happened in the '90s [1990s], after going--using a lot of molds and using a lot of reliefs, acrylic reliefs, acrylic mold making, the idea of paint as collage is becoming more visceral.  I paint, it's skin.  When I make the skin the slab, there's a layer of skin, I can pick it up in my hand.  It gives me more dimensions to work with as a painter.  That's when I discovered, starting in 1990, that I could cut the paint into tesserae.  Tesserae is the cubic.  So the concept of the unit had become this tesserae, a little cube of paint.  And the first ones in 1990 were very thin, paper thin, very thin layers of acrylic that I would laminate down to a prepared canvas surface, all acrylic.
Speaker 1: And what were you searching for?
Speaker 2: I'm searching for--I'm being affected a lot by modern technology and how data flows and operates, information, codes, coding.  The word we use, bits, which is a storage of information.  That's how I'm relating to the tesserae.  Or when I use the word compression, it's down in the tesserae (laughter).  I'm a scuba diver, I'm a certified scuba diver.  I'll never forget one of the first lessons I had and they introduce the tank to you.  And the instructor says, "This is--tank is compressed air and you have to learn how to use it (laughter)."  Huge body, you know enough to fill this room, but it's compressed into this little thing, you have to learn how to use it.  Learned a lot from diving.
Speaker 1: Well it's another place--
Speaker 2: Oh it's another place.
Speaker 1: --where you're in (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It's another space.
Speaker 1: Oh yeah.
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, I'm very comfortable underwater, I like being underwater.
Speaker 1: And some of your work looks like it lives underwater?
Speaker 2: Oh I wouldn't doubt that.  I mean after years of spearfishing, crawling into caves and shit underwater, yeah, has to have some effect on you.  The kind of light you see in space, it's different underwater then walking out here.  Sometimes I find walking out here on land quite boring, I'd rather be underwater.  (Pause) I miss it.
Story_ID: 526958
Speaker 1: When you're underwater, what are you seeing?  What are you experiencing?
Speaker 2: Oh, depends on where you are (laughter).  I've crawled into caves when I see things.  There are some little fish that live in caves that are fluorescent bright, bright blue fluorescent.  Some of them are bright red, bright orange.  But I'm crawling into caves 'cause I'm hunting something we call ophor [ph.], the Greeks call it.  I'm a hunter (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And you're hunting it?
Speaker 2: I'm hunting, yeah.  I go in with a light in one hand and a gun in the other.  I'm looking for the eye (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What are--what are you shooting?
Speaker 2: I'm shooting big fish.
Speaker 1: And what is the--is it a bullet--what's coming out of it?
Speaker 2: Oh, it's a spear gun.
Speaker 1: Spear?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I have spear guns.  Some of them are using compressed air, hydraulic.  Some are using rubber.  Some are using springs.  I have a bunch of spear guns, all different types, but they're powerful thing, they're just as powerful as any gun.
Speaker 1: And the ophor are big fish?
Speaker 2: Big fish, oh yeah.
Speaker 1: Like what size?
Speaker 2: Oh I've caught them up to twenty kilos [kilograms].  I've seen them bigger, but the biggest one I ever caught was about twenty kilos.  But they live deep in the caves.
Speaker 1: And do they ever charge you?
Speaker 2: As a rule no.  They're afraid of you, you're afraid of them.  You have to go in extremely quiet.  I've had them to turn back and come--they're not trying to bite you or eat you or anything, they're just trying to get out of the way.  And that can be a very frightening experience, especially when--in a cave and you have one of these big fuckers come and bump into you, that can scare the shit out of you.  Which can cause a lot of trouble because when you go into these caves, you have to be extremely careful 'cause you don't wanna stir the sediment.  If you are not careful and you disturb the sediment on the bottom of the sea, you can't see anything.  You've got to remember, you're in pitch black darkness, there is no light.  So if you stir the sediment, you're fucked.  'Cause you can't see, the light don't help you anymore.  So you have to be extremely careful, so if one these big mothers come back and hit you, and you do something stupid like making any erratic move or something and stir up the bottom of the ocean, you're in big shit.
Speaker 1: Has that ever happened to you?
Speaker 2: More than once.  I don't like to tell my wife [Mary Whitten] though, she gets all upset.
Speaker 1: How long do you have to wait for it to settle?
Speaker 2: Oh forget about it, if you do that, you have no choice, you have to get up and go back up.
Speaker 1: You just have to get out?
Speaker 2: Yeah, you have to go back up to the top.  You can't see, so you--usually what I'll do is I'll leave the gun down on the bottom and just go back up to the top.
Speaker 1: Why are you leaving the gun?
Speaker 2: Extra hassle having to take it back down, it's down there in place, I know the fucker's still in there.  You just have to wait 'til it settles.  And when it settles you go back down again and maybe you can get another shot.  You're always looking for the eye.  Big fish like that, you have to hit them in the head.  Only way you can get them out.  You hit them in the tail or the body, they're so powerful they'll tear the spear and you'll lose them.  So the rule of thumb, I don't pull the trigger until I see the eye.  You see the eye, pull the trigger.
Speaker 1: Your friends in Greece taught you how to?
Speaker 2: Yeah, the Greeks taught me how to fish.  I'd never done that.  I mean I've done things in Alabama like catching snapping turtles and spearing frogs and spearing catfish, but I'd never.
Speaker 1: So you had good aim, for starters?
Speaker 2: Well I've always been a good shot, even with rifles when I was hunting.  When I went hunting I used to hunt squirrels with a .22 rifle, single shot.  I've always had a good shot.  I mean I grew up shooting, I grew up with guns.
Story_ID: 526959
Speaker 1: Back in the water, I'm thinking about your art and the caves, and your discussion about what you can't see that you're searching to express in your work.  There seems to be a relationship between the depths of the cave and that search in what's (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That's probably, also in poetry a lot, you know, we--the term full fathom five, you know, it's what the Greeks call (Greek word), a meter is here.  Tip here to here, that's a meter, right past the tip, right.  Two of those give you one (Greek word), that's your fathom.
Speaker 1: How do you spell the word, (Greek word)?
Speaker 2: (Greek word), oh my god that's a tough spell.  When we set out our lines, we set them by (Greek word).  Twenty (Greek word), 50, 100, 150, depending on what you're fishing for.  You have to learn when you're fishing, first you have to know what are you going for, what's the target, and then you have to know what's the habitat, where do they live, what do they prefer.  Like this ophor [ph.] for example, I don't find that fish out in the open sandy bottom, you always find them in caves and big rocks, underwater caves.
Speaker 1: And how many people are fishing with you?
Speaker 2: Oh it's usually two, three of us.  My boat is not a big boat, so we just like--
Speaker 1: And do you stop at one fish or is everybody trying to catch one?
Speaker 2: Oh everybody's trying to catch a fish, that's what we're out there for.  Because, you know, we eat.  That's why we're there.
Speaker 1: But that size of a fish is a feast?
Speaker 2: Oh I've caught a fish where I've fed forty people off of one fish.  Making soup from the head, the bony part, taking the rest cutting it into steaks and make and bake what we call plaki.  I've fed forty people off one fish.  More than once.  You catch a big fish, it's a lot of fun.  Like you say, it's a feast.
Story_ID: 526960
Speaker 1: The '90s [1990s], you--it's more geometry, more math, what's going on in your world and what are you exploring?  The monoliths are coming now, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, the monoliths started back in the (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And what are they?
Speaker 2: --eighties [1980s].
Speaker 1: What are the monoliths?
Speaker 2: The monoliths, it's an ongoing thing that I've been doing.  In truth, the first monolith started in the '60s [1960s], my brother Tommy [Tommy Cross].  It's about a person in a black community.  They're always Black Monoliths.  It's about someone who has made amazing contributions, someone who's made a difference, someone--important people in society.  And I have Black Monoliths, oh I've done them for Ralph Ellison ['Black Monolith II (For Ralph Ellison),' Jack Whitten], Barbara Jordan ['Black Monolith III (For Barbara Jordan),' Jack Whitten], oh Jacob Lawrence ['Black Monolith IV (For Jacob Lawrence),' Jack Whitten], there's a bunch of them, I don't know how many there is.  I'm still doing them.  I could do Black Monoliths the rest of my life.
Speaker 1: And are they--do they include living people?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: It's after they passed?
Speaker 2: Yeah, it's a memorial.
Speaker 1: It's a memorial.
Speaker 2: Yeah, it's a memorial, it's a dedication, an act of reverence.  It's an act of thanking you for what you have done, what you've given me.  What I've learned from you.  It's this act of reverence.
Speaker 1: And because you--
Speaker 2: And by the way, the Black Monoliths, the idea came from--we have at my house in Greece, we have a--we have a natural monolith, which is a huge stone that comes up out of the earth, we call it--the Greeks call it (Greek word).  It's a huge massive monolith that comes out.  That's where the idea came from.
Speaker 1: Seeing that?
Speaker 2: Yeah and I took, and coming back to New York [New York], I said, "Well shit I can use that."  And--though even the shape comes out of it.  This thing is massive, massive rock that just comes up out of the earth.
Speaker 1: Can you see it from your house?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, see it from the back porch.  Every morning.
Speaker 1: So if you, it's as people who have affected you pass on that you are inspired to create these pieces? How many have you made so far (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right.  People who have contributed a lot to society.
Speaker 1: Yes, how many have you made now?
Speaker 2: Again, my daughter's [Mirsini Amidon] not here, I think it's about, I don't know, ten or twelve of them.  It's still ongoing.
Speaker 1: You mean, so, Ralph Ellison--
Speaker 2: Ralph Ellison (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) Barbara Jordan--
Speaker 2: Barbara Jordan.
Speaker 1: Thelonious Monk, Betty Carter ['Flying High for Betty Carter,' Jack Whitten]--
Speaker 2: Betty Carter, I mean all of those monoliths.
Speaker 1: And they are--you can see the mosaic in them?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.  Yeah they're tessellations.
Speaker 1: And so that--what does that mean--you're--these pieces that you (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Tessellation, is built from the tesserae.
Speaker 1: That represent the unit.
Speaker 2: Yeah, it's a pattern that's created from the use of the tesserae, the tesserae is the unit and they're all built from that.
Speaker 1: And they're built from these individual pieces of paint that you have created?
Speaker 2: Yes.  Right. It's a chip of acrylic paint, right.
Speaker 1: So the process for making the tesserae is what?
Speaker 2: Oh, I start off with pouring layers of paint onto a release of some sort.  The most simple form of release was just a sheet of polyethylene that releases acrylic.  And as it dries I build it up in layers and I get to the thickness that I want, always unique to the subject that I'm working with.  The tess- the slab of paint which is built in layers, the information is gone in the paint into those layers.  Layer after layer after layer.  And I get it up to the thickness I want.  You know, that can be anywhere from extremely thin, extremely thin meaning like early 1990s, they were like a sheet of paper up to some of those in the '90s [1990s], in the late '90s [1990s] it could be three eighths of an inch thick.  And even now today, some of them are even thicker.  So they have a very dimensional, physical presence about them.  I'm interested in multidimensional space, and this is my way of extending the dimensionality.  When the light hits that tesserae, it kicks it back out in multiple dimensions.  It doesn't come out in just one dimension.  It's multiple dimensions.
Story_ID: 526961
Speaker 1: The 2000s, which is, I see you're continuing to do the monoliths, but also--
Speaker 2: Yeah, like I say, the black monoliths are ongoing.
Speaker 1: Right, because it's the memorial, so--
Speaker 2: It's memorial and it's lon- in the black community shit we got so many important people to celebrate.  I could do them the rest of my life.
Speaker 1: There's a shift, tell me about the ones I'm looking at, one called 'The Black Butterfly: For Bobby Short' ['E Stamp II (The Black Butterfly: For Bobby Short),' Jack Whitten] (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh the Black Butterfly, that's what we call Bobby Short (laughter).
Speaker 1: Right.  And what is the difference--what is this on, you were describing?
Speaker 2: Again, that's the tesserae that's laminated to canvas, or it's using as a reference the electronic stamp.
Speaker 1: The electronic stamp being like the barcode you say?
Speaker 2: Yeah, the electronic stamp we use today is a printed thing, you know, it's not a stamp that you lick and put on.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: It's coming through the machine-
Speaker 1: That you scan.
Speaker 2: --you scan through it right.  So all of those paintings the e-stamps are built on, on e-stamp.  And it's the storage of data, data is built into it.
Speaker 1: Are these also part of the monolith series?
Speaker 2: I don't call them black monoliths, one could, but you know, they're still memorials (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) But they're celebrating--they're still memorials.
Speaker 2: They're celebrating people.  Like you'll look at Al Loving's [Alvin D. Loving] e-stamp, that's Harvey Quaytman's e-stamp.  These are people I know.  That's Michael Goldberg's.
Speaker 1: Now-
Speaker 2: Again, what I have found out that with this unit which is the tesserae, I can build anything in that that I want.  The choice is mine.
Story_ID: 526962
Speaker 1: And the process of making the tesserae, how long does it take, now, well, we're in the 2000s now (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah.  It--you have to build it up in layers.  And time wise, weather is always a factor.  Like now it's wintertime.  With the heat on, and if I turn the heat fan on, it can speed up the process a little bit (laughter).
Speaker 1: Oh heat speeds it up?
Speaker 2: Yeah, with air.  If you got humidity, though, shit takes weeks to dry.  But I need it to dry as fast as I possibly can.
Speaker 1: So like, heating helps because it's dry air?
Speaker 2: Dry air.  So when I'm building a slab to cut tesserae from, when I'm pouring I leave the heat and the fan on, and that helps speeds it up.  But even with that said, acrylic has to go through different stages of drying time.  I can't make the--I can't use the slab until not only does it dry, but acrylic has to cure.  It goes through a curing process.  So just to make the slab you could be talking about a month to two.  I make the slabs ahead of time.  Like the slabs I'm working with now, I started those slabs last spring, before going to Greece, and they had all that time to sit and cure.
Speaker 1: So in making the different layers, you have to commit to the colors for each layer, the thickness of each layer, and then not change--
Speaker 2: A lot of material you're using--going through a lot of material (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) and not change your idea?
Speaker 2: Well, the idea can change.  I can change the slab anytime I want.  I can--as long as I got the base, the structural component there, I can change any fucking degree I want.  If I want the color structure to change, I can change anytime I want.  I'm working now with a system, the process that I'm using, I call it construct, deconstruct, reconstruct.  That is the building of the slab, the breaking down of the slab into tesserae and then reconfiguring it through lamination to the canvas.  There's three processes.  And we do that because it's--I'm working with something that is so complex, it's a high degree of complexity.  So what we do with that degree of complexity, we use parallel thinking and parallel thinking we divide it up and delegate it.
Speaker 1: Well that wa-
Speaker 2: So it's a reconstructed process.
Speaker 1: So I was gonna ask you, in making these slabs of tesserae, are you doing it by yourself or do you have support?
Speaker 2: I tend to work by myself.  I can't instruct somebody to do that.
Speaker 1: No?
Speaker 2: No.  I can't tell anybody what color to pour.  Besides, there's a notion of the spirit.  The spirit comes through me.  I can't direct that through somebody else.
Speaker 1: I mean there are artists who work with other people building different parts of their work, but it doesn't work for you?
Speaker 2: Oh it doesn't work for me, I don't like that.  I mean I have two, three people that I depend on when I need help, I can call, but as a rule when I'm working, I don't like nobody in the studio.  Even my daughter [Mirsini Amidon] whose office is upstairs, she knows not to come down here (laughter) unless it's something really--something we have to take care of.
Speaker 1: You said from a young age you knew you needed quiet?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.  And especially now, I suffer from tinnitus.  It's a loud ringing in the ear, I've had it for over thirty some odd years.  And I have to be very careful of my surroundings.  That's one of the reasons I left Tribeca [New York, New York], it got to be too much down there for me.  I can only function, I can only control this condition I have through relaxation, quietness 'cause there's no cure for it.
Story_ID: 526963
Speaker 1: Let's talk about your leaving Tribeca [New York, New York], because you had this building that you were able to purchase and renovate and enjoy, five-story, beautiful building in Tribeca.  And the World Trade Center [New York, New York], you know, the planes fly into World Trade Center?
Speaker 2: Yeah, came right over my building.
Speaker 1: You were very close?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, I was in the street that morning.  I was in the street with the fireman on Lispenard [Street] and Church [Street].  The plane came right overhead.  The young Frenchman who was doing a documentary film for the fire department, his camera was pointing down into the manhole cover and when that sound came overhead, you could feel your flesh crawling.  I mean, seriously, rippling.  And we looked up, this plane was right on top of us.  The young Frenchman pulled his camera up and that's why we have that first video shot.  And when you hear somebody's voice on there saying, "Holy shit," that's me.  That damn thing came like a wobbling arrow, slammed right into it.  At first you didn't see any flame, any smoke, you just saw this big gaping hole and the sky was filled with a chandelier of glass, that's what you saw.  It was later you saw the smoke and the flames.  That's when the fire--I was talking to the fire captain and he said to me, "Oh, we just witnessed a horrible accident."  But my gut feeling told me that that was not an accident and I told him, I said, "That's no fucking accident."  He says, "What do you mean, you just saw what I saw?"  I says, "Yeah, there's no fucking accident."  He and his men jumped on their trucks and just didn't think twice, just made a beeline down Church Street, right.  They were there in the first place because somebody had reported a gas leak, that's why they were there.  And all those years of living in Tribeca, whenever the fire trucks were on the block, night or day, I always went down to see what was happening because, you know, that was our biggest threat downtown, was fire in those old buildings.  A lot of those old buildings (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And you'd already experienced a fire?
Speaker 2: Oh hell yeah.  A lot of those old buildings, you know, especially in the '60s [1960s], there were rag merchants.  These places were stuffed with rags and cardboard and stuff.  So if they ever caught fire and went up in flames, boy you had big problems.
Speaker 1: So that's why you were outside?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I heard the fire trucks.  I always go downstairs when I hear the fire trucks.  My tenant downstairs, we were arguing about whether it was an accident or not and I'm saying it's no fucking accident.  And as we were arguing, the second plane comes from the back and hit.  That's when I looked at him and poked him in the chest, I said, "You still think it's a fucking accident?"  And at that time people were screaming and hollering.  I mean people were crying, 'cause we didn't know what was going on.  We had no way of knowing what was going on.  But my gut feeling proved to be correct, it was no fucking accident.
Story_ID: 526964
Speaker 1: And what did you see?
Speaker 2: Whew.  (Pause)  I had to watch those people jump.  I often ask myself if that had been me, what would I have done.  I would've jumped, fuck it.  I would've jumped too.  But I had to come to grips, you know, close to--this is what I call the particularities of violence, not generalities, particularities and shit that I witnessed, that I saw.  Now close to three thousand people were murdered in my neighborhood.  I'm one of the few people, I saw the first bulldozers that came to dig the foundation.  I would go down with my bike.  I have photographs from that period, of that building coming up.
Speaker 1: When the World Trade Center [New York, New York] was built?
Speaker 2: But I saw it come up from the ground and I saw it go down.  One of the few people who can actually say that.  That actually saw it from the ground up until it came down.  It was obvious that they were gonna come down at some point, but I couldn't figure out how.  I'm thinking, my god, how far must we run if they're coming straight down this way (pulls hand towards himself), but they didn't do that.  They imploded, vertically, which I found amazing.  I thought maybe they would do this (gesture).  They did that (gesture).
Speaker 1: And just to give us some perspective, how far away was your building?
Speaker 2: Well, I'm on Lispenard [Street], we're up Church Street.  So we're a good what eight blocks, ten blocks.
Speaker 1: But for buildings that tall, if they had fallen over, they would have easily fallen (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Big time--shit--
Speaker 1: --into your block?
Speaker 2: --can you imagine the additional damage we would've had if those buildings had come down sideways?  Think about it, as opposed to what happened.  The damage we would've had would've been three, fourfold or more.
Speaker 1: So a lot of people who could see, as well as people who were watching on TV, you know, those who were nearby, were just--couldn't move, transfixed?
Speaker 2: Well, yeah.  I'm telling you, people were crying in the street.  People were screaming, crying.  That was one of the most horrible days that I've ever witnessed, truly.
Story_ID: 526965
Speaker 1: It affected you in a number of big ways, how?
Speaker 2: I had already planned to sell the building and move out of Tribeca [New York, New York].  People often ask me, "Did you move because of 9/11 [September 11, 2001]?"  No I didn't.  I had decided to move already.  And in truth, I had already bought another place, a co-op out in Jackson Heights [Queens, New York].  And I was in the process of looking for another studio.  But I did make a vow that the first painting that I would do in my new studio would be a memorial to 9/11 ['9-11-01,' Jack Whitten], which I did.  I built it on that vault wall right there.  That was the first painting I did in the new studio.
Speaker 1: And compared to much of your other work, this is more literal, perhaps?
Speaker 2: Well, yeah.  I deliberately--I wanted that painting to be read by the common person in the street.  I wanted the subject matter to be more upfront.  I wanted it to be more roaring visceral.  And I deliberately put that big triangle in there.  I was down at my bar getting drunk after that and I went to pay my bar bill and I noticed the dollar with that pyramidal shape and I said, "Well shit, that's where I start."  Because well you know, you're talking blood and guts, money, petroleum, that's what you're talking, politics (laughter), which brought that to a head.  So, that painting is built on some basic stuff.  But the pyramidal shape acted as an anchor.  That's--working at that skill you have to have something to anchor it to.
Speaker 1: So geometry is still very present?
Speaker 2: Geometry is present.  Geometry is very present (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) But the--it--either this is a piece that even if you don't understand or appreciate abstract art, you get it?
Speaker 2: Oh I've had people that stand before that painting and cry.  I showed it down in Atlanta [Georgia], people were really.  I tested that painting though before it left the studio.  I first shown it, showed it at Museum of Modern Art PS1 [Queens, New York].  And before it left the studio, anybody who came, my plumber, my electrician, the locksmith, the UPS [United Parcel Service] guy, the mailperson, I pulled them into the studio and made them stand in front and just tell me, what do you feel?  I hate that I did not have a videotape of their responses.  But their responses to that painting convinced me that it was successful, it did what I wanted it to do.
Speaker 1: What kind of work were you making after that?
Speaker 2: Well we're leaving 9/11, and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Actually, how many years after 9/11 did you make this piece, it wasn't immediate?
Speaker 2: Well it took me, it took me to close up the sale of the building, to locate another building.  I bought this building out here, which is an old firehouse by the way, it took me a good--more than a year before I could get my act together 'cause I had to do a major renovation.  I gutted this building out and rebuilt the whole thing before I could start working on that.  So a whole year going into two years had passed.  And it took me another close to two years putting it together.
Speaker 1: I'm sure you were working on other things at the same time (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, not really.
Speaker 1: No, this was the single, single focus?
Speaker 2: I was consumed, yeah.  Plus I had the added heavy emotional thing, my younger brother [Bill Whitten] was on his deathbed in L.A. [Los Angeles, California], so I'm having to stop and go out to L.A.  Things were getting worse and worse out there.  Flew out there, back and forth.  So in between dealing with that, I'm having to deal with my brother being on his deathbed.  So it was a very intense emotional period for me.
Speaker 1: So there's a lot of prolonged grief?
Speaker 2: Long grief, a lot of emotional stuff in that.  Speaking of compression, it's all in there baby (laughter).  It's all in there.
Speaker 1: But it's not so compressed?
Speaker 2: It's in there.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  Was that unusual for you to work on one piece for so long, singularly (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I tend to work on piece at a time.  I find it difficult to work on several pieces.  I always tell people I'm not a cookie cutter painter.  I don't do ten paintings and they're all the same and they all just change the color a little bit.  I don't do that.  Each painting comes out a specific experience with a specific notion of subject narrative built into it.  So they're not cookie cutter painters.
Story_ID: 526966
Speaker 1: When you finish that piece, what are you working on next?
Speaker 2: That piece?  Oh when I finish that we're talking '9-11' ['9-11-01,' Jack Whitten], what came--that's a good thing, what came immediately after that.  Probably one of the black--
Speaker 1: Well I see that you have a retrospective at MoMA PS1 [Museum of Modern Art PS1, Queens, New York]?
Speaker 2: Well it was first shown at MoMA [Museum of Modern Art, New York, New York], that painting, right.  Mrs. Gund, Agnes Gund.  I had told her that I was leaving Tribeca [New York, New York] and I had bought this building out in Queens [New York].  I was doing the renovation, in truth she came down to see the building and the renovation I was doing.  And I told her that the first painting I was gonna do, I was gonna fulfill my vow to do the 9/11 [September 11, 2001] painting.  I said, "Well, when I finish it I'll call you down to have a look at it."  And when I finished it I did, I called her down.  She came down to look at it.  She said, "Jack [HistoryMaker Jack Whitten], we have to show this."  She says, "It's a very important historical painting."  I said, "Well I would like that."  She called Alanna Heiss and Alanna Heiss sent her curator, Phong Bui.  And Phong Bui curated the show.  And they moved quickly.  We had to get that whole thing together.  And Phong Bui saw the connection to that painting and to the early political things I were doing in the 1960s, so he expanded the show.  It became a big show at MoMA.  Included 'New York Battle Ground' ['NY Battle Ground,' Jack Whitten], 'Look Mom, Look, See the Funny People' [Jack Whitten], big paintings that I had done, done with a lot of violence, Civil Rights Movement, Vietnam War.  He saw the connection to that, rightly so.  So he expanded that show.  But boy Alanna Heiss moved fast.  My gosh, she said, "No Jack, we're doing this right now (laughter)."  I had to stop.  I'm on my way to Greece and in like two months I had to get all that shit together before leaving.  She did it boy.  Got it up on the walls.
Speaker 1: 'Cause usually a show is planned and how long does it take?
Speaker 2: Oh a year--two years, it's nothing, a museum show.  But as Alanna Heiss told me at that time.  She said, no, no, no, that's what makes us different.
Speaker 1: What amount--what was the time?
Speaker 2: Timeframe?
Speaker 1: What was the timeframe?
Speaker 2: Oh by the time they had agreed to do that show, I had three months to get it all together.
Speaker 1: Compressed (laughter).
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.  Now that was the time I had to get assistance here because a lot of the paintings that they were interested in from the '60s [1960s] had to be re-stretched, some were not stretched.  A lot of them, had to strip some of them.  It was a big deal.  I busted my ass getting that together.  But I got it all together, delivered and took off for Greece.
Story_ID: 526967
Speaker 1: And then that same year, you joined the artist roster of Alexander Gray Associates?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.  I stayed--I was with them for about a good--what five years maybe.
Speaker 1: So tell me about them, what makes them unique?
Speaker 2: Alex, Alexander Gray, had a damn good program.  His interests were artists who he felt that had not gotten the recognition that they deserved.  He believed in plurality, pluralism.  Women, people of color or gender issues, that was Alex's interest.  He built his gallery around those interests.
Speaker 1: And him representing you, what did that do for your--the sale of your work?
Speaker 2: This was the first time in a number of years that I had commercial gallery representation.  And immediately Alex started moving things and placing things and participating in the art fairs, and doing--mounting one-man shows here in New York [New York].  And it developed a much larger interest in my work.
Speaker 1: And you had mentioned earlier the show 'High Times, Hard Times' ['High Times, Hard Times: New York Painting 1967-1975']?
Speaker 2: 'High Times, Hard Times' was a show curated by Katie Siegel and David Reed for the ICI [Independent Curators International].
Speaker 1: And was that--that was right before Alexander Gray?
Speaker 2: Yes, that was before (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And you said that show was really important?
Speaker 2: That show was fantastic, and as I've told them and I've said in public on panels that we'd been invited to speak, this was the first time that someone curated a show of that magnitude and historical importance and included black artists.  They included myself, [HistoryMaker] Howardena Pindell, Al Loving [Alvin D. Loving], Joe Overstreet.  And I told them, I told them more once, I said in public, before a show of that importance would not have reached out to black artists, so my hat goes off to David Reed and Katie Siegel.
Speaker 1: So this brings, again, greater awareness (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Big attention, yeah that show traveled to different--
Speaker 1: --New York show when it traveled.
Speaker 2: --museums, yeah it traveled to museums both here and in Europe.  It went to Mexico at the Tamayo Museum [Museo Rufino Tamayo, Mexico City, Mexico], several museums here in the states, in Germany.  I went to Germany to Karlsruhe where I was on a panel.  It was a significant show.  I mean that show has proven to be a historical show.  There's a beautiful book on it, 'High Times, Hard Times.'
Speaker 1: And so between MoMA [Museum of Modern Art, New York, New York], that show and then signing up with Alexander Gray, you were now selling more work than--
Speaker 2: Selling much more, much more.
Speaker 1: And are the prices going up?
Speaker 2: Price is going up, yeah.  And being placed, not just selling, being placed.  It's significant to say to that.
Speaker 1: Tell me what that means?
Speaker 2: The mistake--well, the mistake a lot of dealers and artists make is they sell work.  The emphasis should be on placing work.  There's a difference in placing work and selling work.  Mistake that most of these people make, they just wanna sell it and make the money.  Emphasis should be on placing.  Who is buying it?  Who is you leading that work to?  What institutions are buying it, who are you leaving it to, the placing of it as opposed to the selling of it.  It's a mistake just to sell stuff.
Speaker 1: And is Gray being very strategic about (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) He's very creative and very strategic.
Speaker 1: And so, how--like by what percentages are your prices going up at this point?
Speaker 2: Oh decent, yeah.  We're making moves as much as 20, 30 percent, 40 percent in some cases.
Speaker 1: And now--
Speaker 2: With a premium placed upon things from the '70s [1970s].  And today we continue that.  We place the earlier works, certain periods, especially the '70s [1970s], we tend to place those higher.  Because there's not that many of them left anymore.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: They're already in collections.
Story_ID: 526968
Speaker 1: So as we get into the mid to late 2000s, you know we have Obama [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama].
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Which has changed the cultural landscape of the world (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh yeah.  I mean, considering my background, coming out of the South, I was born in 1939.  Never, never would I have believed that to happen.  No way, no way (laughter), never.  So that made a big difference.
Speaker 1: What impact did it have on your work?
Speaker 2: As far as my work is concerned, I think for me personally it forced me to be even more conceptually aware of positioning the work and the politics in what I do.  I'm becoming more and more aware whether I tell a story or not.  Just the fact that I'm doing it is political.  Which is something no one has ever written about or spoken of, right.  I'm doing something in abstraction, which I call it the--I believe that painting evolves.  I believe painting is--evolves organically.  Whenever you use the word evolution, there are two large segments of evolution.  One is organic, one is synthetic.  What I mean by that, one comes out of nature, what happens in nature.  But one is more synthetic.  It comes out of shit that we do.  We've already altered the planet.  That has contributed to evolution.  So it's too big avenues for evolution to take place.  When I started understanding that what I was doing as an abstract painting that abstraction was evolving, I have been placed in a position that I'm a part of that evolution.  And as it evolves, I'm having to direct the evolution.  So whether I like it or not, what I do is extremely political, just by the pure fact that I'm doing it.
Speaker 1: Which takes you back to the '60s [1960s]?
Speaker 2: Takes me back to the '60s [1960s].
Speaker 1: (Cough) Pardon me.
Speaker 2: Takes me back to the '60s [1960s] but in a different way.  It's the act of doing what I'm doing in abstraction makes it political.
Story_ID: 526969
Speaker 1: We're talking about Obama [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama] and the incredulity of him becoming president based upon your upbringing and all that you know, in terms of possibility and just what it meant for him to be president, how did, how did that affect your work?
Speaker 2: I immediately knew that just mentally that options would be expanded.  I have a theory of what I call the expansion of freedom.  Or I've given talks on jazz, and I claim that jazz, the philosophy of jazz is the expansion of freedom.  The theory goes further to say, when freedom expands, consciousness expands.  When Obama was elected I saw it as an expansion of consciousness.  Now when consciousness expands, it puts you in more control, it puts you into--you get more information to work with, you have more options to work with.  So to have someone in that position who's black I think automatically, okay I realize a lot of people are complaining that he didn't do enough, he didn't do enough for black folks and so forth.  But we can all, all of us within a sense know where the limitations are there.  Just by his being there in that position I think caused an expansion of consciousness that I believe, and that's what it did for me.
Speaker 1: How did your work change?
Speaker 2: The work--I, it became more, I like to use the word profound (laughter).  What I've been working with for the last fifty years became to be more definitively pronounced.  It's like now, you know how I think of it now?  You know the periodic table of the elements, and speaking of painting as being involved--evolving, I think now it has evolved into a totally new element, you know elements are discovered, right.  So abstract painting, now I can put it on the periodic table.  It's an element.  I've discovered a new element.
Speaker 1: And you continue to work with the tesserae, right?  How has your creation of this unit changed, has your--how has it evolved now?
Speaker 2: I'm, I'm working two ways now.  The scientific community now know that energy, it can, it can act as a wave or it can act as a point.  When that is translatable into what I do in terms of light and painting, I can work out of a point or I can work as a wave.  I keep repeating what John Coltrane had told me back in 1965, when he waved his hand in the air and he says, "Man it's a wave, it acts like a wave, it's a wave, right."  And that's what had produced all those late '60s [1960s] paintings in the second show I did at Allan Stone [Allan Stone Gallery; Allan Stone Projects, New York, New York], which I call 'Light Sheet' [Jack Whitten].  So now knowing that it can operate as a wave or a point, or it can operate together.  The last two recent paintings that were shown at the Walker [Walker Art Center, Minneapolis, Minnesota] show was called 'Point/Wave'--'Point/Wave/Point' ['The Birth of Jazz (Point/Wave/Point),' Jack Whitten].  So now I can work it both ways.  The tesserae, not only can I work it as a little unit like that, but I can work it like that (makes a downward angled motion with arm).  That gives me a lot more options, lot more.
Speaker 1: Is that part of the freedom that you have experienced--have experienced (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh yeah, everything has expanded, it continues to expand.  Again, when freedom expands, consciousness expands.
Story_ID: 526970
Speaker 1: There's also been a lot of interest in looking at your work retrospectively in recent years?  In 2013, you had a solo exhibition, 'Light Years' ['Light Years: Jack Whitten, 1971-1973'], se- well it was a couple years, '71 [1971] to '73 [1973] at Brandeis [Brandeis University, Waltham, Massachusetts].  What is that, the 'Light Years'?
Speaker 2: That--Katie Siegel curated that show.  And we've talked a lot and she knows the emphasis that I place on light.  And she was smart enough to connect my speaking about light and she's smart enough to know how it has broken down in decades, ten years, twenty years, thirty years, forty years, fifty years.  It continues to evolve, that's what I face (unclear).  But, that's a good example of a smart curator for you.  Someone who can connect the dots.  Now the emphasis on what I've been doing for the past fifty years are becoming placed more on a proper perspective, that's a good thing.  Because now without a doubt, we can show that here you have somebody who has been doing research consistently for fifty years.  The importance of that is being placed now.  In comparison to other people who have been working in the field of abstraction.  Now I can truly say that I have successfully and continue to be successfully, in structuring the evolutionary aspects of modern abstraction.  Today I speak of what I call third-phase modernism.  I don't use the term modernism anymore as such.  I say modernism has existed in two major stages, first stage, second stage.  First stage primarily European, second stage American, but I feel now after postmodernist rhetoric has passed, it's over, forget about it.  It was just an intermission, we're into third-phase modernism.  The evolutionary aspect of modern abstract painting continues to grow and change.  And I've become a part of it, beyond a doubt.  We have the works to show for it.
Speaker 1: In 2014, there's a huge retrospective created along with a book, 'Jack Whitten: Five Decades of Painting' [Jack Whitten] and it travels.  Was it that it traveled in '14 [2014], or when did it start?
Speaker 2: It started then at the San Diego Museum of Contemporary Art [Museum of Contemporary Art San Diego], curated by Kathryn Kanjo in San Diego [California].
Speaker 1: How many works of art are included in this?
Speaker 2: Oh my, I think around about sixty-five, oh, it could've been twice that size.
Speaker 1: But to create a traveling show, sixty-five pieces is a lot?
Speaker 2: Yeah, it's a lot.  It left the San Diego Museum and went to the Wexner Center [Wexner Center for the Arts, Columbus, Ohio] in Ohio, and from there it went to the Walker [Walker Art Center, Minneapolis, Minnesota].  But the Walker, they enlarged it.  They showed works on paper and they also included 9-11 ['9-11-01,' Jack Whitten].  So it was a much larger show at the Walker.
Speaker 1: And all of it in '14 [2014]?
Speaker 2: No, no.  That show was traveling.  It started there and it was on the road for like more than a year, close to two years on the road.
Speaker 1: That--the same year you participated in a group exhibition, 'Beyond the Spectrum, Abstraction in African American Art, 1950-1975' at the Michael Rosenfeld Gallery here in New York [New York]?
Speaker 2: That's correct.
Speaker 1: Uh-huh, and that's a prominent gallery as well?
Speaker 2: Yeah, Rosenfeld, sure.  Michael, yeah I know him well.  Both he and his wife Haley [Haley Rosenfeld].
Speaker 1: Sure.  Now there, you're in a group exhibition, who else was in that exhibition with you, do you remember?
Speaker 2: Bill Williams [HistoryMaker William T. Williams] had a painting in that show.  I think they had a Norman Lewis, I believe.  It wasn't a big show, but I think it was an important show.  It was sort of like a selection.  They had works there of mine from the '60s [1960s].  Things that had come through Allan Stone Gallery [Allan Stone Projects, New York, New York].  And true--'Zen Master' [Jack Whitten] was shown.  It was a good show.
Speaker 1: So this is, now you're being honored all over.  You receive an honorary doctorate from the San Francisco Art Institute [San Francisco, California] in '14 [2014], '14 [2014] is a big year for you, that's the year you turn seventy-five and everything's happening?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Yeah, that was my first honorary doctorate degree.  Not only did I receive the honorary doctorate degree, I had to give the commencement speech, yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Commencement.
Story_ID: 526971
Speaker 1: In '15 [2015], you're part of a group exhibition in Belgium?
Speaker 2: That would be through my gallery, Zeno X [Zeno X Gallery, Antwerp, Belgium], I'm represented by Zeno X in Antwerp, Belgium.
Speaker 1: And have you been represented in Europe for many years at this point?
Speaker 2: Oh, before Zeno X, I showed with Kienzle Gmeiner [Galerie Kienzle and Gmeiner] in Berlin [Germany], I did a one-man show in Berlin.
Speaker 1: And how was your work received in Europe?
Speaker 2: Oh, the Germans loved my work.  And I loved being there, and I loved talking with the Germans on abstraction, because the Germans, they're into abstraction.  They understand the history of it and they understand, the Germans more so than anybody I've met, understands how my paintings are rooted philosophically in the history.  And they also understand that a lot of my thinking due to my reading--and I love German philosophy, I mean the main people that I read in German philosophy are Edmund Husserl, Heidegger [Martin Heidegger], Hegel [Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel], Nietzsche [Friedrich Nietzsche], and Ernst Cassirer.  So I have a background in German philosophy.
Speaker 1: So you can speak fluently with them?
Speaker 2: They understand my language.  And the Germans, you know, they have a way, they engage you.  But they also wanna know where you came from.  They want you to speak about your experience of growing up in the South. What was it like? They wanna know that.  I don't hold my tongue.  When I'm asked to speak I speak, I speak out.  I tell them exactly how it was.  And I don't have to exaggerate.  I've witnessed a lot of horrible shit growing up in the South.  But one thing I can say about the Germans, is that they--those people like intellectual rigor, it's like a young German told me once at the beginning of a talk, he says--I'd never met the guy, evidently I found out later he was pretty well known.  He says, "Sir, I want you to know we keep our swords very sharp here."  I said, "Bring it on baby (laughter)."  I like that kind of a thing.  I like people who know the history of painting and know the philosophical underpinnings of it and are able to talk about it.  I enjoy that.  One of the things that bore me is when people do not know the history of that, you know.  But there's a history to what we're doing.  It's rooted and it's not just from America, it started way back.  It's now when I speak about painting and abstract painting, I say, "Look I'm dealing with western abstract painting, the evolution of western abstract painting."  I make it specific.  I'm not a generalist, I don't like everything.  A lot of shit out there I just don't like period.  And I have to say to people, you know, when they're asking me, now look I deserve the right to say what I like and what I don't like, lot of shit I don't like.  It's very little out there that I like, very little.  I'm not a generalist.  I don't see the point in having to like everything.
Story_ID: 526972
Speaker 1: When you say that it just brings me back to your family, how did your family react to your work?  Did they understand abstract painting?
Speaker 2: No, but I'll tell you a really beautiful story.  When the Metropolitan Museum [Metropolitan Museum of Art, New York, New York] bought my painting, Henry Geldzahler included it in a show of American Modernism at the Metropolitan Museum.  My mom [Annie Cunningham Whitten] just happened to be in New York [New York], first time she was visiting New York.
Speaker 1: First time?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Wait a minute, is that true.  No, second time, because the first time she came when my brother Tommy [Tommy Cross] was on his deathbed.  I had my whole family here sleeping on my studio floor, mattresses all over the floor.  Big loft over on Broome Street.  I had the whole family here.  My brother passed, he survived twenty-eight days in intensive care.  He was in--his apartment caught fire.  It was a horrible scene.  That was the second time she came back to New York.  And of course I took her to the Metropolitan and she was in pretty good health then, she was walking good and so forth.  And we walked up those big steps, oh boy she was so impressed.  You walk into the Metropolitan, there's wide steps.  It's like wow, palatial, you know, and especially if you haven't been in a place like that for the first time, it's built this design purposely-
Speaker 1: It's grand.
Speaker 2: Grand, palatial, you know.  And she walked up those steps and I took her into the gallery, the gallery was right off to the side there and she walked into the gallery and I walked in front of my painting and she said to me, "I don't know what I'm looking at, but I know it has something to do with the atomic world."  Boy I gave her a big kiss (laughter).  Good example, not educated in terms of the history of art, knows nothing about abstract painting, but the hard intuitive force in her is at work.  I do not know what it is, but I know it has something to do with the atomic world.  She's right on the money.  Right on the money.  It's that kind of a thing.  So what else could I ask for?
Speaker 1: Nothing.
Speaker 2: You know, I took her to the Museum of Modern Art [New York, New York], right, oh god, she loved it.  She walked up to an Ellsworth Kelly painting, one of those color paintings in an exact grid.  You know what my mom said.  She saw those beautiful Ellsworth Ke- Kelly colors and she says, "Oh my god, that would make a beautiful quilt."  (Laughter) But my mom was a seamstress, you know, she worked with her hands, she was a maker.  She understood material, that she could do.
Story_ID: 526973
Speaker 1: In 2016, you changed your gallery?
Speaker 2: Yes, I left Alexander Gray [Alexander Gray Associates].
Speaker 1: And went to Hauser and Wirth?
Speaker 2: Went to Hauser and Wirth.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well, why did you make that decision?
Speaker 2: I had arrived at a point with Alexander Gray--and he did a lot for me.  We did a lot for each other, as I put it.  We did a lot of interesting stuff, very successful, made a lot of money, but it came to a point that I wanted another level, and I didn't feel that Alexander Gray were the people who could promote me to the level that I wanted.  That was the only reason.  And when Hauser and Wirth came along, I immediately realized that they had the type of capital, the type of resource, that would propel me to the next level.  It was a business decision.
Speaker 1: And so you're planning with them now for exhibitions in the coming months?
Speaker 2: We'll do our first New York [New York] show.  We did a presentation at the 18th Street gallery, just a presentation, you know, like three, four paintings in a room.  We did that here and we have another presentation up in L.A. [Los Angeles, California] now at the new gallery, Schimmel Hauser, that just opened last night.  But the big show would be May.  I'll use the 96--69th Street gallery.  It'll be there--the building there is three floors and I'll use all three--they're giving me the whole building, three floors.
Speaker 1: Great.
Speaker 2: Working on that now.
Story_ID: 526974
Speaker 1: Tell me about meeting President Obama [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama].
Speaker 2: Over the top, over the top.  I cannot imagine having such a more, phew, fulfilling experience in my life.  He--I sense something in that man.  How can I put it?  Noble, there's a nobility about him.  At the same time, a beautiful coolness, looseness.  Someone unique, you know, I had a similar thing when I met Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] back in 1957 down in Montgomery [Alabama].  I immediately knew that I'm facing somebody that there's a presence, a power in that person, it was that kind of a thing.
Speaker 1: And what were the circumstances of meeting Obama?
Speaker 2: Oh I got the National Medal of Arts.
Speaker 1: And this was just in 2016?
Speaker 2: Oh just recent, a few weeks ago we were in Washington, D.C.  First time I'd been in the White House [Washington, D.C.].  It was a beautiful experience.  A beautiful experience.  He's a special person.
Story_ID: 526975
Speaker 1: So this time in your life and career is extremely busy.  It's a time when many people retire and you seem to be revving up?
Speaker 2: Well, I'm seven- I'll be seventy-seven in December.  You know what my dealer at Hauser and Wirth tells me?
Speaker 1: What's that?
Speaker 2: He says, "Buckle your seatbelt, kid (laughter)."  And that's what Mark [ph.] tells me, buckle your seatbelt.  Yeah, but I'm not a youngster anymore, you know, I'm seventy-six, you have to pace yourself.  I mean I've accepted the fact being an artist there is no such thing as retirement, all artists, we all work 'til we fall dead.  We don't retire, there is no such thing.  So whatever comes my way now, I'm ready.  I've gone through years of preparation and years of experience.  So whatever comes my way, I'm ready for it.  I feel confident in that.
Speaker 1: Too often artists' work is only recognized after they're gone, you're fortunate to be (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, that's true, yeah I'm fortunate, I'm thankful.  I'm thankful that I have lived to enjoy the fruit of my labor, I'm thankful for that.  Because very few artists can say that, of all the people who are working.  The percentage of people who are artists who can say that they make their complete livelihood from their work and I'm just--I'm speaking of people in the fine arts, painters, musicians, sculptures, writers, dancers.  It's a rare breed.  When it comes to the visual arts, I would assume the percentages run about 4 percent of people who actually can make a living decently on what they do.  I don't think there's more than that.  Unfortunately, but that's the way it is.
Speaker 1: So what are your plans for the future?
Speaker 2: Work.
Speaker 1: Well, you have shows planned--
Speaker 2: That's my only plan is to work.  And I learned that years ago, I learned that when I was down in New Orleans [Louisiana].  I met a man, his name was Mestrovic [Ivan Mestrovic], a sculptor.  He is Serbian, well-known sculptor.  I was a student at Southern University [Southern University and Agricultural and Mechanical College] in Baton Rouge [Louisiana] and they put me--my works in a statewide group show, first time I had participated in a show at Xavier University [Xavier University of Louisiana, New Orleans, Louisiana].  And Mr. Mestrovic, his first name was Ivan, was the--he was the artist that they had invited, a senior artist, professional to show.  Show--he's a sculptor and he was an imposing character, I mean the guy had a big beard on, he had--wearing like this big cloak.  In truth, I was afraid of him.  But I knew I had to approach this man and speak to him, and I gathered every strength I had in my body to go speak to him, very humble.  And I said to him, "Mr. Mestrovic, what does it take to be an artist?"  And my god, he looked at me and he rode back on his heels like this, threw his body back, and he was like a bull breathing fire, he pulled down on me and he says, "Work, work, work, work and more work," (laughter) scared the shit out of me.  But I got the message.  I got the message, he woke me up big time.  And that's what my plans are, is work.  I mean what I pray for is to be able to get up and go to the studio.  I get up, have my coffee, have breakfast, read my newspaper in the morning, go to work.  That's what I do every day of the week.
Story_ID: 526976
Speaker 1: When you look at your body of work, and you have been looking at it, what do you believe your legacy to be?
Speaker 2: Oh, I think I'll go down in history and it's all--there's already evidence in that with the amount of documentation and people who are taking interest.  I'll go down in history as an innovative artist.  You know, someone who has expanded the possibilities of abstract painting.  But that--that's what's shaping up.
Story_ID: 526977
Speaker 1: What advice do you--you told about the advice that the German [sic.] artist [Ivan Mestrovic] gave you, what advice would you have for--in particular for an African American artist looking to step onto this platform?
Speaker 2: The same thing the Serbian told me, work.
Speaker 1: Same.
Speaker 2: Same thing.  I mean I don't know any other way.  I mean, I give talks, I go to colleges, I just gave a lecture at Boston University [Boston, Massachusetts] just over the weekend.  Met with some very nice people down there, some beautiful graduate students.  I don't know anything else, all I know is work.  That's the only thing that works.  Only thing that works is stay in the studio.  Don't confuse it (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So when you get stuck, you know, you're working out your ideas, you're, because it's obviously a creative process, is it just continuing to work is what gets you to--through a period where you might get stuck?
Speaker 2: Oh walking, I believe in walking.  If I feel like I'm getting stuck or getting depressed or something, can't figure shit out, I walk.  I find walking to be the best.  It's amazing what happens with walking.  That--that gait, that rhythm, that energy that you're burning.  It makes you forget about this and just, you're into your body, the flow of the body.  Walking is the best.
Speaker 1: Well speaking of the body, because you are using your hands and well you have some really large pieces, you use your whole body into your work (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh yeah, oh yeah, absolutely.
Speaker 1: How has your relationship to your art and your body changed as you're getting older?
Speaker 2: I don't feel the difference yet.  I still have a lot of energy.  I don't.  I mean I have some hurts and you know, some pains.  You know, I've broken shit here, I've broken shit here and cuts and bruises from spearfishing all these years, and metal in my legs from grinding metal, ah fuck it.  You just do it.  You just do it.
Story_ID: 526978
Speaker 1: When you look at your life and all the choices that you made, do you have any regrets?
Speaker 2: Regrets, no.  I can't think of any.  I can't think of any.  I really can't think of any.  I mean like, whenever I've made anything in the way of mistakes or something, I've just learned to correct them.  I'm a child of the '60s [1960s] you know, our motto was keep on trucking, seriously, keep on trucking, that was the motto.
Speaker 1: Is there anything you'd like to share that I have not asked you?
Speaker 2: I think the thing that we should add from my perspective is that there is a joy in what I do.  I'm an artist who believes that when you go to the studio, if you're not having fun, you shouldn't go.  If you're doing this thing called painting and you're not having fun at doing it, you shouldn't do it.  You should become, I don't know, a used car salesman, anything.  But that--there's a joy in what I do.  And that's the thing, I think to add, you know, the sense of joy, sense of wonder.  When I finish something, there is a stone that I work with on Crete [Greece], we use a lot of it on Crete, we call it petra Karistou, it's from the island of Karistos.  And when I built my house there I used a lot of this stone.  I built it and designed it in such a way that the stone is used from the outside and it goes into the inside without a break.  So you feel like you're just walking from the outside into the inside on the same thing, right.  Petra Karistou is a sedimentary stone, and when I first bought it I bought trucks of it--truckloads of it straight from the quarry.  I had sent trucks to the island because at that time it wasn't sold locally.  And you get these things, sometimes they're big slabs like that.  Sometimes they can be that thick.  The advantage of the sedimentary stones is that you can take your chisel, you look where the stratification lies and if you're careful, you can take one slab and get three or fucking four stones out of it (laughter).  Do you hear me?  Every time you do that, every time you take that chisel and cut that stone and opens it up, do you realize, you are the first person that have seen something that took place 40, 50 million years ago, some cases 100 million years ago?  You're the first person to see it.  Painting is that way.  When you get to that point and it lets loose and you know it's complete, you realize I'm the first motherfucker to have seen this (laughter).  So there's a fantastic joy to that.  It's like cutting stone right, and that's 50 million, 100 million, 150 million years ago, and you're the first person to see it.  Every time I've cut this stuff, I mean hundreds and hundreds and hundreds of times, and every time I do it, it's like wow, wow.  Sometimes you see whole ferns, sometimes you see a little animal of some sort, fossilized that was caught, motherfucker was caught fucking, you know, damn thing come and fell on top of his ass, was there for 150 million years (laughter).  And then some little black dude from Alabama cut it, cut it open and caught him in the act (laughter).
Speaker 1: Well do those kinds of magical moments occur in your tesserae?
Speaker 2: Well yeah, down in the tesserae, that's why I invite people, take a magnifying glass, look at it up close, look at all the layers, look at all the ridges that's in there.  Sure it's magic in that.
Story_ID: 526979
Speaker 1: Have you ever looked at the rock from the moon, rocks from the moon?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, I've seen them.  I even got an asteroid hanging up there in the ceiling, see it?
Speaker 1: Yes you do.
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.  Fucker flew in from the window one evening.  I hung it up in the ceiling.  I don't know where it came from, who knows.
Speaker 1: Where do you think humanity is going next when you think about your theory of molecules, you're looking at the future of people, where are we headed?
Speaker 2: Well we don't have no choice.  We're gonna go with the flow of wherever the universe takes us.  I just read an amazing book this--over the summer, it's by a woman, her name is Barad, B-A-R-A-D, Katherine [sic. Karen Barad].  She wrote a book called 'Meeting the Universe Halfway' ['Meeting the Universe Halfway: Quantum Physics and the Entanglement of Matter and Meaning,' Karen Barad], I really enjoyed that book.  She is a particle physicist.  But she has a deep background in philosophy, and she especially knows a lot about the Danish physicist, Niels Bohr, who had a heavy philosophical leaning in his writings.  It's an amazing book, you know, and I love the title, 'Meeting the Universe Halfway,' and the title came from a poem of someone she knows, a woman named Haraway [Donna Haraway].  In the '60s [sic.], we had a little book, we called it 'Dancing With the Wu Li Masters' [sic. 'The Dancing Wu Li Masters: An Overview of the New Physics,' Gary Zukav].  Great book.
Speaker 1: Dancing with the?
Speaker 2: Wu Li, W-U, we, Li, L-I-U [sic.], Masters.  Great little book from the 1960s, okay.  Well what these things tell you where humanity is going, if you don't learn to dance with the universe, your ass is fucked.  You hear me?  You got to get in rhythm with what's going on out there.  It has a beat, it has a sound to it, there's a rhythm to it and you got to learn to get into it.  So you keep on dancing with it, that's where it's headed.  I mean okay a lot of evilness and horrible shit's gonna be happening on the way, but keep on dancing.
