Story_ID: 128356
Speaker 1: All right. My name is Larry Crowe.  I'm interviewer today for The HistoryMakers project.  Our videographer is Scott Stearns.  Ma'am, could you please state your full name and spell it for us please?
Speaker 2: My name is Ms., M-S, Ruby, R-U-B-Y, Wilson, W-I-L-S-O-N.
Speaker 1: And do you have a middle name?
Speaker 2: Lee, L-E-E.
Speaker 1: All right.  And ma'am, what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: Two twenty-nine forty-eight [2/29/48, February 29, 1948].  I was born in Texas.
Speaker 1: Do you know--remember the town?
Speaker 2: No, no.
Speaker 1: Where were you close to, were you close in Dallas or Houston?
Speaker 2: Dallas.
Speaker 1: Okay, so near Dallas?  All right.  And ma'am what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: I am a professional entertainer.  Actress, singer, commercials, documentaries, movies, whatever.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what is today's date?
Speaker 2: It is 7/30/2010 [July 30, 2010].
Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: We're at Cadre [Building] in Memphis, Tennessee.
Story_ID: 128357
Speaker 1: Okay, now before we go into depth, there are five kind of warm-up questions we ask as kind of--and they only require a brief answer.  And the first one is do you have a favorite food?
Speaker 2: Yeah, my favorite food is, I call it bologna sandwich (laughter), barbecued bologna sandwich.
Speaker 1: Barbecued?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, and I get it at Interstate Barbecue.  Oh man, you talking about good.  With some mustard and some salad on the side, oh yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And water.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: My favorite color is black.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you have a favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Summertime.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you have a favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: My favorite destination is New Zealand.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: It ain't nothing but a party.
Story_ID: 128358
Speaker 1: I'm gonna ask about your family history.  I'm gonna ask about your mother's side of the family and your father's side, and we're gone start with your mother's side first.  Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: Ida, I-D-A, Emma, E-M-M-A, Reed, R-E-E-D.
Speaker 1: And what is her date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: Her date of birth is 7/22/22 [July 22, 1922]. Place?  I don't know.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Where did she grow up, do you know?
Speaker 2: In Texas.
Speaker 1: Okay.  How much do you know about your mother's side of the family?  How far back can you trace that side?
Speaker 2: I can go back to my grandmother.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: She was Cherokee Indian.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And can you give us her name?
Speaker 2: Her name was Ida Emma too.
Speaker 1: Okay.  What about your grandfather?
Speaker 2: I can't remember him.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you know what they did for a living, your grandparents?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you imagine they lived on a farm or some (unclear)?
Speaker 2: On my father's [Ocie Lee Wilson] side, I can remember her.  She was a farmer.
Speaker 1: We gone wait until we get to her and that other side in a minute.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: But on your mother's side, do you know what they did for a living?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you don't have any idea?
Speaker 2: Nope.  I don't know how I met her, she was real old.  She was retired.
Speaker 1: But you don't know where she retired from?
Speaker 2: No.  She was, you know, back then there was nothing to do but be a maid.
Speaker 1: Well, I'm asking now.
Speaker 2: I guess she was a maid.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Now did your mother grow up in Texas?
Speaker 2: Yep, she did.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Did she talk about growing up and what it was like?
Speaker 2: Not really.  She didn't really talk about it.  She just knew it was hard work that she did.
Speaker 1: What kind of work did she do?
Speaker 2: She was a maid.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  And, in Dallas [Texas] or--
Speaker 2: In Dallas.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now was she, did she have a chance to go very far in school?
Speaker 2: She went to like the sixth grade.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Are there any stories she's passed down to you about anything that happened when she was growing up or--
Speaker 2: They picked a lot of cotton.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Anybody on that side of the family involved in music?
Speaker 2: My momma would sing in church every Sunday.  That's the only thing we were allowed to do is sing in church (laughter).  When it comes to that blues stuff, we weren't allowed to sing nothing like that.
Story_ID: 128359
Speaker 1: I want to go to your father's side now.  Can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: My father is deceased.  His name was Ocie Lee Wilson.
Speaker 1: Okay, how do you spell that?
Speaker 2: O-C-I-E, L-E-E, W-I-L-S-O-N.
Speaker 1: All right.  And what is his date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: December the 31st, December 26, 1917.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now what do you know about your father's side of the family?  How far back can you trace them and what were they doing?
Speaker 2: I can trace them back to the days when he was a farmer's child, and he did a lot of crop and he worked hard.  He was a contractor who built buildings and he only went to the third grade, but he was very smart.  He could build anything.
Speaker 1: Now where was he born and raised?
Speaker 2: He was born in Texas.  I don't know where.
Speaker 1: Yeah, but near Dallas [Texas] too, the same vicinity?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.  Now, okay, so both your parents [Ocie Lee Wilson and Ida Emma Reed] they, okay--so you were born there and your parents were born there too, so but you can't tell me the town at all?  You don't know?
Speaker 2: I'd rather leave it out (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay, I thought that was it, I thought it very remarkable that you couldn't remember the town that you were raised in, but--
Speaker 2: I remember everything but a lot of things I don't say because it's personal.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, well you can say that, you know, 'cause it's better to say that than to make it appear that you don't know (laughter).
Speaker 2: Yep.
Speaker 1: You know, which is incredulous, you know.
Story_ID: 128360
Speaker 1: So is there a story about how your parents [Ocie Lee Wilson and Ida Emma Reed] met?
Speaker 2: You know, she needed her hair straightened and he told her you need to straighten your hair 'cause it was all over her head.  He went and took some black grease out of a wheel and put it on her head, and told her, this is how you straighten your hair.  With the grease from a wheel.  And she been using that grease ever since.
Speaker 1: The same kind of grease?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  It's grease from a wheel.
Speaker 1: Axel grease.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Wasn't nothing else to use.  He said, "I waxed her head down with this grease and she fell in love with me."  I said that's a wonderful story.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Were they teenagers at that point?
Speaker 2: Yeah, they were very young.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: He was born in 1917 and she was born in '22 [1922].  And it was her only husband for, they were married, I think, for thirty-five years, and then he passed away.
Speaker 1: Now did your father serve in the military?
Speaker 2: I don't think so.
Speaker 1: 'Cause he was World War II age, you know.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  He was in that field so much that in them times, you know, you did more work in the fields than you did anything.
Story_ID: 128361
Speaker 1: Can you describe your parents' personalities and talents and dispositions, and tell us who you think you take after the most?
Speaker 2: On the singing side, I take after my mom [Ida Emma Reed].  On the workaholic side, I take after my dad [Ocie Lee Wilson].  The only thing he could do was work, work, work.  He would make the ends meet and bring the food home and feed all of us.  And my mom would work, work, work, but she was a religious woman, and she still is.  She's still alive today.  She's eighty-eight.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And she had like six or seven heart attacks.  She just got out of the hospital.
Story_ID: 128362
Speaker 1: Now, do you have brothers and sisters?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I got one sister and three brothers.
Speaker 1: Okay, and where do you fit in?
Speaker 2: I'm the baby girl.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you're the youngest?
Speaker 2: I'm the youngest on the girl side.  I got a brother that's younger than me.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  You care to name 'em for us.
Speaker 2: Hattie, H-A-T-T-I-E.  Her last name is Davis, D-A-V-I-S, and the others are Herman, H-E-R-M-A-N, Wilson, W-I-L-S-O-N, Earnest, E-A-R-N-E-S-T, Wilson, W-I-L-S-O-N, and Ocie, O-C-I-E, Wilson, W-I-L-S-O-N, Junior, J-R.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right, now when you grew up, what did your household consist of, was it just your mother and your father and you and your brothers and sisters, or was there grandparents too?--(Simultaneous)
Speaker 2: It was like, just one family.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Story_ID: 128363
Speaker 1: All right, and what, can you describe, even though you're not going to give us the name of it, can you describe, you know, the place you grew up in and what it looked like, and what was some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up?
Speaker 2: It was country.  It was like what they used to call it, the suburbs.  To us, it was the country 'cause we had to walk like ten miles to get to a bus stop to go shopping.  We had to walk two miles to get to the bus to go to school, and everything involved walking.  We walked, walked, walked because we wouldn't have no money to catch the bus.  So we had to walk.  Did a lot of walking, but we had a lot of fun in the neighborhood because everybody knew everybody.  And everybody was allowed to whoop us and we were allowed to get whoopings by everybody, because it was a neighborhood thing, not like now.  Then everybody had it together and if we find your child does wrong, we give him a whooping and send him home.  But, you know, you can't do that no more.  It was that much unity in my neighborhood.
Story_ID: 128364
Speaker 1: Typical questions I ask about, you know, can you give us the name of the school you first attended?
Speaker 2: My first school was Riverside Elementary [Fort Worth, Texas].
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, back in the day when you were going to school, this, would this be considered a segregated school, or colored school?
Speaker 2: No, it was all black.
Speaker 1: Yeah, that's what I mean.  Yes, that's what I mean.
Speaker 2: We weren't allowed to go to no white school.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That was like 1950.
Speaker 1: All right, and so, so in the area that you lived were there like, there were separate white schools and separate black schools?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So at Riverside, about how many students did you have?
Speaker 2: Oh, that's a terrible answer 'cause I can't remember back that far.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That was 1954, I think it was '54 [1954] when I was in school, first grade.  That was a long time ago.
Speaker 1: You know some schools were one room and some are--
Speaker 2: We had one room.
Speaker 1: Uh hum.
Speaker 2: Everything was done in that one room.
Speaker 1: Okay.  It was small, that pretty much dictates--
Speaker 2: It had first through sixth grade--kindergarten through the sixth grade.
Speaker 1: Okay, so what do you think, maybe about forty students in there?
Speaker 2: In each room?
Speaker 1: I mean was it a school one room or was it--
Speaker 2: It was a school many classes.  They had like first, kindergarten through the sixth grade.  Everybody had individual rooms.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So one class per grade?  Or one room per grade?
Speaker 2: Yeah, we would go to different rooms for different subjects.  Like the bell rang, we go to another school, another room, rang again, we go to another room, but we stayed in the same school.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  Now, what kind of student were you, pretty good student in school?
Speaker 2: I better be, if we weren't, we would get the aftermath at home.  We had to be, daddy say if you can't be smart, at least shut your mouth and listen.  And he says, and I mean it, don't come home with no bad grades, I'm a think you weren't paying attention.  And if your grades are bad and then your conduct is worse, we'd get real good punishment.  And so we made sure if we had bad grades, at least we had A in conduct.  You, know, it's E in conduct now, but we get A, B or C in conduct then.
Story_ID: 128365
Speaker 1: Now you didn't answer this question, but what were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up?
Speaker 2: In the country?  It was, it was a, like I say, in the country, it took-- now it's called the suburbs, and we call it down south in the woods.  We had a lot of woods around us.  You say we can go down into the back alley and see bears and wolves and dogs and everything that's wild.  But, you know, they called the suburbs now.  We called it the country.  They call us country Birdville people.  Called us the colored folks from Birdville.  I said okay, I'll go along with that.
Speaker 1: Is that what they called the neighborhood you lived in, Birdville?
Speaker 2: Birdville [a former community area, now annexed by Haltom City, Texas].
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.  Well what were some of the sights and sounds and smells?  Now, you give me a description of the woods and all that, but--
Speaker 2: The smells?  There was no smells.
Speaker 1: You don't have any smells that remind you of growing up?
Speaker 2: No, just woods.  We didn't have no street lights.  So we were just out there.
Speaker 1: Well, you grew up indoors too as well as outdoors, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Any smells indoors?
Speaker 2: Cooking.  Mama's [Ida Emma Reed] cooking.  That was the only smell in the house, food cooking.
Speaker 1: Does that remind you of growing up?
Speaker 2: Yeah, you can say that.  It was always a good harmony at the house.  Great harmony.  And when she cooked, we know its dinnertime.  But it was like after five o'clock when she got home.  We couldn't mess off no food while she was gone.  We had to wait until she come home.  We had to wait 'til daddy [Ocie Lee Wilson] come too.  They cooked food together and we would eat together.  And that's the only smell you'd have in the house.  Any other time, we'd be outside.
Story_ID: 128366
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, was church a big part of growing up?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, well what was the name of your family church, or were there several churches or just one?
Speaker 2: We went to one church.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It was called, I think, Valley Baptist Church.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And did you like church?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, I got baptized early.  I remember getting off in that lake to be baptized and I could see that snake coming toward my head, and I jumped out that water.  They say she got religion, and I said no, snake, 'cause we got baptized in a real lake.  You know water moccasins be in the real lake, and when they put my head under the water, I could see that snake coming toward me, they said, "She got religion."  I jumped out of that water big time.  I start running and they said oh that girl got religion.  It was a snake coming at my head and I said y'all can stay in that water if y'all want to, but y'all gone get bit cause a snake coming.  And they said, "Where it at, Ms. Ruby?"  They call me little girl, "Where it at."  I said, There it is right there."  And they looked and saw that snake coming, they ran too.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So were you a part of church organizations and that sort of thing when you were--
Speaker 2: Naw, just in the choir.
Speaker 1: Okay.  They had the BTU, Baptist Training Union?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  We didn't never do that.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: We went to morning service, sang in the choir and went home.  And had dinner that evening and go to bed, wake up and go to school.
Story_ID: 128367
Speaker 1: Okay.  So did you have the most fun on Saturdays, or, what were Saturdays like?
Speaker 2: Saturday was like any other day.  It was boring 'cause we ain't have nothing to do, we had nowhere to go unless we walked to--walked downtown.  That's like ten miles and nobody wanted to walk.  So we stayed at home a lot.  We didn't have no money first of all.
Speaker 1: 'Bout how long did it take to walk ten miles?  I think a lot of people don't know.
Speaker 2: It takes all day to walk ten miles now because of the way the traffic is.  We didn't have no traffic out there, didn't have no cars worth anything.  We'd just walk the street, the middle of the street.
Speaker 1: It's the middle of the highway?
Speaker 2: Yep.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: A dirt road.
Speaker 1: A dirt road.  What was the nearest town?
Speaker 2: The nearest town?  That was downtown, ten miles.
Speaker 1: Yeah, but where it near, where was that town?
Speaker 2: It's downtown Dallas [Texas].
Speaker 1: Oh, Dallas, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So you could walk from your house to downtown Dallas?  That's a ten-mile walk?
Speaker 2: Uh hum.
Speaker 1: Okay, now what--how often did you get downtown?
Speaker 2: Not often because nobody wanted to walk.  Didn't have no money to catch the bus and the bus wouldn't come in our area.  We had to walk two miles to get to the bus stop.
Story_ID: 128368
Speaker 1: Okay, well let me ask you some entertainment questions since you're an artist, a performing artist.  Were there any performing artists in the little town you lived in?
Speaker 2: Naw, no, nobody performed.  It was just like we go to church, go home.
Speaker 1: Nobody was playing the blues or anything, or--
Speaker 2: Naw.
Speaker 1: Or no music--
Speaker 2: Naw.  The only music we allowed to watch on TV was Tennessee Ernie Ford because he sang a gospel song at the end of his show, and then we had to turn the TV off.  There was nothing else on TV.
Speaker 1: Oh, so you did have TV out there?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: A little round, a little round screen TV, and mama [Ida Emma Reed] say turn the TV off, Tennessee Ernie Ford is gone off.  We had to turn it off.
Speaker 1: Okay, so did you all watch the news on TV?
Speaker 2: We had no news.
Speaker 1: Did you get the newspapers, any of the--?
Speaker 2: No, no newspaper.  We couldn't afford none of that.  Long bumpy ride to bring newspaper to our house.
Speaker 1: Now was, was radio, did you have a radio at home?
Speaker 2: We had a radio, but we weren't allowed to listen to it.  They said daddy the only one to listen to the radio, 'cause he would listen to R and B stuff when he come home.  We weren't allowed to listen to that music.  Mama wouldn't allow it in the house first of all.  Only person allowed to listen to that music was my father [Ocie Lee Wilson].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And he run the house.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So that's, so your mother was very religious or strict--
Speaker 2: Very religious.
Speaker 1: --as a result
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --of her religious beliefs?
Speaker 2: Very strict.
Speaker 1: Okay, so no, she didn't like rhythm and blues music?
Speaker 2: No, that was out of the question.  How I became a blues singer, I grew up and left.
Speaker 1: Okay, did your father ever talk about the music with you all, about who was on the radio?
Speaker 2: Naw.
Speaker 1: So when you grew up, you didn't really know the artists on the radio or who they were?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And on television, unless they were on Tennessee Ernie Ford, you wouldn't--
Speaker 2: Yeah.  We could watch cartoons, but that was it.
Speaker 1: Now do you remember ever seeing anybody black on television on Tennessee Ernie Ford's show?
Speaker 2: No.  Tennessee Ernie Ford was all we could watch because he would always sing a gospel song at the end of his show, and she allowed us to watch him.  She said, "I love Tennessee Ernie Ford cause he sings gospel music," so we were allowed to watch him and cartoons.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now did you have a favorite gospel song at your church?
Speaker 2: In my church I was, I led the gospel song on Sunday morning, and it was called In the Upper Room with My Jesus.
Speaker 1: Can you sing a little bit of that for us?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.  I was like six years old and I would stand on a Coke bottle, a Coke crate, two Coke crates at the pulpit and I was (singing), "we in the upper room with my Jesus, oh in the upper room talking with my Lord, my precious Lord, we in the upper room, in the upper room, hey, we in the upper room, talking with my Lord."
Speaker 1: Okay, you got a nice voice.
Speaker 2: Thank you.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: All right.
Speaker 1: So, okay, so you're saying, now I'm just trying to recant this, that you didn't really hear a lot of popular music at all--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: --and you had no favorite popular music singer.  Did you know who [HM] B.B. King was?
Speaker 2: No, no.
Speaker 1: Elizabeth Cotton?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: No.
Speaker 2: None of those people.  Mahalia Jackson?  Yeah.  Joe Mays, Mighty Joe Mays, yeah.  All the gospel people I knew about.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Did you ever go to gospel revivals?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, all the time.  We would be on the mourner's bench until we get our life straight.  We go on a mourner's bench and sit there until, tell her she can get up now.  Yeah, I've been forgiven, you can get up and we'd stay there, and stay there, and stay there.
Speaker 1: Have you seen any of the celebrity preachers come through and do revivals or anything?
Speaker 2: No, we didn't have no celebrity preachers to come to our church.  We had one preacher.
Speaker 1: Was he the pastor the whole time?
Speaker 2: Yep.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you remember his name?
Speaker 2: No.
Story_ID: 128369
Speaker 1: Okay, so, now did you go to high school there too?
Speaker 2: Yep.
Speaker 1: Now what was the name of your high school?
Speaker 2: I.M. Terrell High School [Fort Worth, Texas].
Speaker 1: I.M. Terrell, okay.  Now was that named after a local person, black person--
Speaker 2: I don't have an idea.  I don't really know.
Speaker 1: They're often named after, you know, whoever built the church or was the first teacher.
Speaker 2: Uh hum.
Speaker 1: So, I.M. Terrell.
Speaker 2: It was an all-black school.
Speaker 1: Okay, I guess you really get started in 1962?
Speaker 2: It wasn't started when I graduated.  Integration you talking about?
Speaker 1: No, I said when did you start school?
Speaker 2: In the ninth grade?
Speaker 1: Okay, yeah, okay.  So what was that, 1962, or--
Speaker 2: I guess.
Speaker 1: Sixty-three [1963]?
Speaker 2: Something like that 'cause I graduated in '66 [1966].
Speaker 1: Okay, so it must have been '62 [1962].
Story_ID: 128370
Speaker 1: Now I.M. Terrell High School is in Dallas [Texas], right?
Speaker 2: Uh hum [sic, Fort Worth, Texas].
Speaker 1: And you were telling me off camera you had to be bused there from your, your little town?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, you said it was a big high school?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, extremely big.  The seventh through the ninth--through the twelfth grade.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, did you like high school?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, I did love high school.  You know, I, I remember when I was taking music lessons and my teacher's name was Ms. Presivant [ph.] and I was like in the ninth grade then.  You know I never like going to the board 'cause I had big legs and the boys would make fun of me.  They said, "Oh, that big leg girl."  So I would stay in my seat 'cause I wouldn't go to the board.  She said, "Wilson, get up here and do this."  I said no.  "Wilson, get up here and do this," and I said no.  She says, "Why?"  I said, "Because I don't want to."  It's not because I didn't want to; I didn't want the boys making fun of my legs, and they were pretty legs, big pretty legs.  And they would make, "Oh, look at that big leg girl."  I was always embarrassed.  So she said, "You gon' make a F."  I said, "Good, give me a F." She said, "Well I'm a call your mama to school," and then they call your mama to school, and I say, "Oh, here goes drama."  So I said okay.  I went to the board 'cause you don't want your mama to come to school 'cause she'd whoop you right in front of the class then.  It wouldn't be no dialing 911 and have your parents arrested.  They could whoop you at school.  I didn't want to go through those changes so I walked to the front of the class, gave her my lesson.  I sang and went back to my seat.  And I said, you know, I'm a get out of this class.  I'm a take auto mechanics.  So I went to auto mechanics 'cause they didn't make me go to the front of the class.  And I started to learn how to fix cars, compared to sing.  And I never knew I was gon' be a singer.  But, you know, time changes.
Speaker 1: Now, did you sing in the high school choir?
Speaker 2: No, 'cause I refused to go to the front of the class.
Speaker 1: Oh, so that's the class.  It was a music class?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Oh, okay.
Speaker 2: That was in ninth grade.  I made a bad grade.  She said, "I'm gonna get you out of here."  I said, "Okay, I'm gonna leave."  So I left and went to auto mechanics class.  I stayed in there for the rest of the school system 'cause I wasn't asked to go to the front of the class.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you didn't even taken music in high school then?
Speaker 2: I took it for a year.
Speaker 1: But you left.
Speaker 2: I failed.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: 'Cause I wouldn't go to the front of the class, you know, and I said if you want to be a singer, then how you gone stand up in front of the class if you don't want to go to the front of the class, so I convinced myself that I wanted to be a singer. It meant going to the front of the class.
Story_ID: 128371
Speaker 1: One day I was in church singing and my mama [Ida Emma Reed] said, "Get up and go up there and sing."  I said, "No."  She said, "Yes you will.  If you don't I'm gone whoop you when you get home."  I said, okay, so I got up and I held to the pulpit for dear life and I started singing and the folks started falling out.  And my pastor said, "You know that girl can, can sing.  She got people falling out."
Speaker 2: About how old were you?
Speaker 1: I was ten.
Speaker 2: Ten, okay.
Speaker 1: I had folks falling out, and I said, you know, I really can sing.  But then when I got into school in ninth grade, I wouldn't go in front of the class so she [Ms. Presivant (ph.) at I.M. Terrell High School, Fort Worth, Texas] kicked me out of class and I took auto mechanics for three years.  From the ninth, tenth, eleventh and twelfth grades I took auto mechanics.
Speaker 2: Now you were singing in church though all during this time?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Right, back at home.
Speaker 1: Singing at church in the choir.
Speaker 2: So, would you say that the only people that really knew you could sing was the people back home in your little hometown?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: The ones where I could sing was the church people 'cause I could only sing in the choir and I couldn't sing nowhere else.
Speaker 2: It was a small church, right?
Speaker 1: Oh, real small, about the size of this room.
Story_ID: 128372
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now when you went to high school [I.M. Terrell High School, Fort Worth, Texas], were you exposed to more popular culture and what was going on in '62 [1962], '63 [1963], you got like Motown had started, Stax Records (unclear)--
Speaker 2: I knew about them.
Speaker 1: [HM] B.B. King.
Speaker 2: But we still weren't allowed to have it at home.
Speaker 1: Okay.  But you started learning about them.
Speaker 2: Yeah I learned in twelfth grade.  That's when I got married too.  I got married when I was in the twelfth grade.
Story_ID: 128373
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now in 1963 you were a sophomore [at I.M. Terrell High School, Fort Worth, Texas], I guess, when [President John F.] Kennedy got killed in Dallas [Texas].
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Do you have any memories about that?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.  We were in school when we heard about his death and people started falling out the windows.
Speaker 1: Out of the window?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  They were jumping out the window.  I'll never forget that day.
Speaker 1: Teachers or students?
Speaker 2: Students.
Speaker 1: Were jumping out of, out of the school?  How high were the windows?
Speaker 2: Second floor.
Speaker 1: Were they trying to hurt themselves?
Speaker 2: I don't know.  You can say that.  They were crying and jumping out the window.  They knew their future was over when they killed Kennedy.  Everybody thought our life was over.  He's the only one that cared about us.
Speaker 1: Is that what people thought?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  He was the only one that cared about blacks.  And they thought they life was over, so they start jumping out of windows and we went to the spot where he was killed and they wouldn't let us go to his spot, and we could stand back at a distance and see what was going on the same day that he passed away.  But they wouldn't let us get close and everybody felt, I think they felt let down, 'cause somebody killed the president and the president was the only one that cared about us at that time.  He was a good president, a real good president.  That's why I get afraid for [HM] Barack Obama, 'cause Barack is just like the president, President Kennedy was.  He's a good man, who can go in front of anybody.  You see him on TV yesterday?  On TV, just like a normal person.  That's what President Kennedy was.  He came to our school and he spoke to us at school and everybody fell in love with him that day.
Speaker 1: President Kennedy?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: He came to--
Speaker 2: He came to an all-black school.
Speaker 1: --I.M. Terrell High School [Fort Worth, Texas] and spoke?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Now this was before--okay.  Now when did he, when was that at?
Speaker 2: This was right before they assassinated him.
Speaker 1: The same day?
Speaker 2: Not the same day.
Speaker 1: But the same year?
Speaker 2: But the same year.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And they fell in love with him.  We all fell in love with him.
Speaker 1: So I guess it was, it was more than just a passive association.  They felt like they knew him because he'd been--
Speaker 2: Yeah, he felt the need to come to our school and you know, we felt a need to love him 'cause he came to us.  He took the time out to come to our school and we was the only school he came to was I.M. Terrell and we said, the president's coming.  We said what president?  The president of the United States?  Why he coming?  Coming to see us.  I said, aw, that's an honor.  And then when he got assassinated people just started jumping out of windows.  They say our life is over.  Our president is dead.  So, that's history.
Story_ID: 128374
Speaker 1: Did you, did you know very much about Lyndon [B.] Johnson?  He was from Texas.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I knew about Lyndon Johnson.  He, he didn't too much please me.  He was a good Texas man, but he was a rich man.  His farm, he had a farm, Lyndon Baines Johnson, right?  He had a farm in Texas.  Couldn't nobody go to it.  So, he wasn't, he wasn't like Kennedy.  Kennedy was down to earth.  He could be touched.  And, you know, that's history.
Speaker 1: Now, Barbara Jordan, did she come around the same time as you?
Speaker 2: What year was she born?
Speaker 1: I'm thinking maybe just, she's older than you I'm pretty sure.  She would have been maybe seventeen years old, but did you know anything about her--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: --did she have any impact on people?
Speaker 2: I don't know too much about her.  I knew she existed.
Speaker 1: Did you know about any of the black leaders in around the Dallas [Texas] area when you were growing up?
Speaker 2: Very few.
Speaker 1: Who would you consider a leader?
Speaker 2: [HM Reverend] Jesse Jackson was a young man at that time, Operation PUSH Breadbasket.
Speaker 1: Well that's 1970.  I'm talking about maybe when you were in high school, from '63 [1963] to '66 [1966].
Speaker 2: I didn't get into, I didn't get into politics.
Story_ID: 128375
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Only thing I'd do was go to school [I.M. Terrell High School, Fort Worth, Texas], go home, go to cotton fields.  We'd always start school late.  We started school in October because we had to pick cotton in September.  So we didn't really know about no politics.  We would pick cotton and go to school, every day, every day.  The whole summer we would pick cotton.
Speaker 1: So was that a major way the family sustained itself?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, it was the only way of survival.
Speaker 1: I'm not going to ask you if you liked it 'cause I know you didn't, but--
Speaker 2: No, I don't have a cotton pair of nothing at my house.  On purpose.
Story_ID: 128376
Speaker 1: Did you have a favorite teacher in school [I.M. Terrell High School, Fort Worth, Texas]?
Speaker 2: My favorite person at school was not a teacher.  She was a, a counselor.  Her name is Ms. Peace [ph.] and she was a good woman.  'Cause you could always take your troubles to her.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Ms. Peace.  Do you remember her first name?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Do you remember who the principal was?
Speaker 2: No.  I think one of them was named Mr. King [ph.].  I think that was his name.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: We had three principals.
Story_ID: 128377
Speaker 1: Now did you start singing as a profession in high school [I.M. Terrell High School, Fort Worth, Texas] at all?
Speaker 2: Only when I got to twelfth grade and I got married and I was gone.
Speaker 1: Okay, now how did this happen?  Now you were in the twelfth grade and you met a guy in high school?
Speaker 2: No.  He was a musician.  I married a musician.
Speaker 1: And where did you meet him?
Speaker 2: He happened to wander into Texas from, I think, from Chicago [Illinois], but he wandered into Texas and he stayed there for a while.  And he wanted to date me and my daddy [Ocie Lee Wilson] being the way he was, he said you can't, if you can't buy the whole cow, you can't eat off the hock.  And that was daddy's, that's what he meant.  You know what that means?
Speaker 1: You want to explain it?
Speaker 2: You can't eat off the hock, you got to buy the whole cow because when he had to marry me if he wanted to date me.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: 'Cause he didn't believe in no dating.  It was illegal.
Speaker 1: So how old were you then?
Speaker 2: I was sixteen.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  So what did the musician do?
Speaker 2: He married me.
Speaker 1: He married you, okay.
Speaker 2: He had to marry me, if he wanted to date me.  I was his. Then, it was legal.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you using date in a different sense?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Today it means date, you talk about going on a date today, they talk about just going, could be something deep, may not be.
Speaker 2: Yeah, sexual encounter.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  Might not be though.
Speaker 2: Dad didn't care.
Speaker 1: But in those days--okay.
Speaker 2: He really didn't care.  He says if you don't buy the cow, you can't eat off the hock.  That was his saying.
Speaker 1: And the hock, H-O-C-K?
Speaker 2: Hock, yeah.
Speaker 1: Like ham hock?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Ham hock, turkey hock, cow hock.  He meant that, and so we were serious with him.  He says you gotta date my daughter with sincerity.  You not gone get her pregnant and then gone.  He said you got to buy the whole thing.  So, in order to start dating I had to get married.
Speaker 1: Okay, so what was this gentleman's name?
Speaker 2: His name was Jessie.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And, just one name?
Speaker 2: Mosley.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, okay.
Speaker 2: My kids' last name is Moseley.
Speaker 1: Right.  Keith [Moseley] who's sitting here as we speak, right.  Okay, so, this is 1966?
Speaker 2: Uh hum.
Story_ID: 128378
Speaker 1: Okay, so did you, you said you left home [Texas] then?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.  I moved to Chicago [Illinois].
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now was that, were you glad to get out of Texas?
Speaker 2: Yeah, 'cause I could start singing for real.  I started singing gospel music when I left Chicago, left Memphis [Tennessee], I mean left Texas.  I went to Chicago and I was singing gospel music.  And I sang gospel music until one day I ran into [HM] B.B. King.
Speaker 1: Now, wait before we get you to B.B., I just want to establish now, your husband [Jessie Mosley], what did he play?  What kind of music did--
Speaker 2: Piano, for gospel churches.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  So that's how, so that makes, so you would sing along with him--
Speaker 2: Uh hum.
Speaker 1: --at churches that he would play?  So he was like a special guest soloist?
Speaker 2: Naw, he was musician, he was playing for a group when he came to Texas.  I can't remember the name of the group.
Speaker 1: The gospel group?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  But he left them and he stayed in Texas and that's how he got hooked up with me.  I married him, we moved to Chicago, where he continued to play.  That was his hometown.  He came from Chicago.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And he continued to play in Chicago at different churches.  So I would direct the choir or sing with 'em.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you remember some of the churches you played in Chicago?
Speaker 2: One was First Baptist Church [Chicago, Illinois].  The other was Prince of Peace [Baptist Church, Chicago, Illinois].  Those were two regular churches.  I was a member of both churches.
Story_ID: 128379
Speaker 1: Now did--how did you like Chicago [Illinois]?
Speaker 2: It sucked.
Speaker 1: What didn't you like about it?
Speaker 2: I didn't like the neighborhoods.  I didn't like staying under nobody, or over nobody.  I wanted my own house.  And I thought when you went to Chicago you had to live in row houses, and that's what I wasn't adjusted to 'cause I left a real house in Texas.  Up there with my mama we had individual houses.  I moved to Chicago, there were three families on top of you, plus the basement.  I said, "I can't get to this."  We moved ten times.  The glass would come in and the grass would leave.  We were gone.  I say, I can't understand this.
Speaker 1: Now did you live on the West Side or the South Side?
Speaker 2: West Side.
Speaker 1: On the west Side, okay.
Speaker 2: My last address was Ferdinand and Lake.  You familiar with that address, with that area?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: By the L track.
Speaker 1: Right.  The L track runs right above Lake Street.
Speaker 2: Uh hum.  That was my last area I moved to, house number ten.  And, you know, all my kids were born in Chicago.
Story_ID: 128380
Speaker 1: Now nineteen, were you there [in Chicago, Illinois] in 1966?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: On the West Side. Now, were you there when [Reverend] Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.] came?
Speaker 2: I was there when he died, he got killed.  He got killed here and I was living in Chicago.
Speaker 1: Right, when you were living in Chicago, he actually moved to Chicago and lived on the west side.  You remember that?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And when he marched into Cicero [Illinois].
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I was marching with him.  I used to be a member of the Thomas, it was called the Thomas choir [sic, Thompson Community Singers], at a church on Madison.  What was the name of that choir?  It was a well-known choir.  They would go around the city singing.
Speaker 1: Do you remember Reverend Sheldon Hall?
Speaker 2: Uh hum.  I was a member of, I used to go to Bishop Anderson's church all the time and that was for midnight service.  I remember him locking his doors, saying if you come you can't get out.
Speaker 1: Really, he would lock people in?
Speaker 2: He would lock the people in church.  Had a security guard with guns at the door.  That was because people wanted to hop from one church to the other and ketch the broadcast and right in the middle of service would leave, get up and leave and go to another church for they broadcast.  From just one church, one church, one church.  So he fixed it.  He put a guard at the door and he said anybody leave, if you come in you can't go out because you jump out of my church and go to another church, 'cause the other broadcast would start at eleven and go to twelve.  They would start broadcasting at nine, ten, eleven and twelve.  They have like five different churches people wanted to go and they would hop and get up and go to another church.  And that's why he had those guards at the door.  That was Bishop, it's a Bishop Anderson on the South Side.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I've never heard of him but that's not now, he may not be there anymore.
Speaker 2: I think he died.
Speaker 1: What was the name of his church?
Speaker 2: I know his name was Bishop Anderson [ph.].  It was the Church of God in Christ.  And they had a fabulous choir.  His broadcast came on at eleven o'clock.
Speaker 1: His broadcast on WVON, or?
Speaker 2: Whatever the station was that aired black radio.  Come on at eleven o'clock and go off at twelve.  And then we'd go to another church.  We would church hop.  That's what they called it then.  Church-hopping.  But he fixed that.  But you, wasn't it Thompson Community Choir [sic Thompson Community Singers]?
Speaker 1: That sounds about right. I'm not sure.
Speaker 2: Yeah, that sounds like the choir.
Speaker 1: Thompson Community Choir.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I used to sing with them.
Story_ID: 128381
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you were there when [Reverend] Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.] came to live on the West Side [in Chicago, Illinois].  Did he live close to where you were living at the time?
Speaker 2: I don't have an idea because at that time I was pregnant with my twins.  No, I was pregnant with my second daughter.  I had a daughter [Lisa Alexander] born in '66 [1966].  I had a daughter [Stacey Ragston] born in '67 [1967] and my twins [Kenneth and Keith Moseley] were born in '68 [1968].  And this time I lived in an alley on Monroe.  I lived in a basement apartment on Monroe and the people were stealing stuff from Madison and coming to my apartment with it.  You know we had, you run through under there.  We had a backyard you could run through.  Yeah.  What them kind called?  You know I lived in the basement and they had where you could just run from the front to the back.
Speaker 1: A gangway?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  And they were, they would have so much property from that, from when they burned down Madison Street.
Speaker 1: Now this was after Dr. King was assassinated in '68 [1968], yeah they had riots on the West Side.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I was in that riot.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So was my husband [Jessie Moseley].  My husband was like, he looked like him.
Speaker 1: So your husband was real light.
Speaker 2: Yeah, he was real light and he had to show his I.D. to get home 'cause they wanted to kill 'em.  So that was a terrible scene when they killed Dr. King.  I remember every bit of that.
Speaker 1: How did you find out about it?
Speaker 2: I watch TV and they showed where Dr. King had gotten killed here in Memphis.  And that's when the riots started.  And Chicago was red.  Red with fire.  What time you come to Chicago?
Speaker 1: 1977.
Speaker 2: Seventy-seven [1977].  That was '68 [1968] I was there and Chicago was red.  It was a burning inferno.  I'll never forget that.  I used to dream about it, have nightmares.
Speaker 1: Did the flames come close to your house?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.
Speaker 1: How close?
Speaker 2: I was on like--this is Monroe and this is Madison, one block, half a block over.
Speaker 1: So the businesses on Madison were being burnt up?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  It was red.  The whole city was red.  The whole street, Madison, they burned the whole street up, from one end to the other.  All the businesses, if they didn't burn 'em up, they rammed them with bricks.  And the windows and everything was broke in.  And they were stealing stuff so much.  They came through my gangway with all kind of stuff, but, you know, wasn't nothing I could do, but watch 'em come and watch 'em go.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And you tried to stay inside?
Speaker 2: Oh, I did, 'cause I was pregnant.  Was pregnant with the twins.  Then I called my husband (unclear).  I said where he was?  He says, "I'm leaving the job," and I said, "Watch your back because you know you got this afro, got this process on your head" and he looked like a white man.  He's a creole.  I said, "You watch your back and hurry home," and he said, "They snatched me out of my car 'cause they thought I was white, and they wanted to bust my head in.  I had to show my driver's license to get home."  I said, "Good deal you had your driver's license."  And it showed that he was a black man.  They let him pass.
Story_ID: 128382
Speaker 1: So did you stay in--while you were in Chicago [Illinois], did you get involved in any blues music at all or just gospel?
Speaker 2: I just sang gospel.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I sang with Shirley Caesar, I sang with the Caesar Singers, I sang with all the well-known groups.  I went to church with Mahalia Jackson at New [sic Greater] Salem Baptist Church.
Speaker 1: Uh hum.  Now did they, did you, what kind of a sense did you have for your talent then?  You know singing with these greats?
Speaker 2: I know I could sing 'cause they loved me and I was asked to do a solo everywhere I went.  "Ms. Ruby would you please come and do a solo?"  I didn't get paid, but I did solos.
Speaker 1: Did any of them ask you to perform with them, in a position where you would get paid?
Speaker 2: Not really because I was already singing with my husband.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: We had a little group.
Speaker 1: Okay
Speaker 2: And we would be either the first or last on the program.
Story_ID: 128383
Speaker 1: So did you meet Albertina Walker?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.  I met all the Caravans.  That's when I was a little girl, sixteen.  Just before I left my home I had the opportunity of singing background for Shirley Caesar.
Speaker 1: Okay, you didn't tell me that.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I was a substitute singer for her when her singer got sick, and I was a singer for almost a month.
Speaker 1: In Dallas [Texas]?
Speaker 2: All over the United States.
Speaker 1: Now, that's something we shouldn't miss in terms of telling your story, that's something you should definitely tell.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I sang with her everywhere she went.
Speaker 1: While you were in high school?  It was during the summertime or what?
Speaker 2: Yeah, the summertime, 'cause her singer happen to get sick and she came to my church to perform and they found that the singer was gone be sick out for a long time and they heard me sing, and they said, "Would you consider singing in a, my singer's place," and I say yeah, "What I have to do?"  She said, "Go from city to city singing and I'll take good care of you."  I said "but I'm a teenager, you have to get permission from my mama."  And she signed a piece of paper and allowed me to go out with Shirley and I was out with her a month.
Speaker 1: Okay, this is in the summer before your senior year or--?
Speaker 2: It was during my senior year [at I.M. Terrell High School, Fort Worth, Texas].
Speaker 1: Okay.  Oh, during the school year?
Speaker 2: I didn't get married til end, I was graduated.
Speaker 1: Okay, it was during the school year you sang for Shirley Caesar.  Did you make pretty good money?
Speaker 2: I can't remember.  It was alright.  It was a salary I wasn't used to getting.  You know, I was getting paid to sing, which freaked me out.  And I said, wow, I got talent.  I can get paid.  So I did that and when I was up there singing with Shirley, I began to sing full-time and I sang gospel, gospel, gospel and then when I came from Chicago [Illinois] I was really independent then. I worked with, at a club and I can't remember the name of the club, but I got paid a dollar and fifty cent.  And I said, boy, I got paid a dollar and fifty cent.
Story_ID: 128384
Speaker 1: We had to go back to high school and hear a story that we should have heard before, but, back in high school, how did you meet Shirley Caesar?  So you went on tour with Shirley Caesar?
Speaker 2: Yeah, well you know, this, this preacher would always have concerts at his church and so we would be the opening act, being a choir.
Speaker 1: Was this in Dallas [Texas]?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  And we were invited to sing at his church and being the choir to open up for different acts, they heard me sing.  Shirley Caesar happened to be in the audience because she was, it was a show that she did for the auditorium the night before so on that Sunday when they're not working, they would come to this church and sing and get paid extra money just to continue on where they got to go.  So she heard me sing.  She said, "Would you consider going on the road with me, my singer is sick and I need somebody to take her place until she gets better."  I said, "Yeah, but you have to ask my mama 'cause I have to get permission 'cause I'm a student."  She said, "You're a student?"  I said, "Yeah, I go to school."  She said, "Well, where is your mom?"  And I took her to her [Ida Emma Reed] and she agreed to let me go on the road with her and I went out there for a month and we would all have a, what was these gospel choirs and quartets, and the quartets would come on first and she would always get the house and say, "Whoever gets the house in this city, gets the chance to come on last in the next city."  It would always be Shirley.  She would always get the house 'cause she would jump off the stage and she'd have the choir robes on.  I would have to sew the hem in her choir robe every night that she jump offstage and get her shoe caught up in her choir robe.  And so, after doing that, they paid me.  I can't remember what the salary was, but they paid me and I came back home.  And I said, "Boy, you got paid for that.  Maybe you can continue."  So I went from singing gospel to singing jazz.
Story_ID: 128385
Speaker 1: Well, wait a minute now.  How did that transition happen?  You were paid for singing gospel, not jazz.  But how did you think of singing jazz?
Speaker 2: I did one thing, I said I could do another.
Speaker 1: Okay, did you always want to sing jazz or blues?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I just heard it on the radio.  I said I can sing that.  Then I got a job working with this man named Mel, and it paid me a dollar and twenty-five cent.
Speaker 1: Now this is while you're still in high school?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Oh, and no, this is after I came out of high school.
Speaker 1: And after you moved to Chicago [Illinois]?
Speaker 2: I moved to Chicago, I moved back to Memphis [Tennessee], I moved back to Texas and then I start singing jazz.
Speaker 1: Okay, now well tell me.  Let's follow it closely on this.  Now you were in Chicago married and we just talked about the riots.
Speaker 2: That was ten years.
Speaker 1: You lived in Chicago for ten years?
Speaker 2: Um hum.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you went there in '66 [1966] and you stayed until '70 [1970]?
Speaker 2: Oh no, I got there before '66 [1966].  Oh no, I got there in '66 [1966].  That's when I got married.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I stayed there until like '70 [1970], 1970, then I left--
Speaker 1: That's four years.  Yeah.
Speaker 2: I stayed out there longer than that.  I stayed in Chicago until the kids were four.
Speaker 1: That'd be about four, well, '66 [1966] to '70 [1970] is four years.  So in 1970 you moved back?
Speaker 2: I think I stayed longer than that.
Speaker 1: Okay, maybe '71 [1971], '72 [1972], I don't know.
Speaker 2: Yeah, something like that cause I can't remember no dates.
Speaker 1: Okay, but you moved back to Texas?
Speaker 2: I moved back to Texas.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And then I started singing jazz.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, why?
Speaker 2: 'Cause I was grown.
Speaker 1: Okay, right, yeah.  I know you can do it, but why did you think--
Speaker 2: It paid money.
Speaker 1: It paid more money than gospel?
Speaker 2: Gospel didn't pay no money.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  There we go.  Okay.  So, what kind of, you were singing jazz, by jazz you mean what?
Speaker 2: I was singing Duke Ellington, Ella Fitzgerald stuff.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yep.  And then after jazz I started singing R and B.  R and B went from R and B to the blues.  And then I start mixing it all up.  And that's where I am today.
Speaker 1: Okay, now you said your first job singing jazz, you got paid a dollar and forty-five?
Speaker 2: I got a dollar and twenty-five cent.  I said I'm a go back tomorrow and made two dollars and I kept going back and going back.  I made more money.  I got a bill for fifteen dollars.
Speaker 1: Now what was the name of the place that you were singing?
Speaker 2: I can't think of it.
Speaker 1: Was it out there in the suburb of Dallas [Texas]?
Speaker 2: I can't begin to think of where it was located.  I know it was long away from where I lived.  Mel would come pick me up and take me there.
Speaker 1: Okay.  At this time, when you'd been introduced, I guess to jazz music, I guess--did you have a favorite artist?
Speaker 2: Ella Fitzgerald.  She was my favorite artist.
Speaker 1: So did you try to pattern your singing after hers?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I wanted my diction to be like hers 'cause when she sang you could understand every word she sang.  And that's where I wanted to be.  I wanted to be clear and understood.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Not the second time I go around, the very first time when you hear me sing, I want it to be understood and Ella Fitzgerald was that kind of person.  And Sarah Vaughan was the same.  I would do they music and you know, it really worked.  He [Mel] invited me come back again and so I went like, I sang at this club like a whole year and I got my salary up to fifteen dollars.
Speaker 1: Per night?
Speaker 2: Per night.  I said this is really good.  Compared to then, what I'm doing now, that's a long ways--
Story_ID: 128386
Speaker 1: --Well, for instance, your mother [Ida Emma Reed] was working as a maid at the time.
Speaker 2: Uh hum.
Speaker 1: How much would she make per day?
Speaker 2: I couldn't tell you, I know it was not a whole lot.
Speaker 1: Was it fifteen dollars?
Speaker 2: Wasn't even fifteen dollars.  When you a maid back there, they had minimum wage was, I think a dollar.
Speaker 1: In those days probably about a dollar and fifty.
Speaker 2: Yeah, a dollar.
Speaker 1: One seventy-five an hour.
Speaker 2: Yeah, an hour.  She worked like ten hours a day.  So how much money is that?
Speaker 1: About seventeen, eighteen dollars I guess.
Speaker 2: And then she had to catch the bus and come home with some of that money.  She had to pay the bus driver to come home and after getting home with that and she got paid once every two weeks, and that was a hard job.  I'll never forget the name--I went to her job one time and they put me under the table 'cause he said put her under the table and she can stay there all day, until you get ready to leave.
Speaker 1: That's when you were little, little?
Speaker 2: I was little.  I said I'd never work for a woman like this.  I don't want my mama to do nothing like this.  I had her retire when she was like forty, from working and I took care of her after that, and I still take care of her.
Story_ID: 128387
Speaker 1: Okay, now, something I didn't ask you about from this move [from Chicago, Illinois to Texas].  Now when you moved, did your husband [Jessie Moseley] move with you and all your children or what?  Was it just you?
Speaker 2: Oh, I got a divorce.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  That's important, and so--
Speaker 2: I left him there.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So you bring your children with you to Texas?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.  I don't leave nowhere without my kids.  He had a house, the car.  I couldn't drive anyway.  And I'm gone.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I called my daddy [Ocie Lee Wilson] and he came and got me.
Speaker 1: Okay, so he drove all the way up to Chicago?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  He told my husband, "If you take my daughter away and I hear about you misusing her, you can bet I'm a be knocking on your door cause I'm coming to get her when she call me."  So I called.  I said, "Daddy come and get me."  He drove all the way to Chicago from Texas, got me and brought me back to Texas.
Story_ID: 128388
Speaker 1: So you're back in Texas and now, did you continue to sing gospel too?
Speaker 2: I did it sometime, on Sunday morning.  I would go to church and sing on Sunday morning.
Speaker 1: Okay, this is an age old dilemma, Saturday night and Sunday morning.  Can you sing gospel and jazz at the same (unclear).
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I balanced it up.  I never was late for church.  I didn't never go to Sunday school anyway.  I was never late for church but hung out all night long, I was not late for church.  That was a cardinal sin.  'Cause you're already marked by going to clubs and my mama [Ida Emma Reed] said, "You gone hang out in that joint and you gone come to church?  At least you can be on time."  I said, "Okay, I'll be on time."  I never was late.  I'd be in that choir on Sunday morning.  But I was by myself.  I was single.  Yep.
Story_ID: 128389
Speaker 1: Is it around this time that you met [HM] B.B. King, or did we skip past that part?
Speaker 2: I met B.B. King when I was nineteen.
Speaker 1: Okay, so this is much earlier, okay--
Speaker 2: later.
Speaker 1: --than where we are?  Earlier because you got--this is after you moved back to Texas, or while you were in Chicago [Illinois]?
Speaker 2: After I moved back to Texas.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I think I was nineteen, maybe I was twenty when I met him, but I met him at the Fairmont Hotel.
Speaker 1: He was in Dallas [Texas].
Speaker 2: He was performing there.  He was opening act for Ray Charles.
Speaker 1: Well, tell us how you met him, you know, what happened?
Speaker 2: I happened to get the opportunity to go to his show.  I didn't have to pay to go.  I had the connections.  I went to his show and there he was.  Then he said, "You wanna go to dinner?"  And I say yeah.  So I went to dinner with him and he said, "You wanna be my friend, you got to eat this."  I said what is that?  He said, "Escargots," and I said, "What is escargots?"  He says, "Just eat it, you'll be my friend, eat two of them."  Escargots is snails.  I say, "I wanna be your friend" so I ate 'em.  So I put 'em between two crackers with black butter and I ate 'em.  He said, "You're my friend."  I said, "Thank you very much."  I wanna be B.B. King's friend.  I ate them escargots.  It tasted so bad, but I wanted to be his friend and we've been friends ever since.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  Did you perform with B.B. King's group at all?
Speaker 2: I have had the opportunity to perform with him.
Speaker 1: Did he know then that you could sing?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: He does now.  He respects me as one of the greatest singers he ever heard, especially when he listens to my CD.  On my CD there's a song called "A Song for You."  That's his favorite song.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: He said, "You know I listen to you on my iPod all the time and can't nobody touch you when it comes to singing that song."
Story_ID: 128390
Speaker 1: Now did you ever have any voice training or anything?
Speaker 2: Only in school [I.M. Terrell High School, Fort Worth, Texas], with Ms. Presivant [ph.].
Speaker 1: But you weren't in there--
Speaker 2: I didn't last very long because I didn't care for her because she told me to go to the front of the class.  That's why I took auto mechanics.  I never had professional voice training.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you just started singing?
Speaker 2: Yep.
Speaker 1: Do you think that when you look back on it, you think you should have had any training or didn't it make a difference?
Speaker 2: Didn't make no difference.  If you travel somewhere and hear somebody singing, you gone pick up what they got.  You gone add to yours and that what make you a singer, stuff you find to add to your voice and you keep going and going and going, and being appreciated because you sing with diction and your voice is clear and they can understand you the first time around.  So you can be appreciated and that's how I get the jobs.  And one job leads to another, another, and I keep going, keep going and going.
Story_ID: 128391
Speaker 1: Okay, so when you got back to Dallas [Texas], how long did you perform in Dallas, you know, at this club?
Speaker 2: I performed until the club closed down.
Speaker 1: Okay, and how long was that?
Speaker 2: I think it lasted about four years.
Speaker 1: So that takes us to what, about 1974 or '75 [1975]?
Speaker 2: Yeah, and then I moved to Memphis [Tennessee].
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now how did you come to move to Memphis you know?  What was the attraction?
Speaker 2: Well I was on tour.  I was going for, I was working at this club called the other, The Other Place. It was the name of the club and I was traveling from club, it happened every town I went to and I wound up in Memphis and I wanted to find [HM] Isaac Hayes, Rufus Thomas and Carla Thomas.  I know when I saw Isaac do a show, he said, "Why don't you come to my town?"  I said, "Where you live?"  He said, "I live in Memphis, Tennessee."  I said, "One day I'm going to come to your town and I'm a find you."  I came to Memphis and I looked for him and I couldn't find him.  So I left and then I came back and I found him, in the studio on Chelsea [Avenue].  I think (unclear) the other Stax [Records].
Speaker 1: Okay, the Stax studio?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I found him there with his band in rehearsal.  And I said, I told him who I was.  I introduced myself and I said you told me to come to Memphis.  Now I'm here and he said, "Well how long you gone be in Memphis?"  I said I don't know how long I'm a be.  I'm a singer at this club and I said, "I'm renting a car and I'm staying at the hotel."  And he said what hotel you staying at?  I said I'm staying at Red Roof Inn on Brooks Road, and he said you have a rental car?  I said yeah.  And he said, "How long you gone drive the rental car?"  I said until I find my way around.  So he told his boys, go out there and disconnect her speedometer so she can stay in Memphis a long time.  So they disconnected my speedometer because then when you rent a car you can disconnect the speedometer.  You can't do it now, but they disconnected it and I found there was no west side of Memphis, 'cause I was in West Memphis and I said, "I'm across the river and it says Arkansas."  He says because there is no west side to Memphis.  I said, "Why is it north, east and south?"  He said that's it.  I said I'm gone stay in Memphis and learn the rest of it.  He said you gone stay here?  I said yep.  I'm a permanent resident.  "Well, I'll help you get around, just call me."  And that's how I got into Memphis.
Speaker 1: Isaac Hayes was a huge star at that time, so--
Speaker 2: He was a great star.  He was one of my best friends.
Speaker 1: Yeah, in 1974, I think it was the height of Isaac Hayes' fame.
Speaker 2: He was hot, real hot.
Speaker 1: Yeah, with the chains on and all that.
Speaker 2: Yeah, 'cause he came to Dallas [Texas] and I met his singer, the dancer named Smash.  That was a bald headed woman and I got pictures of her now and she just had an aneurysm.  She's real sick and she got gray hair now.  Then she had a bald head.
Speaker 1: To match his I guess.
Speaker 2: Yeah, and she danced, she had dancers and they danced with the chains on, and I said wow, she's wonderful.  And then I met her in the lobby and she said, she introduced herself.  She said my name is Smash.  I said Smash.  He said a.k.a. Helen.  I said Helen, is your real name right?  She said that's my real name, but everybody know me in Memphis by the name of Smash.  I said okay Ms. Smash.  I'll see you in Memphis.
Speaker 1: Did she explain how she got that name?
Speaker 2: Naw, Isaac gave it to her.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: Isaac thought it was a great name for stage.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But I found out her name was Helen Washington, which is cool.  She's really a nice person.
Speaker 1: Okay, but she just had an aneurysm?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  She had her aneurysm about three years ago but she still got the effect.
Speaker 1: So, did Isaac Hayes help you get a lot of jobs?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.  I got the hook up and I stayed here and I worked everywhere in Memphis--
Story_ID: 128392
Speaker 1: --Then I met Rufus Thomas.  He got the hook up for me.
Speaker 2: What's he like?
Speaker 1: He's deceased.
Speaker 2: I know.
Speaker 1: He was a cool person.  He was a dirty old sexy senior citizen.
Speaker 2: Kind of like the way his image was on the--
Speaker 1: Yeah.  He said, "I'm not, I'm not a senior citizen, I'm a dirty sexy senior citizen."  I said okay and I went along with that.  He's used to come to my apartment and sit on the floor, because I didn't have no furniture.  Until I got some furniture he would sit on the floor.  Yeah, we had a good time together.  Then he introduced me to his children and I met Marvell [Thomas] and Carla [Thomas] and Vaneese [Thomas].
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Then he introduced me to his wife [Lorene Thomas].  She passed away too.  She passed before Rufus.  They all were good people.
Story_ID: 128393
Speaker 1: So was the music community here [Memphis, Tennessee] very, you know, tight?
Speaker 2: Oh, very tight.  People knew everybody's business.  People with good business.  Not like it is now.  Everybody's hush hush and to themselves.  Then, when people were real entertainers were dealing, everybody would keep everybody's business to themselves in the entertainment business.  Outsiders would never know your business unless you told 'em.  But, it's not like that anymore.
Speaker 1: Now, did you ever meet Elvis Presley?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I sing now with the Elvis tour on the cruise [Carnival Cruise Lines 'The Elvis Cruise'].  I did that for two years and we all got together on the last cruise in '08 [2008].  That was before I had my stroke and we went on the cruise and we never made it where we were supposed to go because of hurricanes.  We were surrounded by three hurricanes and I was out there with the crew--the whole group, the Jordanaires, Ronnie and Joe Guercio, the leader of the orchestra.  We were all on a cruise ship together. And we got stuck by hurricanes, three hurricanes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: We never made it to our destination.  We sit in the middle of the ocean and rocked.  And George Klein was on the ship with us.  George Klein was the creator of Elvis.
Speaker 1: Uh hum.
Speaker 2: And, what's his name?  After I had the stroke, I can't think of too many names.  The creator.
Speaker 1: You said George Klein.
Speaker 2: Yeah, he helped create Elvis.  He was the M.C. of the show.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Trying to think of this man name.  Jerry Schilling, he was the actual creator of Elvis.  He was out there on the cruise ship with us, but we never made it where we were supposed to went.  But we entertained every night.  I was the only female on the show.  And we (unclear).  It was a great cruise until the storm.
Speaker 1: About what year was this?
Speaker 2: '08 [2008].  I went out there in '07 [2007] too.  I was supposed to went out there this year, but I had the stroke.
Story_ID: 128394
Speaker 1: Okay. Now back in those early days, so you met [HM] B.B. King. Was B.B. King here in Memphis [Tennessee] too (unclear)?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.
Speaker 1: And [HM] Isaac Hayes and Rufus Thomas--
Speaker 2: Albert King.
Speaker 1: Albert King.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I didn't know Otis Redding, but I been with his son recently.  Otis Redding, III.  We communicate on the phone all the time.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Yeah, Otis Redding had passed away by the time you got here, and most of the Bar-Kays had been killed too, that same plane crash.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  The Bar-Kays are cool people.  Yeah I worked with them before, a couple of times.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And we just did a album together, for Haiti.  We did, one hundred percent went to Haiti, although nobody ain't got no money yet.  I don't know where the money went.  But we made the album and called it Message from Memphis to Haiti and Larry Dodson, who was the lead singer for The Bar-Kays, him and another guy, created this song so we could send it back through the Red Cross and do one hundred percent dedication to Haiti.  I don't think Haiti has received any money.  From nobody.  They raised millions of dollars.  Nobody know where the money is.  And we gave our time at no charge.
Story_ID: 128395
Speaker 1: Now you were singing in Memphis [Tennesee] in various places or were you in just one place for most of the time?
Speaker 2: I was singing at the place across the street and then I went to Hawaiian Isle, which is an all-black club, and I met with Bow Legs Miller, and I told him what I sing and somebody said he said, "You can't sing, you can't sit in with us, you have to rehearse."  I said, "Well you know, they ain't paying me."  So I go back to my hotel and sit down and chill out, and then he heard that I could sing.  He says, "Ms. Ruby Wilson in the house and we gonna ask her to sing."  I got up and I sang and he got on his knees and apologized.
Speaker 1: So he didn't realize that you really could--
Speaker 2: He didn't know that I could sing for real.
Speaker 1: He thought you were just somebody up there asking--
Speaker 2: He thought I was a person from the street who wanted to sing.  And then when he heard me sing he got on his knees and apologized and then he said, you want to travel with us tonight.  I said where y'all going?  We's gone club hop.  So I said, I can club hop.  Let me go the hotel and feed my dog.  I had a chihuahua that was traveling with me at the time.  He went everywhere and he would swim in the water at the hotels.  He was a good companion, and I said I'll go back and feed my dog and then I'll follow y'all anywhere.
Speaker 1: Well, what was your dog's name?
Speaker 2: What his name was?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: I can't remember.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: That's a long story.  I know he was a good little dog.  And so I went back to the hotel and I fed him and that's when they took me around to all the clubs and introduced me to the black people in Memphis.
Story_ID: 128396
Speaker 1: That's when I got introduced to the black clubs all over Memphis [Tennessee], 'cause the place across the street was an all-white club.  Some blacks were allowed to come in if they knew you.  You had to be on the register.  It was a private club.
Speaker 2: The Other Place?
Speaker 1: Yeah, The Other Place.
Speaker 2: Now, I wanted to ask you about The Other Place.  Now is there a chain of these around the country?
Speaker 1: It was a chain of clubs.  And I went to all of 'em.
Speaker 2: You were a part of an entourage that went to The Other Place in different cities--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: And the place was called The Other Place, just so people watching this will not be confused.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: So the club's called The Other Place and you're part of The Other Place's entertainment, and how many different groups of people were traveling to the Other Place?
Speaker 1: I traveled with an all-white band, and one time we were traveling on the road and we were up in Columbus, Georgia and the car ran hot, so we had to get out and walk to a destination that was close.  So we started walking and walking we found this church.  We thought it was just regular church service.  We got up there and looked in the door.  It was a Ku Klux Klan having a meeting and I told my singer, I said, "I'm gone pretend I'm white with a tan 'cause you are a," he was a Jew and he had nappy hair.  And, it was so funny.  So I said, "The next best thing for us to do is get out and start running back to the car."  So we start running back to the car and we got back to the car, it was some soldiers who were headed to base [Naval Air Station Memphis, later Naval Support Activity Mid-South] and they were going to Memphis--what they call it, Millington [Tennessee].  So they wanted to help us out and they, they were driving in front of us and all of a sudden they cut they lights off so our generator went bad.  I said why did y'all turn the lights off?  They wanted to see what it felt like driving in the dark.  I said up in the mountain?  That was how I got into Memphis [Tennessee] and stayed.  I said this is just too much.  When I get to Memphis, I'm gone stay.  So I wound up staying here.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And I been here ever since.
Speaker 2: Okay, so they kind of showed you the ropes of what's going on in Memphis you were saying and this is late '70s [1970s] I guess?
Speaker 1: Um hum.
Speaker 2: And you started performing in other places?
Speaker 1: Yep, then I started singing in the black clubs.
Story_ID: 128397
Speaker 1: Let me ask you about [HM] Jerry Fanion.  Is--just a moment ago, even as we sat here, we got a word that Jerry Fanion had passed away and he was a long-time civil rights activist and community volunteer and car salesman, a lot of different--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: One of the things he did, he had a club and you said that you all were very good friends.  Can you tell us something about your relationship with Jerry Fanion?
Speaker 2: St. Thomas Square.  That was a great hangout for all the boys, and the girls.  And he would hang out all night long with us, as long as we want to be there, that's as long as he was open.  And his son is now the security for Mayor Wharton [HM A C Wharton, Jr.], the mayor of Memphis [Tennessee] and the Jerry Fanion was on, he was a good man.  And he was like a political man who was involved in everything.  If it happened in Memphis, he would know.  You always ask him what was going on, he would always tell you exactly what was going on in Memphis because he was up on everything.  If he didn't know, he would find somebody to tell him, and that way you would know.  He wouldn't leave you in the dark.  And that's where I met Dr. [W.W.] Herrenton, at his place, at his club.  Dr. Herrenton was then the school superintendent.  And then he became my friend.  And Jerry and I were best of friends.  I miss him.  I think the world, the City of Memphis is gonna miss him.
Story_ID: 128398
Speaker 1: You were known for quite a while as the Queen Ambassador of Memphis [Tennessee].  Now, here's somebody from outside of Dallas [Texas] who lived in Chicago [Illinois] for a while, didn't grow up here, you move here and start singing.  The community kind of embraces you and you become Queen Ambassador of Beale Street, right? Beale Street.  Now how did that happen?
Speaker 2: Twenty-five years ago.  I was approached by, I think his name was, I can't think of his name, but he worked for Channel 5 NBC, and he said what do you think about becoming the Queen Ambassador of Beale Street.  I said that sound like a great ring, you know, I would love that title.  He said, well I'm gonna make that happen.  And then, they gave me that title.  Three years later, they said you have moved up.  I said what do you mean?  He said along with Queen Ambassador of Beale Street, you are now the Queen of Beale Street.  I said that's a wonderful title.  What I do with it?  He said you just go around and keep doing what you doing and representing Memphis.  I said that's a good deal, I can do that.  So I went around the world seven times as Queen of Beale Street and I went every destination there is.  I walked the Great Wall of China as the Queen of Beale Street.  I've been with the queens, both the queens, Queen of England [Elizabeth II] and I've been with the Maori Queen of New Zealand [Dame Te Atairangikaahu].  And I walked in a volcano in Reykjavik, Iceland as the Queen of Beale Street.  I've been everywhere.
Story_ID: 128399
Speaker 1: So this [Queen of Beale Street] is an official position where the city sends you to other countries to represent Beale Street [Memphis, Tennessee]?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  And I met the [Maori] queen of New Zealand [Te Atairangikaahu] right here in Memphis when I was singing at the club called Mallard's at the Peabody Hotel.  Mallard's was a bar and the queen came in and I said, you look like a queen.  She says I am a queen.  I said right.  She says, and then somebody came and said, did you meet the queen.  I said you talking 'bout that little lady with that little purse on her arm?  I said yeah.  They said she's a real queen.  I said wow.  The queen.  And they said yeah, she's a queen, the Maori queen of New Zealand.  And she says, I'd like to invite you to my country to sing.  It's going to take me like a year to do it, can you do it?  I said yes I can.  And I admired a ring on her finger.  It was a jade ring.  You know jade is an expensive jewelry in her country.  So she says a promissory note, I'm going to give you this ring, so she put the ring on my finger and I wore the ring and then I finally got a chance to go to her country.  And after being over there, I was complaining about it being cold.  She said take her shopping.  I went shopping and they bought me a coat, and the coat cost four thousand dollars and it was so expensive I couldn't wear it back to the USA.  Had to have it shipped back by Federal Express, and you know the country is a country of sheep.  They have over ten million sheep.  So this coat was made of sheep skin, and I said, I love this coat and so I entertained during her show.  They had a homecoming and I was the only outsider that was invited back to the grounds.  They lived like behind walls, and it was like a kingdom, so I walked with the people one step at a time and I walked into the village and the mothers would be praying for you as you walk inside, and she allowed me into her palace, and I was the only person from outside that was allowed ever in her house.  And she says pick anything you want and you can have it.  So I picked several things.  She said they're yours and she gave me a place to live and she gave me a maid.  I never been woke up by a maid (laughter).  "Dinner is served, breakfast is served, your clothes are ready, your car is ready," you know, and I felt like a queen over there.  It was a great experience and it was my first trip out of the United States, and I been traveling ever since.
Speaker 1: Now what year was this?
Speaker 2: This was 1996.  You know we give tribute to a different country in Memphis for Memphis in May every year, and that was the year we saluted New Zealand.
Story_ID: 128400
Speaker 1: Now, so this pos--, once again lets go back to the--you weren't just given a title, you were given a position which is kinda like, it's not like a full-time job, but it's a position where the city [Memphis, Tennesee] actually would pay you to go to be their mascot.
Speaker 2: No, not the city would pay me.
Speaker 1: Okay, who?
Speaker 2: The people who I travel for.
Speaker 1: Okay and who were they?
Speaker 2: I was traveling with a group called Jazzdagen, D-A-G-E-N.
Speaker 1: D-A-G-A-N.
Speaker 2: E-N.
Speaker 1: So the Jazzdagen--
Speaker 2: From [Los Angeles] California.
Speaker 1: From California?
Speaker 2: They had selected me to go travel with them and they found out I was Queen of Memphis, Queen of Beale Street so they wanted a singer, so they found me and they had me travel with them, and I traveled like for about thirteen years.
Speaker 1: Okay, around the world singing.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  On a cruise ship.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  All right.
Speaker 2: That's how I got a chance to walk the Great Wall of China.
Speaker 1: Oh, okay, I thought it was some kind of position where you represented the City.
Speaker 2: It was a position, they heard about me in Memphis [Tennessee].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And they selected me to be their representative to sing with them on the cruise ships--
Speaker 1: Okay, I understand.
Speaker 2: --because of my title.
Speaker 1: I understand now.  Okay.
Story_ID: 128401
Speaker 1: All right, now, you said earlier before we got started that you knew [HM] Ernest Withers very well.  He's a one of the Memphis [Tennessee] legends who passed away last year, a photographer.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: You said he was your godfather?
Speaker 2: Yeah, he was like a godfather, he called me Baby Girl everywhere I went.  He used to call me Baby Girl.
Speaker 1: And when did you meet Ernest Withers? Can you tell us something--
Speaker 2: When I first came to Memphis, he was the first photographer I met 'cause he took great pictures and I found that he had millions of pictures that he had already taken.  I said take my picture.  So he took me.  I went to him on all his locations and he took my picture everywhere I went.  He'd always be there for a photographer, the main photographer who would take all the affairs pictures, and he would always take my picture and I would get a copy of it, and I got, and I started taking pictures too.  You know I got hundreds of pictures in my possession and because of Mr. Withers.  He said girlfriend if you want to keep a memory of everything, keep a camera in your purse wherever you go and take pictures.  And it's the only way you can remember what you did.  So I got his advice I start taking pictures myself.  And I took pictures last night.  I took twelve pictures last night.  And I got pictures of everybody, wherever I go I take pictures and I got it from Mr. Withers.
Speaker 1: Okay, that must have been a valuable skill to have on the road, as much travel as you've done, right?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, you better know I got some pictures.  I got thousands of pictures I've taken myself.  All because of Mr. Withers.
Story_ID: 128402
Speaker 1: Now, out of all of this, you traveled you say for eighteen years, how many years was it?
Speaker 2: How many years I been on the road traveling?
Speaker 1: Right, with Jazzdagens [Jazzdagen]?
Speaker 2: Thirteen.
Speaker 1: Thirteen years?  Okay.
Speaker 2: I still got a trip I got to do next year, I got to go to Japan.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So you can say maybe fifteen years.  I been on the road since '88 [1988] with Jazzdagen.  That when I got on the road with them, 1988.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now of all the places you've been, you know, it seems as though New Zealand made the biggest impression on you?
Speaker 2: And Australia, yeah, and Japan, China, Taiwan.  You know the double tower, I think it's in Taiwan.  I crossed over that.
Speaker 1: That's the one in Sri Lanka [sic, Petronas Towers, Kuala Lampur, Malaysia]?
Speaker 2: Uh hum.  The double twin towers.  And they got this connection at the top.  I went across that.  I always been adventurous, be like the typical tourist.  Everywhere they went I could go so I took advantage of it.
Story_ID: 128403
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now here in Memphis [Tennessee] where do you normally perform?
Speaker 2: On Beale Street.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: You could say just on Beale Street 'cause I do the seventeen-piece orchestra on Sundays at Alfred's.  I do Ground Zero on Sundays and on Thursday I'm at Itta Bena's Restaurant above [HM] B.B. King's.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  That's named for the town that he grew up in in Mississippi.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Itta Bena, Mississippi.
Speaker 1: He and [HM] James Bevel are from Itta Bena.
Speaker 2: Yep.
Story_ID: 128404
Speaker 1: Well you've made several, well, lots of recordings, how many albums have you made?
Speaker 2: I have ten albums.  And the last one was 'Show You A Good Time.'
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now these are mostly blues, or were they mixed up?
Speaker 2: No.  Mixed.  My first album was with the, with the Hot Cotton Jazz Band.  And it's traditional Dixieland jazz.
Speaker 1: Uh hum.  Let's see you performed Dixieland jazz, the blues--
Speaker 2: The blues, R and B, gospel, I can do country cause I'm from Texas.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: My favorite country/western song is (singing) 'Don't It Make Your Brown Eyes Blue' [sic, 'Don't It Make My Brown Eyes Blue'].  Or either, what's the other song?  I can't think of it right now.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But it's a country/western song that I love.
Story_ID: 128405
Speaker 1: Okay, now did you ever meet Ray Charles?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.  I did a concert for him the last two he did in Memphis [Tennessee], I was the opening act.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And when he came here the last time, it was like 2004, right before he passed away, at the Gardens [Live at the Garden - Memphis Botanic Garden], I opened up for him.  And for his sixty-fifth birthday, at the Orpheum Theater, I was a Raelette for a night.
Speaker 1: A Raelette for a night.  That sounds like a, good title of a movie.
Speaker 2: Yeah I was a Raelette for a night.  I had the right clothes on.  I had on all black and I mixed, they put them right in the middle and I was a Raelette for a night.  But I was the opening act for Ray and I sang "Happy Birthday" to him.
Speaker 1: Okay, now do you have a favorite performer that you perform with?
Speaker 2: My favorite performer is Patti LaBelle.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Patti LaBelle, she's at (unclear) I guess you would call her an R and B singer.
Speaker 2: Yeah, she sing everything.
Speaker 1: Soul singer, yeah.
Speaker 2: She's a soul singer, and my favorite group are the Temptations because when they come to Memphis they let me sing with them.  And I sing.  The song is called My Girl, but I say My Man, but I sing with them.  As a matter of fact, I talked with the Temptations this week.  They are not doing as many shows as they normally do.  They've cut back.
Speaker 1: You ever talk to Otis Williams?
Speaker 2: Yeah, Otis is my running buddy.  But I talked to Joe Herndon.  He's the bass in the group.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: The new bass.
Speaker 1: Okay, sings the part that Melvin [Franklin] used to do back in the day.  Okay.
Story_ID: 128406
Speaker 1: What do you strive for as a singer in terms of style?  Do you strive to--
Speaker 2: I strive to make people understand that Ruby Wilson exist, and I'm carrying my own weight, my own personality and my own voice.  And I can be duplicated, I would love to be duplicated, but you know, if you can reach what I do, then you're good, 'cause I love doing everything.  And they said jazz.  Yeah I can do that.  R and B?  Yeah, I can do that.  Gospel?  Yeah I can do that.  The blues, I can do that.  It's according what you paying.
Speaker 1: Have you ever tried to rap.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I don't really like rap.
Speaker 1: Okay.  I had to ask that.
Speaker 2: I ain't never been paid to do rap.  I had a rap one time (laughter).
Story_ID: 128407
Speaker 1: Let me ask you about your film career.  Now how, when did you first, was 'Heart of Dixie' the first film that you made?
Speaker 2: Naw.  The first movie I did was called 'Marie.'
Speaker 1: 'Marie.'  Okay what year was that?
Speaker 2: Oh, I don't remember.  It was like in 1980 something [1985], but I did it with Morgan Freeman and Sissy Spacek.
Speaker 1: That's easily looked up.  But the film is called 'Marie'?
Speaker 2: Um hum.  'Marie: A True Story.'
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now what was it about?
Speaker 2: It was about Marie Ragghianti who was the prosecuting attorney and she worked for the governor of Tennessee [Ray Blanton] and the governor was allowing pardon to the people in prison for a certain amount of money.  The governor went to prison because he was pardoning too many prisoners and I was one of the prisoners and my pimp paid the governor fifty thousand dollars to get me out 'cause I was six months pregnant.  And I had other children at home so I didn't get a release.  Instead I was sent back to prison again, for eighteen more months.  And so my pimp said, I paid you fifty thousand dollars to get my wife out of here and now you gone send her back?  What the hell wrong with this system?  So, got into a fuss and Morgan Freeman was my parole officer.  He said, "Eighteen more months.  Now get outta here."  And they took me out and threw me back in prison.  And that was the end of my character.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: I played a part of, I think, my name was Rose Lee Cooper.
Speaker 1: Now how did that happen?  How did you get involved in movies?
Speaker 2: I just showed up.
Speaker 1: Was that a casting call or something?
Speaker 2: I didn't have no call.  I heard about the movie being filmed in Nashville [Tennessee], so me and my sister decided to drive up to Nashville and I said who you gone be when we git up here?  Who gone represent you?  I used [HM] B.B. King represented me.  B.B. King told me to come up here.  He didn't send me, but I said his name B.B. King and that got me in the door.  So I just walked right in and I happen to read the lines and I read 'em right.  And they say, "You got the part."  I said, "Thank you very much."
Speaker 1: So you hadn't had any acting lessons, or--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: No acting training?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Didn't go to acting studio?
Speaker 2: No.  Just like the singing.  I didn't have no training singing.  I said, you know, in Memphis [Tennessee] we can act.
Speaker 1: Was it hard to do?
Speaker 2: It was not hard, I just remembered the lines.  The only thing was remembering the lines and coming in at the right time.  So I did everything right and they hired me.
Speaker 1: Well you know there are people that study for years and years and try, and you know, they audition for all these parts, and they--
Speaker 2: I didn't audition, I just showed up.  And I, they said, "Can you stay overnight?"  I said, "I got to go to work tomorrow."  They said, "Well, they told me, we'll pay you."  I said, "Oh yeah, I can stay."  I didn't ask how much.  Enough they say we'll pay you.  And I told my sister, "We gotta stay because we got to go film this movie."  Find out we was filming at a prison for real.  Went to that prison, they stole all my jewelry, they stole my purse.
Speaker 1: The prisoners actually stole your--
Speaker 2: I had it locked up.  I think the people who do the, who dem--
Speaker 1: The security guards?
Speaker 2: The security guards 'cause they gave me a key to where my bag was.  I come back and my bag was gone.  Now all my stuff is missing.  I say we can't go home 'cause I ain't got no money.  So the people gave me money to live in a hotel, and that was the beginning of my acting career.  I stayed there for three days.  Couldn't go nowhere.  They paid for me to come back to Memphis.
Story_ID: 128408
Speaker 1: Okay, so, now you were in several other movies.  Now you've been in 'The Client.'
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: 'Separated by Murder,' 'People versus Larry Flynt,' 'The Chamber.'
Speaker 2: Uh hum.
Speaker 1: 'Cookies' Fortune.'
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And, how many movies have you--'Black Snake Moan.'
Speaker 2: Yeah, that was with Samuel L. Jackson.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  'Streaker.'
Speaker 2: They said in that 'Black Snake Moan,' I auditioned with, what that producer [sic, director] name [Craig Brewer], the one who did 'Hustle and Flow.'  It was his movie and he said, "can you cuss?"  I said "what you want me to say?" He say "say the word, it start with a F."  So I, I can say that.  I said that word, he said "you got the part."  I said "all right."  Then when I got with Samuel, and he gave me more lines, and then I added lines.  I added myself.  He said "you added those lines?"  I said "yeah, I added those."  He said "that sound wonderful, keep it in."  So I kept it in the movie.  And it became a part of the movie.  And I said "I'm gone get paid for this extra work?"  He said "nope."  I said "okay, just put me in the movie, don't cut nothing out."  He said "I won't leave nothing out."  So I was at the jukebox and I was saying "y'all got anything in this jukebox beside country and western?  You got any Luther Vandross?"  And that wasn't supposed to be on the script.  And it sounded good to the producer.  He said leave it in.  And so I switched from the jukebox over to the bar and I said Laz, Samuel L. Jackson name was Laz, and I said, "Laz I know you's lonely, but I thought you knew.  Ain't but a cure for blues and some good," just add it in.  He say, he say, "You ain't got it then and you ain't gone get it now."  So I switched away from him and this man said, ain't that some kind of woman, and Laz who was Samuel L. Jackson, said yeah, that's some kind of woman.  And I went on the pool table and I stuck my behind out and I wiggled it at him, and he kept looking.  He say, "Yeah, that some kind of woman."  And that was the end of that script.  It wasn't supposed to be like that.  I added that to it.  I said all, every time I do a movie, I add something and they say, keep it in.
Speaker 1: Okay, so this is, this is pretty, you got a, now another Memphite who was in a Larry Flynt movie, Judge Bailey.  [HM] D'Army Bailey was in that as the judge.
Speaker 2: Yeah he was.  And I was in a movie called 'People vs. Larry Flynt'--
Speaker 1: Yeah, that's the one.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I played, I sang, I sang I think America, I sang something in that rally and that was the end of that.  But I been in some good movies with some great producers.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I would have thought when I saw this information that maybe you even had a singing part in most of these movies.
Speaker 2: I didn't sing in none of 'em.
Speaker 1: Most of them are singing, are acting, acting roles.
Speaker 2: Yep, they were.  They were good though.  I had some good directors and producers, major producers and directors.
Speaker 1: Were all the films that you've been in made around here, produced here in Tennessee?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  And I, the first one I did was in Nashville [Tennessee], and it, it went to California.  We did the premier in California at the Hard Rock Cafe.  Naw, it was the House of Blues.
Speaker 1: In Los Angeles [California]?
Speaker 2: Yep.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So this, this is exciting.  So, now the last, the latest film that you're in is 'Delta Rising' and you play yourself, right?  It's a documentary.
Speaker 2: Yes, and I'm with Morgan Freeman who's narrating the show.
Speaker 1: Uh hum.  So what do you actually do in this one?
Speaker 2: I sing the blues, twice.  And I do, I talk on the documentary.
Story_ID: 128409
Speaker 1: Now you have, you said before you were involved in the Elvis Cruise and you were talking about the hurricane.  That's Hurricane Gustav.
Speaker 2: Yeah, it had three of them around us.  We couldn't go anywhere.  We just sitting in the middle of the ocean.
Speaker 1: That's 2008?
Speaker 2: Yeah, that we're just sitting there.
Speaker 1: Uh hum.
Speaker 2: Rocking with the ship.  And one man died on the ship.  He had a heart attack.  He was so scared that he passed away on the ship right in front of his son.
Story_ID: 128410
Speaker 1: Now tell me, now you received several awards.  You're in the African American Hall of Fame.
Speaker 2: Yep.
Speaker 1: That's just this year.  And quite a few other awards.  Tri-State Defenders Women of Excellence Award.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And, yeah, I guess, when they say that you're the Queen of Beale Street [in Memphis, Tennessee] and applied some kind of civic responsibility to the area--
Speaker 2: Uh hum.
Speaker 1: --what, since we been in Memphis [Tennessee] this week, we've heard people talk about the gentrification of Beale Street and the changes, I mean it was like a popular street where black entertainment took place, and now it's more of a touristy thing, but what, what's your take on it?
Speaker 2: It's changed a whole lot compared to what it was at first.  It's more young people on Beale Street, where it used to be old people.  I walk around explain to you how Beale Street exists, how it came about.  Now it's just young people and they don't play the blues.  They're playing everything but.  And you know, you have to go in between the hallways, the alleys, to see the real blues players 'cause they not allowed to sing in the clubs no more.  They don't make no living that way.  So I think Beale Street has changed a considerable amount compared to what it was 25 years ago when I start singing on Beale Street.  Yeah, everybody was inside the clubs instead of being in the alleys.  So now you got to find a real good blues person in the alleys.  You can't find them in the club.
Speaker 1: Now, I take it you don't like that?
Speaker 2: I do not, because you know, they got all those stars on the ground, but they not the people who they should be.  It should be the people who hustled down there every day.  Their name should be on the ground, not people like Justin Timberlake.  He got a musical note.  He's only been on Beale Street once.
Speaker 1: Is he a native of Memphis?
Speaker 2: Yeah, he lives here.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: He spend good money.  That's one of the reasons why his name is there.  And there's a few others that name should not be there, but they are.  But I would give more credit to the ones that down there every day, hustling.  The ones who don't have a club to play in, but they're playing the blues.  Their names should be on the ground.
Speaker 1: For instance, who would be--
Speaker 2: Fred Saunders and people like that.  They got all the old players and they all are playing in alleys.  They not playing in the clubs where they should be.  The new entertainers are playing in the clubs, which is not the blues.
Speaker 1: And the audience?
Speaker 2: The audience is like taking it 'cause they have to pay and once they pay and go into a place, you gotta take what they got.  They think they going into a club and they getting the blues, but the only place you can get the blues is at Morgan Freeman's Ground Zero.  And if you got the right band, they're playing the blues.  You got the wrong band, they playing everything.
Story_ID: 128411
Speaker 1: Let me ask you, if--you are called the Queen of Beale Street, if you really had power over Beale Street [Memphis, Tennessee], what would be your vision for it?
Speaker 2: My vision would be to put the old acts to work inside the club and don't let them suffer the fact they got to be out there in the parks.  Put 'em inside so when people come to Memphis, they can see some real blues, some authentic blues and not R&B or, you know R&B sometime, but not all the time.  Not rock and roll, 'cause rock and roll has no place on Beale Street.  That's the heart of blues and that's what you have to be doing.  People come and they expect to hear one thing and they get another.  And they be disappointed.  So I would take the doubt from their minds so they'll realize that this is Memphis and we do real blues and you can find real blues on Beale Street.  The same way you can find barbecue in Memphis.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  Well said.
Story_ID: 128412
Speaker 1: We always ask this question and it's almost like the same thing, but what are some of your hopes and concerns for the African American community today?
Speaker 2: That we face reality and come together as one, 'cause having two mayors ain't gone kick it, but the mayors have to have help like everybody else and if we can realize that we have to come together and be as one and realize there is no I in we, then we can do it.
Story_ID: 128413
Speaker 1: Now when you look back on everything that you've done to this point with your many talents and activities, is there any major thing you'd do differently now if you could?
Speaker 2: There is.  I would change my whole life career.  I would change everything.  You know the Lord gave me a second chance at life and you know, I'm gonna find out what that second chance is, and I'm a try to make it better.  And you know I represent now the American Stroke Association and I go around and I try to help people not do what I did, and not to go through stress because stress will take you down and it will take you out, and you know, I try to enforce people that the reason that they have strokes is because they let worry and I tell them all the time, if you worry don't pray, if you pray, don't worry.  Wonder, and everything will be all right.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now you had a, somewhere in the outline it said that for a period of time in your early days, you were homeless.
Speaker 2: I'm homeless now.
Speaker 1: Really?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: How, I mean, for real?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: What, how can the Queen of Beale Street be homeless in Memphis [Tennessee]?
Speaker 2: Because I allowed somebody to take care of my bills while I was sick and they weren't paying 'em.  They trying to figure out how they were going to come back and tell me they weren't paying, and I said I know you weren't paying my bills because my stuff is in storage.  I've had my house for over twenty-five years.  And I lost it.  But you don't cry over spilled milk.  You keep going and get better.
Speaker 1: Okay.  But you have many friends here, seems like, so, are things being taken care of?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I'm in control.  The Lord has control and he gives me the power to stay in order and I can't let the fact that I allowed that to happen to me.  It's my fault that I trusted somebody and I thought they were legit, but they are a runner right now.  And I can't catch 'em.  But one day I'll catch up with 'em.  And they'll have to have a big apology.  But you know I keep going because I can't let stress get me down no more.  No more.
Speaker 1: Okay.  You went through, you referring to the stroke that you had recently, that was just a year ago, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: You were hospitalized for how long?
Speaker 2: Four months.
Speaker 1: And just describe what you were like after the stroke.
Speaker 2: I wake up with pain every day.  But I try to get past that.  I take the pills.  I take twenty-seven pills a day, and I get past that.  And, you know, I stopped crying in public because I felt I was having sympathy for myself.  I had to go to speech class to get my speeching back.  And I had learned how not to say uh because uh is a deterrent and I stopped saying uh because--and I said uh then--uh is a statement where if you're saying something, you have to pause and, you don't need to pause.  You think about it and then you say it.  So I stopped feeling sorry for myself.  So I went to speech class to get my voice back and I started singing every day in the window to get my singing back.  Now I gained everything back, except the little movement of my legs which gets a little tender and then if I don't have the chair, I'll fall, so I keep my Cadillac with me so I won't fall.  But I got the use of my hand.  It was like this at first.  They bandaged it down with duct tape and a board and when they took it off thirty days later, it was straight.  So now I'm getting my everything back, which is a task, but God is good and I believe he will bring me through all of this.
Story_ID: 128414
Speaker 1: Tell us a little about what your, what your children are doing.  You're not married now are you?
Speaker 2: Oh no.
Speaker 1: And you've got three children?
Speaker 2: Four.
Speaker 1: Four, okay, all right.
Speaker 2: I got four kids and thirteen grandbabies.  And two are professionally employed and two work with me.  And we have a good time.  One is a security guard.  One who works for a company and the other two, one works for Pinnacle Airline and my son, who sings professionally.
Speaker 1: Okay.  You care to name them for us?
Speaker 2: Kenneth, Keith, Stacy and Lisa.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 128415
Speaker 1: Now here's another question we always ask.  When you look back again at everything you've done to this point, to right today, what would you consider to be your legacy?
Speaker 2: That somebody would take the torch after I'm gone and continue to do what I'm doing now and make it better.
Speaker 1: And, now is there anything I haven't asked you about that you need to talk about before I ask my last question?
Speaker 2: I don't know, but you've been very thorough.
Speaker 1: Well, thank you.
Story_ID: 128416
Speaker 1: Well, the last question is similar to legacy, but a little bit different.  Ma'am, how would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: As the Queen of Beale Street.  Ms. Ruby, M-S, Ruby Wilson, who was an original, kind and very nice.  And I'm willing to give you my last dollar.
Speaker 1: Okay, well thank you very much.
Speaker 2: Thank you.
Story_ID: 127111
Speaker 1: [I used to] live in Paris [France], I didn't mention that.
Speaker 2: No, you didn't.
Speaker 1: I used to live in--in Neuilly [ph., Neuilly-sur-Seine], Paris.  I had a house there. I've done so much.
Speaker 2: That's in Dublin, Ireland, at a castle.
Speaker 1: That's me and Mr. B.B. King [HM B.B. King] on the back of his bus, right after his show.
Speaker 2: That's me in--at the Hobart Zoo in [Hobart, Tasmania] Australia.
Speaker 1: That's me and the late Lorenzen Wright who played basketball for the Grizzlies.
Speaker 2: That's Fred Jones, who put on the Heritage Classic.  He's a millionaire from Memphis [Tennessee].
Speaker 1: That's the blues diva, Ms. Denise LaSalle.
Speaker 2: That's Ms. Denise LaSalle's husband, who ran for Congress.  His name is Wolf.
Speaker 1: That's me and [HM] Tavis Smiley, who was a talk show host.  And he went around, he came to Memphis and did a special show with me and my friends.
Speaker 2: That's me and the legendary Mr. David Porter, who wrote all the songs for [HM] Isaac Hayes and for Stax Records.  He wrote Hold On, I'm Coming, wrote all the songs for Isaac Hayes.
Speaker 1: That's me and the producer from Italy, and Sam the Sham, who wrote Wooly Bully.  The lady is Judy Prizer [ph.] who owns the historical restaurant and club downtown.
Speaker 2: That's me and Marvell Thomas who was the son of Rufus Thomas, who wrote The Dog and the Funky Chicken and we were at the memorial for Isaac Hayes.
Speaker 1: That's me and the now county mayor of Memphis, Joe Ford.
Speaker 2: That's me and the legendary Mr. Isaac Hayes, Black Moses.
Speaker 1: That's my mama and one of my grandkids, Ms. Emma.
Speaker 2: Those are my sons, Ken and Keith.
Speaker 1: That's my mother I live with now, Ms. Evelina Sellers.  We out fishing.
Speaker 2: That's the bass player for Elvis Presley, the original player.
Speaker 1: That's Joe Guercio, the original conductor for Elvis Presley.
Speaker 2: That's the original lead guitar player for Elvis Presley.
Speaker 1: That's George Kline who helped Elvis Presley get on the map.
Speaker 2: That's Ronnie, who sings Elvis Presley songs.
Speaker 1: That's one of the Elvis impersonators who was on the cruise ship.  They had about fifty Elvises on the cruise ship, maybe more.
Speaker 2: That is one of the Imperials and his wife, who sang backup for Elvis.
Speaker 1: That's my family.  Stacy, Brandon, Kenny, Jacob, Ruby, Lisa, Keith and Beverly.  That's the clan.
Speaker 2: That's me and my best friend, Otis Williams of The Temptations.
Speaker 1: Those are my two kids who sing backup with me, Stacy and Ken.
Speaker 2: That's--he owns Holiday Inn.
Speaker 1: That's the night of my stroke.  That's on New Year's night, and I created that outfit.
Speaker 2: That's my best girlfriend, Ms. Rosalind McMillan, who is the sister of [HM] Terry McMillan, who wrote 'How Stella Got Her Groove Back.'
Speaker 1: That the late Lorenzen Wright and his wife Sherra [Wright].  You could say I'm a godmama to Sherra.
Speaker 2: That's me on Christmas Day doing my thing.
Speaker 1: That's the party for 'Hustle and Flow' and that's me up there on the left side and that's the premier party.
