Story_ID: 94088
Speaker 1: My name is Julieanna Richardson, I'm the interviewer and Matthew Hickey is the videographer and observing is Nefertiti McKenta.  And I'd like to have you start out by stating your name and spelling it for us.
Speaker 2: My name Edna Fay Williams, E-D-N-A, F-A-Y-E, W-I-L-L-I-A-M-S better known as E. Faye Williams.
Speaker 1: And your date of birth?
Speaker 2: I was born December 20, 1941.
Speaker 1: And may I also have today's date?
Speaker 2: Today is June 1, 2003.
Speaker 1: And our location?
Speaker 2: We're at Washington D.C., my home 1251 4th Street Southwest.
Speaker 1: Okay and your profession?
Speaker 2: I'm a lawyer, a business woman and most recently I'm a minister of the gospel.
Story_ID: 94089
Speaker 1: Okay. And I ask five questions of everyone.  They are "People Magazine"-ish, a little "People Magazine"-ish; I'd like to know what your favorite food is?
Speaker 2: My favorite food is turkey burger (laugh).
Speaker 1: Favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Favorite time of the year is summer without a doubt.
Speaker 1: Favorite color?
Speaker 2: Favorite color is blue.
Speaker 1: Favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Oh anywhere the sun shines, preferably in the Caribbean or on the continent of Africa.
Speaker 1: Favorite phrase of saying?
Speaker 2: "Where there is a will, there is a way."
Story_ID: 94090
Speaker 1: Since we were talking about your mother, I'd like you to start out by talking about her and give her name and tell me what you know about her background.
Speaker 2: My mother's name is Frances LaCour Williams.  She lives in Alexandria, Louisiana in a home that I spent a lot of wonderful, happy years with my eight other brothers and sisters.  My mother was very ambitious with children.  She had six girls and a boy and a girl and then another boy.  She's lived in Alexandria now since I was in high school while she was married to my father, whose name was Vernon Williams.  They were divorced when I was about eleven years old.  So my mother reared her children alone.  We had a wonderful, happy life.  We were what we now know as poor, we didn't know it then because I never remember being hungry a day.  My mother was pretty much a disciplinarian which doesn't mean that we weren't allowed to do things, we could do many things but we always had to be responsible for whatever we did including we had to take the responsibility for our younger brothers and sisters and that's something that all of us have carried with us.  I don't think a day goes by where we don't talk with each other.  Maybe sometimes in a chain reaction or connection I talk with one sister, she talks with another but before every day is over my mother has taught us to be in touch with each other and to know how we are all doing.  My brothers were the babies so they were very small when I left home and I only got to know very well one of my brothers.  He's now a deputy sheriff in Alexandria, Louisiana.  But my mom is now eighty years old, we've just celebrated her eightieth birthday and we had a wonderful time.  We all gathered in Houston, Texas where I have two sisters and a brother.  We had a surprise eightieth birthday party for her.
Story_ID: 94091
Speaker 1: Can I just ask--can you tell me do you know anything about her family background, on her growing up?
Speaker 2: Yes, my mother [Frances LaCour Williams] was a twin but her sister died at childbirth.  My mother has six sisters and brothers; she grew up in what's called a mulatto family.  My mother was very light but I guess was sort of the rebel of the family because she married my father [Vernon Williams] and in Louisiana we have the differences.  We have whites and blacks and mulattos basically.  But there were places we could not go when we were growing up and my mother would refuse to go also.  She would tell people who invited her if my children can't go, I won't go either.  My mother was always very actively involved in the community.  I remember we grew up in a farm area and--(simultaneous) (unclear).
Speaker 1: Was that outside New Orleans?
Speaker 2: Oh it's quite a distance from New Orleans.  New Orleans is about a three and a half up to four hour drive from my hometown.  I was born in a little town called Melrose, Louisiana which is in Natchitoches Parish and we lived there until I was a teenager and after my parents were divorced, my mother moved to Alexandria.  But I only spent my senior year of high school there.  Everybody loved my mother and they still do.  It's kind of like she has children all over the world.  All of our friends liked going home with us and they loved my mother.  We always thought she was the strongest disciplinarian in the world when we were growing up.  We also thought she was psychic because she's the kind of mother who doesn't confront you all at one time, she asks you one question today and another tomorrow and pretty soon she's put together whatever it is you've been doing that she thought you shouldn't have been doing.  But we didn't realize that that's what we were doing, we were actually giving her the answers, we were telling her the truth and she was piecing the truth together about whatever we did.  My mother always had to work, in fact I remember her working two often three jobs to take care of children and when I was growing up, I remember I wanted so much to be a waitress because I thought I could make a lot of money in tips but my mother would never allow me to.  Instead she worked all those jobs herself.  We participated in a lot of school activities and sometimes we'd have to stay home to take care of the younger brothers and sisters because she was working so much and at that time I guess we considered her to be very mean for keeping us away from certain things.  But again I think it was the way that she taught us to set our priorities and determine what was the most important thing to do and of course, family was always important to her and still it's always important.  She brings this together on many occasions.  There was a time for years almost no one thought of going any other place at Christmas other than to my mom's house but of course now that sisters have and brothers have their own children and their own grandchildren, they don't go home every year but certainly every two years.  I doubt that anyone misses the second year in feeling that it's important to be home with mother and with all of our brothers and sisters and their families.
Story_ID: 94092
Speaker 1: Now your father, what do you know about his name and what do you know about his growing up and--(simultaneous) (unclear)?
Speaker 2: My father's name is Vernon Williams.  Everyone, of course, knew him as Jack Williams.  He's very tall, he was very handsome and I say was because my father is deceased now.  He had twelve brothers and six sisters himself and I got to know all of them during his lifetime.  We had family reunions when he was living and before he died he always still liked coming to my mom's [Frances LaCour Williams] house.  They were friends at that point.  All of my mother's in-laws-my dad's sisters and brothers still loved her, still come to her home.  She's just that kind of person that everybody loved her whether in-laws or not.  My father was not around very much as I was growing up and finally he and my mother divorced when I was eleven years old but I just remember his being away most of the time.  Again, we lived on a farm as we were growing up but he did other things other than farm.  I remember he was a barber, he was a mechanic, he was the electrician, he did almost everything in the community but one of things I always say is that he seemed to have always done most things for other people rather than for us at home.  Therefore my mother had to learn to do all these things.  She could fix the iron if it broke, she could fix the plumbing if it broke, she learned to do everything.  Now granted she learned a lot of these things from him but she was always the one I remember who took care of all of our needs at home rather than my father.  We all loved my father and my mother never allowed us to say negative things about my father like many mothers she said "he's your father."  So she just didn't allow us to say bad things about my father even if we wanted to and I guess the worst thing we could say is that he was not always there when we wanted a father like everyone else did, there were a lot of us but he just was not a big part of our life.  He would come to bring presents at Christmas, he would take us to spend summers with him occasionally but he was not there on an everyday basis as we were growing up.  I remember the thing that hurt most when I graduated from college and from high school, he was not there.  I guess young people always want their fathers to be there and I can't say that he was there.  Now we were blessed because we had lots of uncles and there were always uncles who were there.  So we had very positive male images in our family.
Story_ID: 94093
Speaker 1: Now your siblings can you give their names and their birth order and tell me where you fit?
Speaker 2: Yes my oldest sister who is in Washington, D.C. and has lived in Washington since graduating from high school is Bernice Oden.  She's married, she has two sons and she has a granddaughter.  I'm next in line and there is a sister in Los Angeles [California], Rose Marie Williams.  You know down south we've always got lot of names but most of us are known by our middle names.  Rose Marie Williams, we call Marie.  She has a son Keith and Keith has spent the last two years living with me in Washington, D.C.  Next is Siverene Jones and she lives in Houston [Texas].  She has a son and two daughters and I don't remember how many grandchildren at this point but she has several grandchildren.  Both her daughters are working in Houston.  Her son is also working; he's a member of the Texas Highway Patrol [Texas Department of Public Safety].  The next sister is the middle sister of nine Erna Ruth Williams.  She's my sister who is deceased and her son has lived with me since 1997.  He's now living on his own nearby but-his name is Ronald Troy Smith and I guess most people in the family consider him my son since I kind of took over after she passed away.  She drowned by the way in a tragic incident.  After Erna Ruth is--again she's known by her middle name--is my sister, she's in Alexandria.  When she was a little girl, she was injured-a truck ran over her and she has a slight limp still.  That was one of those summers we had gone to spend with my father [Vernon Williams] and she ran out of the house to go to the store and just dashed across the street and was run over.  That was perhaps one of the biggest tragedies in my life.  I was a teenager at the time about to go to college and I didn't want to go away, I wanted to stay in the hospital with her but my mother [Frances LaCour Williams] insisted I go to college and, of course, I did.  She has five children including a little girl who has cerebral palsy.  She has one granddaughter and unfortunately her granddaughter is autistic, we're trying now to try to find help for her.  And after Gussie is my brother, Vernon Williams, Jr. who is named for my father, we call him Sonny.  He has two daughters and he is married to someone who already had three daughters and a son so we've always said that his destiny was to be around women.  He grew up around all of the sisters and then wind up having seven other women in the house-six or seven women in the house with him.  He has his two daughters and he's adopted the son of one of his stepdaughters.  My next sister is Mildred who is the baby girl.  Mildred Duncan, she's in Houston.  She's married and has two children.  Her son is finishing up medical school now and she has a daughter who's leaving high school this year going to The University of Texas [Austin, Texas] and she's much sought after for basketball.  She's really interested in women's basketball.  But what my sister is blessed with is that both of her children also got academic scholarships.  So the one who wants to play basketball has both academic and sports scholarships.  And then my youngest brother [sic, half-brother] is Stevie LeCour [ph.] who is my mom's son but not my father's son.  He has one daughter and they'll be coming to visit me next week.
Story_ID: 94094
Speaker 1: Now what is your earliest memory of growing up?
Speaker 2: I remember living in Melrose, Louisiana and we were farmers.  I remember having to go out in the field and pick cotton and chop cotton and I remember how we didn't like farming--my sisters and I not my brothers because they were too young then but my sisters.  So we hurried to do our work every year and then as soon as we finished harvesting our crops, my mother [Frances LaCour Williams] would have us go and help the neighbors.  I mean there was no reward for finishing early but it was during that time that we learned to work very fast and we learned to be helpful to neighbors.  There were a lot of skills to be learned, it's not something that I would want to do again--farming but I think we learned a lot then and we certainly learned to be neighborly there and that's something that's carried with me all of my life.  No matter how difficult something is, if my neighbor has a job to be done, I'd try to be there to help them.
Speaker 1: Now how close or far away was the next neighbor. Were they--?
Speaker 2: Well at different times in my life, I guess neighbors were--
Speaker 1: But I'm saying on--
Speaker 2: my very, very early life we had neighbors which would be at about an eighth of a mile away and then all the way down for about a mile we had other close neighbors but these were all distances we walked.  I mean it was just an ordinary thing to walk back and forth to a neighbor's homes even though they lived a mile or more away.  We also walked from that point to school and all along the way we had friends and neighbors.
Story_ID: 94095
Speaker 1: I'd like you take yourself back to Melrose [Louisiana] and I would like you to sort of try and remember what sights, smells and sounds remind you of growing up.
Speaker 2: You mean today what kinds of things--(simultaneous) (unclear)?
Speaker 1: No if you would take yourself back to that period of time.  What sights, smells and sounds-- and/or sounds remind you of growing up?
Speaker 2: Well whenever I see large houses with the veranda, with the porch all around them I think of Louisiana.  I loved those homes.  I see them occasionally here in Washington [D.C.] but more often you see them driving along highways especially if there is a porch that goes all the way around the house, I remember that.  Also, whenever I see stairways in houses I remember that because when I was a very little girl we had stairways in our homes, in our home.  Anytime I smell--the smell of grass, I mean you can't miss it if you have ever lived on a farm.  How that smell of fresh grass reminds you of home.  In terms of sound it would be animals because we always had animals around, horses, cows, pigs, you know you name it.  Dogs, we had them all around when we were growing up.  So I--(simultaneous) (unclear).
Speaker 1: Smells?
Speaker 2: The smells would be the smell of fresh grass--fresh cut grass that would be the main one.  Or fruit trees because we had fruit trees all around us and just the sight or the smell of fresh fruit takes me back to Melrose.  It's rare that I see these days if I ever see a cotton field that, of course, reminds me of home.  I sometimes look at pictures and see pictures of my exact childhood because there is an artist who is from Melrose who did a lot of pictures of cotton and baptism and other things.  She became a well known artist by the name of Clementine Hunter and I see those in people's homes often.  So those pictures always remind me of home.
Story_ID: 94096
Speaker 1: Now did you--how would you describe yourself as a young person?
Speaker 2: Well my mother [Frances LaCour Williams] might describe me differently but I think I was very quiet, I was very studious, I studied a lot, I read a lot, I always thought that I had to dress up to go places, I always sort of had that feeling that you've got to look like what you want to be even though I was a little farm girl, I had big ideas about what I wanted to be when I grew up and I thought I had to look the part and that's something that's carried over with me to today.  My mother would never let us go out of the house without combing our hair, without having a bath, without doing little things that maybe people on the farm don't always do.  Cleanliness was important to her.  So those are things that have carried over to today with me.
Speaker 1: And where were you getting those ideas of wanting to be someone other than a little farm girl?  Where were those coming from?
Speaker 2: Well, I had an aunt, her name was Erna--one of my sisters is named for--my sister who is deceased and I remember when I was a little girl I used to go and stay with her and she would make little clothing for me.  She always worked for white people, she always had to go out in the morning to go to work but she got every morning and dressed up, put on her hat and put on her gloves and she would always tell me why she was doing this.  Now when she got to work, she had to change her clothing, she had to go into her little maid's uniform but it was important for her to look good, to look like, look like somebody--that's a term I know we use today too.  But she wanted to look like somebody special and so I think I got it from her but I also got it from my mom because my mom even though she had a lot of children, she insisted that the house would be clean all the time and I guess maybe I also go back to my grandmother [Orelia LaCour].  I remember my grandmother living on a hill; we used to have to sweep the dirt.  My mom tells me I got that practice from my grandmother.  There just couldn't be any dust or dirt around anywhere and if where then you had to make sure there was no trash on it.  So we would sweep the dust--the dirt down the hill at my grandma's house.  I used to think wow this hill is just going to probably collapse one day because I swept it so much and my grandmother swept it so much.  But I would think Aunt Erna probably played the biggest part in my life of dressing up and looking like somebody, you know, and being special.  In other words, you could be a maid but that didn't mean that you had to dress poorly.  It had something to do with dressing properly that made you different from other people and when I say different, I don't mean we felt better than anybody else but it's just that more was expected of us.  We grew up kind of setting the pace, setting the standard and I got a lot of that from my mom and from my dad's [Vernon Williams] sister Aunt Erna.
Story_ID: 94097
Speaker 1: Now share with us some other memories of your family life or why--now Melrose you lived at until what age?
Speaker 2: Until I was fourteen--I was almost fifteen getting ready to go to my senior year in high school and I graduated when I was sixteen.
Speaker 1: So you were advanced early?
Speaker 2: Yes, what happened is school was always important to my mother [Frances LaCour Williams] even though she didn't have a lot of education, she insisted that we go to school and that we get all of the education that we could and I had a cousin and a sister who were two years older than I so my mom would allow me to go to school with them.  So I went to first grade when I really wasn't eligible to go to first grade but I participated in everything and did will so I got promoted to second grade at the end of the year and I had a December birthday so that means that when school started in September, it wasn't time for me to go to school but my mom allowed me to go anyway.  Then when I was in seventh grade, I did very well in school and my principal promoted me to ninth grade which was high school.  He felt that I was a bit above the other students in my work so he allowed me to go to the ninth grade.  So that made up the two years with my sister and my cousin.  I don't think they've ever forgiven me for it but then I started having classes with them.  We played basketball together, we had a girl's team that was very highly competitive and I played with them.  They were very surprised when I decided to play basketball with them.  What happened was when we went on a trip, one of our players didn't make it and the coach just kind of looked at me, I'd been the one who had just the records, kept the time and what have you and she said "Williams you're playing today" and so from that point on, I became a member of the team and just pretty much grew up with my older sister and my older cousin.
Story_ID: 94098
Speaker 1: And can you share some other just sort of memories, sort of anecdotes of that time probably before fifteen?
Speaker 2: Before fifteen.
Speaker 1: Either around some holidays or just regular family life or--(simultaneous) (unclear).
Speaker 2: Mmhmm. Yes. As I said, all holidays--I remember my father [Vernon Williams] used to do those special things that you would hope fathers would do all the time and he always bring us new clothing then, bring us fresh fruit.  Many things, he would come to visit during--from when I was about ten because really he and my mom [Frances LaCour Williams] had split up before they were actually divorced and he would bring us special things then.  But what I remember most, I guess, is my mom with all the children she had always made holidays special for us.  She's a great cook so she always cooked a lot of wonderful things and perhaps the thing that even my brothers-in-law would drive miles to come was the fact that she made great biscuits.  So we always had biscuits and I remember growing up, we always had breakfast--we always had a full breakfast.  I see people now who give their children just some cereal maybe or a piece of fruit or what have you.  My mom got up everyday no matter what time she had to go to work and she insisted that we would have a full breakfast everyday. She fixed all of our meals, now she would allow us to be in the kitchen and show us how to do things but those were responsibilities and she did the cooking, she did the laundry everything.  I guess all the memories I have of my mom are just positive but it was always--she was always working and I think I've gotten that habit from her.  I hardly know how to rest or relax or not be doing--I almost feel guilty when I'm not doing something and I think I got that from her.  I remember playing with my younger brothers and sisters and we didn't really need neighbors to come and play because there were so many of us and we were so close in age that there was always somebody to play with around our house.  We did have cousins who would come to visit and we would go to visit them but we had a crowd right at our own home.  And then growing up I remember having sisters who were younger than me when we started to get interested in boys and my one sister Siv [Siverene Jones], every time we would get close to a boy we would be sitting on the porch because that was dating in those days, the boys came to your house and you sat around and you talked at night and my youngest sister Siv would come and sit between us.  She would always sit there and then if you started to get too close to the boy she would say "mother they're kissing these boys out here."  So later in life when we asked her about that, "Why did you always tell on us?"  She said "I didn't know, I always heard about girls having babies and I thought you got babies by kissing people and I didn't want my sisters to have babies" (laugh).  She of course grew up to have several of her own.  She got married right after high school.  So I guess she wasn't taking any chances.  My best memories are just with my own brothers and sisters and my first cousins who lived near us.  And when we would go to school, I had a cousin who is now retired from the Houston Police Force [Houston Police Department in Texas]; he was kind of my lord and protector.  He would take me and nobody would bother me because he always protected me.  He would hold my hand and we would go to school together and we just kind of grew up together and we were very very close.  We had been born near each other.  We were born just at the time of the attack on Pearl Harbor [December 7, 1941].  So I guess that made us very close.  I was born two weeks before [sic, after] the attack and he was born on the actual day of the attack and somehow that fact always kept us close as we were growing up and he became my protector.
Story_ID: 94099
Speaker 1: Now how would you describe yourself as a young person?  Were you shy at all; were you introspective, do you have a great imagination?
Speaker 2: I wouldn't say that I was shy but I was quiet.  Quiet only in the sense that I was busy doing things or reading when other children went out to play.  I didn't always want to go out to play because I always had a good book I wanted to finish and I remember my mother [Frances LaCour Williams] telling you're going to have bad eyes if you don't get to bed and turn those lights off because we had lamps and lanterns at that time and then I had a flashlight. When she just absolutely made me go to bed, I would use the flashlight under the cover to read books because I wanted to finish reading certain books.  She was right; my eyes did turn out to be bad because I started to wear glasses by the time I got to college.  But, I was kind of the loner, I mean when everybody else wanted to go to a party, I usually had a project for school or something and I set my priorities.  That was what I wanted to do and so I did it.  I'm not suggesting I wasn't sociable because I was.  I had a boyfriend when I was in oh I guess seventh grade and he remained my boyfriend until I was a senior in high school, unfortunately he's deceased now.  But he went on to marry somebody else; we just remained friends throughout elementary school.  His name was Dave Jones and I remember the Jones' there were a lot of boys and we were a lot of girls.  So we had a lot of boyfriends/girlfriends among my cousins and my sisters in that family.  I just--I guess the best thing I can see about growing up is that I was the one who was going to be studying and who's going to participate in the academic contests and whenever no one else was, I could always be relied on to make good grades.  I remember once when I was in eleventh grade and I made a C in History on my first six weeks.  The principal called me in and questioned me and finally got to the big question, Williams because he always called us little Williams, big Williams and middle size Williams because he had so many around but "Williams, what is wrong with you?  Are you pregnant?"  Of course I was not but it was just simply because I had this History grade and I always attributed it to the fact that my first cousin-- my first cousin's boyfriend was also someone who was known to be dating this teacher and I thought well maybe she's taking it out on me.  I can't think of anything else.  I ultimately made an A in her class but for that little point, I just knew that that's why she didn't like me, it had to do with she liked my cousin's boyfriend.  But, of course, I shaped up and I managed to get through that and graduated with very good grades.  And it was always important to me to have very good grades.  I mean, it was-- everybody expected it of me, my teachers, my aunts, my uncles.  Everybody around me so I think those expectations always pushed me to do a little more than my cousins and my friends and even my other sisters and brothers.
Story_ID: 94100
Speaker 1: Now in school, give me the names of the schools you attended, like for elementary--  Was there a middle school and then a high school?
Speaker 2: No we didn't have middle schools then, it was just elementary and high school and actually they were the same--on the same campus just maybe across the way with the high school classes and then the elementary school was in a separate building but we had the same principal.  Now in between elementary and high school, I did leave to go and spend a year with my uncle in California and then I came back when I was in--getting reading to go to seventh grade and that's where--from seventh grade I was promoted to ninth grade.  Then after St. Matthew High School at Melrose [Louisiana] which was the only black high school there, I then went to Alexandria [Louisiana], my mother [Frances LaCour Williams] moved between my junior and senior years from Melrose to Alexandria.  We attended Peabody High School.  Peabody was one of two predominantly black high--well I should say black high schools in the city because at that time black and white students were separate.  There are now other students who attend my high school but at the time we were an all-black school.  Then there was one catholic high school.  We were the largest high school in the city for black students.
Speaker 1: And were there subjects that you particularly liked?
Speaker 2: Oh yes, English of course was my favorite but I must admit I liked all subjects in school but it's just if I look back on any and see where I remembered the most--where I was happiest, it was in my English class and I think I had great English teachers all through elementary, high school.  I will never forget Mrs. Immanuel [ph.], she taught me [William] Shakespeare and helped to learn to appreciate Shakespeare and Mrs. Anderson who was my English teacher and also became my supervising teacher when I was doing my student teaching.  She taught me a lot about English.  I had Mrs. Butler who is an excellent English teacher.  I knew then they were great teachers.  Sometimes you look back and you say "oh yeah she taught me a lot" but even as they were teaching me, I seemed to have had a lot of confidence in them and I knew which of my teachers knew a lot to teach me and I seemed to have known the ones that didn't know a whole lot to teach me because there were some who had just gotten out of school and probably didn't know a lot more than I knew.  But if I look back on it overall I can say all the way through elementary/high school and even into college, I had excellent English teachers.  So they always taught me to appreciate the importance of English and that has been important.  As I went on to law school and to do other things that has probably served me more than any other course I took in school.
Story_ID: 94101
Speaker 1: What other things were forming you as a young person though Dr. Williams?  Were there other people, events, things like that?
Speaker 2: Yes when I was a little girl and I was out there in those cotton fields, I knew that I didn't want to be there forever.  I read a lot of magazines and I just knew I was going to be a movie star and I was going to be a teacher and I was going to be a nurse.  I mean everything I read, I wanted to be that.  So I grew up wanting to be a lot of things. Well, whether I do them well or not, that's exactly what I've grown up to be because when somebody asked me these days what are you, I have to start out saying well I'm a teacher, I'm a lawyer too, well I'm a minister and I go like that because that's the way it is.  But when I was a little girl, I wasn't thinking of being the things I am today necessarily but I certainly had a lot of ambition about things I wanted to be.  I went on to want to be a nurse; I wanted to be a doctor.  I don't think I ever said I wanted to be a lawyer that came later in life.  But I knew I always wanted to be a lot of different things.  So it was necessary, I think, to study to get to be some of those things and I was always encouraged by everybody around me starting with my mother [Frances LaCour Williams], my father [Vernon Williams]--my father not as much as I would have hoped he would but he always--I would learn later not so much from him directly that he was proud of me.  People would tell me, I just always wanted him to tell me that but I don't think he ever got a chance to tell me that.  I remember being the one to help to teach my younger brothers and sisters the things that they needed to know in school.  And when I was in all of sixth grade, I believe it was--no I'm sorry seventh grade [at St. Matthew High School], I was asked to teach the third grade class for several weeks because I was in a little school and there weren't many teachers to substitute like now.  So I was given responsibility for a third grade class and that was one of the highlights of my school to be able to just leave my classes and go over and teach the little third graders.  I mean laws would probably never permit me to do that today but that's the kind of confidence my school principal had in me when I was a little girl.  I was really teaching children who were just slightly younger than I.  Because you remember now I was also two years ahead of my own grade at a certain point so I wasn't much older than these.  But I always tended to be thought of as being responsible.  Whatever someone told me to do, if I didn't know how to do it, give me two minutes and I'd know how to do it and I've carried that with me the rest of my life too.  Whenever someone asks me today can you do X, Y and Z, I'd say well I don't know, let me try and I do them and I think that it's served me well because it's taught me to do a lot of things.
Story_ID: 94102
Speaker 1: Now when it came time to graduate from high school [Peabody High School] and you were sixteen, right?  Is there a decision at that point that you're--I mean are you anticipating that you're going to college at that point?
Speaker 2: Of course, I was the one in my family that if nobody else went, uncles, business people, doctors everyone knew that I would be going to college.  So my mother [Frances LaCour Williams], of course, couldn't afford to send me to college but bless her heart, she arranged--that she took me to see a medical doctor who was very popular back in Melrose [Louisiana] and he arranged to get me a scholarship to go to Grambling State University [Grambling, Louisiana].  There was also a doctor in my hometown because we now had moved to Alexandria who helped with that.  He helped me to get a job.  I worked all the way through college in addition to having the scholarship and I kept my grades up so that I could get academic scholarships also.  So I was able to get through school that way.
Speaker 1: Now you went to Grambling State, right?  Okay so how was that whole experience?  To date you've been primarily with your-no at this point you're living in Alexandria.
Speaker 2: I spent my senior year in Alexandria at Peabody High School, yes.  And of course, that I thought was the most-well let me see that was the worst thing I thought my mother ever did in her life was take us from St. Matthew [High School in Melrose, Louisiana] at the end of junior high to senior high because everyone likes to graduate with their class members.  I had to make new friends and probably the most positive thing about that was that I met the star of the football team and he became my boyfriend and so I was the envy of all the girls.  But beyond that, it was very difficult to move from one school to another your senior year.  But I did play basketball at that school, I was on city council-not city council I mean school council and participated in a lot of activities.  So I soon overcame St. Matthew even though I would go back to visit frequently.  I participated in a lot of events and I think that helped and then of course, in a few months I was then planning to go off to college.  So I wasn't in Alexandria very long after my mom moved there.
Story_ID: 94103
Speaker 1: Now how did you like Grambling [State University in Grambling, Louisiana]?
Speaker 2: Oh, I loved it.  I still love it.  I've been to a lot of universities and colleges but whenever anyone ask me what my school is, I immediately say Grambling no matter how many other schools I've attended, that's still where my heart is.  I served as national president of the alumni association for almost ten years.  That drew me even closer to the school.  I set up an endowment there for Grambling, helped to organize that.  I started the life membership program to raise money for scholarships.  I did a lot of-and I graduated magna cum laude from Grambling so I had a good experience at Grambling.  I've remained friends with a lot of my professors and it's a different relationship now but when I was there, their expectations of me were great.  People like Coach Eddie Robinson, I've considered among my best of friends.  Dr. Helen Richards-Smith is still one of my best friends.  There was a time when I went through difficulties in my life; I never went to bed without talking Coach Robinson or to Dr. Helen Richard Smith.  I mean, they've gone through life with me being advisors and giving me wonderful advice and encouraging me.  It just seems that in almost every situation I've been in growing up, I've had people who, I guess, down South we'd say "took to me" and just sort of encouraged me to reach for bigger and better things.
Speaker 1: And what were you majoring in--what did you major in there?
Speaker 2: At Grambling speech and dramatic arts and English and of course, I wanted a triple major and they wouldn't allow me to do it, I wanted social studies.  Yes I told you I've always wanted to do a lot of things.  I started taking more units than I was allowed to take.  I had to drop them but the others were in government and social studies and I did take courses in those but I also wanted that to be one of my majors.
Speaker 1: And how--how would you describe the college experience?   Were there (unclear) like 19--what year are we in?
Speaker 2: Oh please (laugh) you'd have to do that wouldn't you?
Speaker 1: We're in like 19--the late--(simultaneous) (unclear)?
Speaker 2: '58 [1958] I graduated from high school, went on to Grambling, I graduated in 1962 and then of course, I was there in the--all through the '80s [1980s] that's when I was steering the alumni association.
Speaker 1: But were there some friendships and things--I'm just trying to--what I'm trying to understand is what was forming you during those Grambling years?  I mean because college is a time we sort of get out--you're the really the only person at your college at that--well you're the second child too--I mean your family.  So I'm just wondering who is--how are you influenced during these four years?
Speaker 2: Well of course, my mom [Frances LaCour Williams] because my mom expected me to do well in college.  So she was a great influence.  She would come to visit me at school.  While she didn't have to take care of my bills in terms of my tuition and all, she'd arranged to do all of that.  So she didn't do that just to waste her time and that was understood so I knew that I had to do well and once I arrived at Grambling I met many people who became good friends like Dr. Kara Vaughn Jackson who is now deceased, Dr. Helen Richards and as I said Coach Eddie Robinson and others who always felt that I could do well and they put me in situations where I could compete, where I could grow and I remember Dr. Jackson, Dr. Helen Richards-Smith, she was just Dr. Richards at that time always brought very strong black women to the campus and they always made sure I met them and I had a chance to spend time with people like Jean Noble [ph.] and many others who visited our campus while I was in school.  All of them influenced me, Richards and Jackson and Jean Noble and other Deltas.  I ultimately was asked to join Delta Sigma Theta and so I met every Delta who came on the campus.  But not just that, there were many influential women for instance, the founders' daughter was an AKA [Alpha Kappa Alpha], I met her and knew her well.  I met Dr. Floyd Sandle who was my department chair person.  Again who encouraged me and if I ever thought of anything wrong, he reined me back in and he'd put me to work in his department and I got a starring role in one of the plays, I was a drama major.  So one of the seniors got sick during my freshman year and I was allowed to take over for her role.  So I had a chance to travel to many of the wonderful black universities in Tennessee and Tennessee State [University in Nashville, Tennessee] and others.  I met many wonderful people like Wilma Rudolph.  They were in school too at that time; they were my peers.  Carla Thomas and just a lot of people so just my willingness to do things, to be involved and having all of these friends--I don't know if I'd call them friends, they were my professors and teachers at that time, they later became friends.  But they were always encouraging me and telling me that I could do things so I wound up doing them.  And I was blessed to be able to many of them well.
Story_ID: 94104
Speaker 1: Now what were you thinking you were going to do with a degree in theater arts, what were you wanting to do?
Speaker 2: Oh well you know since I was a little girl, I was planning to be this movie star so this just fit right in with that.  I was going to be a movie star so when I graduated [from Grambling State University in Grambling, Louisiana], where do you go?  You go to New York or California, right?  Well I went back to California because I had lots of relatives and friends there and I went to UCLA [University of California, Los Angeles] and decided I was going to study there and I studied for a while but reality set in, I had to go to work.  So I worked for a few theaters in Hollywood and did everything except acting but then I finally decided some of the kind of work that you do that I needed to do something more productive.  So I left the theater and decided to become a teacher because I had a teaching degree.  So I taught and while I taught I did some stage plays and did that for a while until decided I couldn't carry on full time stage shows and teaching.  So I gave up the theater even though by then I had become a member of Screen Actors [Guild] and I had met a lot of actors and done some little bit parts in film.  But I then took teaching very seriously so I taught for the next seven years in Los Angeles public schools and enjoyed that experience very much.  I worked a lot with young people.  I was in what is now sort of called the edge of Watts [Los Angeles, California].  I have many of my young students who've gone on to become members of city councils and lawyers and doctors and other things now and I tell them I must have been very young when I taught them because they all look about as old as I am now.  They have children and grandchildren and what have you.  But again, my teaching experience was very good, I enjoyed that.
Speaker 1: What was in black Hollywood when you were there?  I mean if you-- you said you did some things around then, I'm just wondering who was there around that time?
Speaker 2: Well of course, Dorothy Dandridge was still living then, then of course, Nat [King] Cole was not an actor but he was singing and I had a chance to meet him.  I'm trying to think of some of the others--Leslie Uggams, of course was up and coming at that time and of course she was the one I admired greatly.  I didn't meet a whole lot of stars, not black stars because remember I was only doing bit parts and these were usually in other little films, probably who have never been heard of since then.  Most of my work was done in stage work.
Speaker 1: Oh in stage work, okay.
Speaker 2: I met people like Mantan Moreland and the old comedians and others.
Speaker 1: But you decided that the teaching--well that was more productive.
Speaker 2: Yes and paid more because actually I paid more for my Screen Actors [Guild] membership than I ever earned in theater (laugh).
Story_ID: 94105
Speaker 1: And so you're teaching and enjoying teaching and you're at the same time you are getting your master's degree, right at UCLA [University of California, Los Angeles]?
Speaker 2: USC [University of Southern California in Los Angeles, California] actually, I switched over to--I started at UCLA in theater but then again by now I'm now teaching so I decided to go into something more related and I did a master's actually in public administration.  I had a very good friend who was teaching at the University of Southern California and I decided to go where he was teaching.  I did my education courses for education supervision and all mainly at UCLA though.  But I didn't get a degree at UCLA; my master's is from the University of Southern California.
Story_ID: 94106
Speaker 1: And what are you thinking that you want to do with your MPA [Master's in Public Administration] degree?
Speaker 2: Well I wasn't sure but I thought that I wanted to go into working for city government at that time.  I did not do that before leaving Los Angeles but I did work to help a whole lot of people get elected to public office while I was there.  At that time [HM] Maxine Waters had just moved to California.  She was of course, "Maxine who?" at that time (laugh), you know.  I worked with her; we worked on secretary of state election for [William] Bill Williams.  Maxine was working with him and I worked on that election.  I had a friend I had met by the name of Louise Rigel [ph.] White who is now Dr. Louise Rigel White Cashin; she's married to [HM] Dr. John Cashin from Alabama.  I worked in her campaign, she ran for the state assembly when someone who would later become my boss in congress, [HM] Mervyn Dymally.  When he left the assembly, Louise ran and I worked on her campaign.  I worked as an advisor in education to Mr. Dymally who at that time was in the state senate in California.  I met [HM] Diane Watson, she was not in public life then but she was just beginning to think about running for school board first and then she later ran for the California senate.  But these were all people who were just getting involved when I was in California.  I worked in just lots of elections but my thing was of course, school and I worked on my administrative credentials, I completed that.  I became assistant vice principal with the intention of becoming a principal at this time but I unfortunately got married at that time and I say unfortunately because my marriage was not a very happy marriage.  Fortunately I didn't stay in it very long and at the end of that marriage I left California.  I thought I would never leave but that did cause me to leave.  I moved to Atlanta [Georgia] and I began work there for the teachers' union not as a teacher but to work as their council.
Speaker 1: So you--if it hadn't been for your marriage breakup you would have probably stayed in Los Angeles.
Speaker 2: I love Los Angeles too.
Speaker 1: Did you ever work with [HM] Yvonne Brathwaite [Burke]--did you work with her?  Wasn't she in congress at that time?
Speaker 2: No she ran for congress after I left Los Angeles.  She was in the California assembly prior to that.  I worked with her only in the sense that I worked with Mr. Dymally and Bill Green and many other people in the assembly and the senate on issues pertaining to teachers mainly.
Story_ID: 94107
Speaker 1: And what did you like about that work?  What did you find satisfying and of interest?  You had won the political work and getting involved in--.
Speaker 2: Well first of all it was teaching that's where my heart was in the beginning and I found that I could make a difference in the lives of young people as people had done with me.  I took a lot of time with several young people who went on to become important in their own right and once I started working in the school, I got really interested in issues that had to do with education.  So I started to work in the teachers union [California Teachers Association] and I became a leader.  I was elected to serve teachers to work in the teachers' organization.  We ultimately had a strike, I played a big role in that teachers' strike in Los Angeles [California].  I think it was the first teachers' strike ever in Los Angeles and I saw that I could make a difference in helping teachers get a contract.  So I went on after leaving Los Angeles to work further in the teachers' union, in fact, I became a director of several departments and divisions including negotiation, human rights and professional development and other things.  After I left California, I continued in that field for a number of years.  I even became director of the overseas education association and worked with teachers on American military bases.  Again, because I thought that I could make a difference.  By then I was doing grievances for teachers, I was not a lawyer at that point but we didn't have to be a lawyer in order to do grievances for teachers and do negotiating work.  So I was doing that and it was at the time that I left overseas, I decided to go to Michigan and I continued this line of work and there actually lawyers who were my competitors who were representing the school boards who always encouraged me to go to law school because I was always winning over them and so they said they didn't want to admit that I wasn't a lawyer so they thought I should go to law school and get a law degree.  I left Michigan and did exactly that.
Story_ID: 94108
Speaker 1: But I want to take you back to a little on LA [Los Angeles, California] with the [California Teachers Association] teachers' strike and also the work that you were doing in Atlanta [Georgia].  I want to ask you what were the issues that were sort of front issues for teachers at that point?  The union was sort of involved within it and I would assume that California would be different than Atlanta on those issues.
Speaker 2: Yes in California the main issue was of course, pay.  Then of course, teachers were beginning to assert themselves and wanted to be involved in their professional development.  That was very big at that time because prior to the time that teachers received rights to bargain generally a principal or vice principal told you what to do, what you would do and you did it.  You had nothing to say about it.  So this was kind of the beginning of teachers being involved in what kind of workshops they would have, their leave, their pay, how they would run their classrooms; those were all issues at that time.  And I think many of them continue today but teachers in many states now have the right to bargain and to be an equal partner at the table with the school board or with the administration.
Speaker 1: In Atlanta what were the--were there different issues?
Speaker 2: Oh Atlanta there were many issues.  That was a very exciting time for me.
Speaker 1: Now what period--can we establish this time period?
Speaker 2: Sure you want to establish how old I am, I think.  But anyway--(simultaneous) (unclear).
Speaker 1: No I don't (unclear).
Speaker 2: You already know.  Let's see--(simultaneous) (unclear).
Speaker 1: Was that 19--(simultaneous) (unclear)?
Speaker 2: In California I was there from 1962, I was teaching through 1971.  I left Los Angeles in '71 [1971], I went to Atlanta.  Atlanta was different because Atlanta had not had a teachers' strike, they had no contract, they had no social security, they had almost nothing except I thought they had wonderful schools.  Many of them were wonderful schools.  But again teachers were beginning to assert themselves and wanted to be more involved.  So I was able to take a lot of what I had learned working for teachers in California and bring it to Atlanta. Now--
Story_ID: 94109
Speaker 1: There are some people who might have preferred not to have me there [Atlanta, Georgia].  At the time the wonderful Dr. Benjamin Mays was president of the school board and I will never forget Dr. Mays.  You are supposed to have this animosity, if you are working for the teachers union, you're not supposed to like the administrators and the school board.  But I loved Dr. Mays and he was always so wonderful and he would come into school board meetings and I remember a particularly difficult issue I was bringing to the school board one day and I came in ready for a fight and I--Dr. Mays spoke with me and he asked me how I was doing and I said "I'm not so good today" and he said "What's the matter, you're looking awfully pretty."  He was just like that; he had this wonderful sense of humor so he sort of broke down this hostility that I was coming into the board meeting with that day.  He set up a committee and we were actually able to resolve the problem whatever it was that I came there with that day.  Teachers were not quite where Los Angeles [California] teachers were.  I doubt that I could have gotten them to go out on strike even if they had wanted something very badly.  They were just at that time trying to become an association between black and white teachers.  I was their first staff member once the black and white teachers associations merged.  In fact, I actually helped them to come together and to build a new team because there had been in the early years in most of the southern states black teachers association and a white teachers association.  So those were rugged days but they were wonderful days.  There were always fights, often racial overtones and in fact after I had been there for about two years, there was a situation where the board of directors did not renew my contract and you will understand in merging, one year the black teachers had to greatest number of the board and the next year the white teachers had the greatest numbers.  So I think they were just waiting to get me.  So in my second year, they decided not to renew my contract and they had an investigation done, they had the NEA [National Education Association] come in and they said that I was a racist because I always catered to the black teachers and I put more black teachers on committees and what have you.  Well when the investigation was completed, the investigation committee basically asked me why I had not filed charges because it turned out to be just the opposite way.  And the teachers themselves came together and voted and overruled the board of directors and brought me back.  Well my supervisor said to me "You know Williams it's time for you to move on, you always move when they want you" and he decided that I should take the overseas education job.  I love Atlanta, it seems every place I go I love the city after a while and I loved being in Atlanta but decided to take the job that he'd asked me to take which was director of the overseas education association in the pacific and I was there for two years.  I pretty much lived on the road and continue to work for teachers on American military bases.  Every experience I've had with teachers has been very, very different.  That one of course, was different because teachers there had no bargaining rights whatsoever.  These were military bases and in addition to all of the rules about education, they had to be very aware of military rules and being on bases that--military bases that brought with it a lot of other difficulties.  We bargained contracts but the government could tell us what the limits were.  We could only bargain those things that the government said we could bargain and that mainly was like transfer rights from Germany to Japan to the Philippines or what have you.  I remember we used to get so frustrated some time because I'm coming out of California and other places where we were bargaining, doing real bargaining that one day we went out and we decided we were going to picket with the Japanese who were picketing the U.S. base in Japan.  So we did that and we thought that was fun, it was kind of a highlight.  We had someone out from NEA who came out to be with us.  Fortunately we didn't get in trouble for that or we didn't get accused of being treasonous or what have you.  We were very adventurous; we did lots of different things.  So that was one kind of experience but then I went on to work with other types of teachers groups.
Story_ID: 94252
Speaker 1: When it comes to fighting for their own rights, I find the average teacher a very timid person and even if the public doesn't always believe it, teachers think of their students first instead of themselves and so often they sacrifice themselves to remain in the classroom with their students.  I guess that's an admirable quality but when you're working as the staff person for the teachers, you want them to have a little more--be a little feistier.  You want them to stand up for their own rights and not just expect those who are hired staff to work for them.
Story_ID: 94253
Speaker 1: Now in Atlanta [Georgia] also before you, you know, were working abroad, who were you meeting in that community?
Speaker 2: In Atlanta?
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: Oh I had an opportunity to meet [HM] Julian Bond of course, we used to walk at lunch.  He was in the legislature at that time and we had quite a lot of fun.  We got a chance to know each other very well.  I was sort of the new person in town so everyone knew I was there.  I met him, I met Jesse Hill [Jr.] who became a very, very good friend.  Jesse taught me to save my money, that's what I look back on.  Jesse was of course a business man there, I think he has since retired but he helped me with that.  I met Maynard Jackson. In fact, I was on Maynard's election committee when he was elected Mayor of Atlanta the first time [1974].  I was one of a few women who was in a field where I could get away during the day or be there early in the morning and attend all of the meetings.  So I was welcomed by many people who were running for office or who were in business positions because I was freer during the day to meet with them and to do things with them.  I worked with Maynard, he won and I had hoped to go back to Atlanta to work in his administration but somehow I get sidetracked once I came back; I went to Michigan instead.  But I guess you could say almost everybody who is somebody in Atlanta, I met them and had an opportunity to become friends with them.  Of course, I met Mrs. King, Coretta [Scott King], I met [Reverend] Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.]'s sister [HM Christine King Farris] who was there at the time, I met Ralph Abernathy, Reverend Howard Creecy.  All the names that you think of in later years you heard as being very actively involved in the Civil Rights Movement, I had a chance to know most of them one on one, to at some point have lunch or dinner or to run into them at a party or to talk with them about some of the issues in which I was involved.  So Atlanta was very positive for me.  I enjoyed it, I would never have moved from Atlanta but for the fact that my supervisor wanted me to--because I'd met all the challenges in Atlanta that he expected me to meet he wanted me to move on to a new situation.  And somehow--I laugh about it but it just seems like every two years somebody decides that I've met all the challenges there are to be met and I need to move on.  So that has happened to me many times in my life and I can't say that I regret it although I loved Los Angeles [California], I'd love to still live there but I met new challenges after leaving there.  I loved Atlanta, I went to--the only place I probably wouldn't want to go back is abroad to work.  That's because I think I can make a greater difference here in the U.S. than I can abroad, although I've had an opportunity to do travel all over the country and all over the world and meet a lot of different people.  I just think I want to make these last years of my life--I want to make that difference in this country and I do that.  I loved Michigan, I just learn to adapt wherever I am and I can see positive things about every place I've ever lived.
Story_ID: 94254
Speaker 1: Now Dr. Benjamin Mays--do you have any other stories about him?  I mean he seemed to be such a towering man.  You know, and people--I've seen grown men cry talking about him.
Speaker 2: I just remember never seeing him angry as he presided over the Atlanta [Georgia] School Board [Atlanta Public Schools Board of Education].  You could always rely on him--(simultaneous) (unclear).
Speaker 1: So at that time he had retired from--(simultaneous) (unclear).
Speaker 2: From Morehouse, yes [College in Atlanta, Georgia], right, he was serving as president of the Atlanta School Board and I remember he would never be angry and he would always have a recommendation no matter what problem you brought to him, he had a recommendation.  And it wasn't his-- it didn't seem like it was ever his goal to just put one side down whether it was the principal or whether it was the teacher or the teachers union representative or whatever.  He always tried to bring the parties together and to say something to bring them together and do something to bring them together to work out their problems.
Story_ID: 94255
Speaker 1: And so this advisor again, his name that said--I don't think I completely heard what your position was.  I know you were working with--as a--(simultaneous) (unclear).
Speaker 2: NEA [National Education Association] we were called UniServ Directors or United Services Directors.  We were like what would be an executive director of a company, you were executive director of the teachers association and you were responsible to the teachers and the board of directors of the teachers union for carrying out the contract for resolving teacher grievances representing them before the school board and I did the same thing abroad.  That was also my title but I had a much larger territory.  I had Japan, Korea, Okinawa, the Philippines, the Midway Islands.  So my territory was much bigger but it was the same kind of job.
Speaker 1: When you were referring to the NEA, you're talking about National Education Association --(simultaneous) (unclear)?
Speaker 2: Yes not the National Endowment for the Arts (unclear).
Speaker 1: So then was the NEA--no when you went abroad you were working not for the NEA at that point?
Speaker 2: Yes, it was NEA and their affiliate abroad; it's called the Overseas Education Association just like every state has a state NEA affiliate.  That was equivalent to the state association, the overseas education association but it's all under the umbrella of NEA.
Speaker 1: And you spent how many years travelling?
Speaker 2: Two years.
Speaker 1: Two years and those were 19--?
Speaker 2: '71 [1971] through '73 [1973].
Speaker 1: Abroad?
Speaker 2: Yes
Speaker 1: Oh I thought you came to Atlanta in 197--okay.
Speaker 2: Wait, you're right '71 [1971] through '73 [1973] I was in Atlanta; the end of '73 [1973] through the end of '75 [1975] I was abroad.  You're right, you know my life better than I do (laugh).
Speaker 1: Just trying to listen.
Speaker 2: I'm trying not to let you add up the years.
Speaker 1: No but I've already got your birthday, so we're done with that.
Speaker 2: But you don't have to repeat reminding people.
Speaker 1: I'm not trying to remind you.  So that's 19-- and you travelled where when you were doing that?
Speaker 2: I started out in Germany because that's where the headquarters was located in Germany but my actual areas of responsibility were Japan, Korea, Okinawa, Taiwan, the Philippines and the Midway Islands.
Speaker 1: Did you spend much time in Germany at the beginning?
Speaker 2: No just a short time getting sort of an orientation and then moving on to the Philippines.
Story_ID: 94256
Speaker 1: Well how did you like the east [Japan, Korea, Okinawa, Taiwan, the Philippines and the Midway Islands]?
Speaker 2: It's a man's world and he can have it.  I met a lot of wonderful friends but I wouldn't want to live there again and when you talk about places to go for vacation that would probably be very low on my list.
Speaker 1: What didn't you like about it?
Speaker 2: Well first of all, this I'm not going to say that (laugh).  First of all I'm very tall right, so in Japan I felt like, oh my God I was so--(simultaneous) (unclear).
Speaker 1: The jolly green giant?
Speaker 2: If I wanted to go shopping where did I go?  The stores didn't have anything that I could wear and of course, I was not in the military so I couldn't shop on the bases.  So it was just a little bit difficult for me, probably of all the areas I preferred the Philippines.  It was a more open place, everyone there spoke English.  The people were very friendly, they loved black Americans and they all thought I was a movie star.  So I always got excellent treatment.  I had to be, I think they always thought [HM] Diahann Carroll or Diana Ross or somebody they just always thought that I was a movie star.  So all the young women, the young men they went wherever I went.  They were there to help me to do things.  If I dropped the light bulb or the thing out of a camera, they were there to pick it up.  They were just so very positive and I think they love Americans and particularly African Americans in the Philippines.  So they made that a very pleasant experience and remember now there is a lot of sunshine in the Philippines and I love sunshine.  I had an opportunity to sort of hold my office events out by the pool most of the time because I lived in a hotel.  Remember I was on the road for two years.  I didn't have a specific place I lived.  I lived in hotels and occasionally in barracks if I was allowed to live on those bases.
Speaker 1: And after that too--so what did you say the issues were different there?
Speaker 2: Well we had the federal government to deal with there.  There were no federal bargaining laws particularly for salary.  The salary was just sort of figured out by stateside; a certain number of the largest cities--an average of that.  They didn't bargain your salary.  Well for some people the salary was the most important part of it but we could bargain for things like transfer rights from school to school or from country to country or the kind of housing teachers had, we could do all of that.  But in the end the base commander was really in charge, you know.  So you could bargain and all of that but still be overruled.  So you had a contract up to the point that the base commander decided otherwise.
Speaker 1: So were these teachers that were hired by the base--the federal government--I'm just trying to understand who are the teachers on bases?
Speaker 2: Okay they are American teachers who go abroad to work in military schools.  They are just like any other teachers but they are just working in a different location and under a different set of rules.  But all of them have-almost all of them I would say have been teachers here in the United States at some place.  It's almost like Peace Corps, but they are going to work with Americans not with the foreign students as Peace Corps people work with the foreign students or foreign people but we are working with our own in American schools going by all the federal rules and the rules that we have in schools here; same kind of subject matter, etc.  Now the young people in those schools as well as the teachers get a chance to do a lot of things in those local countries; they learn a lot.  Maybe they study Japanese or they study Tagalog or some other language.  They get a chance to see the culture there and that can be very rich but they are operating under rules that are made back here in Washington [D.C.] for the most part.
Speaker 1: And were they typically more younger people who were working there or were they--and what would the typical tour of duty be two years?
Speaker 2: As a matter of fact, they are kind of mixed.  I met a lot of--in fact my best friend overseas was probably already about seventy then, her name was Melissa from New Orleans [Louisiana], I will never forget her and she was so sociable.  She pretty much managed my social life when I was on a base where she was.  There are a lot of young people who are maybe looking for adventure.  They come for a while but then there are those who have been there for years who stay, who stay year after year.
Story_ID: 94257
Speaker 1: And then after those two years you went to Michigan, right?
Speaker 2: After come-- yes that's right.
Speaker 1: You went to Michigan and you had said earlier that that was not a move that was anticipated.
Speaker 2: Right because I had fully planned to go back to Atlanta [Georgia].
Speaker 1: So how did that come about, were you still working for the NEA [National Education Association] at that point?
Speaker 2: When I went to Michigan?  Yes but for the Michigan affiliate which is the Michigan Education Association.  I went first to Flint and everybody from Flint, forgive me, but I remember arriving and saying "Lord, please don't let this be the town" but it was.  I worked there for a while, I then got a promotion and I worked in management of the Michigan Education Association.  So I was moved to the Detroit area, Southfield [Michigan] which I enjoyed.  I also worked in East Lansing which is the headquarters of the Michigan Education Association.  But I'm now working not so much closely with teachers but I'm working with the staff that did the work for the teachers.  So I'm kind of like a supervisor--I'm management now for the teachers union most of the time I was in Michigan and I served as director of professional development and human rights.  I served as an assistant director for the negotiations department in the metro Detroit area.
Speaker 1: Excuse me again but are we in like 1978, around that time?
Speaker 2: Yes '75 [1975] through '82 [1982] I was in Michigan.
Speaker 1: Okay
Speaker 2: And I was moving around to different cities but still working for the Michigan Education Association.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 94258
Speaker 1: And of the places you have been to that point, what have you found to be most progressive?  Because you know California up until they started having the propositions was always viewed as the most liberal and progressive and had the best--better schools.
Speaker 2: Well I would say except for the weather that California and Michigan were very much alike.  I think Michigan was more advanced as far as teachers because they had collective bargaining rights long before many of the other teachers did.  So they were more sophisticated at this.  They have now arbitration and they have many other things that teachers in other states did not have.  Michigan is a very highly unionized state so I think we were able to do more things.  There we had more strikes but we were able to do a lot more things in Michigan than in my early period and involvement with collective bargaining.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 94259
Speaker 1: And when you--as you're-you know, at this point you've amassed quite a few years in the whole area of sort of union negotiations and collective bargaining and I'm wondering what were some of the lessons you learned out of that or what--were issues pretty much the same location to location?
Speaker 2: Well in many ways they were the same but wherever I went I found teachers except for the leaders to be pretty much alike.  As I said relatively timid when it comes to working for themselves they expected staff to do the work not realizing that it's in numbers that you can accomplish more things if you're sticking together, you're unified and more of you are speaking up without just allowing one or two people to step out there and speak for you and then you can always go into--fade into the background if there is a problem.  Staff members for NEA [National Education Association] always know and expect there to be problems and there are problems and sometimes that gets you in trouble even with the people you are working for because many of them will say "well maybe we shouldn't have done that, maybe we shouldn't have gone on strike."  Because when you go on strike remember teachers are not getting paid and there are people who are not quite ready for that.  But the staff members such as myself would still be paid while teachers are on strike because we're working for the teachers' union instead of the teachers.  And sometimes, I think that created a little bit of a problem between teachers and their staff.
Speaker 1: So what was the most difficult situation that you came across?
Speaker 2: Probably when I was working abroad, the travel, the constantly being on the road and having to adapt to new situations so quickly and since I was going in and out of countries where I did not speak their language and often except for the Philippines they didn't always speak my language that the travel to and from the commercial airports to the bases that turned out to be very difficult and also a lack of access to information.  If I'm here, I can always call up my national office and get information or statistics I need.  That was not so when I worked abroad.  You're pretty much going on instinct and trying to figure things out for yourself.  And remember even though I had six countries, we are talking many, many more bases within those countries.  So it was constantly like putting out a fire, you're just trying to help one group and move on to another was putting out a fire and then you're coming back around and sometimes finding the same old problems reoccurring, you know.  So you just never felt the resolution and then of course, there was weather to adjust to.  Some of the countries were very, very cold.  Others were very hot, never bothered me when it was hot.  But moving from one place to another and never having the right clothing.  If I've gone from the Philippines and I arrive in Japan, I've got on Philippines type clothing or I'm carrying that kind and then I'm freezing in Japan.  So it was constantly that--the personal comforts were not there and I was sleeping in a different hotel, a barracks almost every night.  I never had any roots when I worked those two years abroad.
Speaker 1: What I was talking about sort of difficult issues, I'm talking about from a collective bargaining standpoint.
Speaker 2: The fact that when you're working on the issues of the overseas teachers, they are going to be very different because you're talking housing, you're talking moving from one country to the another and what those rights are and whether you're going to have money to do that.  You're talking about years that you can work in one location because there were rules about everything as to how long you could stay in an area.  Then there was the issue of home leave and that kind of thing.  You don't get into those when you are working here in the United States.  Teachers there wanted to be involved in their salary but they just had to settle for a salary because that was not a negotiable issue.  While in the United States salary is probably one of the key issues that teachers bargain for.  Overseas teachers knew that striking was not a possibility.  All the base commander had to do was send them home if they decided to strike.  That's not true here in the United States.  Probably the most uneasy place you could go is to jail but then you've got a union to take care of you and to get you out-you know, get you out of that problem.
Story_ID: 94260
Speaker 1: Now just as a little sidebar but can you give some background on the National Education Association?  I mean, how long it's been around and is it a well-endowed association?
Speaker 2: Yes the National Education Association is the largest teachers union in the country--in the world no doubt.  When I was there it was right about one million, it's probably doubled in size by now.  We have a presidential election where the person comes out of the classroom and comes in to be president of NEA but aside from that you have staff members in the NEA working headquarters who have been there for years and years and are very, very good at what they do.  Whether it's a teaching bargaining, whether it's training teachers in various fields of professional development, whether it's bargaining the contract, resolving grievances or what have you.  These people tend to have been there a long, long time and are experts in what they do.  Now through the years when I was working for NEA, there was a lot of competition with the American Federation of Teachers [AFT] which was the smaller union but yet they had the reputation for being the strongest in collective bargaining.  That's changed now, I mean the NEA is as strong or stronger than they are but at that time there was a lot of talk about merging the two organizations to become one so that they could have their greatest strength being together.  Unfortunately that has never happened but those talks as I understand it are still underway.  But you can see how long they've been talking and how difficult it is to merge the organizations.  NEA had the early reputation for having the greatest concern with the in-classroom themes while AFT, whether this is right or wrong, had the reputation for the bread and butter issues.  I think NEA has all of that now and has been for a number of years.
Story_ID: 94261
Speaker 1: Now when you left Michigan [1982] where did you go at that point?
Speaker 2: Well I had gone through so many snows and every year people told me this is the greatest amount of snow we've ever had and after hearing for about seven years and having said my last rites a lot of times because I went off the road and almost went off an embankment in the ice and snow, I decided I've got to get out of here because this is going to turn into an ice age and I decided I would do anything at that point to get out of Michigan even though I had some very good friends back there and I had some very good experiences, I decided to go to law school.  Well I didn't know I was getting out of the--what do you call it--out of the frying pan into the fire or whatever because law school is not easy.  I know there are some people who have gone through it and pretended it was easy but even with all the experiences I had, law school was traumatic.
Story_ID: 94262
Speaker 1: So I did well in law school though and when I went to law school--(simultaneous) (unclear).
Speaker 2: This is 1982.
Speaker 1: It was 1982.  When I went to law school I thought that I was just taking a sabbatical and I was going to go back to Michigan.  We had a--(simultaneous) (unclear).
Speaker 2: What were your thoughts about--is it because people kept saying "You're good at this, you should be a lawyer."  So you were trying to add the credential to what you had been doing already?
Speaker 1: Yes because it took in a lot of things I was already doing, it just gave me a credential to go and represent someone before a board or before somebody and have the actual credentials to do it.  Before I was just doing it because that's what was called for me to do.  But again the school board almost always had lawyers representing it.  So there's always that feeling that well they probably know something I don't know and I remembered [Robert] Bob Pisarski who was very actively involved in the unions--not the teachers' union but other like UAW [United Automobile Workers] and others and he always said to me "Well you know when you go in and you don't know what to do just say--play the helpless one and say 'Okay you know what to do, tell me what to do'" and I did that a few times and it really disarmed lawyers to say, "Tell me what to do."  It's like this poor, helpless person and well maybe we need to do this whatever.  So you got a little bit of help from them because they thought you were helpless when you really were not but if a lawyer would get up and say--because you don't know all the rules of law--a lawyer would get up and say she can't do that and all you'd have to do is say then tell me what to do and so we could move things that way.  So I admit doing that a few times until I got a chance to go to law school and learn that other lawyers probably know that same trick and it would never work if you are a lawyer talking to another lawyer.  But I left Michigan in 1982 because as head of my department, I had to make some cuts and it just broke my heart to think that I would have to cut any of my staff.  So each of us was responsible for working out our own plan of how we would bridge this budget deficit or problem.  So I decided instead of laying off any of my staff I would take a sabbatical and in so doing, I would go to law school.  So here I am in June of the year I'm going to law school finally making that decision.  I had to quickly take my LSAT [Law School Admission Test] and quickly think about moving here to Washington [D.C.] because I was coming to Washington to law school and I came and I did well my first year.  So I decided I think I'd like to try this again but my leave was only for one year so I decided then to just resign from the teachers' union and complete law school.  I did and I graduated cum laude, I think but it was difficult.  I'm not saying that just because I did well that it wasn't difficult.
Story_ID: 94263
Speaker 1: And I was in school [Howard University School of Law in Washington, D.C.]  with a lot of people who were a lot younger than I again who looked up to me and thought that I knew all the answers and I had all the answers because of all my experience.  So again I had something to live up to.  I remember in my class, the year we were graduating a group of young women had a program and they called it "the great women" and they gave me this award.  They kind of penciled it--it was kind of a handwritten thing and it was the Coretta Scott King, Fannie Lou Hamer--I mean they just took all the great women that they could think of and they put into an award and they scribbled this little award--drew little things and gave that award to me.  That was really very special because it told me that I've been helpful to a lot of them through law school even though I'm having many of the same difficulties they're having but they always thought I was so cool and I had everything under control.  But I had to study a lot too.  In law school all you have time to do is call up your mom and say "Hi mother how are you doing, I'll talk to you later, I've got to study."  For three years that's the way it was.  I didn't really have a real social life.  The other thing the students found interesting was that I could be friends with the professors.  They were generally scared to death of-[Herbert] Herb Reid I remember who was one of the icons at Howard Law School [Howard University School of Law in Washington, D.C.] and we'd walking down the hall just talking and having a great time and students would come to me and say how could you talk to Professor Reid.  But it was generally--because I was older than they, we had friends in common, we had activities maybe we had attended together over the weekend.  So my life was just a little bit different from theirs.  But everything that I ever studied, my English, my drama, my history, my--everything was helpful to me in law school but it was still difficult.
Speaker 2: I understand, so you were really a girl like forty going to school with people in their mid-twenties--(simultaneous) (unclear)?
Speaker 1: Right I was in my early forties; that's right.  I went--I think when I was thirty nine about to be forty that December, exactly.
Speaker 2: And what are you--
Story_ID: 94264
Speaker 1: Because law school can be like you say quite daunting.  What are you thinking that you're wanting to do with that?  You're planning to go back and operate within NEA [National Education Association] as a lawyer.
Speaker 2: Yes at that point but of course, by the time I finished law school in 1985, there was the challenge of having to take the [bar] exam.  So I had to spend my whole summer of 1985 studying for the exam.  I took the exam and then by early fall I got a trip to--I was invited to come to the Netherlands to do kind of like a fellowship for six weeks and study the Dutch government and travel and learn about their system.  I did that and while I was there I received a phone call from someone who would become my boss, [HM] Congress Mervyn Dymally and basically saying "Oh you're going to run for Congress."  I said "What do you mean run for Congress?"  I thought he was joking and by the time I arrived back in the United States he told me all about my congressman having died in Louisiana.  Well I hadn't lived in Louisiana for a number of years but Gillis [William] Long--that's like a big name in Louisiana--he died [1985] and his wife [Catherine Small Long] was not going to run again.  She filled out his term but she was not going to run again.  So this was going to leave an open seat for the first time in my adult lifetime because Gillis Long had always been my congressman.  Well by October of 1985, I was on my way to Louisiana; I didn't know I was going back to Louisiana to live but I did.  I went back and I started to run a congressional campaign and my name of coursed registered zero on the scale.  The little survey they do the polls that they do.  But by May of 1986 there was a new story, it was like Williams is the person to beat and I was running against the head of the labor committee, a mayor, a district attorney and a state senator, the chief of the staff to a congressman whose district it was and I won the primary to everybody's shock and surprise.  But I campaigned very hard, I--
Story_ID: 94123
Speaker 1: You know, you won the primary [Louisiana's eighth district in the United States House of Representatives].
Speaker 2: Yes I won the primary and I was running then against a Republican and the Republican happened to--
Speaker 1: Who was he?
Speaker 2: --Clyde Holloway.  He was the person who some years before had stood in the school house door and said let them burn rather than allow black and white children to go to school together.  Even the Republicans kind of stayed away from him but again you are in Louisiana, now this is 1985/'86 [1986] by the time the election comes about and even members, many members of the Democratic party were afraid to support me because I'm the first black who's running a viable congressional campaign in Louisiana.  I say viable because a couple of people had run in New Orleans [Louisiana] before that had not even come close to winning the primary or winning a race.  So I'm like a novelty, I'm new, people are curious about me.  Where have I been, I haven't been around and I've done all these other things.  I even had to take my bar card to press conferences and meetings because some of the news reporters would question whether I was a lawyer or not and I'd go through experiences where white men would not shake my hand.  When you're out, you're campaigning and you're shaking people's hands.  They would just not do it.  But anyway I'm the Democrat now so I'm in an almost ninety percent Democratic district.  I'm supposed to win.  The National Democratic Party helped me but the local Democrats were still white, southern Democrats and did not come out and help me as they would have anyone else.  They're first of all in shock that I've won the primary because I wasn't supposed to.  Often newspapers would--they would name all my people who were running against me and then referred to me as a "black female liberal lawyer from Alexandria" with no name.  So this went on, I didn't have any press on my side and I had to struggle all the way.  But as we neared Election Day in 1986, all the polls had me winning and why not? It's a Democratic district.  So white Democrats had voted for me even a large amount of them, I would have won.  So on the night of the election I leading, as a matter of fact, I'm told newspapers around the country carried the fact that I was winning or that I had won.  But then in the closing minutes of the counting the vote, there was a mysterious computer breakdown and they hand counted the rest of the vote.  Does that remind you of anything?  Okay. On the night of the election by the way, I had a call from Mr. [Mervyn] Dymally saying "Tell Al Gore if the democrats had supported me and stood up for me in 1998-in 1986 maybe this wouldn't have happened again in Florida [in 2000]."  But anyway when the vote was finally counted I was told that I had lost by six tenths of a percent.  No one believed that but the point is I didn't get credit for the election.  Now an interesting thing happened the evening before the election because nothing was taking votes from me, I was constantly gaining.  They had a number of undecided people out there.  So the only way that you can beat me is to make something negative happen right at the last minute.  So as we were coming into our last stop, we had been around the district which was very large-it was a fifteen parish district, I think.  We had a helicopter and we were landing in different places having the last minute rallies and as we came back into my hometown where I was to have the final rally we were ordered to land right on a military base--England Air Force Base and when we landed there were surrounded by armed personnel carriers, military guys coming towards us with their guns drawn and ordering us to get out of the helicopter.  Well we don't know what's going on.  Then when we were finally released to leave, they're saying the pilot made a mistake and landed there but the pilot says he was ordered to land there.  Well we didn't know the purpose of this until the following morning.  My sister came out to get the paper and on the front page there's a story saying "Williams is rude, abusive and threatening to the military."  They had the guns; I was supposed to be rude and threatening to them.  So what that did was it held me up from my final news conference to get at the undecided vote, it got a negative story on the day of so that whites who had not wanted to vote for me now had their excuse not to vote for me.  Ninety nine percent of the black people voted for me, only about twenty seven percent of the white Democrats voted for me and as the votes were counted, we were told it was at six tenths of a percent but no one believes that.  But the point is I didn't get elected.
Story_ID: 94124
Speaker 1: We filed an appeal, again my state [Louisiana] Democratic Party did not help me at all, we filed an appeal with the [U.S.] Air Force.  If you look at the records, they have like blacked out almost everything so when they gave us the information, almost everything was blacked out in terms of what actually happened that night.  We know that that was intended to get me that negative report on Election Day when I don't have a chance to defend myself.  So I came away from that just really very angry about--in fact, I wrote a book called "Be Angry, but be Constructively Angry."  Because as I spoke to students in the weeks following, I had to be able to tell them something so I came up with this theme and I got it from [HM Reverend] Jesse Jackson because when I came to Washington [D.C.], I met with him and I met with a lot of the other black leaders who were so sure that I had won the election and that it had been stolen from me.  And I was telling Reverend Jackson about how young people were looking up to me and they had expected me to win and they were angry that I didn't win.  I was told elementary school students were angry and they were saying she was cheated out of the election and as I was relaying these stories to him he said--I said "they are angry" and he said "they ought to be angry so tell them to be angry."  So I sort of set of theme and over that next year as I spoke to students I would say "I want you to be angry and I would go back to the story and say I want you to be angry but I don't want you to be plain old angry because that can consume and destroy you.  I want you to be constructively angry" and then I gave them a litany of things that they could do to be constructively angry.  And of course that was reading and studying and staying in school and turning off the radio and turning off the television and being so good that people would wonder why they needed affirmative action in the first place and things like that.  And I just gave them a whole litany of things and as I would go back to schools over the next few years, young people would quote my lines to me and they were wonderful.  That's sort of what got me through that difficult period in addition to the fact that I wrote the book about it.  I just stayed up at night and I--through my tears I put together this be angry but be constructively angry.  I never had it published but it's all there.
Story_ID: 94125
Speaker 1: How long had the campaign process been? It had been how long? Was it a year that that-your campaign? (simultaneous) (unclear)?
Speaker 2: Yes right after law school [Howard University School of Law in Washington, D.C.] I went right after law school after I did my bar exam and all.  I went back home [Louisiana] and so I campaigned for the next year.
Speaker 1: Okay and what did that teach you about the political process because you had been involved in politics but more as helping campaigns not, you know, as the candidate?
Speaker 2: Well it was certainly a different phase of my life having to go through this process where you know you've worked hardest, you know you're the most qualified and yet you can have something taken away from you.  Something that you don't control, you know, even people who are supposed to be with you aren't always being honest with you because everywhere we went Democrats no matter if they were white or black were saying "I'm with you" and if all these people had voted for me or half the whites had voted for me there was no doubt that I would have won even more than that close election.  But I also learned through that process to manage and channel my anger and not, you know, allow it to stop me.  So even today I serve as a regular on Louisiana Radio Network and many of the same people who could not bring themselves to vote for me because I'm black now tell me "you were just ahead of your time."  As I look back now it was Louisiana's loss, in fact one of the newspapers did an editorial on that saying that the fact that I was not elected was a lost to our state.  All that sounds good but I was very, very angry at the time that it happened.  That racism could do this.  The person against whom I ran [Clyde Holloway] came to Washington [D.C.] and Republicans would hardly allow him on the floor, he was hardly literate yet he could--they could prefer him to me who had proven myself, who was obviously qualified if there is such a thing for being qualified to run for office.  I'm pleased that I did it even though there was a lot of pain associated with it because after I ran the next time around two black males did run and one [HM William Jefferson] did win [1991] and then two years later Cleo Fields ran again and did win [1993].  So I call it as Coach [Eddie] Robinson taught us, "I took the ball to the goal post but somebody else took it over."  So we ultimately had two black members of congress out of a delegation of eight just four years after I ran and one of the things I always fear is that people will and I know there have been a lot in our community who've taken that ball to the goal post and yet the person who takes it over is the one who receives the honor and the others are forgotten.  So I've written a lot about that period because I hope that people do remember that I did a lot of things to help the two who ultimately won.  I even gave Cleo all of my materials I had so that he could take advantage of the things that I learned.  I told him what about my mistakes--the things I might have done differently and I gave him the benefit of everything that I had during that campaign and I think all of us have to do that.  That's how we as a people progress by maybe not going across that goal post ourselves but helping somebody else to get across.  That's progress to me.  Women started to run for office in Louisiana, in fact there was one white woman who ran for office in my hometown.  She was known as the "white Faye Williams" and many of the women came to me and said but for my race and they saw what I did and how I managed everything so well, they might not have had the courage to run.  So to me that's progress.  I won't be remembered as winning but I did become known by many people as Louisiana's congresswoman-in-exile.  I'm still involved with the state, I still go back there.  I speak at schools and churches and when I go home I meet with people, I still have people who call me now to help them resolve problems.  So the point of it is, I guess even though I didn't win the race, I know that I made a difference in the lives of a lot of people in Louisiana.  And I'm very proud of that in spite of all the pain, I'm glad I did it.
Story_ID: 94126
Speaker 1: Now [HM Mervyn] Merv Dymally, what was he-what was his take on things; he was probably equally disappointed?
Speaker 2: Oh probably even more than I.  He still talks about it because he knows that I actually won the race [for the U.S. House of Representatives in Louisiana in 1986] and he put a lot into it.  He helped me to raise money, he helped me with issues, he helped me all along the way and he has done that for a lot of other young women including his daughter [Lynn Dymally].  His daughter ran in his place after he didn't run again and she ran a very strong race-an excellent race but again she got very, very close but she lost the race.  The person who did win ultimately went to jail.  He didn't serve very long.  She was a brilliant young woman.  Her race reminded a lot of people of my race and it was just unfortunate that she didn't win because she would have made an excellent congresswoman following her father.
Speaker 1: How would you describe him as a person and also then a politician?
Speaker 2: Well he's been a politician all of his life, ever since I've known him.  He was in the California [State] Assembly and by the way he's gone back to the assembly.  He retired from the assembly--from the senate actually and then he retired from [U.S.] Congress and just a couple of years ago he-well last year [2002], he wanted to go back to the California [State] Assembly and he's been welcomed back because he's a person who and this is one of the things he taught me is to be able to work with anybody and everybody.  Don't be afraid to take on new challenges even if you've not had the experience before.  If there is something you really want to do, there are people who will help to make that possible and he has been that way with just a lot of people--a lot of other people who are in congress.  He was very well respected in congress even by conservatives or by Republicans or people who were very different from him because he's a very progressive member of congress.  But he could laugh and didn't take himself seriously.  He was always willing to help people and he's still doing that.  He encourages you, all you've got to do is say you want to do something like that summer in 1982 when I said "Oh I think I'd like to go to law school" and a couple of months later I'm in law school.  Well that's the way he is with everybody.  He enables you to do what you want to do.  When you're working for him as I did for a number of years, he gives you responsibility and he doesn't micro manage, he allows you to make your mistakes and correct them.  All he requires is your reporting what you've done when you are doing something on his behalf but he never second guesses you.  I enjoyed working for him more than I've enjoyed working for anybody in my whole life.  And after him I also knew I could never work for anybody else and I've not had a job except for a very brief time in the [President Bill] Clinton administration--his first term.  I worked there and that was because I was asked by the administration to work but I've never gone in search of a job.  I've always known that I had a responsibility to be in a position to give work to other people.  With all this knowledge I've amassed with all the things that I've learned to do, if I'm just getting a paycheck for myself then I feel like I'm a traitor to all the people who helped me to learn and to do all the things that I've done in my life.  And by having a business, you can give work to other people, you can enable them to work, you're freer to speak out and to say and do the things that you want to say and do.
Story_ID: 94127
Speaker 1: So did you allow yourself some healing time after that whole period?  I know you said you were talking and I'm wondering how long you spent in Louisiana after that [after losing her 1986 campaign for the U.S. House of Representatives]?
Speaker 2: I was there for--well I traveled a lot even during that time because I was invited to Harvard [University in Cambridge, Massachusetts], I was invited all over to speak.  I was living on the road practically speaking and sharing that experience with people especially people in unions.  [HM William] Bill Lucy was very helpful to bringing-- in bringing me to many of places where he had conferences and conventions because remember I had deficits to make up.  Whenever you run for office you have deficits to make it unless you're wealthy like John Kerry or somebody whose wife [Teresa Heinz Kerry] is wealthy.  But I was not, so I had to work, I had to do something to pay off those campaign debts.  As for healing, I think the greatest therapy was writing the book and being able to talk about it.  I always tell people now the worst thing to do is to just go behind closed doors and be hurt and not share that hurt or that anger with people.  I shared mine and I still do because it hasn't gone away.  I didn't just take off time you would say is healing because I was often ready to do something else.  I then came to Washington [D.C.] and I went to work for [HM] Mr. [Mervyn] Dymally at that point and I worked very hard again, then I decided I wanted to go divinity school.  There is always something else to do and I think I healed more by being active, by being involved and meeting new challenges.
Story_ID: 94128
Speaker 1: I wrote some other books in the year following--or some years following.  I wrote a book about the campaign and the year following and then I wrote other books.  I wrote about the issue of harassment of African American officials.  Mr. [Mervyn] Dymally had started that ten years earlier and I then picked it up and did my Ph.D. Dissertation on harassment of African Americans.  Such as himself and others who when they've tried to step outside that boundary--as you know he was about to become governor of California and then there were charges leveled against him which were never proven.  They were suddenly dropped.  So what the case we make is that these things happen simply to discredit you and your community, to break you, to make sure that you have no funds because you're using funds that you would have to defend yourself.  But at any rate, it takes away people from our community and I think maybe if I study again, I'm going to update even that because this writing is about ten years old now.  But if you look around the country, you will see so many African Americans who were so, so productive--were doing so many things and then suddenly they were just broken, you know, by the system and that's still happening.  What I find is often when people are discredited or harassed, the people they work most for begin to back away from them and that's another part of that.  People who brought you to this goal post, you suddenly begin to forget them and you move on to whosoever is the big wheel or the important person of that day and I try never to do that.  I try always to work for the underdog, to be with that person who's least likely to succeed; not necessarily who is most likely to succeed because there are a lot of young people, because nobody believed in them, they never had a chance to make it.  A lot of people who have worked all these years in civil rights, in human rights people forget who they are.  But for projects like yours, nobody would know who they are and I don't want that to be said of me is that I forgot how I got where I did.  So many people helped me even in that race in Louisiana.  I go back to Louisiana now and the people are so wonderful and they still thank me for what I did and I'm like I didn't really do anything, I didn't win.  But because they believe that I did, then I'm treated by them as though I am somebody special.
Story_ID: 94129
Speaker 1: Now this decision to go to divinity school, do you think it came out of an attempt for healing--self healing in many ways?
Speaker 2: I think so.
Speaker 1: And so what did you find there?  What did you find in your studies at the school?
Speaker 2: Well, I think in the school I had an opportunity to look at myself and to--you might say that I began the healing process there or well maybe I carried it just a step further because I had an opportunity to study with other people who had very, very big problems who have been hurt deeply, who've had a pain--a pain in their lives also--had tragedies in their lives, native Americans.  I probably learned more from the Native American classmates than anyone else as they talked about their experiences.  So you begin to understand, no matter what you've gone through, you're not the only one who's got pain.  There are other people out there and maybe something you can do that can help them through their pain.  So we kind of helped each other.  We cried a lot and I had an additional thing happened to me during the time I was in divinity school that caused new pain, I guess that I had to work on.  My business partner who was also one of my very best friends, his name was [Reverend] Bennie Thayer.  He died midway through [October 2, 2000] so it was kind of like I wanted to give up going to divinity school.  It was my classmates who talked me into staying and who helped me through that and I've dedicated my writing--my dissertation to him because I know how much he wanted to finish divinity school.  So once I got there, it wasn't a matter of well I can just go for a year and I can quit.  It became another cause for me and I have completed all of the course work and as I said, very shortly I've completed my writing, it's being checked now.  So other than what I may have to do--changes I may have to make, I've finished that.
Speaker 1: So what school did you go--what divinity school?
Speaker 2: Wesley Theological [Seminary] on the Campus of American University here in Washington [D.C.].
Speaker 1: Now, but your thesis--your dissertation was on harassment.  Was that at divinity school the harassment of African--(simultaneous) (unclear)?
Speaker 2: No that was before divinity school.
Speaker 1: That was before?
Speaker 2: Right that was after--that was my Ph.D. work.
Speaker 1: Okay but your Ph.D. work you did when?
Speaker 2: Right after [HM] Mr. [Mervyn] Dymally retired in--I started it in '93 [1993].  He retired in '92 [1992] and then that's the year that I went to work for the [President Bill] Clinton administration for a short time and I also wrote--I did some of the Ph.D. work then.
Speaker 1: I see, okay.
Speaker 2: And because I already had a Master's in Public Administration, I didn't have a lot course work to do.  I did my Ph.D. in Public Administration too so it was just kind of a continuation.  I could have actually have done them together.
Speaker 1: So did you move back to L.A. [Los Angeles, California] for that period?
Speaker 2: No
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, okay. But, I understand, okay, I'm just trying to get a point of clarification.
Speaker 2: No, no, no. I stayed here and I've been here ever since Mr. Dymally retired in '92 [1992].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 94130
Speaker 1: And now what role did you play with the [President Bill] Clinton administration? What (unclear)
Speaker 2: I was the White House liaison to the Department of Energy and I did that for--during his first term when they were just getting set up.  I had some challenges in Louisiana with the pro-Israel lobby in 1986, in fact that was one of the difficulties I had in getting some of the Democratic Party support because many of them are pro-Israel and I made a statement when we--when the U.S. bombed [Muammar] Gaddafi.  I said something to the affect that it's no more right for us to kill Gaddafi's children than it is for Gaddafi to kill American children and that along with, I guess other statements I made during the campaign was perceived--I was perceived as being anti-Israel and once you're on that list, you don't get off the list no matter what.  Even though I had--my issues director was Jewish.  Yeah it's just a thing in our society.  There is something called the lobby and when you get on their bad list, you're on their bad list.  So when I came to the Clinton administration at their recommendation, there was a newspaper article that was done in the Baton Rouge Morning "Advocate" and it basically said that I had gotten this job without the help of Louisiana politicians and generally politicians like to think they're the kingmaker and what have you.  So they were pretty upset that this article came out and that in fact I had gotten it without their help so they decided to block it at that point and I was relieved of duty because the gentleman from the pro-Israel lobby who is deceased now--a guy by the name of Shelly Bayshock [ph.] ran interference and made sure that Louisiana politicians did not support me in keeping the job.  So even though [HM] Hazel O'Leary and I had been very good friends, she used to come into my office and we were very close, we were like sisters.  We looked a lot alike, we were about the same height, her security people used to get mixed up; they never knew whether they were following me or her often.  We were very close; she would come in and cry on my shoulders sometimes because those were very challenging times for her.  But when she was away on a trip once one of her staff people, I guess had the authority to do it and told me that would be my last day.  It was just that abrupt and as it turned out, it had to do with my so-called anti-Israel feelings or statements which I am not anti-Israel but I was perceived that way because if you say anything that is perceived as positive about Arabs and or the middle east except for Israel, than you are perceived as anti Israel.  I'm not as I said some of my best friends are Jewish and always have been.  But that's the way I was perceived by them.  So it was at that point that I decided which I had known I could never work for anybody else because of that kind of thing that you're not free to say what you want or do what you want then I couldn't work for anyone because I couldn't accept that to be told that you can't comment on world affairs.  So since that time, I've been a struggling lawyer and business person trying to do things on my own but being my own boss.
Story_ID: 94265
Speaker 1: Well tell me about, you know, how that--tell me about how the Million Man March even got started?
Speaker 2: In 1995 there were a lot of things that were wrong in the country, you know, and particularly in our community with rising crime rates and all and [HM] Minister [Louis] Farrakhan decided that he wanted to try and do something to make a difference. And so he went on about a year long trip around the country talking to young African American men.  He was calling for the men to come out to the meeting because he felt that that was where he really could make a difference.  And so he went from city to city talking to young men about building up to this million men coming to Washington [D.C.] and this positive display and coming out of it with some new attitudes.  I had an opportunity to travel to some cities to help organize them for the march, but mainly I was here in Washington.  And the way really that I guess I got to be the chairperson was when Minister Farrakhan came to Washington and we all packed this place to hear about this march and what was going to happen, and he was saying this was the day the women will get a chance to stay at home, unlike what the media said, the media said he said that we had to stay at home, that wasn't what he said.  He really said we'd get a chance to stay at home, in other words we could sit back on that day, come home from work, not have to go out, not have to be up front, we could just enjoy seeing all these wonderful things the men were going to be doing that day.  And of course, at the end of the session I raised my hand and said, "Now Minister you know I love you, I admire you and I respect you, but I don't have any children at home, I don't have a husband at home and it's going to be awfully boring if I have to sit there that day by myself" (laughter) and he kind of laughed and then of course the next thing I knew his chief of staff came to me and said, "You're going to run the meetings every night."  So I started running the meetings, you know, the organizing meetings and from that point I was just made the chair.  I replaced someone who had started out doing it and for the rest of it, we were in charge of organizing the march.
Speaker 1: Now had you had contact with Minister Farrakhan up until this point, had you had a previous relationship with him?
Speaker 2: Just hearing him speak, listening to his tapes. Nothing in particular, no.
Speaker 1: And so the, the march, just sort of tell how it came together.  I mean at what point were you--did you really get involved, that's what I'm trying to understand?  How much had he been talking about it beforehand?
Speaker 2: Well he had been going--he'd gone to several different cities before he came to Washington.  I would imagine six weeks or so at least before he came to Washington.  But I was involved from the very first night that he came to Washington with the story I've just told you and chaired the meetings thereafter, all the way through the march. And even after the march we continued because we were trying to assess where we were, what are some of good things that are happening as a result of the march, so we stayed together for quite a while after that.  Then of course, at a certain point the men took over again and decided they could do it better and by that time I needed a break and I needed to get back to work and to catching up on some of my bills.  So I sort of backed away from the committee itself.
Speaker 1: Okay. But the--you backed away from the committee after the march? (Unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh yes, I went all the way through the march, yes.  I even was--I was one of few women who spoke the day of the march.
Story_ID: 94266
Speaker 1: You know because he [HM Minister Louis Farrakhan] often--he has said--I've heard him say that he was even shocked when all was said and done at the amount of people who came out and when asked about a game plan he said that he--there had--it not been thought out past that point.
Speaker 2: Past the march.
Speaker 1: Past the march, that there was all this tremendous enthusiasm and he was and I think he just said this in point of that sort of humility but he just was--he was overwhelmed.
Speaker 2: Well he was.  I remember the day--I always believed he'd have a million.  I guess I'm just like that, I just figured if he said we would have a million, we'd have a million because remember now I've had an opportunity to go to different cities and see the enthusiasm and I'm in the office and I'm around and I'm hearing all the reports coming in of how many buses are coming from here and how many people are coming and what have you.  I'm hearing all this excitement every day.  So I think I was in a unique position to really believe that we were doing it.  Now once the march was over, I-- Minister Farrakhan was very depressed starting with the day after the march and I think it started to happen leading up to the march.  The last few days when the press suddenly got interested, he kind of said to me you just go ahead and do what you're doing because every time you're gaining new friends and new allies and what have you.  I was responding to all the foreign press, to everybody during that period of time and--with a smile.  I was doing debates with [HM] Armstrong Williams and never getting angry and continuing to know and believe that we were going to have the million.  But then the press started to say very negative things about him when they finally decided to talk about it and we worked very hard so we didn't lose our enthusiasm.  So he just kind of withdrew and then even the day after the march when he's obviously gotten a million plus people there and everybody is really high and very excited about the possibilities, then they start jumping on things about what happened to the money and we're going like "what money."  We haven't been paid a penny; there was no money except to pay for all those things out there on the [Washington, D.C.] mall, you know.
Story_ID: 94267
Speaker 1: So all of that was, that was very depressing to him.  We had dinner together the day following the march, I believe it was and he [HM Minister Louis Farrakhan] was--he just kept saying "Why are they doing this.  I mean, you know, we've just pulled off this wonderful, positive march, why do they want to destroy it."  For the next week or well actually several weeks, he didn't say anything publicly because he was hurt, he was really hurt.  Our enthusiasm was still there even though we were upset by the fact that the day after the march, I remember going into the office early in the morning and someone called from the West Coast and started to say to me what the papers were going to say that day and that he had--I don't even know who the person was.  He said that there had been a meeting of several of the newspaper executives and they had decided they were not going to say that there were a million people there.  Then of course, they started to question whether we even had close to the million and what have you and if you remember the City of Washington and their officials were saying it was more than a million.  But those-the park services and others were saying no.  We had a news conference and we just decided that we would stick with our million plus and as it turned out, all the people who started to judge and to look back at the picture started to agree with us.  There were more than a million but we kind of decided it doesn't matter whether there was a million, whether less than a million whatever.  It was a wonderful march and we of course, had the intention of going on to what was called a five year plan after that and we were going to have a Million Youth March, a Million Woman March, a Million Seniors and a Million Families were going to come back together in 2000 which we did come back in 2000.  But in between, everybody started to jump the gun.  Other groups decided to start having a million-everything-march.  So we instead of trying to cut into theirs and cut them back, we decided to try to cooperate with them.  Most of them were not receptive to our help but we did offer to help.  Minister Farrakhan asked us to help the Million Woman March.  Just a few weeks before the march they still hadn't gotten permits; they hadn't done the basic stuff that we knew you had to do.  We had a meeting here in Washington, we attempted to help them.  I was even asked to speak at the march and then I was uninvited to speak at the march, basically.  So it got to be very tense.  So we just kind of backed off but whenever they asked for help, we did and it then kind of took away our five year plan.  So then we just simply started to work toward the Million Family March.  But, of course, we had the Million Family March in 2000 but nothing-nothing, absolutely nothing could exceed 1995.  So while the Million Family March was wonderful, we brought in more people, we brought in other than black people, we brought in--we tried to bring in Native Americans, Asians, women, whites anybody who wanted to come.  It was all of their march but it just did not bring the same kind of excitement or generate that kind of excitement even with those of us who worked with it because I think the 1995 Million Man March had just been the height of what a march could be and there people who accused us of not following up on all of this energy had and I want to say "Why were we supposed to do it and where were we to get the money to do it?"  Our idea was as everybody who came were supposed to get a new excitement and generate this when they go back home and they were to do projects.  It wasn't like this little group of people who put together the Million Man March that we suddenly are going to go out and change the world.  It was just that we were going give the inspiration or provide that inspiration for them to go back home and do things.  But I think people misunderstood that and thought we were going to do things after the march.  Mainly what we had to do after the march was go back to work and pay off some of our bills that we hadn't been able to pay while we were working to put on the march because none of us were paid to put on the march.  We raised every penny of it the hard way.
Speaker 2: Now in hindsight, do you think--would you have done some things differently?  Hindsight is always 20/20 vision, would you have done things--some things differently or approached it--there has not been much excitement in the black community since really the March on Washington [1963]?  I mean even in the Poor People's Campaign [1968], it was sort of--.
Speaker 1: Well probably the only thing that I would see, because to me it was a perfect march.  The only thing that I would see is that since we did not have the mainstream press with us, I probably would have continued to talk with the black press, I probably would have made it clear what our goals were after the march and would have come back perhaps very often and said something about that.  But as I said, if you remember after the march, [HM] Minister [Louis] Farrakhan just kind of faded out and I'm sure he was very tired, very disappointed with the response to the march.  But I would have had maybe a bigger committee of people authorized to speak and would have stayed on key, stayed on point about where do we go from here and that's probably the only thing.
Story_ID: 94268
Speaker 1: Now what-- So what is Dr. Williams doing now?
Speaker 2: Well, I'm still trying to find myself at this age.  There's still many things I want to do but the one thing that I'm glad I did after that march [Million Man March] and it's inspired me to do that, and that was form my own business [Natural Health Options].  I hear wonderful stories from people who've worked in my company who've been distributors for my products, who said you know since I started working with your company, I now have money to buy things at Christmas.  I don't have to use my credit card, I can go out and sale some rubbing oil or sale some sage and sulphur or some of these wonderful products and make that extra money I was never able to make before.  That makes me very happy because even though I often have had to spend my own finances--my own funds to make the company go, I've seen a lot of good things happen with a lot of other people.  We've helped to make a lot of other people leaders.  I promoted people who probably didn't feel that they should have been promoted but I saw potential in them and made them a vice president or an executive director or state director or what have you and I'm very proud of that because I think I've produced a lot of leaders and a lot of desire for people to go into business.
Story_ID: 94269
Speaker 1: And what do you think you haven't done that you would like to still do?
Speaker 2: Let's see; find my prince charming (laugh).  I haven't done that yet and I'm not opposed to marriage, I even go--mine was not a very positive marriage.  I would still someday like to be married.  I can't say be married and have children, I'm past that but I'd like to find that prince charming and maybe settle down somewhere in the country again and just have a nice tranquil, quiet life where I can read all the books I would ever want to read in my life and where I can sit and talk with young people and motivate them and help them to become all that they can be.  I've had a lot of experiences and I'd like to share that with other people and hope that will inspire them.
Story_ID: 94270
Speaker 1: So Dr. Williams what-when you look at the black community, what like hopes do you have for them and what concerns you may have for it?
Speaker 2: Well my biggest concern is that we're not united as much as I'd like to see us united around good causes.  I know there is a lot of talent out there, I see it every day.  But I don't see that will, that desire to do for others and to bring others in and help them grow as I saw when I was growing up.  There were always people who helped me to grow, who believed in me and who sacrificed for me.  I don't see us as a people willing to make that sacrifice for others knowing that that's how we progress is each of us reaching back and bringing someone else along.  I'd like to see more of us do that.  I'd like to see more of us not be so concerned about what someone is going to say about us or what's going to happen to our jobs or our homes.  In other words, I'd like to see more people speaking up and speaking out against injustices wherever they see them and not laying back because of a fear of losing something.
Speaker 1: And do you--what do you think would it take to do that?  I mean on a practical--?
Speaker 2: Well, I think more of us have to work to be in a position to pick people up when they get into these difficulties.  I think that's the biggest thing that happens.  A person doesn't speak out because of the fear of loss of a job, loss of an opportunity.  I look at, for instance, black college presidents and mayors in cities-black mayors in cities.  When they leave, where is there for them to go?  We don't have any place to take them.  We don't have any place to give them an endowed chair or to say you can come and be a senior fellow or to have an endowed chair or to share your knowledge with me because most of our universities are dependent on corporations or state funds.  So we don't have the means to take a person in when that person has burned himself or herself out or has made himself or put himself or herself in a position that no one will take you as an employee or as a consultant or look to you.  We just have to find a way to be able to pick up our own and wrap our arms around them and when they run into difficulties, to be there for them as they've been there for us.
Speaker 1: Do you honestly think we don't have the means or do you think that's our approach?
Speaker 2: It's probably our approach because we do have a lot of people who have a lot of resources but not enough of them are perhaps using them for the betterment of our community.  They are using them for the betterment of self and I don't know how we get people to do that.  I think it has a lot to do with being in a new age now maybe and a lot of people in my age group grew up the hard way and maybe have more appreciation than a lot of young people who just took the ball over the goal post as opposed to working to bring that ball to the goal post.  And it is not all young people because there are a lot of people in my generation who don't look out for our community.  But we can keep trying and I think as more of us try, we'll get there and we can't always think of things as happening in our lifetime in order for it to be a success.  We've got to think about playing our part in moving toward the goal post.
Story_ID: 94271
Speaker 1: So what do you see as examples of sort of things that- are good things that are happening or people who are-there is a whole talk of our leadership and sort of the lack of leadership or our leadership getting older and I'm just wondering if you have any thoughts-some people say we shouldn't have leaders, you know.
Speaker 2: Well, I don't totally agree with that.  I think that we need leaders; we need leaders to inspire us--all of us.  Even those who call ourselves leaders need leaders to inspire us and we don't have a lot of those.  We do have some people who can inspire certain segments of our community.  But I would like to see us have some totally honest leaders who are not afraid; who are not looking for anything in particular and maybe these are people who are later in their years, later in life.  Maybe they've retired, maybe more of our retired people should come back out and work with our young people, work with our community because they don't have that threat of losing things.  Losing a paycheck or losing your homes or what have you.  I think there are a lot of good things happening; after the Million Man March [1995], I began to see more of our people believing that it's important to start businesses and to hang in there and maybe make the sacrifices to make those businesses work.  You know when I was young, we had a lot of businesses in our community and we were supportive of them; that's how they survived.  Integration wasn't in every way good for us because we lost a lot.  We lost that caring feeling; we lost that spirit of unity and togetherness.  But I think we've brought a lot of it back after the Million Man March.  I've certainly seen more of that.  Just the fact that we call each other "brother" and "sister," I think that's a help.  I think I've seen more people go back to church; I think that helps a lot too.  So I think people are working on the things that are good.  I've seen more people concerned about other people's children again.  We've had a long period where we were afraid to say anything to other people's children.  I see people beginning to be concerned, not just about their children but about their neighbor's children again.  I think all of those things will ultimately come back together and bring us back to where we were before integration in the positive ways.  I mean, there are a lot of things about pre-integration that I don't want to happen again.  But for us to care about one and another and each other's family, that's important.  I should like to hope that I will play a big part in that.  Studying the ministry has given me more determination--more energy actually to move ahead and to continue to work and to have hope because we all lose it--leaders lose hope, you burn out, you get tired and I think divinity school just sort of rejuvenated me to let me know that there's still a lot of things out there I can do.  As I talk with people, I hear more people who are in that position now believing that they want to come back, they want to be more involved in working for the good things in our community.  We know the good is there but like Alex Haley said we've got to find it, we've got to praise it more often so that we can encourage the people who are willing to take those risks to go out there and make our community stronger than it is.
Story_ID: 94272
Speaker 1: Do you ever think you would run for political office again?
Speaker 2: Only if I were independently wealthy.  I don't think I could ever run for office and have to beg for money because that's demeaning, that is what prevents some people from holding on to those ideals they have about where our community ought to go.  They give it up for the dollar and I could never do that.  So I'd have to be wealthy knowing that I don't have to trade my values, my morals for a dollar to campaign on.  I'd also have to be pretty sure of who my supporters are before I go out there and test the waters.  I would want to know who's going to be with me and they'd have to acknowledge that publicly.  They'd have to acknowledge that they're going to help me with whatever I have to do and that they're not going to talk me into changing my positions in order to get elected.  There are people in 1985 and '86 [1986] who said that if you just change your position on various things, you could get elected.  But then I say how does that make me different from anybody else?  And I wouldn't have to go through anyone even believing they could talk me out of standing up for the things that I believe in just to get elected because then we are right back to the same old people being elected.  And if I were elected, I would want to make a difference.  I believe I can make a bigger difference now not being elected just by helping to be an inspiration to those with whom I come in contact.
Story_ID: 94273
Speaker 1: You know it's interesting that you would credit a lot of things and I don't mean this pejoratively but I thought it was interesting that you would credit a lot of things to the Million Man March.  The reason I say that is that the black community, I think in many ways, many people are afraid to associate with [HM] Minister [Louis] Farrakhan.  In fact, even though it was this great success and people--a lot of our--they are afraid because this fear factor that association will bring anti-Semitic forces out, will mean that they will lose jobs--contracts thing like that.  And so I just thought it an interesting thing that the--one of the most significant things that has happened since the '60s [1960s], since the beginning of our modern day Civil Rights movement in terms of the gathering together of--especially part of our group.  So my question for you is do you have any sort of thoughts about that because it sort of turns on this whole issue of black leadership?
Speaker 2: Well, I've learned through the school of [HM] Mervyn Dymally and my mother [Frances LaCour Williams] again is that you don't disassociate yourself from your friends because you are afraid of what someone's going to say or what may happen to you.  So I think it was a natural when I saw Minister Farrakhan and saw all the positive things that he was doing in our community, all over and not being afraid to do them that I guess I identified with him in a lot of ways.  My work from harassment of African Americans, I'd seen so much of that and then when I got to know him, he was such a wonderful person, such a brilliant person and I keep thinking about the potential he has if only the system would allow him to do the positive things that he is capable of doing instead of constantly putting them down.  What a wonderful world we'd have and how much stronger our community would be.  So it was just natural that I would gravitate toward him.  I've had a chance to know him up close and personal, I guess you could say and I know that he's not that person I hear about in the media.  He's a wonderful, warm, brilliant person who would help anybody in the world that he could.  I guess I sometimes speak out and maybe I sound like him but I also know that like Minister Farrakhan there's not a person in the world that I want to see hurt or in pain or suffering.  Whatever I say, whatever I do, I want the world to be better for all of us and that's all I ever see him doing.  Do I agree with every single thing that he has said?  Maybe not but then we don't have to agree people to be able to work with them.  I agree with the majority of what he says.  I know that he's inspirational and I know that he takes sometimes the worst of our people and makes them into a better person and anyone who can do that is worth celebrating and I don't dare criticize him for anything that might be a mistake or might be wrong or that I don't agree with because I know he does much more good than he does harm to anybody.  And I know that his heart is right.
Story_ID: 94274
Speaker 1: What do you want your legacy to be?
Speaker 2: I want it to be that young people or people who come behind me can look at me and say there is someone who is always willing to help us to be better than we even believed I-- we could be ourselves.  There was someone who went to a lot of goal posts and didn't always have an opportunity to cross over but she never allowed it to keep her from helping somebody else go across.
Speaker 1: And what do you want to be remembered for?
Speaker 2: I'd like to be remembered for being a positive, inspirational role model and mentor.
Story_ID: 94141
Speaker 1: OFF CAMERA VOICE:  Can you tell us a little bit about the campaign poster?
Speaker 2: Yes in 1985 I returned to Louisiana to run for the U.S. Congress [House of Representatives] for old Gillis Long District [Louisiana's Eighth District] and this was my campaign poster.  I remember the wording, it said "elect attorney."  It used to be really funny in a campaign because everybody would say "Oh is that your name attorney?"  The reason we had to use the title because the press people were always questioning whether I was or not.  So we just decided to--my campaign manager actually decided to put it on the poster and that picture is from my announcement day--the day that I announced that I was going to run for Congress in November of 1985.  And of course, in Louisiana you vote by number, many people can't read so they always put numbers on it.  My number was nineteen.
Speaker 1: Chicago too.
Speaker 2: That's mother all of eighteen years old.  I guess right about the time or maybe just before I was born.  This is a picture all of her children have in our homes.
Speaker 1: Okay this is the day after the Million Man March [October 17, 1995].  This is in [HM] Minister [Louis] Farrakhan's hotel room and the man with me is Dr. Abdul Alim Muhammad, he is the national spokesperson for the Nation of Islam and he is also Minister Farrakhan's medical doctor.
Speaker 2: This is in Atlanta, Georgia.  I was speaker for the day, I don't know if anyone ever remembers that but me but the person to the left is Mr. Nathaniel Ingram, he was president of the Teachers Association in Atlanta and Billy McKinney who is a state representative and is the father of former Congresswoman Cynthia McKinney and the gentleman is the real speaker of the house.  I think his name was [Tom] Murphy.
Speaker 1: For about ten years I served as national president of the Grambling State University [Grambling, Louisiana] Alumni Association and as such I was also a member of the Athletic Foundation Board.  This was a meeting of the Athletic Foundation Board and Ray Leonard was attending the meeting and as you can see wearing a t-shirt and I'm wearing a silk dress.  I remember his teasing me about our running up and down the steps in the stadium--Robinson Stadium and I was not even sweating and he said "How can you do that in this hot weather; you're not even sweating."  But there again that was one of my things, you've got to dress better than the rest.  You've got to be dressed no matter the guys are dressed and even though we were in a football stadium, it was important for me to be dressed up that day.  Most of the guys wore their t-shirts including Coach [Eddie] Robinson.
Speaker 2: I'd like to do Coach Robinson too.
Speaker 1: This is a picture of [HM] Congressman Mervyn Dymally when he was still in Congress here in Washington [D.C.] and the little inscription there, I think is admonishing to--or encouraging me to smile.  I don't know what I was unhappy about that day but I had about eight interns and whenever he wanted to have a crowd for his luncheons or dinners, he just sent for me and my gang as we were known on Capitol Hill and this is one of those many luncheons and whatever I'm unhappy about, he's telling me I should be smiling and the whole world will smile with me.
Speaker 2: This is right in front of the U.S. Capitol with Congressman Mervyn Dymally.  This is his first year in Congress after leaving the lieutenant governorship office of the State of California and he's presenting me with a little plaque for my community service. That's the plaque.
Speaker 1: This is a congressional black caucus in about 1982, I believe shortly after Congressman Dymally came to Congress in Washington.  I attended the dinner--the dinner is the big event of the congressional black caucus and I attended the dinner with him.
Speaker 2: (unclear) on her lawn where we had a family reunion when both of them were both living.
Speaker 1: OFF CAMERA VOICE:  I think I may have made a mistake.  I may need that previous one back again.  Okay this is your Uncle Ezra and--(simultaneous) (unclear).
Speaker 2: This is Uncle Ezra, E-Z-R-A Williams and my dad Vernon Williams.  This is a picture that's taken on my mother's front lawn at one of our family reunions oh back in maybe about 1980.
Speaker 1: On the left is my sister Siv Williams Jones who is two sisters beneath me and her name is spelled S-I-V-E-R-E-N-E.  Siverene is actually her name.  She lives in Houston [Texas], then I'm next, the next person in the center is my father Vernon Williams, V-E-R-N-O-N, my brother next to him Vernon Williams, Jr., all the way to the right is my sister Marie, her name is actually Rose Marie but we're never known by our first names in our family.  It's always our middle name and of course in the center in the white blouse and red skirt is my mother Frances LaCour Williams.  LaCour being her maiden name, F-R-A-N-C-E-S, L-A-C-O-U-R and W-I-L-L-I-A-M-S and this is a picture that was taken during my graduation week from Howard Law School [Howard University School of Law in Washington, D.C.].
Speaker 2: This is quite a long time ago.  Let's see that's me bending down on the left with the black jacket and being cool with the sunglasses.  Standing behind me is my sister Erna Ruth.  She's my sister who is deceased now and next to her is my sister Gussie who is next to my youngest sister, G-U-S-S-I-E.  She's named from one of my dad's sisters.  Next to her is my sister Marie, Rose Marie.  To the right with the hair--the big hair is my oldest sister Bernice, B-E-R-N-I-C-E and her last name is Oden and next to her is my baby sister Mildred who now has this son who is gone through medical school and a daughter who is about to go to college.  So you can see she's not that little anymore.  There is in the middle, I think there is--oh I must have missed a sister.  I can't even tell who they are.  Oh that's Siv--the one with the glasses is my sister Siv.
Speaker 1: You have to put that back.
Speaker 2: Oh I've got to put it back.  I've got to figure out who they are.  Okay now I've got it.  Okay now with the glasses and the coat is my sister Siv, S-I-V Williams Jones, her married name is Jones, J-O-N-E-S, next to her is mother in the hat, Frances LaCour Williams and that's F-R-A-N-C-E-S and she's very big on spelling her name right because many times people spell it like the male Francis but it's F-R-A-N-C-E-S, L-A-C-O-U-R, Williams.
Speaker 1: LaCour. Is there a capital C?
Speaker 2: Yes LaCour, then down to the bottom the little girl in the middle is my niece Lynn who now has three or four children of her own and she lives in Houston.  Her name is Lynne, L-Y-N-N-E and of course she has my mom's name too, her first name is Fran, F-R-A-N and its A-R-L-Y-N-N-E, R-A-D-F-O-R-D and her oldest sister DeeDee we call her but her name is actually Espernola. She lives in Texas. E-S-P-E-R-N-O-L-A, Radford.
Speaker 1: I didn't get the one--
Speaker 2: Oh wait I've got to see, is that me in the middle?  Okay standing in the back is my sister Gussie, G-U-S-S-I-E Williams D-U-P-A-R, in the middle is my oldest sister Bernice, B-E-R-N-I-C-E, O-D-E-N and to her right is my sister Siverene or Siv Williams R-A-D-F-O-R-D sitting at the bottom is my baby sister, Mildred D-U-N-C-A-N, in the middle is my sister Marie, her name is R-O-S-E, M-A-R-I-E, Williams.  Next to her is, I guess that's me, E. Faye Williams and to her right is my sister who is deceased Erna Ruth Williams, E-R-N-A, R-U-T-H Williams.
Speaker 1: This is graduation day and it's out on the lawn at Howard University School of Law and of course I'm being different, I've got my robe all over there.  This is obviously after the graduation and by me that's E. Faye Williams.  This is a luncheon in Washington D.C. of foreign correspondents and it was taken by my friend Abdul Salaam who is now deceased who had invited me to this luncheon.  I'm sitting at the table with blue jacket and of course standing to my right is the mayor, he was mayor at that time, [HM] Marion Barry and I'm not sure who the person is he's shaking hands with but that's not somehow I know. This is--to the left is Ron Brown, of course who I dearly loved, he was a very good friend.  Everytime I saw him he called me "gorgeous."  I'm not sure he knew my name, he just always called me gorgeous and he was always--this smile was always so wonderful.  This is at Trans Africa Dinner that's me in the middle and of course, is a friend Candace Jones who once worked with me when I worked for [HM] Congressman John Conyers [Jr.] briefly, they were very good friends.
Speaker 2: This is my dad's oldest brother, Uncle Frank Nelson, N-E-L-S-O-N and his wife Aunt Christina both deceased now.  This is my favorite aunt and uncle.  I should say one of my favorite uncles but certainly my favorite aunt, Uncle Nathaniel to the left, his name is Nathaniel, N-A-T-H-A-N-I-E-L, B-R-E-W and that's Aunt Erna with the hat on, that's just the way she would go to work with that hat and all dressed up.  That's Erna Brew, E-R-N-A, Brew and you noticed I have a sister named for each of my dad's sisters, Gussie and Erna and all those that are my dad's sisters.
Speaker 1: Of course you can see that determination in those eyes straight ahead, that's me at six months old and of course, my sister had that one all done up there.  For my birthday she put it on display at a birthday party a few years ago.  My mom said that when I was a kid, it was like I had that questioning look about everybody and determination whenever I saw them.  I don't look like that anymore but she tells me I did look like that at one time.  That's so old that I think it was hand painted.
Speaker 2: This is a picture at a TransAfrica dinner and I'm sure I must be telling Randall Robinson some big secret, I just don't remember what it was at the moment but the gentleman on the left is Randall Robinson who was of course president of TransAfrica at that time.  I think he's been replaced by Danny Glover now.
Speaker 1: Danny Glover is the chairman of the board; I don't know who the executive director is.
Speaker 2: Right, okay but it's the same organization now.  You remember I was telling you about how we couldn't have demonstrations or pickets or protests or go on strike when we were in these foreign countries when I was working for teachers, well here we are.  We found a way to do it outside with the Japanese workmen who were demonstrating against the base at Tachikawa Japan and of course, all the way to the left is a friend Charlie who was one of the teachers in the overseas programs and Brenda, another teacher.  Charlie was in Japan, Brenda was in Okinawa and then the gentleman in the middle who is holding up a sign is John from the NEA [National Education Association] staff who had come out to work with us and all the way to the right that's me and this was like at the height of a bargaining sessions that we actually had going on the base but we just couldn't picket the base.
Speaker 1: Oops what is that?  I don't know what--well I told you I was a farm girl or I intended to anyway.  This is at my grandmother's house.  My mother's mother, Mrs. Orelia LaCour, O-R-E-L-I-A and of course facing front is my oldest sister Bernice Oden and that's me there picking those greens.  Everytime we went to visit my grandmother or my Uncle Ezra, we did what's going up the country and that's where that is on Melrose [Louisiana].
Speaker 2: This is one of my many trips to Tunisia and the woman on the left is Um Naser and of course the word Um means mother in Arabic as I understand it.  N-A-S-E-R and she's kind of one of the leading Palestinian spokespersons.  When I went on a trip to try to prevent the first Gulf War, she was one of the women on that ship with me.  We call it the "ship of peace" and women from all around world were on that ship.  We had dinner at her home, when I say we I mean Congressman Mervyn Dymally in the white shirt and black jacket and I went there, that's me on the right, went there to Tunisia to meet with Mr. Yasser Arafat just before he went back to Palestine.  We were there simply to talk with him.  From time to time he called on people he knew of ideas and we were just discussing his return to Palestine on that trip.  Um Naser and Mr. Arafat were very good friends, worked very closely in the Palestinian movement.
Speaker 1: The end of, a formal picture of my first year in law school at Howard.  So this would have been 1982 or maybe as late as '83 [1983] when I was studying and I don't remember the occasion but I had to have photographs for something so that's why it looks so formal and that was one of the photographs I also used in my congressional campaign which by the way, my favorite photograph but of course, the other one that you saw earlier, won out over that one where I was speaking into the microphone, the one on the poster.  My campaign manager didn't like this one, no one else did.  I was the only one who did and of course, that's what campaign managers are for to overrule you.
