Story_ID: 435018
Speaker 1: My name is Loretta Henry, and I'm conducting the interview.  And Scott Stearns is doing our video.  Could you please tell me your name, first, middle, and last, and spell them, each one--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --for me.
Speaker 2: All right, Doris Margaret Ward [HistoryMaker Doris Ward].  Doris is D-O-R-I-S, Margaret, M-A-R-G-A-R-E-T, and the last name is Ward, W-A-R-D.
Speaker 1: Okay, thank you.  Could you tell us your date of birth and where you were born?
Speaker 2: January 27, 1932, in Chicago, Illinois.
Speaker 1: Okay, and today's date is?
Speaker 2: October the 14th, 2005.
Speaker 1: Okay, and the location of this interview, the address?
Speaker 2: 440 Davis Court, Apartment 1409, San Francisco, California.
Speaker 1: Okay, thank you very much.
Story_ID: 435019
Speaker 1: Okay, now I'm gonna ask you some few questions, kind of People magazine questions.  Okay, could you tell us what's your favorite food?
Speaker 2: Oh, I really have never thought (laughter).  There are a lot of things I like.  I really don't have a favorite food.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, your favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Oh, I like to think it's summer, but for San Francisco [California]--
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: --my favorite time of the year is October because this is the only really wonderful month that we have in terms of weather.  In the summertime, I love the summertime simply because it's summer, and I grew up in the Midwest.  And I'm thinking about all those wonderful opportunities where we had opportunities to go to the beach at night, to do all those things that you cannot do here.
Speaker 1: That's right.
Speaker 2: So, you know, just because that reminds me of what a good time is--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --from when I was growing up.  But actually, the best time for here is October.
Speaker 1: October.  Right, your favorite color?
Speaker 2: Red.
Speaker 1: Me too.
Speaker 2: (Laughter) I love it.  It gives you life.
Speaker 1: It does, it does.  Okay, your favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Any number of places.  I just love to travel, any place the--well, I don't really have a favorite place.  I've been to a number of places that I like.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: What I try to do when I go on vacations is to go to places I have not been.  I will go back to places I have been, but life is too short, and money is too limited for me to continuously go back to places--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --I have been.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But my very favorite form of vacation are cruises.
Speaker 1: Yes, sir.
Speaker 2: I could cruise every day of my life (laughter).
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Okay, good answer.  Do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: A favorite saying, well, I don't have a favorite saying, but it's a principle that I've tried to be guided by.  I have said that what happens to you is not nearly as important as how you handle what happens to you.  And I'm reminded of that, for example, when I was told that I had breast cancer, and of course, that's devastating.  But, what is more devastating is the fact that you could either handle it in a positive way or a negative way.  And that's what I think is very important, that a people would learn to take the problems or the hands that they are dealt and make the best of it.  That's what's important in life.
Speaker 1: Okay, very good, wonderful answers.
Story_ID: 435020
Speaker 1: I just thought of something.  When you asked me my favorite food, it's because I put it out of my mind.  'Cause of my cancer I don't do it anymore, but I love steak (laughter).
Speaker 2: Okay, (laughter) okay.
Speaker 1: Right, I just thought about that.  I don't eat steak anymore except very rarely (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay.
Speaker 1: --because, you know, that's not good for cancer--
Speaker 2: Right, right.
Speaker 1: --survivors.  You gotta get away from the fat.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: But once in a while, I will chomp down on a steak and potatoes, oh Jesus, that's marvelous to me.  Yeah, that's my favorite (laughter).
Speaker 2: All right, good, okay, thank you--
Story_ID: 435021
Speaker 1: Now we're gonna talk a little bit about your family, your background.  Could you please tell me about your mother?  What was her name?  Where was she born?
Speaker 2: She was born in--I'm trying to think of the town now in Mississippi.  Her name is Robbie Floyd--Gunnison, Mississippi.  And in the '20s [1920s], my grandparents brought their children north to Indiana, as many, many African American people were escaping the segregation, the racism, all of that.  And they were leaving the South for better opportunities for their kids.  And so my grandmother and grandfather brought their three children north, and they settled in Indiana.  And their son was ten; my mother was eight; and my aunt was six, and interesting--in Gary, Indiana.  And that's where I grew up.  I was born in Chicago [Illinois], but I grew up in Gary.  But, interestingly enough, I think, but I'm not certain, that my grandparents were, I think my grandfather was headed for Detroit, Michigan, but he didn't get there.  He stopped in Gary for whatever reason.  And he may not have been headed for Detroit, but I thought that my dad- my grandfather had said that at one time.  But anyway, that's where she was from.  She never went back until I took her back.
Speaker 1: To Mississippi?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  You talked about your grandparents and their moving north.  What were their names?
Speaker 2: Joseph [Floyd] and Julia Floyd.
Speaker 1: Okay, and they came from Mississippi and moved up--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --and they had three children?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, your, two uncles and an aunt, right?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Do you know their names?
Speaker 2: Yes, Selma Reid, she's dead.  And my uncle, Jesse Floyd, he's dead, but my mother is alive.  She's ninety-one years old.
Speaker 1: Oh, my.  How would you describe your mother?
Speaker 2: Oh, she is a strong woman, a very innovative woman.  She took, as I wrote something about her, she took the hand that was dealt her and she made the very, very best of it.  She became a deputy sheriff in Gary, Indiana.  She became very, very political.  She became a precinct committeewoman in Gary of the largest precinct there.  She was at two political--she was a political--she was, she had been a precinct committeewoman for two different precincts.  She worked for the mayor, very, very, very political, and she did all, she did all those things.  And she and my father [Jesse Keys] married, and moved to Chicago.  But she was a fighter and determined to do things.
Speaker 1: Certainly was.
Speaker 2: We had a grocery store.  That's how I grew up, that she was looking for an opportunity to take my grandfather out of the mill, because he worked in the mill.  That's where people worked when they came to Gary.  And her goal was to take daddy out of that mill, so she bought, she and daddy--that's my grandfather--bought property.  She said, "Daddy, we have got to buy some property, and I have just seen a wonderful apartment building with five apartments and a grocery store.  And how would you like that?"  And he said, "That's fine with me," and so they bought that.  And I was in, I was in the eighth, I was seventh grade, something like that.  And so we grew up, and the grocery store was our, you know, our--
Speaker 1: In the family.
Speaker 2: Yeah, our, income.  And then my mother went to city hall, and she became the deputy mayor.  She was the mayor--she was the secretary, personal secretary to George Chacharis, the mayor.  And then she became a deputy sheriff.  And now, of course, she's retired.
Story_ID: 435022
Speaker 1: Did she [Ward's mother, Robbie Floyd] ever tell you any stories about when she was growing up when she was young, what her life was like?
Speaker 2: Well, yes, we would talk about things.  I think life for her was very much like life was for the average African American.  When they came to Gary, Indiana, there were eight schools there.  And black students could only go to two of them.  One was all-black, and the other was integrated.  In the other schools, you could not go there.  The schools began at kindergarten, and they went to twelfth grade.  I don't think any other city has ever had that kind of educational organization where you start at kindergarten and go all the way to the twelfth grade.  That of course, does not exist in Gary anymore, but that's the way it was.  And there were eight schools that you could go to and the black kids could go to.  One was Froebel [Froebel School; Friedrich Froebel High School, Gary, Indiana], and the other was Roosevelt [Theodore Roosevelt High School, Gary, Indiana], which was all-black.  My grandfather [Joseph Floyd] moved the family into Froebel's district so that they could go to the integrated school, for the reason that my grandfather used to always say that if you're sitting--'cause he knew what the situation had been in Mississippi: no books, no materials, and denial of education, all of that.  He would say, "If you're sitting next to white students, you gotta hear the same thing they hear."  So he wanted to make certain that they heard what white students heard, so that's why they, they settled in the Froebel district rather than the Roosevelt district.
Speaker 1: My, your grandparents were pretty amazing.
Speaker 2: Oh, my grandfather was something; he was absolutely something.  I absolutely admired him and respected him.  I admired him because his father had been white, and he, and, and my grandfather looked white.  And my grandmother [Julia Floyd] was a very dark-complected woman, but my grandfather could pass for white.  He only went back to Mississippi one time, and that was for his sister's funeral, and he went back as a white man.  He said, "I was sitting next to this man on a train," because at that time, you couldn't sit in certain areas of the train.  He said, "And I was sitting next to him, and he gave me a swig of his liquor."  And he said, "If he knew that he was giving it to a black man, he would have died."
Speaker 1: That's a good one.
Speaker 2: But my, I got my commitment about, about racism and, and fighting for civil rights basically from my grandfather.  It has come down through my mother but my grandfather, because he was very, very adamant about that because of his own experiences in Mississippi.  Unusually, his father acknowledged him.
Speaker 1: Oh, did he?
Speaker 2: And invited him up to his, you know, big, palatial, whatever it was, but my grandfather would not go.  He would have no parts of it; no, he did not.  And he was very distressful, and he didn't like white people, and so he got the hell out of there, and--
Speaker 1: Oh, I can understand that.
Speaker 2: He, I guess he could have come, and as many people have gone and they will make accommodations for their bastard black children.  But my grandfather didn't want any of that.
Speaker 1: I see.
Speaker 2: So he left Mississippi--
Speaker 1: I see.
Speaker 2: --and came, and so he went back once.  My grandmother never went back.  She would say, "I didn't leave anything in Mississippi." I'd say, "Don't you want to go back mother?"  She said, "No, I didn't leave anything there."  And ever, I said to my mother, after I became a member of the Board of Supervisors [San Francisco Board of Supervisors], because we were going back a lot for--I was constantly going to conferences, and conferences would be in the South.  And it was only after I became a supervisor did I ever went south.
Speaker 1: I see.
Speaker 2: I had never been south in my life, but I have almost, I have been to every southern state there is now.  And I have said to her, because I was in Mississippi and everything, I said, "How would you like to go to Gunnison [Mississippi]?"  She said, "Oh, I would love it."  So I then took her to Gunnison so she could see where she had--and she was interesting.  She left when she was eight, but she remembered everything; it came back--
Speaker 1: Oh, my.
Speaker 2: --came back.  She, and we saw the house she was born, that she and her sister and her brother were born in.  The lady that lived in the house and owned it, she was gone.
Speaker 1: Oh, I see.
Speaker 2: She wasn't there, so we couldn't get in--
Story_ID: 435023
Speaker 1: Could you tell me about your father?  What was his name and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) His name--
Speaker 1: --where was he from?
Speaker 2: --Jesse Keys, yeah, Jesse Keys.  He met my mother [Robbie Floyd] in Gary [Indiana].  Well, yeah, he was in Gary.  They grew up and they went to Froebel, Froebel School [Friedrich Froebel High School, Gary, Indiana], the school that I went to.  They went to school.  They fell in love; they got married, and then they went to Chicago [Illinois] to live, for my mother thought was going to be a great, you know--
Speaker 1: Experience?
Speaker 2: Yes, right.  And my father was quite a musician.  He did not.  He wasn't a musician, professionally.  He just played beautiful piano, and I play the piano, because I wanted to be a concert pianist.  That was my first goal.  But I didn't know my father that well, because he and my mother divorced when I was very young, and he didn't come to Gary very often.  I would say maybe once a year he would come.  And, when he came, we were very uneasy with each other as, in the beginning of the day, but by the time the day was over, it was fine.  But I never, and I never became attached to his family--
Speaker 1: I see.
Speaker 2: --and they were right there in Gary, and there was no reason.  And I often think about that now, that I could have, and I wish I had, because my mother's family is almost gone.  And you know, I could have become attached to them, but I did not become attached--
Speaker 1: I see.
Speaker 2: --to them.
Speaker 1: What did he do as a profession?
Speaker 2: Oh no, my father was not a professional person.  He worked in the post office.
Speaker 1: Oh, okay.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Did he ever tell you about his growing up, his background?
Speaker 2: Not really because I wasn't close to him.  No, I just, he was just a very handsome, smooth-talking man that was a ladies man (laughter)--
Speaker 1: I see.
Speaker 2: --then.
Speaker 1: We understand (laughter).
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Did you have any siblings, brothers and sisters?
Speaker 2: (Clears throat) Excuse me.
Speaker 1: It's okay.
Speaker 2: Debra [Debra Floyd] is my younger sister, right.
Speaker 1: Okay, how old is she?  When was she born?
Speaker 2: How old is Debra?  Oh, she's much, much younger than I am, forty-eight, I think.
Speaker 1: Oh, she is.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you two weren't very close (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, because those years, you know, you could say that I could be her mother.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Okay.
Story_ID: 435024
Speaker 1: What was your earliest memory of growing up as a child?
Speaker 2: Oh, I--
Speaker 1: Well, are there any other memories of childhood you could share with us?
Speaker 2: Oh, gosh, so many, so many.  Let, well me see, in growing up, I always wanted--okay, Froebel School [Friedrich Froebel High School, Gary, Indiana], as I said, my mother [Robbie Floyd] and my father [Jesse Keys] lived in Chicago [Illinois].  When they got divorced, my mother came back to Gary [Indiana].  And my mother wanted my grandparents to raise me because she wanted me to have a father and a mother, and my grandfather [Joseph Floyd] insisted.  My grandfather said, he said, "Now I'm gonna take her; now you, you and Jesse go have another one."  And this is when she and my father were having problems, before they actually divorced.  And he said, "You and Jesse go have another one."  But anyway, she wanted me to have that stability of a home.  And I was very happy about that because I just adored my grandfather and also my grandmother [Julia Floyd].  But my mother was very, very much in the picture.  You know, she supported me financially, but I had the stability of a man and woman in the house.  But sometimes that would cause problems as I got to be older and to be a teenager.  My grandmother had very old-fashioned ideas about how to raise children.  And my grand--my mother would, I would always have to go to my mother for her to intercede.  I would say, but would you please tell mother that that's what the kids do today?  My grandmother didn't want me--no, you can't do this; you can't do that.  And my mother would say, but mother, that's what the kids do today (laughter), I'll never forget that.  We had some hot times about that, you know.  And then I know I was always involved in activities in school, and my mother was very supportive of that.  She would take--I loved theater, where I'd go to Chicago to see--my mother started me going to Chicago when she knew that I was interested in plays.  She would take me and my friends to see the plays, take me and my friends to see Sonja Henie, all those kind of things, you know, because all of these things I wanted to do, whatever I wanted to do.  I said this to my mother when I was home recently.  I said, "I wanna thank you for one thing."  I thought about this when, when the Academy Awards [Oscars].  What's--Jamie Foxx, he thanked his grandmother.  He said, "I wanna thank my grandmother who's in heaven."  And I said, "When Jamie Foxx did that, I thought about mother and daddy.  And I wanted to thank them, but I also wanna thank you very much for trying to let me do whatever I wanted."  When I wanted to take piano lessons, she said yes.  When I wanted to take ballet lessons, she said yes.
Speaker 1: Oh, my.
Speaker 2: When I wanted to take, I wanted to take--I took ballet lessons, and I took, there was a third les- a second lesson I took: ballet, and I can't think of what that--
Speaker 1: Piano?
Speaker 2: Oh no, I took piano, because I wanted to become a concert pianist--
Speaker 1: Right, right.
Speaker 2: --whatever I wanted.  She would say--I would come and say, I gotta do this; I wanna do this; I wanna start going to the theater in Chicago by myself.  I was fourteen.  She says, "Now wait a minute."  I said, "I'm gonna get on the South Shore [South Shore Line], drive--I mean get off the train, go to the theater, get back on the train, we're gonna eat, and then come right back home."  She said, "You may do that."
Story_ID: 435025
Speaker 1: I wanted to get into the drama club.  As I said, Froebel School [Friedrich Froebel High School, Gary, Indiana] was where I went to school and where my mother [Robbie Floyd] went, that was an integrated school.  It was not an integrated school; it was a desegregated school, because there were so many things that they did not allow black kids to do.  It was not written.  Nothing was written down, but you could not swim.  That's right.  They could, black kids could not swim.  You went to the pool.  You could not be a cheerleader, and you always wanted to be a cheerleader.  You went out and tried for it, but you couldn't be a cheerleader.  You couldn't be--I wanted to be in the drama club, couldn't be that.  So what I would do was, I was would find ways around.  And if I couldn't go through this door, I would go through that door.  I couldn't be in the drama club, so then I got on the debate society, and I became one of the best debaters there had.  And I was in a lot of oratorical contests, and I won those kinds of things.  Being on the debate team, all the schools in Gary [Indiana] debated against each other, and we would go down to Indiana University [Bloomington, Indiana] for the finals.  But Roosevelt High School [Theodore Roosevelt High School, Gary, Indiana], which was the black school, they didn't allow that school to participate.  That was the kind of climate that you're talking about in the late '40s [1940s] and the early '50s [1950s].  And so, and they would make a lot of concessions for me, because I would go places that black people could not go.  And the school would have to call ahead and say, "We're gonna have a black student with us, and we would like for you to make these kind of concessions."  And so you see all of that, and it becomes a part of you.  And it makes you angry, and it makes you want to fight for those things.  Plus I had a [maternal] grandfather [Joseph Floyd] and a mother who were very cognizant of all of that, and a mother who was always fighting, and a grandfather who was always fighting.  And so when I saw that, you know, I said, no, no, no, you know, "I'm not gonna accept this; I'm gonna fight this."  And then when we went to Indiana University to participate in a debate contest, and I was the only black that went, they had to call, which was disgraceful, call down to the university, say we have a black one, student coming, now you're gonna take care of her with the rest.  And since my debate partner was a white female, and we were very, very close, the best of friends, they said, "Are you gonna room with Mary Ballestero?"  I said yes, you know, but always concessions, this and that.  But I learned to fight, to become very conscious of what was my right and all those things very early.  And my grandfather was absolutely: "You gotta do this; you gotta fight, Doris [HistoryMaker Doris Ward]; you cannot accept things."
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: So, and that was growing up.  They wanted me--I wanted to be in everything, to do all of these things.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And they said, anyway, you can do all these things.  Mother let me drive when I was fourteen years old.
Speaker 2: Oh, my.
Story_ID: 435026
Speaker 1: What was your community?  What was--that you grew up in?  What was your neighborhood like?
Speaker 2: Okay, there were, Gary [Indiana] was a small community.  It was a small, the black population was a small population.  And the school, the kids that I went to school with, their parents had come from Eastern Europe.  And so we have a--I grew up with a lot of kids from Czechoslovakia, Yugoslavia, and Poland.  And the interesting part, when they got out of school, they dropped all those Cs from their last (laughter), from their names.  And you know, and I, and they were able to, you know, move on and do whatever they wanted to do without being stereotyped or anything, something that blacks didn't have that opportunity.  Because we could never get rid of the color, but they could get rid of anything that would identify them from a place they didn't choose to be.  That, I always found that interesting.  But that is exactly what happened.
Speaker 1: So in your neighborhood you played with the kids across the street and next door and--
Speaker 2: Yes, it was basically a black neighborhood that I lived in.  The block, the neighborhood that I lived in was--well then I did live in a white neighborhood when I first went there--I mean when my parents [Robbie Floyd and Jesse Keys], my [maternal] grandparents [Julia Floyd and Joseph Floyd] first went there.  And when, when they went there, and then after that it was basically a black neighborhood of people who had moved there so their kids could go to Froebel [Froebel School; Friedrich Froebel High School, Gary, Indiana], for the same reasons my grandfather wanted us to go to Froebel: "'Cause they're gonna always get the best, so I want you to be where you can halfway can get the best of everything."
Speaker 1: Okay.  Are there any sights or smells or sounds that when you come in contact with them, it really takes you back to your childhood?
Speaker 2: Let's see, what--I often think about my childhood, and not really.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But I often think about it.
Story_ID: 435027
Speaker 1: Was the church important to your family life?
Speaker 2: Oh yes, right.
Speaker 1: Could you tell me about it?
Speaker 2: Yes, we, yes, we, because my [maternal] grandmother [Julia Floyd] was quite religious, not fanatically religious, you know, just a nice, good religious woman.  And because she, oh, she and my [maternal] grandfather [Joseph Floyd] raised me, as I said, I was greatly influenced by--you know, I went to church.  We went to church every Sunday, and to Sunday school, and, pardon me, and then as kids, we had cliches, you know, and little groups in school.  And I remember my grandmother was always looking, wondering, "Where is she?  What is she doing?"  And I remember my little gang was sitting up in the balcony, and my grandmother kept looking up in the balcony to see, you know, if we were up there, if we were talking, because after Sunday school, we would go down the street to a little soda shop.  And then we would come back to church.  But the whole, all the young people would go down there, and we would get back to church just before church was out (laughter).  And I remember we snuck back in, and my grandmother continuously looked up, was looking up and a family was sitting next to me 'cause we had just gotten back.  And she said, "If your grandmother doesn't stop looking up here, she's gonna get a crook in her neck."
Speaker 1: What was the name of the church?
Speaker 2: First Baptist Church [Gary, Indiana].
Speaker 1: First Baptist?
Speaker 2: Yes.  And sometimes I go--I'm a member of Third Baptist [Third Baptist Church of San Francisco, San Francisco, California] here.  I sometimes write First Baptist on my check--
Speaker 1: Oh, do you?
Speaker 2: --instead of Third.  And now you know, I'm talking about way back, but I will do that sometimes.  And so, but my grandmother wasn't such that she would make us go back at night.  I didn't want to go, and she didn't make us.  But we had to go to Sunday school, and stay for church, but, unless we could get out of it, 'cause we didn't want to stay (laughter) for church.  You know, and that was that.  But that was basically it.  I really wasn't very active in the church.
Story_ID: 435028
Speaker 1: You were mentioning, you were telling me about your stepfather (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes.
Speaker 1: --taught you to drive.  What was--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --his name please?
Speaker 2: Tony Bean, B-E-A-N.  He taught me to drive and when I was fifteen years old and Imogene Bolton--she's Imogene Edwards now--was the only other girl that we were driving.  And my mother [Robbie Floyd] had a red convertible.  And--
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Hold on a second.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: All right so, you--I'm sorry--you were talking about your friend, Imogene.  And her mother had a restaurant.  What was the name of the restaurant?
Speaker 2: Mae's Louisiana Kitchen [Gary, Indiana].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Right, it was the restaurant for black people.  And, and my mother and her mother [Mae Bolton] had been friends and had grown up together.  And when Imogene's mother married Horace [Horace Bolton], my mother was there.  And they had remained friends forever.
Speaker 1: That's wonderful.
Speaker 2: And I would work in our grocery story, and sometimes I guess Imogene worked in her restaurant.  But my mother and her mother would let us do, they would try to give us whatever we wanted, but we were not selfishly.  You know, it was just that, you know, I liked to do this, and they were just supportive mothers who said, "Okay, is that what you want to do?  Okay."  And that's what I said to you.  I said to my mother, "I wanna thank you for having tried to give me everything I ever asked for, and I want you to know that I appreciate that."
Speaker 1: They sound wonderful.
Speaker 2: And I loved clothes as a young girl.  And she would take me down to the best shops in Gary [Indiana].  And you know, I was, in high school [Froebel School; Friedrich Froebel High School, Gary, Indiana] I was voted as the best dressed girl.
Speaker 1: Oh, my.
Speaker 2: And, and so, she just, whatever I wanted to do.  But I wasn't a bad kid, and so she just tried to do that--
Story_ID: 435029
Speaker 1: I was a good student.
Speaker 2: Were you a good student?
Speaker 1: Yes, and she appreciated that, and she appreciated I didn't, you know, give her any trouble or whatever, everything like that.  And, as I said, Imogene [Imogene Bolton Edwards] and I were the only two that were driving.  My mother [Robbie Floyd] had a convertible, and I would take that car.  And my mother would say, "Do not put that top down, because it, to get a new top it costs money."  I said, "Oh, absolutely not."  And I would pack the car up with kids, and as soon as we turned the corner, down came the top.  And I, I learned a very, a lesson at one time very early in life--
Speaker 2: Which was?
Speaker 1: --about trusting people.
Speaker 2: Which what--oh.
Speaker 1: Yes, I have a cousin that came from Michigan.  He and his family, that was my [maternal] grandfather's [Joseph Floyd] first cousin.  And his father was a physician, and he had these two sons.  And they were very handsome young men.  They were my grandfather's first cousins.  And I, and I said, "Oh, God, he's so, so handsome."  My [maternal] grandmother [Julia Floyd] says, "Now you just stop that.  You cannot, that's your cousin.  You can't think of things like that."  I said, "But he's not, he's my third or fourth cousin."  Anyway, I just had to show out and put everybody in the car.  And here I am fifteen.  And everybody gets in the car, and we go to Michigan City [Indiana]--no, no, we didn't go to Michigan City.  We went out, we went to the dunes [Indiana Dunes National Lakeshore, Chesterton, Indiana] in Indiana down by the lake [Lake Michigan].  And everybody was very happy to be there.  I drove everybody.  And when we got there and I parked, and I hit a car, and big dent, I mean a real break in the hood.  And everybody, all my friends--this car is filled, filled with kids, "Ooh, your mother, your grandmother, your grandfather, ooh, okay, we'll see you later."  Everybody runs off.  And I'm scared to leave the car.  I'm sitting there and nothing I can do, and I'm there by myself.  Everybody, I learned that lesson: when the going gets tough, the tough get going.  They left, and finally they came back, 'cause I was just devastated.  I didn't know what I was gonna tell my mother, didn't know what I was gonna say, 'cause my mother was gonna be so angry, so angry.  And then I had put this top down and all that.  Got back home, and I said, "And I really thought this could happen."  I got back home.  When we came back everybody said well, listen, Doris [HistoryMaker Doris Ward], if you get in real, any real trouble, just give me a call.  Well, give me a call for what?  (Laughter) But then nobody was there.  And then, of course, I'm trying to impress my cousins who are here from Michigan, and you know--
Speaker 2: That's the way it happens.
Speaker 1: --and they were older.  They were freshmen in college.  My mother said and besides, they're too old for you (laughter).  You're just a junior or sophomore in high school [Frobel School; Friedrich Froebel High School, Gary, Indiana]; they're too old for you.  So anyway, so I said, "I know what, I will go to bed," and 'cause I was living with my grandparents--well, my mother comes tomorrow and to go to open the store.  I'll just not wake up.  And so I'll never, ever wake up.  I'll just always be in bed.  Now how in the world I was gonna stay in bed for the next hundred years, I don't know, but that was my solution, and so obviously my grandparents had seen it.  My grandfather had because I heard him talking to my grandmother.  He said, "There's a big cut, a big--in that car."  He said, "I wonder what happened."  And he said, "Robbie is gonna really be angry."  And so, finally, my mother came, and I'm asleep.  I'm not supposed to be awake, but she came in.  And she grabbed the cover (laughter), and she pulled it back.  She said, "What happened to that car?  How did that get in there?"  Uh, uh, I, you know, I, I, I, I, I, I, I was, I, I was just gonna tell you.  And she said, "You know what?  You really weren't going to tell me," and she said, "and what really disturbs me is not so much that you had an accident but that you were going to try to hide it, and you were not going to tell me.  And for that, I am very, very disappointed in you."
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And that was more harmful to me than had she done anything else, and I learned also from that.  I learned that you can't depend on your friends (laughter).  When you get in trouble, you may be out there by yourself.
Speaker 2: That's true.
Speaker 1: And then I learned that you gotta own up to what you did.  Take, take it, you know, and you know, things like that.  And I use that story to talk about how things like that, you know, you learn, and it's (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) You go on.
Speaker 1: --and it, and, and it's very, very important.
Speaker 2: Right--
Story_ID: 435030
Speaker 1: Imogene [Imogene Bolton Edwards] and I, because we had, we have a lot of friends, she was at Roosevelt [Theodore Roosevelt High School, Gary, Indiana].  She was not at Froebel [Froebel School; Friedrich Froebel High School, Gary, Indiana], but we still were friends.  Mr. Means [Andrew Means], who had developed the first houses in Gary [Indiana], he had the first, you know, really, really nice houses.  It was called--
Speaker 2: For black people?
Speaker 1: Yes, for black people, called Means Manor [Gary, Indiana].  He was well known, and you know, well-heeled.  He wanted to be the sponsor of the Bud Billiken Parade in Chicago [Illinois], which was during the week of Emancipation Proclamation, biggest parade in Chicago.  And Mr. Means wanted to be the sponsor of that parade.  So they had told him in Chicago: it's your parade, and we are going to have a Gary girl as the queen; and, but we're gonna pretend; we're gonna have a contest with everybody.  But they told Mr. Means: you decide who the queen will be in Gary, and that's gonna be the queen; and that queen will just beat people in Chicago.  So, Mr. Means asked Imogene and me if we would collect money, run against each other.  Whoever collected the most money would be the queen and, but win in Gary.  And it was already a foregone conclusion that we would have won in Chicago.  And so my family, which always gets behind everything that we do, my [maternal] grandfather [Joseph Floyd] put up jars in the grocery store to raise money for Doris [HistoryMaker Doris Ward] so she can be the queen of the Bud Billiken Parade.  And Imogene did the same thing in over in her restaurant [Mae's Louisiana Kitchen, Gary, Indiana].  And so I became the queen of the Bud Billiken Parade.  Had you ever head of that--
Speaker 2: Yes, I've heard of it.
Speaker 1: Yeah, right.
Speaker 2: I've lived there.
Speaker 1: And that was a, I mean that was something.  I was sixteen years old then.  I really remembered that because the one thing I was supposed to get, I was supposed to get a trip to some southern city, but that never came about.
Speaker 2: I see.
Story_ID: 435031
Speaker 1: You talked a lot about your school [Froebel School; Friedrich Froebel High School, Gary, Indiana].  What were your teachers like?  Were there any teachers who really (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, absolutely.
Speaker 1: --influenced you?
Speaker 2: Absolutely.  They were all white.  They did not hire any black teachers.  Now interestingly, there was one black teacher.  That's why I never had a black teacher until I went to San Francisco State [San Francisco State College; San Francisco State University, San Francisco, California], when I got a master's [degree] at San Francisco State.  I had, there was one teacher there--it was a black teacher--who taught only special ed [special education] kids.  I mean that was just horrible that they would relegate him to teaching only special ed kids.  And he not only taught special ed kids, he taught them in a room where there was a curtain that, a shade.  The room was always closed.  You couldn't look in.  And so, the images that people had are the kids in that room--because they were just about all black kids; I don't, I doubt seriously if there were any white students in there--that they were idiots, that they were uncontrollable, all that.  And I learned then to hate special education because it did such an injustice to people.  Once in special education, always in special ed.  I don't think those kids ever, ever came out of there.  And then what they did to the teacher was subhuman, because he was treated like just a regular teacher that everybody is who can teach all the other subjects.  And, and I thought that was--and again, all of this goes to, you know, I grasp all of this in the making of [HistoryMaker] Doris Ward, and my civil rights stance, and my fighting for things.  It starts all here in school, 'cause I felt that was grossly unfair, to have all these special ed kids all behind this room, behind, with a curtain, just like that curtain there, that, you know.  And everybody knows, so nobody has too good an attitude about these kids or even about the teacher--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --which is sad.  I had some wonderful teachers, but there were a lot of racist teachers there too.  I'll never forget a woman by the name of Lorraine Peabody.  She was my English teacher.  And she was just absolutely just marvelous to me.  She would let me grade her papers and do all kinds of things.  She would say, "You are really one of my favorite students."  And I would go see her, and I would take her things and that.  So I had people that really, you know, that--and I had a history teacher, and she said, "You know, she says you really should be an A student, but you just get off track sometimes."  And so I--and her name was Brown--Mrs. Jones [ph.].  I'll never forget her.  And there was a man who was a teacher, and I'm not sure whether he liked or disliked black kids.  He was very, very gruff and mean with almost everybody, but I found him to be fair.  I took econ [economics] from him.  And I remember, I did not realize how much I enjoyed him, econ, until he passed back our test papers one day.  And he said, "It's the best paper in the room," and shoved it at me.  And I was shocked, and I realized that I really did like economics.  But yes, I had, I have a positive relationship with teachers.  Now, as I said, I couldn't get in the drama class, but I went to the debate part of society--of the school.  And I had a woman--there were two teachers--that always pointed me out and would call me to come to the auditorium if they had a bunch of unruly kids, to entertain the kids, to do something.  The teacher would say take over for me; I got to go here; you know, get 'em to doing something or whatever, because I enjoyed doing that.  And then they were very, they pushed me a lot, both of them did.
Story_ID: 435032
Speaker 1: And then the school [Froebel School; Friedrich Froebel High School, Gary, Indiana] was going to put on a talent show.  And the talent show was going to be very nice.  Everybody could be in it including the Negro kids at that time because, you know, we were not black kids; we were Negroes.  We could be in it.  But then I noticed that it began to develop that when the Negro kids went to audition, they were all placed in one section of the program.  "Oh, you're wonderful.  Loretta, you may be in the show, and you're gonna be in the group that meets at this thing at two o'clock," and you know, like, it was whatever, like twelve to five, but your part is at two.  All the, the Negro kids, the black kids, were at one time.  And I said, "Oh no, this is a pattern.  I don't like this.  This is a pattern.  They are segregating all of the black kids and putting us as a group together, and we are not as a group.  We're all doing something different," because I was dancing, and I had a young man that I was dancing with who went to Roosevelt [Theodore Roosevelt High School, Gary, Indiana].  We did, oh, I'm so sorry.
Speaker 2: That's okay.
Speaker 1: Ball, I love ballroom dancing.  And he was a magnificent ballroom dancer, and we were gonna do ballroom dancing together.  And we were in the same set with the people who were doing something else.  It didn't make sense.  And so I went to the powers that be, and I said, "You have segregated black students and put us all in one section, and that is not right."  Oh, and they became--oh, what?  I said, "Oh, yes you have, yes, you have."  And I said, "I'm gonna go tell the principal," and all this kind of stuff.  And I'll never forget what those two teachers said: "After all we have done for you, and this is the way you repay us.  We have let you go out here and speak and represent this school when we wouldn't let anybody else."  And I was supposed to find that was acceptable?  I said, "Well, it shouldn't have been that way.  Other black students should have been able to do that.  Other black students should have been on the debate team to go other places.  Other black students should have gone down to Indiana University [Bloomington, Indiana]," because when we went down there, as I said, they had to make compensations for me.  And everybody wanted to go out that night, and black kids couldn't go out in town down at Indiana University.  They couldn't go out there to the bars and things, you know, where all the rest of the kids went.  And in fact, they said, "And we have made it possible for you to go."  I said, "Well, I don't want to go to any bars," 'cause I didn't drink, and I said, "I don't want to do that."  So, so that's what I was told.
Speaker 2: You think--
Speaker 1: Yes, and then I, then we always had the valedictorian, the salutatorian, and the third person who, there was a third speaker.  And it was kind of understood that I was going to be the third speaker.  That ended that, oh yes.
Speaker 2: Oh, really?
Speaker 1: Yeah.  But you know, that was the first--but that was good for me.  In other words, I got a taste of life.
Speaker 2: When you were in high school, what did you want to be when you grew up?  What were your aspirations?
Speaker 1: Oh, I wanted to be a concert pianist, yes.  And as I said, my mother [Robbie Floyd] let me take piano lessons.
Story_ID: 435033
Speaker 1: My first year in college I was a piano major.
Speaker 2: At Indiana, University of Indi (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) At Indiana University [Bloomington, Indiana], uh-huh.  And then I realized that that wasn't practical.  Everybody said, "But, Doris [HistoryMaker Doris Ward], that's not practical.  You need to think of something else."  I said, "No, I want to, I'm aiming for Carnegie Hall [New York, New York]."  But suppose that doesn't happen?  Well, that's what I want.  Well, then you can teach music.  I said, "I don't want to teach music."  "Well, you need to do something else."  So after that first year, I did; I went to political science, and then I said, "I want to be a lawyer."  And 'cause my [maternal] grandfather [Joseph Floyd] had always said he wanted me to be a lawyer.  He wanted me to be a lawyer and he, and my stepfather, Tony [Tony Bean], would say, "Oh, yes, Doris, I think that that would be very, very good if you were a lawyer."  And then, and I said okay, fine, that's what I want to do, and then I changed my major to political science.
Speaker 2: I see.  When did you enter University of Indiana?
Speaker 1: Not, oh, in 19--I graduated in '49 [1949], that November.  I didn't go to Bloomington [Indiana].  I stayed in Gary [Indiana] and went to the extension [Gary Center of Indiana University; Indiana University Northwest, Gary, Indiana], Indiana University extension, because my grandfather had died that year.  And I knew that my [maternal] grandmother [Julia Floyd], who was so dependent upon him, that she would not be able to make it without my grandfather.  Just psychologically it would do her in, just totally do her in, because she was a totally dependent woman.  He was a very outgoing man, but she, every, her whole life was around Joe.  I never, ever remember coming home in life when she wasn't there.  With her, there was no such thing as latch door keys as there is, there are today.  In fact, if I had children, I didn't, I would have had latch door kids, 'cause I would have been working.  They would have had a key.  And see, well, had I lived with my mother [Robbie Floyd], that's why my mother didn't want me to live with her.  She wanted me to live with my grandparents because she knew mother was gonna be there, and mother never went anywhere that daddy didn't take her.  I mean, she was the most dependent person.  But it was really interesting.  This has nothing to do about me, but it digresses, but it taught me about people.  None of us thought that mother would be able to survive daddy's death, none of us.  And so she and my grandfather had a very close, wonderful marriage.  And Joe just did everything and you know, whatever.  So I said, "I'm not going to college.  I'm gonna stay here and go to the extension.  I'll go the next year."  And so I, my mother said okay.  I said, "'Cause mother won't be able to make it."  I found out that mother could.  I was shocked.  Mother, she never wore makeup.  She wore powder.  She was very particular about her clothes, but she, she, and she always wore a chignon on her head, but she was a very conservative woman.  And she started dating a man, Mr.--I can't think of his name--Mr.--somebody, that we all called him, very nice man.  We couldn't believe it.  And my cousin, who my grandmother also raised, I said, "Betty [Betty Reid-Olive], I can't believe this."  And I said to my mother, I said, "I can't believe this; she has lipstick on, not much, but she'll put just a little lipstick on."  And then I'll never forget, one day he came, and she didn't know he was coming.  And she was making herself a sandwich.  She looks out the window.  She saw his car.  She threw the sandwich down, and she beat it out the door.  And we were very pleased, but I did not believe that people, that that could happen, which has taught me a lot about people and grieving.  And I tell people: trust me, you will get over it.  It may take a long time, but you will get over it.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And she and Mr. whatever his name was now, they would go out, and she enjoyed it--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --you know, and all that sort of stuff.  And then they broke up.  We never, ever knew why.  She was always worried about the property, that--you know, I think he's interested in me because of this house, well, this apartment building and grocery store.  The bottom line was, that was half my mother's and half theirs.  He wasn't interested in that.  He owned his own house.  But we couldn't tell mother that he's not interested in this.  He has his own--well, you know, he just may be--and my mother said, "Please, mother, enjoy it, whatever."
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: So--
Speaker 2: When--I'm sorry--when you were at Indiana, what was, you were at the extension school, did you, then did you transfer the year, the next year?
Speaker 1: Next year I went to IU [Indiana University].
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Yes, I went down to IU, because then she was, she was fine.
Speaker 2: 'Cause she was fine?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Okay.  What was it like?
Speaker 1: She would have been fine then.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: But, I didn't know.
Story_ID: 435034
Speaker 1: You went away to school.  What was school like at IU [Indiana University, Bloomington, Indiana] (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, okay, another fight.  Oh yes, IU also was a segregated--I mean had, had a lot of segregation.  I could not live--black girls could not live in white dorms.  We lived in a--we lived in dorms that were for black girls.  There was one house that was off campus that was called, called Elm House; then there was a house on campus that was called Lincoln House.  That's the house that I lived in, and ultimately became president of.  Lincoln House had been a sorority house.  I think it was the Kappa Alpha Theta house.  I'm not sure.  And then, and that, the university had bought that and had made it for black girls, very nice, but it was segregated.  And, and I became very active at IU.  As I said, I became president of my dorm.  I got into all kinds of activities.  And that's how I met my husband, John [John Ward], who was very, very active.  And John was fighting the fi- the battle then, and so I joined him.  John said, "What we want you to do," he says, "What we're gonna have you do is, is go into a white dorm."  He said, "If we have to take this to court, we're gonna do that."  But they had brought somebody else, and then I was the first person in Sycamore [Sycamore Hall].  And so I went to a white dorm.  My jun- senior year, yeah, I went to a white dorm.  But Indiana, we had to fight the fight there too.  We had a president, Herman B. Wells, who was a man who wanted to do the right thing and would try to do the right thing, because he was very proud of John Ward, and he assisted Ward in any way that he could so that we would make sure that things would open up for black students.  But I had a good life in that I met a lot of friends, and you know, and did the things that kids do, get in sororities and all those kinds of things.  And so I had a good life, but, but that racism was there.  It was absolutely there.
Story_ID: 435035
Speaker 1: You mentioned your own husband, John Ward.  You, before this interview you ment- you were telling me about him.  Could you tell us more about--he was a very interesting man.  You said he was blind?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes, born blind but had more determination than anybody I've ever know to succeed, and he did succeed.  He was born blind.  He--
Speaker 1: Do you know when--I'm sorry.  Do you know when he was born?
Speaker 2: Yes, he was born in 1920--'29 [1929].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: He was born in '29 [1929].  And he had nerves, nerves that did not develop.
Speaker 1: I see.
Speaker 2: And so he had grown up in Marion, Indiana.  And he had always wanted to succeed.  He had a burning desire to succeed, and succeed he did.  He became, as I said, a Phi Beta Kappa.  When he heard about the Root-Tilden Scholarships [Root-Tilden-Snow Scholarships; Root-Tilden-Kern Public Interest Scholarships] at NYU [New York University, New York, New York], that was the scholarship for law students because of what it did for them.  I think they selected twenty people all across the United States, and John was the second black they'd ever selected.  There had been a black boy the year or two years before but nobody else, and then John.  When John attempted to apply for that, nobody believed he could do it, nobody.  They said, "But, John, I mean, you know, sighted people don't get this."  "That's okay," John said, "I don't care," and he went on and whatever he had to do, he did.  And he was such a good student, his senior year in college was his first year at a Ph.D. program at IU [Indiana University, Bloomington, Indiana] for political science.  That's what they did and didn't even talk about him get a master's [degree], going straight to a Ph.D.  So, his senior year was his first year.  And then when he graduated, he then went to NYU as a Root-Tilden Scholar, and there were twenty of them.  And I went to New York [New York] to see him, never been to New York.  And while I was there, he showed me New York, and he did it better than any sighted person could have done it.  He took me to the top of the--oh, what's that building that--
Speaker 1: Empire State Building?
Speaker 2: Yes, and he would say, "Now, if you will look directly straight ahead and twenty-five feet to your left, you will see," and then he would tell me what I would see.  Then if you would turn around to your right, and then he would say and you will look such, you know, so many feet, there, then you will see whatever I was supposed to see or see, you know.  And so he took me around that whole building and explained that to me.  He took me to the UN [United Nations].  He said, "Now we're going to see the UN so you can see how they operate.  And we're gonna definitely take a subway at rush hour.  You're not a New Yorker unless you have been on the subway at rush hour."  So he showed me New York.
Speaker 1: He was an amazing man.
Speaker 2: Oh, he was amazing, totally amazing--
Speaker 1: He--
Speaker 2: --totally amazing.  And he played beautiful, beautiful piano.  Anyway, and so he, when he left there, when he graduated, because they were the cream of the crop, they all got the best offers.  And that's when he got the offer for Adlai Stevenson's [Adlai Stevenson II] firm.  And that's when Marilyn Monroe and Arthur Miller were one of their clients, because John's roommate said to him, "Guess who was up there yesterday," 'cause that's when I was visiting John, "Marilyn Monroe and Arthur Miller."  And I said, "And John, I know you're gonna, I know you're going to join this firm."
Story_ID: 435036
Speaker 1: --You had mentioned that your husband [John Ward] was offered a position with Adlai Stevenson's [Adlai Stevenson II] firm.  So did he take it or no?
Speaker 2: Oh, Lord, no, not--
Speaker 1: No?
Speaker 2: Yeah, well, well, I said Lord, no, meaning, for him, no; for anybody else, oh, my God, yes.  I said, "John," and because, as I said, he was a premier student with this whatever.  They all had these fabulous positions.  I said--he said, "No, we're going back to Indianapolis [Indiana] to open up a law practice and you know, fight the fight, the cause there."  I said, "John, we can do that in New York [New York]."  He says, "No, New York is much too easy.  We need to go back where it's hard."  And I said oh, oh, oh, oh, all my dreams have gone out the window, so I said okay.  So we won't be going to 21 [21 Club, New York, New York] (laughter).  Nope (laughter), unless you wanna stay here and go (laughter).
Speaker 1: No.
Speaker 2: Okay, so I said okay, fine.  So that's was we did, and he went back.  And what he did, he had a job.  He was the executive director of the Indiana Civil Liberties Union [American Civil Liberties Union of Indiana].  That was what paid the bills, because it was impossible for a black person to get an office.  And what John wanted was--and see, and the other part, he practiced law.  He was part time, the executive director.  When he looked for an office for himself, we had a very, very difficult time because he wanted to be downtown, and they were not renting to black lawyers downtown.  And black lawyers were not being invited into black--into white firms.  Oh no, you didn't have black lawyers in white firms.  You had black lawyers who put out shingles of their own.  And then they may have, they may take a partner, but it wasn't a partner in the real sense.  It was that they were just sharing expenses and that sort of thing.
Speaker 1: About what time was this?  I'm sorry.
Speaker 2: Nineteen fifty-nine [1959].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, 1960.  And so we went everywhere looking for a law office.  He wanted, he thought that if he were downtown, that people could walk in off the street, you know, and that he could get business, that if you were in the black community, he couldn't get business from everybody.  And so, and but, but he couldn't, 'cause he couldn't rent anyplace.  So finally, and what would happen was, we would go places that had space, and then he would call them and then say, "Oh sure."  And, but when we would get there, they would say, "Oh, I just rented this ten minutes ago."  I don't, I cannot tell you how many times, how much of that, that we went through.  And then finally, when we did go someplace, we went someplace was right down in the circle.  And we had met the landlord.  And he said, "Oh no, I'm gonna tell you right now: I'm not renting to Negroes."  He said, "But I have a place over on--it was off the beaten path.  It was on a side street."  And he says, "It's on the first floor, and you can, I can rent that to you."  You know, it wasn't an office, but it's a storefront.  It was, you know, and you can see it and all of that.  "Now that's it, but I'm definitely not gonna rent to you," oh yeah.  And so, and so then that's what John did, and we took that.
Story_ID: 435037
Speaker 1: And then that was, you know, like the '60s [1960s]; that was during the movement.  And we started, we did sit-ins.  We would go to bars and sit in.  And we had one bar we went to, and they had learned to expect us.  They would have a beer at every seat, you know, all these chairs are taken; all these seats taken, can't you see, you know, and stuff like that.  And then I remember one night we went someplace, and I was so scared.  Our friends, who happened to have been white, were going to be with us.  They were gonna join us.  And John [John Ward] and I had gotten to this, to this bar, and we were sitting down.  And here comes in a bunch of white people.  I said, "Oh, God, John, oh, God.  I said, "Looks like the Ku Klux Klan [KKK]."  He said "No, they're our folks because they are gonna help us," and so they did.  So they said, you know, they were the ones that challenged the seats.  "Well, where, I don't see them.  Where are they?  Well, I want a beer."  And so, you know, and so the bartender served them a beer and took the beer and took the glass and broke it on the ground and said, "Don't come back in here ever again," oh yes, yes.  And then I remember my birthday.  I can't think of her name, very pretty black woman who was--I almost recalled her name--who was well known.  She was very expensive, and you didn't see her in places except expensive bars.  And she was in San Francisco [California].  And I said, "John, that's where I would like to go for my birthday."  It was a white club.  I said, "But I'm gonna tell you, I don't wanna work tonight.  If we cannot, if we're not gonna be accepted, I don't wanna go, because any other time it's okay, but I don't wanna work tonight."  So, a friend of ours, Willis Kirk, that I told you about, he was from Indianapolis [Indiana], and a musician--her name was Barbara [ph.]--can't think of it.  I said, "Willis, would you check with Barbara whatever and see if black people can come to that club?"  'Cause it was a very expensive club.  And so he called her, and she said that yes, they had told her that we could come, so we went.
Speaker 2: Oh, good.
Speaker 1: Oh yeah, I use those examples--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --to show you the kind of period that was.
Story_ID: 435038
Speaker 1: You also said that he [Ward's husband, John Ward] worked with school desegregation (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh yeah, right.
Speaker 1: --in Indiana--
Speaker 2: Yeah, but not--
Speaker 1: --in Indianapolis [Indiana].
Speaker 2: Yeah, not right then.  He was busy working for the Indiana Civil Liberties Union [American Civil Liberties Union of Indiana] and establishing his law practice.  And then later, he and his partner desegregated the Indianapolis Public Schools, and I was so proud of that.  And that was something he wanted to do so badly, and he did it.  But the--what was unique about that case is that he couldn't do it with Indianapolis, too many blacks.  He couldn't desegregate the city, so he had to go outside of the city and take in unincorporated areas and other corporated areas, which was unique.  You didn't have that, but John built a case for that.  He said, "Indianapolis can't desegregate itself, so we have to go outside and take in other places," and they did that.
Speaker 1: Oh my.
Speaker 2: And oh, I was so proud of him, so proud.
Speaker 1: How long were, how long were you married?
Speaker 2: Five years.
Speaker 1: Five years?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: When did you get married?
Speaker 2: We got married.  We had a huge wedding in 1955, yes, had a huge wedding; had the first wedding at the new church.  And I did some things that nobody else had ever done.  That's when they were starting to do ice sculptures and things.  And then I had a band, an ice sculpture, oh yeah.  Well, see, my mother [Robbie Floyd] always did that.  She always gave me whatever she could, you know.  Now, I never demanded things of her, but she knew I liked certain things, and if she could do it, she would do it; you know, she would do it.
Speaker 1: Oh, okay.
Speaker 2: Well, when I wanted to go to law school, she paid for that.  I went to law school, and I've always regretted this: I have only one semester to do.  I, I got married, and John had great plans for me.  He wanted me to get a master's in law, and I didn't.  I saw this marriage coming, and that's what I wanted to do.  And that was--I am so sorry; I am so sorry 'cause I only had a semester to do.  But my mother, she paid for that.  She believes that whatever you want to do, I owe it to you to take you all the way.  I have friends whose parents say, "I owe you that first degree, and after that you're on your own."  My mother said, "No, I owe it all to you, 'cause you didn't ask to be brought here.  And therefore, whatever you want to do, I'm gonna do."  So I, likewise, I do anything I can for her.  As I said to her, I said, "I wanna thank you for trying to give me everything I ever wanted," you know, even though she would sit back and say now you want what?  And I'd say that I want this, and she said okay.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you finished University of Indiana [Indiana University, Bloomington, Indiana] with your B.A., right.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: And you got a master's where?
Speaker 2: At Indiana, yeah.
Speaker 1: And then, and your master's was in?
Speaker 2: Education.
Speaker 1: In education.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.  After you got your master's, what did you do?  Did you teach (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, then I, then I taught--see, because when John and I got married and went to Indianapolis, it was rough because attorneys didn't make that--black attorneys didn't make that kind of money, and so he needed help.  And so I started subbing.  Then I began teaching, and I taught for ten years until I came out here.
Story_ID: 435039
Speaker 1: I came out here.  I got a grant to come out here to go to Cal [University of California, Berkeley, Berkeley, California].  And I got a grant for that summer and fell in love with the place.  And then I got a job in San Mateo County Office of Education as an administrator.  And this was in 1968.  And they didn't have in all these schools in the county of San Mateo [San Mateo County, California] a lot--
Speaker 2: Which is south of San Francisco [California].
Speaker 1: That's right, Belmont [California], San Carlos [California], Burlingame [California], Hillsborough [California], all those counties, they didn't have any teachers, or San Mateo, they had just a few, Redwood City [California].  And so they said--and this was a time when they were feeling the heat--we gotta have some teachers, some black teachers.
Speaker 2: Some black teachers.
Speaker 1: And then I was at a meeting with superintendents and assistant superintendents of personnel, and they said, "We gotta have some black teachers."  And so then I raised my hand, and I said, "Well, I know how to get some," because I was active with the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People].  I had been a president of the NAACP in Indianapolis [Indiana], because as I said, John [John Ward] and I were truly in the fight.  And I said, "I was president of NAACP, and I know a lot of black people throughout the entire Midwest."  I didn't know anybody in the South.  I just knew the Midwest.  I just knew Indiana, Illinois, Michigan, Minnesota, stuff like that.  And I said, "I can go back there, and I can recruit people."  And my superintendent said, "Yes, you can."  And then there was a black man that had been at the county office before I, Ennis McDaniel.  And Ennis said Doris [HistoryMaker Doris Ward], I--'cause it was only two blacks at the county office.  Ennis said, "I went down south," and he said, "And you don't have to work that hard.  If you just come back with one or two applications that'll be fine."  And I said okay.  So then I said to Russ Kent, John Ward, help me structure that.  John and I were divorced by then.  John says--he always was my number one advisor.  He says what you want to do is you tell him you need a budget.  You want a budget to pay people.  He says, because if you go back there, you're aren't gonna time.  You wanna pay people to advertise for you, to get the word out, to set people up, to make appointments for you so that when you're there you're just working the whole time.  So I was gone for two whole weeks.  I was just supposed to be gone for a week, but things got going so good.  I had my friends in Indianapolis, my friends in Gary, Indiana.  I went to Chicago [Illinois]; I went to Detroit [Michigan]; I went every place I had NAACP friends.  And when I would go in, they would have a whole schedule for me.  You're starting today at nine o'clock, and you're stopping tonight at five.  And you're meeting with people every half hour, half, every twenty minutes, whatever it was.  I came back with two hundred applications.  They were shocked, shocked, shocked.  You got two hundred applications.  Well, I found out that when they went, they, white people went, they went wrong.  They went with the attitude that you really aren't qualified because they would ask the wrong questions.  They would ask people who were teachers, do you have a credential?  People back in the Midwest, they didn't have credentials.  We spoke about master's [degree].  In Indiana at Indianapolis, Indiana, you had to have a master's in five years.  You didn't have to have a credential because you went to college, and you had the proper courses.  And you graduated qualified, and so that was it.  Out here, you had to have credentials.  Well, how do you get a credential?  Very easily; all you have to do is go to night school and one of the community colleges to get whatever your credential is in administration or whatever.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And, 'cause I had to have for my job a pupil personal credential.  I never heard of it, but the person that hired me said, "Don't worry about it; you can get it."  And so, and then you had to have California history.  Well, that's easy.  You go to one of the colleges and get that.  But they would just say you'd--oh, you don't have it, oh, well.  And then they would get on the defensive.  Well, you know, I don't guess I really cut, you know, I'm not qualified.  They never said yes, you are.  Did you come out with a valid degree?  Then you're qualified.  Whatever you have to do, you just go do it, and that's what I did.  I'm not a personnel person.  I don't know anything about personnel, but I know about common sense.  And so I just said to people, because there were so many people that wanted to come to California, so many people, that I just, I said, "Oh yeah, you wanna come?  I can't hire you, but I'll take your application back."  And I said that, and I said, "Now you're gonna have to get a credential, but you can get that when you get there.  They got a lot of community colleges.  You just go there and just get the credential."  And I said, and also, and that's something else: they would ask you are you on a--what kind of list is that?  Students would get on a--I can't think of it.  It's a name when you get out of college.  You go to your university and you get on a list for a job in the area that you're interested in.  Black students did not do that in Indiana because back in Indiana they knew what districts were going to hire them as black people, so they didn't have the luxury of saying, I want to get on that list so I can get a job in Utah, 'cause Utah wasn't hiring black kids.  So therefore, they didn't do that.  I think it's called a professional development list or something like that.  But it didn't mean you weren't qualified.  It just meant that it was silly to get on.
Story_ID: 435040
Speaker 1: In the State of Indiana, if you wanted to teach there, you either went to Indianapolis [Indiana], Gary [Indiana], because by that time Gary had built a lot of elementary schools.  They had come away from this K [kindergarten] through twelve concept--to Gary and, or other places that have a nice size population.  That was it, and that's what they did.  Or they, or Kansas City, Kansas was hiring a lot of black people, so a lot of them went there.  They just knew where black people will be hired, so therefore they didn't waste any time.  My cousin, who gave this ring to--her husband gave this ring to her.  My cousin was at, came out of Indiana [Indiana University, Bloomington, Indiana] in the School of Business [Indiana University School of Business; Kelley School of Business, Bloomington, Indiana].  When the companies would come to Indiana University to look for employees, they would talk to everybody except black students.  Well, you didn't have that many black students in the School of Business.  When he went to them, they said, they just said, "Why are you here?"  He said, "Because I'm interested in your corporation."  "We're not hiring Negroes."
Speaker 2: And what time was this?
Speaker 1: In 19, 19--
Speaker 2: Is this the '60s [1960s]?
Speaker 1: --sixties [1960s].  We're not hiring Negroes (laughter), that's right.  So, Cordell [ph.], when he came out of IU, he decided he might as well go to the [U.S. military] service, so that's what he did.  He signed up because, you know.  And he only came out, and then he became a, you know, an officer in the service.  The only time he came out, when I came out here and times were changing.  And he says, "Now I'm gonna have a chance to use my degree."  And so he came out, and I helped him get his job with Allstate [Allstate Corporation], and now he has his own Allstate franchise, you know.  But, so then I bring all these people back here, and they're all shocked, the districts of the peninsula.  Where did you get 'em?  How did you get 'em?  I said, "Easily.  They were waiting to come back, but you had discouraged them."  Then I had some superintendents that personally went back.  Joe Grimes from Redwood City [California], he went back and personally offered twenty-two contracts to people, and they came out, and you know, and they were hired.  San Mateo [California] hired some people, you know, one of my best friends.  People were calling me, and they said, "Doris [HistoryMaker Doris Ward], I gotta--when you, you're back here," I gotta, I gotta--Joe Grimes--whenever these people come back 'cause they can hire office contracts, you gotta get me in.  And I would.  I would tell them.  I would say listen, I--one superintendent, he says, "Doris, you've got me so booked I don't have time for a lunch."
Speaker 2: Oh, my.
Speaker 1: I said, "So what, this is their life."
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: I said, "You can eat anytime you want."
Story_ID: 435041
Speaker 1: You saw that change with the teachers.  There were also some other changes that you noticed when you moved here.  You went to Berkeley [California], and you went out and you saw the social life.  But you also came in contact with the Black Panthers [Black Panther Party].
Speaker 2: Yes, I was most--
Speaker 1: Could you tell us about the--
Speaker 2: I was impressed.  Yeah, see, because I admired Eldridge Cleav--not--yeah, Eldridge Cleaver.  I just read his book, you know.  What was that, 'Black Power' [sic. 'Soul on Ice,' Eldridge Cleaver]?
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Yeah, and he was on the stump in Berkeley, and I went out there to hear him.  And then, you know, and so I had a chance to hear him and everything.  And I was very, very impressed because I've always felt it took everybody.  It took the Martin Luther Kings [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.], the Malcolm Xs, the Eldridge Cleavers to make it possible for black people to get through that door.  And that's something that I always--when you ask me the one thing that I am, that I want to be remembered by, was when I became an elected official.  I made it possible for black people to go through the door because I think that if a black elected official does not make it possible for black people to go through the door, to widen that door, to open that door, then you ought not be there.  That's one of the reasons why I love Jesse Jackson [HistoryMaker Reverend Jesse L. Jackson], because he makes sure that that river is widened.  And I always tell white speakers--I mean white audiences, "Don't be afraid of Jesse Jackson or anybody else."  I said, "First of all, he's opening the door, which means that you'd get in too, that you could get in because you couldn't have gotten in before under those white people."  So he--and because you had more resources, you're gonna get in and get it even farther, better than anybody else.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: So, in a way, what Jesse and other people who opened doors for people do, they help the white community even more than blacks.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: For example, if I said there will be no barriers, that anybody that has money can build whatever they want.  They can build this high-rise, no barriers.  You just have to have the money.  So who's gonna have the money?
Speaker 1: White people (laughter).
Speaker 2: Yes, what I'm saying is so you ought to welcome somebody that's gonna open a door because then you get a chance to get in.  And you know, and I try to teach that to my audiences when they, you know, since they---don't fear them.  They're gonna make it better for you because they're trying to make it better for blacks.  And because you have more resources, you're gonna definitely get in.
Story_ID: 435042
Speaker 1: So you were helping other black people to get into teaching positions, but you didn't teach yourself.  You were an administrator.
Speaker 2: I was an administrator, and then only when I went to San Francisco State [San Francisco State College; San Francisco State University, San Francisco, California], that's right, but I did not teach in the public schools here.  I went to San Francisco State.  In fact, I'm gonna give you my resume, and you'll--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --see what I taught over there at San Francisco State.
Speaker 1: And this is, like, in the '60s [1960s]?  What year did you teach?
Speaker 2: Yeah, no, I came in, in '68 [1968].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So I--but not '60s [1960s].
Speaker 1: Oh.
Speaker 2: I was, I was in Indiana in the '60s [1960s].
Speaker 1: Oh, I'm sorry.
Speaker 2: I came here in 1968.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: We're talking about the '70s [1970s] and--
Speaker 1: The '70s [1970s], okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, '70s [1970s].  Then I got on the community college board [San Francisco Community College District, San Francisco, California].
Speaker 1: Oh, right.
Speaker 2: I got on the community college board in 1972, and I was there until 1979.  And, I made it possible, I, for us to have our first black president--
Speaker 1: Oh, really?
Speaker 2: --Ken Washington [Kenneth S. Washington].  He's dead now.  Yes, I, as a trustee I put together a committee that would bring me a black candidate.  And Ken Washington happened to have been the candidate so that he would get a chance to get a chance.  And so, and so he took it, and he applied, and he was, he was--and we hired him.
Speaker 1: I see.
Speaker 2: And so I opened that door for him.  I opened doors for people here, pardon me, at the community college and you know, just wherever.  When I was on the Board of Supervisors [San Francisco Board of Supervisors], I authored legislation to have a set-aside economic program for minorities and women because minorities and women did not do business with San Francisco, because the business they did, they had contracts about that much.  And Maynard Jackson had set the standard.  He had made it possible for minorities to get contracts in Atlanta, Georgia.  And I called him, and I said, "Maynard, I want to do what you did."  And so he said fine, and he helped me.
Story_ID: 435043
Speaker 1: You were elected to be a supervisor, county supervisor [on the San Francisco Board of Supervisors] in 1979.  San Francisco [California] has an interesting political, this, it's really two different--there's the city and the county.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: You know, they're all in the same (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It's one and the same.
Speaker 1: --geographical area.
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: So are the two governments separate?  Is city--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: --sep- oh, they're--okay.  Could you explain how that--
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: --works?  It's, it's--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --very unusual.
Speaker 2: Right, yeah, it is, it is.  Yeah, it's, you are a city officer.  I was a city supervisor, and I was also a county commissioner; I was both, one and the same, they were in the same body.  And when I--so, but we did not divide our meetings, like, these are city issues, and these are county issues, no.  We just had one calendar, and whatever that calen- whatever, you know, we did, we dealt with the whole thing during that meeting.  That's what happened, and I was talking about pay at that time.  And when I became a supervisor in 1980, I won in '79 [1979].  I took my seat in 1980, and that, I was getting set, nine thousand dollars, $9,700, ridiculous.  And then, by the time I left, I was getting $23,900, something like that, $24,000.
Speaker 1: It's not enough.
Speaker 2: They now get a hundred thousand I believe.  And then I became the assessor in 1992 because I was going to be term limited out.  And the then mayor, Frank Jordan, appointed me as the assessor, and I was there for ten years.  And after that, I ran two times--three, three times.  The third time I lost.  I ran for that, during that ten years.  And my salary went up considerably (laughter), and so I was very happy about that.  But now, but, and this city, in order to get a raise you had to take it to the voters and put it on the ballot.  And the voters didn't say no.  They said hell no, that's right, hell no; no, we're not gonna do this, and we're not gonna give you a raise because they, again, they think that you're not good; you're not doing your job, and you go to these conferences, you're going to these conferences to have a good time.  And that's furthest from the truth.  I love these conferences because you go there and you learn something, and you network with people.  And I never went to a conference that I didn't come back and put something that I had learned into practice here.  And so, and I had an opportunity to become president of either one of those boards, those national boards.  But I knew that if I did, that the citizens of San Francisco would not appreciate it.  They would say, "Oh, she just did this so she can go to all these trips," because you do go on a lot of trips.  You go all over to represent the organization, and you have an opportunity to travel internationally.  But they would say that's what you're doing it for.  But you're not doing for that.  You're doing it so that you can get information and knowledge so that you can better serve your people and meet people who might be able to help you serve your people.  That's what you're doing it for, but San Francisco didn't have that view.
Speaker 1: I see.  When you were county supervisor, what were some of the things that you did to help improve the city?
Speaker 2: Oh, what I was just saying, number one things I'm very, very proud of: I'm proud of the minority set-aside ordinance that helped minorities get into the ballgame.  So we now have women, and Asians, and Hispanics, and blacks who are getting a piece of economic action that not only helped them but helped the city, because in many instances, they were the better contractor.  They offered the city more.  They did more for the city.  But because they were minorities and women, they just got totally overlooked.
Speaker 1: I see.
Speaker 2: Yes, and then what I did, what I would do is, I would stay in contact with the public, with my constituency.  You have to do that.  I would meet with them regularly.  I would go out and talk to them.  When I was the assessor I went out and met with people to explain to them what the assessor does.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: They don't know what the assessor does.  Even after I talked to them, they still wouldn't know.
Speaker 1: What does an assessor do?
Speaker 2: Yeah, right, an assessor places value upon property.  And it's that value that brings tax money to the city to help pay for all the things you need, for all the health you need, the education, for police services, for fire services, for recreation.  That's how the city gets its money, based upon the property.
Speaker 1: I see.
Speaker 2: The property that is excluded, of course, are governmental buildings, churches, non-profits.  Those kinds of things are excluded from being taxed (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Taxed.
Speaker 2: But that's what the assessor does.
Story_ID: 435044
Speaker 1: We were talking about where blacks are in the world today, so (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh yeah, okay.
Speaker 1: --so your--
Speaker 2: Yeah, and I was saying I was trying to do my part when I was here on the Board of Supervisors [San Francisco Board of Supervisors] and I became president.  Frank Jordan made me the assessor--
Speaker 1: And he was the mayor?
Speaker 2: --after only one year of my being president of the board.  The way I got to be president, that, at that time, everybody was elected at-large.  And whoever runs number one becomes the president of the board.
Speaker 1: Oh.
Speaker 2: So I ran number one, and I was the president of the board, got over a hundred thousand votes, and so I was very, very, very pleased about that.  And I said, "Now I can do something, you know.  I want to be president."  But then, but, but Frank Jordan, just as my second term started I had all ideas what I wanted to do, Frank stepped in and said, "Would you like to be the assessor," because I was gonna be term limited out anyway (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Right, right.
Speaker 2: So, as always, I called John Ward, you know.  I don't care how many wives John had (laughter), and they accepted me, you know, and but then I accepted them.  John would come here, and you know, I'd put 'em all up, you know, whatever, even when he had girlfriends I'd put them up.  I mean we were not married.  I mean we were, when we act (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) You just, you were friends.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I mean the best of friends.
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: He was my best friend.  He said, or I said, "John, Frank Jordan asked me did I want to be the assessor.  And the assessor gets a much, much, much better job."  And he says, "When do you have to run?"  And so I said, "In two years."  He said, "Then take it.  If you have to run tomorrow, don't do it, 'cause you don't know anything about it," he says, "but then take it."  And so I said okay.  So, you know, he always gave me advice like that.  Like I was telling you that the reason I was so successful when I went back to recruit people, because I was paying people, you know, and you had to have everything right.  Otherwise, if I went back, I wouldn't have come back with no more than five, five applications--
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Story_ID: 435045
Speaker 1: But he [Ward's ex-husband, John Ward] always gave me that kind of advice, and I miss him so much for that, when things get rough, and I said, "Oh, John, what would I do?  What should I do?"  You know, that (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) When did he die?
Speaker 1: --sort of stuff.  He died two years ago.  Well, no, he died, he, yeah, two, two years ago.  He would, he had developed Alzheimer's.  Oh, and this was interesting.  He left--he was living in Minnesota, 'cause he taught at the University of Minnesota [Minneapolis, Minnesota].  He left Minnesota, and he also continued his law practice in Indianapolis [Indiana].
Speaker 2: Oh, my.
Speaker 1: He left to go--he wanted to go to, to not Phoenix [Arizona], Tucson, Arizona.  And he knew I was active with all these national organizations, and I would know elected officials.  So he called me and said he was going to Tucson to live; did I know anybody?  I said, "I don't think I know anybody in Tucson, but I know a lot of people in Phoenix."  I said, "Tucson doesn't participate too much with us."  So then I called executive directors, and I said, "What county commissioner do you know?"  And then I called the city guy, and I said, "What city council people do you know, you know, in Tucson?"  So they told me some, and whatever.  And, and so I--and, and then he said he picked Tucson because of their university there.  And he wanted to live where the students live because he liked living around students, and he would, he wanted to teach.  And it was his doctor that told us, his best friend and me, why he went to Tucson.  I said, "John, why go to Tucson?"  I said, "I don't know anybody in Tucson.  Most people don't."  He told his doctor that he was going there to die.  Because he was so proud, he did not want to be a burden on anybody with Alzheimer's, so he went there to die.  He did not tell us that.  The doctor told him that (simultaneous).
Story_ID: 435046
Speaker 1: You were appointed to the, to be the county assessor [for San Francisco County, California].
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And you told us what the duties of the county assessor were (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, yes, right, to place value on the property and then to, and from that is where your taxes come from.  I don't collect the taxes; the tax collector does, but everybody got that confused.  They all thought that they paid taxes to me.  They would say--and I don't care how bright and intelligent you are, everybody thought that.  And that's why I say that it doesn't matter.  People don't really want to know what the assessor does, and so they don't really hear you.  But when I would give speeches, I would start off by saying number one, I do not collect your taxes.  I place value on your business.  And then those same people would come back and say, "Oh, I got you; I got to pay you my taxes."  And so that's what the assessor does.  And you can come down and disagree with us and say no, you have, you have appraised my property for too much money.  And then you can take it to the Assessment Appeals Board, or you can talk to our people in our office.  When you came down to talk to me to challenge me, I always have a meeting with you, the chief appraiser, the assistant assessor, and your appraiser in order for us to see if you had any validity.
Speaker 1: Okay, so when something, the assessor would go out to your home, what were they basing the value on?  Were there just the property?  Was there the neighborhood?  What, was there--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --a formula?
Speaker 2: Yes, yeah, right.  There are a number of ways that you'd do it.  You do it by, you do it through market rate, you know, what the going rate (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What the house was--
Speaker 2: --is around there.  Or another way you do it, you can do the cost factor: if you had to build this over again what would it cost you?  You know, that sort of thing.  So, there're five ways in which you can, that appraisers use approaches to come to what your property is valued.  But market rate is one really interesting, you know, one that's handled by a lot of people because, well, that property across the street is only going for whatever, you know.  And with everything else around here is, and as I said, there are other ways too.  So I enjoyed it, and I was able to, to change that office.  That office had been an office that was in the dark ages.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I was able to bring it out, didn't have any computerization, had only two computers, and I was able to make certain that everybody had a computer.  But more importantly, there was a computer program, because people were going towards computerization.  People in the office had, all the appraisers had done their work by hand, at pencil and paper.  And as you well know, Loretta [Loretta Henry], that's a no-no.  And, but I had some appraisers that fought me out of that, people who were old-timers.  That's what they had always done.  And people loved to say, "But I've always done it this way, I've always done it this way," and in my opinion, that is never a viable answer.  You know, I believe in change.  I don't believe in change for change sake because just to change something that doesn't make sense.  It's no good.  But if you must change to improve something, then that's what you do, and that's what I did with the office.  We got a computer program.  You know, everybody had to learn those things, and that was good.  I was able to diversify the office.  You will find that there are very few blacks in this appraisal business.  And in order to get some appraisers and auditors who are black, I created a trainee program.  And so I hired two--six trainees: two blacks, two Asians, one Hispanic, and one white female.  And then that office had never, ever seen am black appraiser.  That's the other professional person, is an--not appraiser--auditor, auditor.  They had never seen a black auditor, and I hired two black auditors 'cause that was very difficult, 'cause I wanted, again, to open up that opportunity so they, they would have that opportunity.  And then I would go to schools, and I would talk to students and tell them about the business of appraising, what it was, what it meant.  I think that's very important, to get out into schools and to expose minority kids to what is out there--
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: --because there's more out there than being a teacher, doctor, and lawyer; because today there are so many professions that have come on the scene and on the market recently that most of us never, ever heard of.  I know when I was in college, I'd never heard, well, I know I'd never heard of all of these things.  And nobody ever told me about what appraisers did.  You know, obviously they had them because all cities had to have their property appraised, but nobody ever told anybody.  But people just need to know that they have other opportunities, and I always take advantage of that, to help people know about other opportunities and what they need to do and must do in order to be successful in this world.  As I tell people, you don't have to go to college, but you gotta go someplace and get some training about something.  You can't come out there, out of high school, and say you--there was once upon a time you could do that, go get on-the-job training, but that's, that door has closed, you know.  There ain't no on-the-job training--
Speaker 1: That's right.
Speaker 2: --and move on up.  Now, we just saw, Peter Jennings shocked me.  Peter Jennings left college--
Speaker 1: Oh.
Speaker 2: --so he can go out and learn his craft.  And Peter Jennings was a marvelous, bright, informed, intelligent man.  I'm not sure you can do that today.
Speaker 1: No.
Speaker 2: You can, but nobody's gonna give you--
Speaker 1: Give you a chance.
Speaker 2: --a chance.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: I mean you're gonna be coming up against people, but you, you've got to go out here and learn how to do a trade.  You don't have--I always tell kids, you don't have to go to college, but you've got to get some training in some field to do something or else it's not going to, you know, you're gonna be at the bottom of the totem pole.
Story_ID: 435047
Speaker 1: You were in, active in politics from '79 [1979] to 2003.  That's almost thirty years?
Speaker 2: Oh yes, I was elected to office (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) You must have--
Speaker 2: --thirty years.
Speaker 1: --seen some interesting changes in San Francisco [California]--
Speaker 2: Oh yes.
Speaker 1: --over time.  Could you tell us about some of the changes that you've seen in the city?
Speaker 2: Yes, this city has--well, let me just say this.  Where we're sitting right now, this whole area right here--
Speaker 1: This is the Embarcadero [San Francisco, California]--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --near the port.
Speaker 2: Right.  This is a fabulous area.  In other words, they've built the city within a city.  You have these three high-rises.  You look out there on that next level down there.  Those are townhouses down there, three high-rises, then townhouses; across the street are the condominiums.  So you have all of this living space.  And then behind us--
Speaker 1: And there used to be what?  There was a highway here, right?
Speaker 2: Yes, that's right.
Speaker 1: And they tore the highway down.
Speaker 2: That's right, right.  And in fact, we'd come right off there.  In fact, I was sorry it went down because I used to come right there and get off and come on home.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Make that your exit.
Speaker 2: Yes.  And behind me is a retail part, part, those, those four Embarcaderos [Embarcadero Center, San Francisco, California], Embarcadero one, two, three, four, that are flanked both by Hyatt Re- one is a Regency, and the other is another Hyatt.  And so they built all of this with--
Speaker 1: And that's where Levi Strauss [Levi Strauss & Co., San Francisco, California] is, right?
Speaker 2: That's right, Levi Strauss, no, is not a part of this complex.  It's not too far from here.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And it was destined to be a high-rise, but Telegraph Hill [San Francisco, California] and other people stopped it because they would not have been able to see; their view would have been enhanced.
Speaker 1: Oh.
Speaker 2: So now it's built as a low-rise.  So I have seen that happen.  I have seen this city go from--one of our biggest problems: we don't have enough housing, as you well know, we do not.  I have seen every mayor try to tackle that problem.  Some are more successful than others.  But the bottom line is that we still have a dire need for affordable housing.  And that's becoming more and more difficult to do.  When this was built, I was not here.  They tell me that this was the produce market.  And so then they built all of this, and very few people live here who are of low income means.  I have a real problem with that.  I like to see all housing integrated so that we have people at all levels.  In the Western Addition [San Francisco, California], I lived down there in Cathedral Hill [San Francisco, California].  That's another high-rise.  I lived in that.  They tell me that that was all inhabited by the Japanese community and the black community.  And when they started building all of that stuff, all those black people left, and they never brought them back, very much like it's going to be in New Orleans [Louisiana].  You know, New Orleans will rise, and it will be (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) It's gonna be--
Speaker 2: --but it will be a--
Speaker 1: --different.
Speaker 2: --totally different city.  Those poor people who were there, there's no way they can come back.  Now they will come back to some extent because they will make some housing that is expec- specifically for them.  But for the most part, they won't be able to afford to come back.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: You know, because when you, when you start building this stuff, then the market rate takes over, unless you have some real strict conditions in there that this has got to be for low-rise.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: And so there are those conditions.
Speaker 1: Right, okay.
Speaker 2: But it's not enough.
Speaker 1: I see.
Speaker 2: There's no question about that.  So, that's a problem that I feel sorry for anybody that's mayor, and to how you're gonna do that.  And you know, and I have seen--but that, that's one of the biggest things (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) It's this change, this building boom then, and moving families out.  Seems there like there are--
Speaker 2: Oh, absolutely.
Speaker 1: --a lot of families that are--
Speaker 2: Absolutely.
Story_ID: 435048
Speaker 1: When I came in, the black community was 15 percent.  We're now down to about 5 percent, something like that.  Oh, yes, that's right, because you can't afford to live here [San Francisco, California].  You just can't afford the rents here.  You just can't afford to buy here.  And everything is so ridiculously high, I don't know how people do it.  And I don't know what kind of jobs these people have.  Now I knew that when we had the dotcom industry and everything was booming then, but that went bust.  And I'm sure all those people who were in that, those young people who were living in a fairyland then because they had no idea what life was really like, they came out of college, and they came into these fabulous jobs making a hundred thousand dollars, and they thought that was what everybody made.  And sadly enough, they have found out that no, they don't, and you don't either now.  And so, you know, that was just so unreal, so unreal.  So, I would like for the economy to come back, but you know, I just don't know, you know, how it will come back.  And then, you know, affordable health, everybody in this city needs healthcare.  There's no question about that, and I don't think that's an impossible thing to do.  But we have improved our health facilities since I have been here.  We certainly have improved on recreational facilities since I have been here.  The education is a problem that continues to grow.
Speaker 2: Oh, really?
Speaker 1: And the diversity of the city is just about a bubble that's about to burst.
Speaker 2: Oh, really?
Speaker 1: Oh, well, what I'm saying is there's so much people from various, the communities and roots that have come here than when I was here.  I mean, there were a lot of Asians that are here, more Asians in this area than down south.  Down south they're Hispanics.  Up here, the largest minority are Asians.
Speaker 2: Asians.
Speaker 1: And that's continuing to grow, and we have that.  The attitude toward the gay community, as you well know, has totally, totally changed.  The attitude of people who have AIDS [acquired immunodeficiency syndrome]--when AIDS came out a few years ago, people wouldn't even touch people.  I had friends--oh, no, I can't touch him; he might have AIDS.  You know, but it isn't transmitted--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --just by touching somebody.  So, I'm happy to know that all of that ignorance is gone and that people are living better according to that.  But, so I mean those problems continue.
Speaker 2: Could you tell us, you mentioned that blacks were 5 percent of the population.
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: What kind of political force do they have?  Do they have a, afford a voice--
Speaker 1: Well--
Speaker 2: --a very powerful voice in the city?
Speaker 1: Let me tell you, we had a powerful voice, much more powerful.  That voice has been diminished, but some of us are very concerned about bringing that voice back.  I am co-chair of a group called Black Women Organized for Political Action.  The other co-chair is a former supervisor, Willie B. Kennedy.  We were on the Board of Supervisors [San Francisco Board of Supervisors] together.  We're trying to make that a voice that is loud and will be heard.  We have the Black Leadership Forum [San Francisco Black Leadership Forum] here in the city.  We have the Bay PAC [ph.], a group that Willie Brown [HistoryMaker Willie L. Brown], the former mayor, started many, many years ago.  It's a political group for the entire state.  And then we have, and then there's the African American Democratic Club out in Bayview-Hunters Point [San Francisco, California].  So we do have some Democratic clubs.  And I say Democratic because very few organized black Republican clubs that I know of, this is not to say they're not here, but I'm talking about those that I know, and the voices that we're trying to hear have basically been organized black Democratic voices.  Black Woman Organized for Political Action is not a partisan club; it's nonpartisan.  But most of the woman are Democrats, but we welcome everybody.  But the black voice is diminishing, but we're determined that it's not going to be extinguished and that we're going to continue to fight for those things that we think are important and that affect the quality of our lives.  I am helping the, the Bayview-Hunters Point Center, the Multipurpose Senior Citizens Center in Hunters Point [Bayview-Hunters Point Multipurpose Senior Services Center, San Francisco, California] to develop an aging campus under the direction of Dr. George Davis and his wife, Kathy Davis [Catherine Davis].  They are doing a marvelous job of trying to make certain that housing and other kind of services will be provided for people out in that area so, because there is no housing out there.  There's no affordable housing for aged people who have health needs because they have to go to Laguna Honda [Laguna Honda Hospital and Rehabilitation Center, San Francisco, California].
Speaker 2: I see.
Speaker 1: And so we're trying to make certain that that's not the case out there, that there's going to be some housing, that this housing is going to have to be built because those people, of course, cannot afford to go to assisted living kind of--
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: --places, so we want to make sure that happen.  And they have hired a very good team of Saad&Shaw to help make that happen.  And I, along with other people, are trying to really make that a reality.  I spend a lot of my time doing that.
Story_ID: 435049
Speaker 1: Could you tell us maybe some names of some, the black leaders in San Francisco [California]?
Speaker 2: Yes, well, as you know, our preeminent leader, Willie Brown [HistoryMaker Willie L. Brown] (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) His Highness.
Speaker 2: Yes, and then Sophie Maxwell--
Speaker 1: And is she--
Speaker 2: --is a black person on the Board of Supervisors [San Francisco Board of Supervisors].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: She's the only black person.  When I was there, there were two of us, but Sophie is the only person.  And on the school board [San Francisco Unified Board of Education] we have nobody, believe or not.  The black young lady lost her seat, and there is not a black person, and that doesn't make sense when the school population is so predominantly black--
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: --that you don't have a black person.  We, you know, there have been--why?  Because there have been several people that run, and then they kind of knock each other out.  But we don't have anybody there.  Then on the community college board [San Francisco Community College Board of Trustees] we have two leaders there.  We have Johnny Carter, and we have Anita Greer.  And then the BART [Bay Area Rapid Transit] board--
Speaker 1: That's the train, the subway.
Speaker 2: That's right.  We have Lynette Sweet.  Supervisor Willie B. Kennedy used to be there, but she's not now.  Lynette Sweet is there.  So those are the black elected officials.
Speaker 1: What about the city council and the county supervisors?
Speaker 2: Oh, that's it.
Speaker 1: That's it?
Speaker 2: Yeah, as I'm saying--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --since it's one body.
Speaker 1: I'm sorry.
Speaker 2: See, there are eleven people.
Speaker 1: Oh.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Let's take a city like Los Angeles [California].  They've got nineteen or twenty people on the city council [Los Angeles City Council], and they have five people on their board of supervisors [County of Los Angeles Board of Supervisors].  But we have eleven for both, so and we only have one person.
Speaker 1: You must be going crazy.
Speaker 2: --Sophie Maxwell, yes.  Now they have gone back to districts.  When I first got elected, I got elected from a district.  And then the very next year, they went back to at-large because of the Dan White murders.  So that sent them back to at-large.  Now we're back to district, and I don't know where that's gonna stay.  I think it will probably stay there.  But when you look at it, it's gonna be, there are very few districts that black people can get elected from.  We can get elected from the Bayview-Hunters Point [San Francisco, California] community, maybe Western Addition [San Francisco, California], but not anymore.  Western Addition was always considerably a black seat but not now.  And--
Speaker 1: Is that a middle-class area or lower--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --middle class?
Speaker 2: Right.  You have a cross-section of people there, and yes, definitely middle class too.  But that no longer is going to be, oh, that's definitely a black seat.  At one time it was, not now.  And so I don't know if it'll ever have another black supervisor.  So the only place that you can count on is Bayview-Hunters Point, but not for long because they are now doing a lot of construction out there.  They are putting in the third, I mean the rail that's coming down Third Street that's gonna change that whole community.  There's a light rail there that's going to come down there, and they're building on that every day.  And what's gonna happen when that comes out there, all of those businesses around there are going to change and--
Speaker 1: Even a lot of the local businesses, mom and pop stores.
Speaker 2: Right, and they're gonna change.  And many of them will be mom and pop, but they will be mom and pop owned by other people, not black people.  So that's another neighborhood that we'll see slipping through our fingers.  That's why I'm working very hard for the seniors out there right now, so.
Speaker 1: You retired from the county assessor's office [San Francisco Office of the Assessor-Recorder] in 2003, but you're still very active in the city.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Are there any organizations you'd like to tell us about that you are working with?
Speaker 2: Well, as I was telling you about Black Women Organized for Political Action--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --I'm a member of the Bay PAC [ph.] communi- well, all those other black clubs--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --I'm a member of those groups.  And I, and some of the other groups I have remained active with, and I work with them.
Story_ID: 435050
Speaker 1: Something happened a few years ago that has changed your life.  You went to the doctor, and you discovered you had a medical problem.  Could you tell us about that?
Speaker 2: Yes, I discovered I had breast cancer.  I discovered that when I was at home at Christmastime in the bed.  And I was asleep, and I was sleeping like this, and I felt a huge lump.  And I said, "Oh, my God."  This is around Christmas.  And I said, "What is that?  Oh, that is something.  I don't know if that's, I don't know if that's malignant or not, but that is a tumor," I said.  So I immediately called Kaiser [Kaiser Permanente, Oakland, California], and I said, "Do I, you know, I just had a mammogram, and what does my mammogram show?"  And they looked, and they said, "Oh, it's fine; you know, it's negative."  And I said, "Well, I don't know, maybe so, but I, that I had felt a big lump."  And they said, "Well, come in when you get back."  And so as soon as I got back, I said, "I'm coming in, I'm coming back tomorrow."  As soon as I got back, I went in.  And I had another mammogram, and we found out that it was positive.  And so I said, oh, well, then I changed facilities, doctors, because I had lost my confidence.  And then, then I was told that I have a, you have breast cancer, and you can do, and we recommend that you have a lumpectomy.  And we recommend after that, that you do chemo and radiation.  You don't have to do either, but you will decrease your chances of that cancer returning.  If you do that, you will greatly increase your chances.  I said, "I want all of it, whatever it is," and so they did.  And I had one of the finest physicians in the United States, Dr. Laura Esserman.  She's a real comer.  I mean she's a real giant in the area.  So I did that.  I had both.  And I was the assessor, and I continued to work.
Story_ID: 435051
Speaker 1: You discovered you had a lump, and you were (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh yes, right.
Speaker 1: --you went to the doctor, and it was taken care of.
Speaker 2: Right, right.  And yet I continued to work.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Now I do definitely believe that you need to work to keep your mind off of things, to keep you positive and going forward.  If, however, you are not physically able to work, and many people aren't, then don't.  I'm not suggesting whatever, you gotta work, but I'm saying if you possibly can, if you possibly can, keep moving, keep working, keep thinking positively. Keep doing what you can for other people.  I truly believe that is so very important.  I believe that was very important to my recuperation.  And that's, and so I have had five years of--and I feel very proud about that.  And then when I eat something fat or whatever, 'cause I'm also a diabetic, and I eat some sweets and stuff, I said, "See, you're inviting that cancer back and making that diabetes worse, and God's not gonna like that."  But anyway, but I think it's so important.  Now just this weekend or last weekend, whatever--time flies so quickly--I was at a press conference where the woman who was responsible for this, she was fantastic.  She was, it was really directed toward the black community, but there were very few black people there, and which was so sad.  But what I heard, the content of it, it blew my mind.
Speaker 1: Oh.
Speaker 2: It's also 'cause I'm breast cancer--because as you know, this is breast cancer month.
Speaker 1: It's October, in case anybody else missed.  It's October, yes.
Speaker 2: Yes, yes, October.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, that's right, October is breast cancer month, all kind of walks, all kind of fundraising, and all of us need to get involved.  They were offering, she said, "Any woman that wants a mammogram can get a free mammogram, can get a free mastectomy if you need a mastectomy, can get a free reconstruction of your breast, every, can get free chemotherapy, can get free radiation."  That blew my mind--
Speaker 1: Really?
Speaker 2: --literally blew my mind.  I had never heard of people, because medicine is so expensive--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --so expensive, that the surgery, the reconstruction, everything is free, is free.
Speaker 1: I didn't know that.  Is this a federal program or (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) You know what?
Speaker 1: --a state program?
Speaker 2: I don't remember.  What did she say?  I'm not sure what it is, but it just, it blew me away.  It blew me away.  I said, "This is free?"  All of it's free, all of it.  There's no reason why women can't have mammograms, why they can't do everything.  There was a man there, and he said--oh, and, and we, had t-shirts, and he said, "May I take a t-shirt for me and for my wife?"  I said, "Yes, absolutely."  And so then he said, "And may I have some literature?"  And so the woman gave him some literature.  He said, "My wife has breast cancer, and but she, she may, but she won't go and see about it.  She is so, she's afraid, and she's afraid that if she does, she'll find out she may die."  I said, "I can tell you this, if she doesn't go, she will die.  So she's got to go and find out what she's gotten and that whole thing."  So he said, "I'll try."  I said, "Please, please, please try to get her to do it."  I said, "First of all, these people have told you everything is free, I mean, because medicine is so expensive, so expensive."  Every time I talk to my mother [Robbie Floyd] she's talking to me about what her medicines cost.  I know that it's very expensive.  You know, people here are having to choose between food and medicine.
Speaker 1: It's not right.
Speaker 2: That is not right.
Speaker 1: It's not right.
Speaker 2: And something needs to be done about that, and something can be done about that.  The kind of money that we have spent abroad without taking care of our own first is absolutely despicable and disgraceful.  This country is in a position to do anything it wants to make everything right for people.  After we saw what happened with Katrina [Hurricane Katrina], I have never been so proud of people who have come forward, and doing what they can do.  I mean, just people, you know, it makes you feel good that whatever they got they are willing to share and to put back.  And it's been just mindboggling, mindboggling.  But then when you look at the role of the federal government and state governments and local governments, that has been disgraceful, especially the federal government, disgraceful, disgraceful for FEMA [Federal Emergency Management Agency] to have kept people like that (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) That's right it was.
Speaker 2: Oh yes.
Story_ID: 435052
Speaker 1: You have done a lot in your life.  Is there anything else you'd like to tell us?
Speaker 2: Well, no, except that I want to keep on being positive, keep on helping people, keep on opening doors, keep on being a force that can help make changes.  Oh, I was about to tell you the one thing that I just keep talking about, and nobody seems to do anything about it.  I would like to try to do something about it, but I don't have the clout to get to the people I need.  We were talking about African American young people, and whatever because of the violence and because of all the stuff, all that needs to be turned around.  They need to be taken off of drugs.  This country is responsible for drugs as far as I'm concerned, 'cause if this country had wanted to shut that down (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) They could have done it a long time--
Speaker 2: --they could have shut it--
Speaker 1: --long time.
Speaker 2: --they could have shut it down.  They didn't do it.  And once people get a hold of drugs, I can understand this, and I've never had a drug in my life.  When I say a drug, I'm talking about--
Speaker 1: Illegal.
Speaker 2: Yeah, you know, cocaine or whatever.  So I don't know what it could do for you, but I truly believe, I truly believe that it gets you, and it just grabs you, and you can't let it go.  I mean, it, you can't put it down like cigarette or put it down like, like a drink, that it's really bad, and it's beyond you, and there's nothing you can do.  I mean, we've seen people get so violent they will kill their own family members to get money to get more drugs.  So that tells you how strong it is.  Anyway, I do think that something can be done, but I think that young people need somebody to help them see and to turn their lives around.  I don't think that I can do that, that you can do that.  I think it takes somebody that they look up to and they respect and they will listen to.  I think that my generation can do something; I think that your generation can do something, but we ain't gonna be the ones to say, "Hey, come listen to me," uh-uh.  But I think that the people who they do respect, the P. Diddys [Sean Combs] of the world, the Russell Simmonses [HistoryMaker Russell Simmons] of the world, these kind of people who have shown that they are interested, look at what they did, Will Smith, during the voting, you know, they got out there and tried to get the young people involved.  What I would like to do, I would like somebody who has the clout that they would listen to, I would like somebody who can organize those people.  See, I don't know those people.  Somebody like--well, see, I, okay, I know [HistoryMaker] Danny Glover, somebody like him to get those people, P. Diddys and people that they listen to, T, Ice T, and what's the other one's name?  Ice T and T something (laughter)--
Speaker 1: Well (laughter).
Speaker 2: --but whatever.  Okay, he's very popular, T--they both got ice, they both got T in--
Speaker 1: Ts in the--
Speaker 2: Yeah, anyway.
Speaker 1: Do you know, Scott [Scott Stearns]?
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  No, no.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yes, you do--
Speaker 1: We just don't know the name.
Speaker 2: Anyway, somebody needs to get them in a room and sit down with them and then get older people there, you know, to say look, we need you to carry the message.  They'll listen to you.  Get the young people together.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Get a program, so you go out here and say don't do this anymore, man.  Stop that drug, stop this, stop that, whatever.  I'm gonna help you get a job.  I'm gonna help you find the way.  I think they're the only ones can do it.
Speaker 1: Right, you're probably right.
Speaker 2: And I'm talking about it, but nobody does it.  You know, see, I can't get to 'em, but I'm just saying somebody--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --that can get to 'em.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: You know, I think Willie Brown [HistoryMaker Willie L. Brown], they would listen to him.  But if he could get some of those young guys with him and the young girls, you know, Jada Pinkett Smith and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Lil' Kim and all those--
Speaker 2: --yeah, Halle Berry and all those kind of folk, I think they could do it.  I think they could really start a movement.
Speaker 1: Well--
Speaker 2: But I don't know.
Speaker 1: --we'll have to get a fire under them.
Story_ID: 435053
Speaker 1: You've had this wonderful life and done lots of things.  Is there anything, when you look back on your life, that you would have done differently?
Speaker 2: I would have gotten my law degree.
Speaker 1: Your law degree?
Speaker 2: Yeah, that bothers me.  That's why I went and got a Ph.D., 'cause I missed that.  And I said, "I'm not gonna miss my, I'm not gonna miss everything.  I'm gonna get a Ph.D."  That's why I went to Cal [University of California, Berkeley, Berkeley, California] and got a Ph.D.  I would have done that differently.  And my married life, I think I would have done differently.  John [John Ward] was my best friend, but I'm not sure we should have been married.  Now I will say this about his blindness: his blindness was never anything that--it was the cause of our problems, with me and other women.
Speaker 1: Oh.
Speaker 2: But not the way you would think.  Well, he was blind, so you had to help, uh-uh.  You couldn't do anything for him (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah.
Speaker 2: --'cause he wouldn't let you.
Speaker 1: He was independent.
Speaker 2: But who wants to be when you get married and be by yourself?  You know, he was, I remember he got married, he came in one day.  And we, we were at Indiana University [Indiana University, Bloomington, Indiana], and we were in an apartment.  And he said, "Well, I'll see you."  I said, "Where are you going?"  "New York [New York]."  I said, "You're just telling me?"  "Well, I'm telling you."  But that's the way he did everything.  He packed his own bags.  I went to iron his shirts, no, I don't want you doing that.  I mean he did everything, everything for himself.  People don't get married to live like that--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --you do, go your way; I go my way.  And so then he said to me, "Doris [HistoryMaker Doris Ward], in order for me to get where I have, I've had to be super independent."  I said, "I understand, but we're not asking for that, you know."  So, we would possibly have done things differently.  What I've done, I don't know, but anyway.
Speaker 1: You had a long political career.  Is there anything you would have done (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh--
Speaker 1: --differently in politics?
Speaker 2: --yeah, let me tell you.
Speaker 1: Oh.
Speaker 2: I would have, I would have had children.
Speaker 1: Oh.
Speaker 2: John and I got pregnant and had a miscarriage.
Speaker 1: Oh, I see.
Speaker 2: And I kept thinking, when I get to California I'm gonna get married again.  I almost did, twice, but it didn't happen, 'cause then I said I'll have children.  But now I have a lot of, I mean I have nieces and nephews that I'm close to, and I've got friends' kids who I'm very close to.  But it, I still, I would like to have had my own, I really would.  So that's what I'd done differently--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --my kids and my law degree.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Story_ID: 435054
Speaker 1: You're a politician.  You were a politician.  You're a retired politician.  Every politician in the world has people who, you got your supporters, and you've got your people who were not your supporters.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: You had lots of supporters, right?
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: Can you just tell me about some of your supporters--
Speaker 2: Huh?
Speaker 1: --in your, in your political career.  You had lots of supporters, right--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --who were on your side.
Speaker 2: Yeah, that's how I got to be president of the board [San Francisco Board of Supervisors].
Speaker 1: Okay, right, right, okay.  And then you also had some, a few people who criti- (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Detractors.
Speaker 1: Detractors.
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.
Speaker 1: Can you tell us anything about them?
Speaker 2: Ooh, there's one I really would love to tell you about, but I have an agreement--
Speaker 1: Okay, you're not--
Speaker 2: --not to, but I really would.
Speaker 1: Well, okay.
Speaker 2: Right (laughter).
Speaker 1: You will stick your agreement then.  Okay, we understand.  You, a very young woman.
Speaker 2: Huh?
Speaker 1: You're still a very young woman.
Speaker 2: (Laughter) That's right, absolutely.
Speaker 1: You are very young.  It's in your--you have a very young attitude, and you've got this very positive--
Speaker 2: Attitude I have found is the best thing, 'cause my mother [Robbie Floyd], if you would talk to her, she is really--you would never know she's ninety-one.  She doesn't even sound that way, but her attitude is certainly young.  Many years ago, we were down in Florida.  She always took me to Florida after one of my races, to a spa.  And we were sitting there on the lawn, and she said--and there were a lot of older people, you know, that were coming down the walk.  And she sat there, and she said, "You know, there's nothing but toddlers here."  And she says, "I got my nerve, calling people toddlers (laughter)."
Speaker 1: Yeah, old people stuck at toddler (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So, look, I meant that she doesn't think of--she's ninety, but she doesn't think of herself as a ninety-one-year-old person.  She, she has a group of women that she plays cards with and have lunch with.  She calls them the golden girls.  And in fact, I'm working with the aging campers. She said, "Find another name for that aging campers."
Speaker 1: Age--
Speaker 2: Forget the aging.
Speaker 1: That's right, that's right.
Speaker 2: Yeah, so, I always say that age is nothing but a number.
Story_ID: 435055
Speaker 1: Are there any plans in your future, any things you'd like to do?
Speaker 2: Well, I'm, well, I'm toying with the idea of taking, of becoming an investment banker.
Speaker 1: Oh.
Speaker 2: But I gotta take an exam.  I was working with an investment banker and basically opened the doors for him.  That's what all elected officials do.  When they get out of office, then they open doors for people--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --like that, so, because they know 'em, and who got a vote on their projects.  And so, and you know, that's what we do.  But now, the SEC [U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission] says you can't do that anymore--
Speaker 1: Oh.
Speaker 2: --without having your own license.
Speaker 1: I see.
Speaker 2: So I'm thinking about, do I want to do that.  But after having gotten four degrees, I had said I thought I was never gonna do it again.  You know, I have a master's [degree], two master's, a B.A., and a Ph.D.  I said, "I'm through with that."  I don't know if I'm through with it now or not.
Speaker 1: Well, now you got time to--you can always learn something new.
Story_ID: 435056
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) You had something you wanted to share with us about your mother [Robbie Floyd].
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, just something I had written about her.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I just thought that since we're talking about her--
Speaker 1: Sure.
Speaker 2: --this will tell you about it.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And tell us what this, why you wrote this--
Speaker 2: Oh--
Speaker 1: --what this was for.
Speaker 2: --it's for her ninetieth birthday celebration.  And I was the emcee, and I had to, you know, basically talk about--well, you know how that is.
Speaker 1: This was, like, last year?
Speaker 2: Yes, last year, Robbie Floyd's birthday celebration, aggressive, focused and determined.  Robbie Floyd took the hand that was dealt her and turned it into economic and political opportunities that improved the quality of her life when there were a shortage of advantages for African Americans.  In the '40s [1940s], when less than 15 percent of black people, and especially black women, owned businesses, she and her father [Joseph Floyd] became entrepreneurs and opened a grocery store in the Central District [Gary, Indiana].  She also recognized that economic power was intertwined with political power and that having a voice at city hall was essential to African American progress.  Mayor Peter Mandich approached her and encouraged her to enter politics.  Thus, she became a precinct committeewoman twice, first in District 4 and later in District 5.  Both of these positions enabled her to serve her constituents in very real ways, by helping them to circumvent the bureaucracy of government and acquire the services they needed.  Later, Robbie worked as a personal secretary to city comptroller George Chacharis, and then the city comptroller, Johnny Visclosky, both of whom later became mayors of Gary [Indiana].  Robbie Floyd was the first African American woman to serve as a police officer for Lake County [Indiana] under Sheriff Mandich in breaking the glass ceiling.  She did so with distinction, dignity, honor, and dedication.
Speaker 1: Oh, that's wonderful.
Speaker 2: So, anyway, that basically tells you--
Speaker 1: Wonderful tribute (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) you know.
Speaker 1: --to your mother.
Story_ID: 435057
Speaker 1: How would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: Oh, for having made--opened doors and made opportunities for other people, that's what I would like to be best remembered for, for having played a positive role in their lives.  And oh, I got a story about a friend of mine, her daughter is a millionaire today, and she accredits me for having--
Speaker 1: Oh.
Speaker 2: --made her that millionaire.
Speaker 1: Oh, wonderful.
Speaker 2: Yes.  What happened was I had, I used to give youth conferences.  Oh, I was so proud of that.  That's when I worked with San Mateo County Office of Education.  I gave two.  I gave those conferences because it just occurred to me that--and they were in some of the finest schools down there on the peninsula, but they weren't learning a damn thing about the real world, right, what's really going on in the world.  So I said, "I need to get a conference so they can really understand."  And I have a lot of friends who were--(unclear)--admissions and all that kind of stuff.  And I said--and who were also fighters, and I said they need to understand, and so I had a conference that was called social change through--and then it would be through various--social change through government, social change through education, social change through religion.  And I was very proud of that.  And I got teachers from the districts to come together to plan the conference.  And my speaker, one of my speakers, my keynote speaker, my keynote speaker, was a black priest from New York, Larry--he recently died.  Sorry I didn't see him again, but Larry Lucas.  I knew him in Indianapolis [Indiana], and he was a real, real fighter.  And, and I have Larry to come out to keynote it, talk about social change through religion.  And I had it--Huey Newton was being tried, and Charles Garry, who was the very famous attorney, was his lawyer.  And I wanted Charles Garry to talk about social change through the criminal justice system, didn't want him talking about the Black Panthers [Black Panther Party], didn't want him talking about Huey, because kids romanticize that stuff.  And that was a time people were holding up hands saying black power.  I wanted to get away from that.  I wanted to say, "That's all well and good, but it doesn't mean a damn thing unless you put something out there that's concrete to make that happen," because people love cliches.  And when it's all over, what has happened?  Nothing, but you--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --just said black power.  So that's what I approach all my speakers about.  I'm not interested in romanticizing stuff.  I'm interested in getting down and talking about it.  I had Cesar Chavez's administrative assistant come to talk about social change through organization, 'cause Cesar Chavez has done a better job than anybody on that great boycott, so I wanted--
Speaker 1: That's right, Hispanic (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, so that's who, the kind of people I used.  And so, and then I used, and I used, you know, Asian people, Hispanics, everybody, you know, so they can bring their point of view.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: So, Larry Lucas came, and he was as I said, a priest.  When I met him he was a young priest, and he said that racism is in the Catholic church, and it's in their very bad, and it must be eradicated.  We gotta get it out.  He said, "I was born a Catholic.  I'm not a convert," he said, "and I'm gonna die a Catholic."  And he said, "And I'm a priest, and I'm gonna stay a priest."  And so when he gave his speech, he said, "I'm a priest.  I'm gonna stay a priest," he said, "but, and the reason I'm gonna do that is because I want to make change."
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: "And I cannot make change from the outside.  I must make change from the inside, so I'm gonna stay, I'm gonna stay in the priesthood, and I'm going to make change from the priesthood."  And everybody was so impressed.  And so he gave a fantastic speech, but I got in a lot of trouble for that because he told it like it was.  He said at that time people were spelling love, L-U-V.  He said, "I don't care how you spell it, L-O-V-E, L-U-V.  He said unless you really mean love, the rest doesn't matter."  And most of these young people, it doesn't really matter with you at--
Speaker 1: So that conference helped your friend to get (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, but, and there were a lot of superintendents there and folks that were there, and they were Catholics.  And they thought that Larry was gonna get up and talk about how wonderful the Catholic church was.  And he got up and called the Catholic church a racist institution, and it's gotta be eradicated, and I'm gonna help eradicate it.  I mean, they were blown away.  And then I, and I had some of the best speakers in the world.  They just took the kids and told 'em.  Charles Garry was over here.  He was supposed to be over in Oakland [California] with Huey Newton.  He said, "But, Doris [HistoryMaker Doris Ward], I'm gonna come and talk about the injustices of the criminal justice system."  I said, "Talk about that, Charles," and you know, and I said and all that.
Story_ID: 435058
Speaker 1: And kids were seated at all of my speakers' feet, I mean literally sitting on the ground, you know, listening to them and looking up at them because they were telling 'em so much stuff.  Dave Musavano [ph.] was one of my very, very best speakers.  He's dead now.  I'm so sorry.  He's a, he was a Ph.D. in poli sci [political science] from Cal [University of California, Berkeley, Berkeley, California], and he was just a fantastic man.  In fact, he, he taught me something he said a long time ago.  He said, young lady, when I first got in office.  He said, "You, every time you have a decision to make, you have two decisions to make: one as an African American and one as an American, because everything that is good for America is not good for African America."
Speaker 2: That's true.
Speaker 1: "So you gotta think about it from two perspectives.  Always think about that."  And I mean he just--and kids just were at his feet.  And she was there.  She was at a private school.  She was at Notre Dame [Notre Dame High School] in Belmont [California], and she asked me could her school come.  And I said, "Well, this is for public schools, but I'll tell you what, absolutely, because it's your school that's gonna be running the country."  You know, kids at private schools run the country.  So I want you to bring all those kids, so she did.  When it was over they were so blown away, they gave me a dinner, private--I mean a surprise dinner party to thank me for having educated them.  And I hear they were going to some of the best schools in the peninsula, but they didn't hear what these folks had told them.  They didn't hear how you have to organize people when Cesar Chavez was explaining to them how you do that.  Nobody was radical, nobody was, you know, trying to get 'em to go out here and break the law.  They were just trying to educate them and whatever.  I never got so many accolades from kids.
Speaker 2: Oh.
Speaker 1: The parents--I mean not the parents--the teachers went ballistic.  "Oh, that was awful.  That was awful, awful.  You told all those kids all those things."  I said yes.  It was the truth.  And so, as a result, she went on and she became a millionaire, got her record company--
Speaker 2: Oh.
Speaker 1: --called Gospel Records [sic. GospoCentric Records] down in L.A. [Los Angeles, California].  I had never heard of (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) What's her name?
Speaker 1: --Kirk Franklin.  Her name is Vicki Mack, but her husband is from the islands, and so it's Vicki Mack-Lataillade, or whatever.  But anyway, she got herself a gospel record company.  And Kirk Franklin, she made him, and he made her.  And I said to her, I said, she said--'cause I went down to see her.  I was shocked 'cause her mother said, "You gotta go see Vicki.  You gotta go see what she's doing."  And I went down there, and I couldn't believe it.  I said, "Oh, my God, Vicki you're kidding."  She said, "Oh, this is all because of you."  I said, "Because of me?"
Speaker 2: How wonderful (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) She said, "You know those conferences you gave?  I came to those conferences."  I said, "But I didn't say anything.  She said "Oh, I know you didn't."  She said, "You provided the people."
Speaker 2: That's wonderful.
Speaker 1: And I said, "I can't believe this.  I gotta get all those speakers to come down here and to see what they have wrought."
