Story_ID: 666663
Speaker 1: All right, my name is Larry Crowe.  I'm interviewer today with The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Matthew Hickey.  Ma'am, can you please state your full name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: Yes, I'm [HistoryMaker] Valerie Wilson Wesley and my--to spell it, it's V-A-L-E-R-I-E, W-I-L-S-O-N, W-E-S-L-E-Y.
Speaker 1: Okay and what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: November 22, 1947 and I was born in Willimantic, Connecticut.
Speaker 1: All right. Now, Can you spell that for us?
Speaker 2: Yes.  Willimantic is W-I-L-L-I-M-A-N-T-I-C, and Connecticut is C-O-N-N-E-C-T-I-C-U-T.
Speaker 1: Okay and what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: I'm a writer.
Speaker 1: All right.  And what is today's date?
Speaker 2: June--March 30th, twenty- 2017--
Speaker 1: Right and, and we're--
Speaker 2: --for a minute I couldn't remember.
Speaker 1: Okay.  People always get stumped on that one.
Speaker 2: Really, that's good to know.
Speaker 1: Each time, even young people say nineteen first before they, they say, "Oh--."
Speaker 2: Yeah well.
Speaker 1: --but it's--and where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: In my home in New Jersey.
Speaker 1: In Montclair?
Speaker 2: Montclair, New Jersey.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.
Story_ID: 666664
Speaker 1: Before we go into depth, there are five lightweight questions we always ask as kind of a warm up and they only require a short answer.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: First one is do you have a favorite food?
Speaker 2: I have many favorite foods.  It's hard to pinpoint one 'cause there frankly are so many.  Do I have to pinpoint one?
Speaker 1: You don't have to, so you can just say--
Speaker 2: I won't.
Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: A couple.  I like purple, maroon, dark colors like that.  I also like turquoise--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --and several you know earth colors I guess I would say.
Speaker 1: All right and do you have a favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Fall and spring.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: A couple.  I love the Caribbean you know.  I--again you discover new things wherever you go so it's not just one place.  It's not--it's what you would love to do.  I love spending time with my husband [HistoryMaker Richard Wesley] when we travel.  That's the most fun for me is just spending time with him and really just discovering things and, and going places.  You know we've been a lot of places.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Singapore I hated.
Speaker 1: All right (laughter).  That's one you don't like?
Speaker 2: Quick, easy answer: Singapore.
Speaker 1: All right.  The last question is: do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: Oh what would that be?  I suppose, "Life goes on," maybe.  "There's always tomorrow."
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.
Speaker 2: Several you know.  "Don't take things too seriously." Try to have a sense of doing something kind every day, and called a random act of kindness I think that's important.  And just to understand your blessings and be grateful for all that you have, a sense of gratitude for each day.  Those are things that I try to remember in the, in the midst of living.
Story_ID: 666665
Speaker 1: Now I'm gonna ask you about your family history.  I'm gonna ask you about your mother's side of the family and your father's side and we'll start with your mother's side.  Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: My mother's name is--well she's passed away, is Mary Spurlock Wilson, M-A-R-Y, S-P-U-R-L-O-C-K, Wilson, W-I-L-S-O-N.
Speaker 1: All right and what is her date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: She was born October 23rd in I think maybe 1923, I think.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, October of 1923.
Speaker 1: Okay and where was she born?
Speaker 2: In Salem, Virginia.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now what can you tell us about your mother's side of the family.  How far back can you trace them and what are the stories about them?  Do they go all the way back to--?
Speaker 2: Well, it was a very closely knit family and it was a family of lot of pride, very well mixed with Native, lot of Native American roots within the family, also European roots.  There were--some of them were able to pass if they wanted to.  They didn't as far as I know.  But there was a range--kind of a wide a range of color in my mother's family.  My aunts, several had blue eyes.  Some were very brown, very dark skinned.  It really was varied you know.  But it was a family kind of different, different looks.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I guess that would be how you define them.  And very much, very, very close.  I mean there would be--when they moved to Connecticut which, well not my mother after she married my father [Bertram Wilson], it was, they were very--they all kind of moved together so I had uncles and aunts there and, and so I wasn't really isolated.
Speaker 1: Now what did they do in Virginia?
Speaker 2: My father--my grandfather [Preston Spurlock] was worked on the trains I think and he was a conductor and let me see.  I don't know too much about him.  I think my grandmother [Laura Spurlock] was basically a homemaker on my mother's side.  She had like eighteen kids you know so I guess that's what she did.  I think it was eighteen, maybe it was fifteen.  It was a lot of kids and, and still two died in infancy, one I think was my mother's, where one was I think died at thirteen years old.  My mother was very close to Louise [ph.]--and that I think is so they were it's hard to really because I grew up in a different place and I have images certainly of of Salem, Virginia, which always very positive, but it was--I don't know too much about the details.  When you're a child you tend not to know those things.
Speaker 1: Did your mother talk about growing up?
Speaker 2: Not too much, well just the family mainly.  We talked about the family.  How close they were.  There are family stories.  And of course I can't recall any I need to share except that there was a sense of goodwill in my mother's family.  Sense of always being there for each other more than anything else there was a real sense of of joy, in, in those family bonds and, and I think what's amazing is that we run into people who didn't have that.  It's always amazing--surprising because so many people didn't and they weren't certainly weren't wealthy people but they were, they had a home and they owned property small so that would make them wealthy I guess but they owned their home and but I think a lot of that too was the fact that they worked so in terms of colorism played a part in the family.  I mean it's--I think that always does in black families and because it was such a variety in my mother's family I think that they were able to have access that many people may not have, many other black people may not have had access as they did you know working and that kind of thing.  So therefore they were able to have a certain amount of you know with fourteen kids--eighteen kids.  Was it eighteen, I'm not sure?  I could count them all but I don't want to (laughter).  They did have that kind of access.  They weren't ever really poor.
Story_ID: 666666
Speaker 1: Okay now did your mother [Mary Spurlock Wilson] go to college?
Speaker 2: Yes, she did.  She went to West Virginia State [West Virginia State College; West Virginia State University, Institute, West Virginia]--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --but she dropped out during the war [World War II, WWII] right, because they were--and moved to Washington, D.C. and that's where she finally went back, when she got to Connecticut, and went and got her degree.  This was many, many, many years later. And I was grown by then.
Speaker 1: Now what did your mother--what were her talents and what was she interested in?
Speaker 2: She was a secretary.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: She was very good at it you know, and my mother was a very--as I think about her now I realize I get a lot of my organizational skills from her.  She's very disciplined in that way and I think very often in women that's overlooked the ability to to do things quickly and to be organized and to do lots of different things, multitask which she did very well, which I do.  I can see my daughter, my oldest daughter [Thembi Wesley] now is great for that and I think that's what one of the things, she was an organizer.  I think maybe under different circumstances she would have been maybe a CEO somewhere but she was a secretary and very proud of being a secretary but she didn't like the idea when computers came in.  That's when she left and retired, but I think that she was you know and she could fix things.  My mother could fix things.  She could fix anything, toys and when we would come for Christmas she would be able to fix toys very quickly and she was a very good cook but also kind of downplay her skills a lot and you know as many women I think of that generation did, a sense of not wanting to be too outspoken.  My father [Bertram Wilson] was the star of the family.
Story_ID: 666667
Speaker 1: Can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: My father was Bertram Wadsworth Wilson [Bertram Wilson], B-E-R-T-R-A-M, Wadsworth, W-A-D-S-W-O-R-T-H, named after the poet [Henry Wadsworth Longfellow], Wilson, W-I-L-S-O-N.
Speaker 1: And what is his date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: Daddy was born September 21st I think, 19--1920 I guess, 1920.
Speaker 1: And where?
Speaker 2: Salem, Virginia.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Salem, Virginia, okay.  Where is Salem, Virginia? Since it's--
Speaker 2: It's I guess maybe eastern Virginia.  It's not, it's not--I'm not exactly sure but it's near Roanoke [Virginia].  It's, it's a large city (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay so it's near the coast [East Coast]?
Speaker 2: On the coast it's very, yes, Roanoke is the city it's closest to it.
Speaker 1: Richmond [Virginia] I guess would be--
Speaker 2: I think Richmond is a little farther yes.
Speaker 1: --Jamestown [Virginia], and all that?
Speaker 2: Roanoke, that was the big city that was only about ten miles away from Salem.  It's a small city, a small town.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now once again, what can you tell us about the Wilsons, about your father's side?
Speaker 2: My father's family were all educators.  My, my great-great aunt was one of I think one of the first women graduates of Hampton Institute [Hampton Normal and Agricultural Institute; Hampton University, Hampton, Virginia].  And education and books and writing and music, they were also musicians, was very, very important to them.  He was--daddy was, my father was very, very proud of his family as he should have been.  But also it's strange because his parents were divorced and he was, but he was, that was the main thing in my father's family was books, education, learning was absolutely crucial and that was how you got ahead.  That was how you were able to achieve.  And I think because he didn't have any sons that, that was the gift he gave me and my sister [Patricia Wilson-Coker] too, who's also a lawyer.
Speaker 1: Okay what did his parents do for a living?
Speaker 2: One father--my grandmother was a registered nurse and one of the few and she always signed her name Carmen G. Wilson [ph.], RN [registered nurse], which was no small thing to be back in the '20s [1920s].
Speaker 1: Absolutely.  You mean even today. Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 2: Even today no and she was and she was good I mean she--and his father was a, I'm not sure, I think he was either a professor or assistant, something at, at a school in but they were not--I'm not sure exactly what he did.  He lost, we kind of lost contact with them when they divorced.  They were in education. Yeah.
Speaker 1: Was he at one of the HBCUs [historically black colleges and universities]?
Speaker 2: Yeah they both went, yeah but I think he was, I'm not sure where my grandfather--too much about him because he was--my father was always very angry at him after--with the divorce, but I know my mother, my grandmother I knew her much better and he, but because of the divorce they kind of separated which was not something that often happened in those days but he still kept in contact with his other members of his family, like his uncle was--he was very close to his uncle and--Othello, his name is Othello Wilson [ph.] and he was a musician and and I think one of his--did he have another uncle (unclear), but anyway I think that he so that part of the family was, was not known as well to me.
Speaker 1: Do you know what kind of music Uncle Wilson--
Speaker 2: I think they were choral music more than anything else.  I think he had composed, did some composing.  'Cause it was along with education and books, music was another thing but that was very, very important to my father's family and I was supposed to be a pianist and that was you know I love music and I you know I think sometimes if I could play--and I used to play not as much anymore but if--even more than writing it's, it's was essential to me as a child, was playing the piano.
Story_ID: 666668
Speaker 1: Did your parents [Mary Spurlock Wilson and Bertram Wilson] get married before the war [World War II, WWII] or before worl- (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right during the war.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Af- right around the war.  I think before he went to war I think--
Speaker 1: Before he went to--
Speaker 2: I'm not sure.
Speaker 1: So is there a story about how they met?
Speaker 2: They met, well they had known each other as kids.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And then they met again in Washington [D.C.].  Daddy was a Tuskegee Airman and so they were, all kind of stayed in touch there but that's where they got in touch.
Speaker 1: Okay so they knew each other--
Speaker 2: They knew each other before but they knew each other from Salem [Virginia] (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) They kind of fell in love in D.C.?
Speaker 2: Well they kind of--I'm not exactly--you kind of got together again in, in D.C. and then when they got married gee, I was born--maybe 1944, 1945 around then.
Story_ID: 666669
Speaker 1: Now your father [Bertram Wilson] went on to become a Tuskegee Airman.  Is there a story about that? How he, how he--
Speaker 2: He always liked, he always wanted to fly when he was a little boy.  He always loved airplanes and he of course was told that he couldn't and he indeed become a Tuskegee Airman.  And I think so many of--for our parents so many things were you know they shared and they didn't share which was often happened with parents but I know he--really until he passed away that I really understood how highly decorated he was.  He didn't talk much about the war [World War II, WWII] and because I think we were girls and not boys it wasn't something he really dwelled on.  (Unclear) him with my husband, who he was very close to, Richard [HistoryMaker Richard Wesley] knew all about the Tuskegee Airman, much more than I did and he also just really they would talk about it which was interesting you know I kind of there was again a certain chauvinism with, with men of that generation.
Speaker 1: So how highly decorated was he?
Speaker 2: Again, well he had the distinguished flyer, which is DFC, Distinguished Flying Cross, just I think that someone told me I mean lots of medals.  And to the point where he had to my embarrassment, when they had a big celebration in Ashford [Connecticut] the time we ended up living in Connecticut.  One of the townsmen said, "You know, that's just below a Medal of Honor, it's just about two steps, it's a really major award--honor," and we still have it of course upstairs and but he didn't really talk about it too much.  I think in the war and it's just something that men who really fought it and really didn't talk about it.  They just came home and they started their lives again and they worked.
Speaker 1: So, did he serve in Italy?
Speaker 2: Yes, he did.  One time he talked about it.  Daddy used to say he fought for the war in cherry, cherry brandy and gin and he was--there was a person over there rooftop who he talked about.  He did have war stories a little bit.  He talked when I went to Germany on my first book tour, I went to lots of different cities and (unclear) some of them and daddy would say, "We bombed the hell out of that, bombed the hell out of that."  He can remember the wars.  Dad, you know.  He just--I think in terms of sharing war stories, 'cause I didn't mention that in the book tour.  He would, he was very--he didn't talk a lot about it.  I think it was just scars you didn't talk about, losing people you know.  I think to have been very young had to be twenty-one, twenty-one can you imagine fighting a war?  As he said fighting the war in cherry brandy and gin, in Italy you know that theatre and I guess certainly and of course the--they were incredible pilots and just incredible pilots but it's we didn't--he didn't talk oddly enough about it at all.  Perhaps if we had been boys he would have but.
Speaker 1: Yeah, my sister says the same thing about our father wouldn't talk about the war to them--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --but I don't--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah and I guess it was just you came back and started life again and you started doing the things that's what you do.  If you were to ask my husband about my father's war experience he would have more, he would know much, much more which is, you know, a little sad but he, he tells me stuff sometimes.  "Your father said--."
Story_ID: 666670
Speaker 1: At any rate so but he, he spent his career in the [U.S.] military (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) In the [U.S.] Army [U.S. Army Air Force; U.S. Air Force].
Speaker 1: In the Army, right.
Speaker 2: He retired as a lieutenant colonel--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --and is in Arlington [Arlington National Cemetery, Arlington, Virginia]. And you know went on from there to work at the University of Connecticut [Storrs, Connecticut] in, I think as in the I think at, oh I forget, one of the departments as employing people I guess--recruiting people.  And he then retired from that and kind of just took it easy, traveled.  He always loved cars.  He drove a Porsche for years and years and years, he was very proud of.  And he was, my father was a real kind of a bon vivant.  I mean women adored him.  He was a good cook, a marvelous cook, he was a gourmet cook.  Very proud of that and I adored my father.  My father adored me but as I get older I can, you know, I can see the flaws but you know he died, he drowned suddenly in, in the pool. I guess he had a pool, you know a pool, in Connecticut.  Daddy had always loved luxury you know.  He had a pool but, and that was sad for me.  God how long ago did Daddy die?  Seven years ago.  But he--that's you know was just a shock, but as someone, a good friend, [HistoryMaker] Bebe Moore Campbell who is another writer, a screen writer said, "Well you know he died at home in his own pool doing what he wanted to do." And she called just to offer her condolences.  She was absolutely right.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And that was when after we say had all those things in town [Ashford, Connecticut], memorial, there were lots of write ups in the paper about him because he was a very distinguished Tuskegee Airman and the older these guys get, the more we treasure them.
Speaker 1: Right, right, I think there are only a couple left.  Yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah, so funny Roscoe Brown [HistoryMaker Roscoe C. Brown] who is one, and he saw me.  I look like my father.  If you see my father that was always as a child, "Oh you're Bert's kid."  I was an adult, I mean in my forties and happened to run into him at a big something with Richard [Wesley's husband, HistoryMaker Richard Wesley] and I went to a celebration at college [Howard University, Washington, D.C.] and he took one look at me and said, "You're Bert Wilson's [Bertram Wilson] daughter aren't you?"  So that was how strong the resemblance was and something I was proud of as a child.  I look like my father, you know but I also look like my mother [Mary Spurlock Wilson] in a funny kind--you know you don't children, parents I, I was my father's favorite I think and like that has it that's good and it's bad.  It holds an expectation and it holds because if you could fall into favor you can fall out of favor and that's why you never have favorites as parents.  But Daddy because he was a bit of narcissist and because I looked so much like him and just I think that's probably the reason.
Story_ID: 666671
Speaker 1: That leads to my next question.  I always ask this.  When, when you think about your parents' attitudes, their sense of humor, how they walk, how they talk, what they look like, who do you think you take after the most?
Speaker 2: I have picked, after my father I think, but I'm, the older I get the more I find my mother [Mary Spurlock Wilson] within me and the more--in so many ways my husband, kinder, kind of like my mother was kind.  My father was could be real awful sometimes.  He could be and so many men of that generation, but my mother was a much more gentle soul and a much more loving soul and I think I married my mother in terms of spirit and I'm sure if I married a man like my father, I wouldn't be married.  But it's I think that that's the difference.  So the older I get the more I find my mother within me and the more you know gestures sometimes I will look at a picture and I'll say I look like my mother not my father and it's something in, in the eyes and it's very strange.
Speaker 1: It is really you know that people can look like two different people.
Speaker 2: Two different people and people do and I--and Richard [HistoryMaker Richard Wesley] said, "You look like your mom," but I always, because I've always been told for so many years you are your father's child you know.  "You look like him, you're Bert's [Bertram Wilson] daughter you know," and that and that sets it up in a way I think that can be unfortunate for children but as I said I adored my father and we always were, were close but, but the older I got and the more as a mother and as a wife, I said, "Well daddy had some major flaws there."
Story_ID: 666672
Speaker 1: Let me ask you this.  Now you have one sister, right?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Yeah tell us about her, now she's--are you the oldest, or is she?
Speaker 2: I'm the oldest.
Speaker 1: You're the oldest.
Speaker 2: Pat's [Patricia Wilson-Coker] an amazing achiever.  She's a lawyer, she was a social worker, she was head of the department of human services [sic. Connecticut Department of Social Services].  She's just been an extraordinary things, and again just a lovely woman and also a gentle woman, a very sweet woman.  So the family, achievement was just very pushed in our family I mean you were supposed to achieve and you know we did what we could.
Story_ID: 666673
Speaker 1: So we're talking about your sister [Patricia Wilson-Coker] and I guess I should ask you, do you have an earliest childhood memory?  First thing that you remember or very first event or almost the first event?
Speaker 2: One of the things, well I remember apparently I was a child with--who had tantrums pulling my hair and whatnot.  I was little, kind of for some reason I don't have--my family, "Oh you were a bad little girl, you were--."  Not, probably because I was, as I know now from having studied early childhood that two and a half is the worst time to space a child because the youngest, oldest child is not yet really independent and the youngest child is there taking the mother's time.  So I think that that's what happened and I think I was always vying for attention.  And in terms of, oddly enough one of them is with my father [Bertram Wilson] when, and this is some- something that he said that I always take with me and I think that for the longest time, I had--I was in kindergarten or pre-K and it was in the base [U.S. military base], it was near the base.  We were in--oh anyway somewhere in, at a base and I was in nursery school and I remember that I wanted chocolate milk, everyone else wanted regular milk.  And so I had gotten--so I told my father I had gotten the regular milk, white milk like everybody else and he said, "Never be afraid to be different."  He said, "Always, never be afraid to be different." And he said, "You should have gotten what you wanted." You know, I do remember that and so that was important to him you know to, to step out, to take chances.
Story_ID: 666674
Speaker 1: And he was a fast driver.  I think about, you know I would often say I would follow him, "Is he trying to kill me" (laughter), you know, "in this damn car?"  Driving his Porsche like a, you know a race car.  He was very daring guy.  He would have to be, I think to have stepped forward into the calm and to the chances that he took.  I think he had there's a picture of him upstairs with, which--where has all of like twenty kills on the you know on the airplane.  They have the crosses and stuff or the, you know.  And he, he was quite you know the Distinguished Flying Cross was one, Medal of Honor I think--not Medal of Honor, service medal [Armed Forces Service Medal].  All sorts of things like that.  I don't know all the names but air medal, just things that really distinguished him as a pilot, taking chances you know that's what you do, very daring guy and therefore he--that was what he passed on.  I guess if he had sons I don't know he probably would have given his son that.
Speaker 2: He saw like the U.S. military change, from a segregated army--
Speaker 1: Yes, he did.  He was one of that he was that--
Speaker 2: He saw the whole change--
Speaker 1: The whole change.
Speaker 2: --and retired in a different--
Speaker 1: Different world.  Daddy [Bertram Wilson] was in--what was really nearly destroyed him though was Vietnam 'cause then he was a base commander and he was in Dong Ha [Dong Ha Combat Base, Vietnam] and he would say--and I was at college at that time.  I was at Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.].  Of course I was one of the protestors in the war and when he came home from Vietnam he, and he still, and for years he kept in touch with some of the men who were in his unit.  Because he was the one who would have to write the letters to the parents to say when somebody was killed.  To sit down and to write and to look after these boys, these kids and even friends, contemporaries of ours who were in the war and many people weren't because they were students, but we have a close friend who was and he and my father kind of bonded and because of the war in Vietnam. Daddy as a, as a commander in the war and he was commander for base.  He used to tell how he would, whenever they knew the base was gonna be attacked they'd look up and all of the maids were gone 'cause that would, they would warn them.  They would call and say, "Get out, we're gonna bomb that base," and but the longest time, they came back. He used to hunt.  He would never hunt again and he, he just never did.  Didn't want any guns.  And he also, firecrackers which are terrifying.  Not terrifying but he would just he couldn't stand the sound of them so the 4th of July he would just he was completely freaked out about that.
Speaker 2: I know people have often speculated, well have thought the Vietnam War was different kind of than World War II [WWII]--
Speaker 1: That's what they said.
Speaker 2: --we knew we were on the right side of everything and a whole different thing.
Speaker 1: That's what he said.  He, he it was a different war for him.  And by then he had a daughter who was the same age as the boys who were over there fighting.  It was a war, it was class war to a certain extent.  It was (unclear) sent here because rich kids went to college.  George Bush [President George Walker Bush], and that fool that is now in the White House [President Donald John Trump]--I shouldn't say that.  It didn't, with his fifth, you know five deferments for his foot you know just to send people to war and nobody went that was in college.  But there were kids who went and whose (unclear)--and they came back devastated and Daddy saw that.  So he was you know that was a difficult war for him.
Story_ID: 666675
Speaker 1: Okay so when, you grew up in a number of different places but in basically [U.S.] military reservations that (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I grew up, yeah in, on bases but basically in Connecticut for a large number of years and then my father [Bertram Wilson] was shipped, not shipped but I guess shipped, not shipped--I guess shipped.  We call it shipped, he was stationed that's what they call it.
Speaker 1: Where were you living when you started school?
Speaker 2: In Connecticut.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I was the only black child in a predominantly white school which was a nightmare and still I think race continues to be something in terms of just understanding it and it's one of the things that I have to, you know the things that come from, from being the only black child in a white environment.  I think it was really important when I went to Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.], to an all-black school [HBCU] because that was really I think crucial to me to have been there during the '60s [1960s] to really understand and be able to put what racism and American racism is.
Speaker 1: Now did you grow up in the same town in Connecticut? You know--
Speaker 2: Yeah Ashford, which was near the University of Connecticut.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And Storrs [Connecticut] is where the university--
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: My mother [Mary Spurlock Wilson] worked in Storrs, too.
Speaker 1: What was the name of your school?
Speaker 2: Ashford elementary [Ashford School, Ashford, Connecticut].
Speaker 1: Ashford elementary, okay.
Speaker 2: And but on the other hand there were good things there.  I had a marvelous teacher who first recognized me as a writer, Mrs. Curran [ph.], eighth grade teacher who encouraged me to write and to read.
Speaker 1: Now what did you, what did you first write about?  And how old were you when you started writing?
Speaker 2: I won a writing contest in eighth grade, seventh or eighth grade, on Lincoln [President Abraham Lincoln] of all things.  And it was a state writing contest and I think it was I won it or got all--something big because the school was excited with the state.  Was it second place I don't--it was major, in was in the newspaper.  I gotta check you know and everything.  And that was you know a big deal.  I think that's the first time I realized I can make money from this.
Speaker 1: Okay well before that--
Speaker 2: Raise money.
Speaker 1: --we have a note here somewhere about how important a library was to you.
Speaker 2: Oh yes.  I did a--yeah it was.
Speaker 1: So let's talk about the library.
Speaker 2: Oh I went over time and the librarian was another very important person in my life.  I can still see her, now that I think about it.  Now the library was very important.  It was the Ashford public library [Babcock Library, Ashford, Connecticut]--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --and it was just really I would go there.  I would just read voraciously.  I read.  I loved Agatha Christie.  I loved Edgar Allan Poe.  I mean I devoured books.  Because again, I wasn't particularly social.  I mean I was social I mean I was (mumbles)--but my father was a reader and that's important but mainly it was just reading.  I just loved to read.  I've always loved to read.
Story_ID: 666676
Speaker 1: Okay now this is the environment, the neighborhood that you grew up in [in Ashford, Connecticut]--
Speaker 2: It's very rural.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Was rural, it wasn't suburban.
Speaker 1: And, and your, your father [Bertram Wilson] had like fourteen acres of land or?
Speaker 2: Yes, yeah, we had a lot of acres but we didn't, it was you know we lived in, it was community.  But it's--but all of that area is rural.  I mean it's not suburban.
Speaker 1: Okay. So you didn't have any, you know you can, I mean you couldn't see your neighbors coming in and out of their house?
Speaker 2: No, right exactly.  So it's but it was no it's like it's a rural area.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But it's, our family was in Willimantic [Connecticut], which was a close, a town that was very, very close by and that was our uncles, two uncles, three uncles so that was also a larger black community there.
Speaker 1: Okay so--
Speaker 2: So it wasn't completely isolated.  But my father always worked in, at various bases [U.S. military bases] in the area so he would come home on the weekends, but it was, but I read constantly you know.  I read.  And my cousin who lived in Willimantic and I would share books.  I think my Aunt Wadessa [ph.] was extremely important to me.  She loved to read and my mother's [Mary Spurlock Wilson] best friend and really started us on we were reading modern romances once, my cousin and me.  She said, "You want to read something good?" And she gave us 'Jane Eyre' [Charlotte Bronte].  That's the kind of woman she was.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: "You wanna read a real book? Here try, try the (unclear)--," and then you fell in love with books, really, really good books.  (Unclear) too is now an administrator and a college professor.  She went on to Barnard [Barnard College, New York, New York] and got a Ph.D. from another school but it's very, again education books has always been important in the family.
Story_ID: 666677
Speaker 1: Were there any other black students in the school [Ashford School, Ashford, Connecticut] here as you, as you go on (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No I was the only one with my, my sister [Patricia Wilson-Coker].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And it was really I think it was one of the things you never want to put a child through particularly in that period of time.  And one of the reasons we selected a town like this [Willimantic, Connecticut] was we, you know you want good schools, but you don't ever want them to be, you know, the only black child in the school. But the reality is that things have changed and even in towns it's not--it wasn't like it was in the '50s [1950s].  It took me I think you're still working on I mean awful things happened to me as a child that were related to race.
Speaker 1: Well like I mean we know that this is not, I mean just because the school is integrated--
Speaker 2: Yea, no absolutely.
Speaker 1: --it doesn't mean everybody's changed.
Speaker 2: No, no you're right.
Speaker 1: So I--
Speaker 2: There's still a gap, for example, in this school.
Speaker 1: In the community even where your father [Bertram Wilson] bought the fourteen acres there were people that wanted him out, right?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, they were, what happened we found out later was that the way it was set up with the G.I. Bill [Servicemen's Readjustment Act of 1944] was, you couldn't buy certain places.  They redlined certain--and the only place that he could buy was in an area like that.  In other words if you look at the way the G.I. Bill was set up during that period and that's what they used as the basis, you had to get, in order to get a loan from the bank, I'm not sure of all the facts but you had to buy certain areas and most of those areas and areas like Ashford [Connecticut] and that's why people were there and he had to get somebody who was a loan or sell it to him and as it ended up there was a really nice guy who basically sold it for him very, very cheap.
Speaker 1: Some communities have restricted covenants.  I know areas like Chicago [Illinois] and other big cities that they the house or the contract for the house actually said you cannot sell it to a colored person or a Jew.
Speaker 2: Yeah, so these were things that he was dealing with and that's why he ended up I think in Ashford was because, and it's because he had and actually I think he did at one point have family in Connecticut before even Virginia, but I, I'm not sure.  I'd have to really do a family history to find that out.  But so it was that's why he ended up in Connecticut.  And he liked Connecticut.  I mean it was--it has a certain it's--it was a, it's always, it wasn't the South and so that was another reason he liked it.  But as a child I don't remember being there was one or two little boys who you know always called me names but and basically they were kids you know.  You had as children once you get over the initial thing of color and kind of like there wasn't a class thing so much, it was everyone was pretty much.  It was a small; it's a one room school, one class per school so we were one class of first graders, one class of eighth graders, one so you were in a class.  And there's something to be said to that.
Speaker 1: So the same group of people basically--
Speaker 2: Start you in first grade--
Speaker 1: --stayed with you all the way up.
Speaker 2: --all the way through so by the time you graduate you have friends.  Now you don't necessarily have those friends forever but as children as people and you do and so that was all.  That was so it wasn't the worst thing that could happen.
Speaker 1: Well you said some awful things happened to you--
Speaker 2: Well I mean I remembered children's you know names and I remember there's one little boy who used to sharpen his pencil and poke me with it.  Really awful but mean.  But children can be very mean.  And those are the things that I think are--were awful but I like I said I remember I have friends too and so you always have other kids who are there for you and there's my cousin Carla [ph.] who we were always.  She was in a similar situation and so we were just in that way the family was very close.  It was very important to have family there with you so that was, that was really essential.
Speaker 1: Okay so your social time growing up is spent with your family basically, yeah.
Speaker 2: Family always family (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: Always family. My mother's [Mary Spurlock Wilson] family and because they were there so.  And that was, that was essential.
Story_ID: 666678
Speaker 1: Reading I know you had like, I saw when you read 'Bulfinch's Mythology' [Thomas Bulfinch] which is something I loved when I was a kid (unclear) (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, yes I did as a matter of fact.
Speaker 1: And yeah.
Speaker 2: You never know what's out there (unclear) (laughter).  Yea, I did.  I was fascinated with mythology and yeah, and yeah I read everything I could get my hands on.
Speaker 1: Now what about radio, TV that sort of thing?  Was that a big part?
Speaker 2: It wasn't you know.  I stopped watching television when I went to, when my father [Bertram Wilson] was stationed in Madrid, in Spain.  I must have been a freshmen I guess, high school--sophomore. And I really because we were up and for the next four years I was in Spain for three--two years and then in Germany and you because this was a different language--
Speaker 1: So you grew up in Connecticut, but the final four years of school, high school, you were in Europe?
Speaker 2: In, in Spain first and then in, in Europe and you did some work and I read then.  I mean then I got more sophisticated reading Hemingway [Ernest Hemingway], F. Scott Fitzgerald and really a lot of poetry.  Really began to write more and, as a high schooler, and to the point where I came back to the states to go to college, I wasn't even sure who The Supremes were because I was so out of the media.  It was like you just, that was what you did and I think living in Europe during that period I became fluid in Spanish but it was but I've lost it now unfortunately but it really opened up a whole new world and you really focused on your work and I've never been a big TV person you know.  Now I just get bored.  I mean there are some things I watch but it's you know it's boring ultimately to me.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  Now in terms of, I know you read a lot of black history now--
Speaker 2: History yeah, that's my interest yeah.
Speaker 1: --but in those days did you get any instruction on black history or (unclear)?
Speaker 2: Not really.  I think it was only to be, to be at Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.] during, during the '60s [1960s] I was there '60 [1960], I was supposed to graduate--
Speaker 1: Well, I didn't wanna get you there yet.
Speaker 2: Oh, okay.
Speaker 1: We're trying to get you through high school so--
Speaker 2: High school, not really.
Story_ID: 666679
Speaker 1: Not really it was just basic- (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Was it a shock going to Spain?
Speaker 1: Well you know, another thing (unclear)--
Speaker 2: Or was it just an extension of the [U.S. military] base environment?
Speaker 1: To some extent except we lived on what they called on the economy which meant we lived in a base, base housing but it was, it was outside of Madrid [Spain].  Madrid was a revelation.  I loved it.  And when I went there recently I felt like I was in a sense going home.  I knew all the subway stops and I, it's just I loved Madrid and I think part of it was that it was, color did not have, because of the Moorish influence in Madrid, they didn't have the same kind of issues that they did. Only America has the kind of issues that we had.  I mean they're variations of racism certainly but the kind of deep seated racial or white supremacy racists that we have in this country is unique to America because of slavery, American slavery.  But I think that in Spain for example, I would pick (speaking Spanish) paramo, it means Moor.  It comes from Moor basically and it's dark and that was--its considered not an insult, it's considered you're paramo but it's not a bad word and to be that as opposed to another word.  And so that, that was like a turnaround in a way to be in Madrid and then of course I used to go to the--I used to sometimes skip school and 'cause you can you know go to the Prado [Museo Nacional del Prado, Madrid, Spain].  You know I would go down in the base housing and instead of getting on the bus I would sneak out and take the train to the Prado.
Speaker 2: Like the national museum, yeah, Prado.
Speaker 1: Yeah Prado was like the major museum in Madrid.  It's extraordinary.  But I would spend the day at the Prado and it was just as a kid you know it was during the winter so probably anybody was there.  And it was just to walk in that it was like the (unclear) walked the museum and just I think I really developed a love of art there at the Prado and because a very personal place you know.
Speaker 2: A lot of black writers, I know in the old days J.A. Rogers [Joel Augustus Rogers], even Woodson [Carter G. Woodson]--
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: --wrote about you know going to the museums in Europe and seeing representations of black people in the museums in a way, seeing themselves in a way that they you know--
Speaker 1: Yea that was it.  I mean it was a different kind of thing you know.  It was not--I think the older you get the more you study American history or just history generally the more you understand the particular issues that we as African Americans face are due to American, the deep seated racism that is America, the deep seated white supremacist doctrine in terms of slavery.  It was enslavement and so many years ago that really did this to the country.  Even in Europe that was never--it's never.  When I'd go on book tours, I never faced--we're skipping years later, never faced the kind of deep seated hatred.  The books sold in Germany, my mysteries, and it was interesting to me because when I was first approached by a German--by a Swiss publisher to publish the mystery, "Do you sell to black people?"  He said, "We don't just sell to black people."  So it was like even at point my life to fully understand how deep seated this is for me and I just recently begun to really begun to explore the roots of racism, really explore them and taking courses in American racism and again and the fascination was American slavery and to understand like, just how deep seated it is and how destructive it is.
Story_ID: 666680
Speaker 1: So I take it you were a good student in high school, I guess?
Speaker 2: I read a lot.  I was--I hated math.  I was bad in math but I, I was pretty good student.  But of course there were often as is often the case with black children, there was kind of a low expectation except that I was an officer's daughter and that had its own--[U.S.] military had its own rules so therefore I was considered because I was--my father [Bertram Wilson] was a captain at that point in the [U.S.] Air Force then everybody, most of the black children, were NCO's, non-commissioned officers, or you know privates what not.  It was a different way to be treated.  One thing I remember when we got to Germany we had--they had a cotillion for the officers' daughters and you were supposed to be accompanied by a first lieutenant will take you down.  And this poor man they found this young brother, first lieutenant, and they shipped him off from somewhere and we found him.  And, to be my escort, I guess he must have wondered, "Of all things I give up my weekend for this?" He was a sweet young kid, but I do remember there was a whole thing trying to find her an escort because there were no young black lieutenants and we were in Germany at that point but it was quite something.  But it was a real cotillion with you know the whole bit and there was an interesting experience, particularly to the poor lieutenant.  I feel like apologizing to him.
Speaker 1: Okay so now you came out of high school [Kaiserslautern High School, Kaiserslautern, Germany] at what at, sixty--?
Speaker 2: Sixty-nine [1969] I think.
Speaker 1: Sixty-nine [1969]?
Speaker 2: Yea.  Well I graduated, now wait that's not right is it?
Speaker 1: No that can't be right.
Speaker 2: I'm--no I came out in--I was supposed to--this is a terrible thing--
Speaker 1: Sixty-six [1966]?
Speaker 2: Well I was supposed to graduate in, in '69 [1969] yeah.
Speaker 1: Now, you came out of Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.]--
Speaker 2: Howard.
Speaker 1: --in '70 [1970]?
Speaker 2: Oh high school.
Speaker 1: Yea high school (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, high school.  High school I guess '64 [1964].
Speaker 1: Sixty-four [1964] okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah '64 [1964].  It would be high school and Howard at sixty--I was supposed to graduate from Howard in '69 [1969] but I was a semester late.  That's why I came out in '70 [1970].
Speaker 1: All right, so you were in high school during some of the key years of the civil (unclear)?
Speaker 2: Absolutely.  And--
Speaker 1: Over here?
Speaker 2: Over in--
Speaker 1: But did you hear much about much of what's going on?
Speaker 2: Nothing.  Nothing. And the reason it didn't--
Speaker 1: The March on Washington.
Speaker 2: --nothing, nothing was because it was an Air Force base so it was the Air Force news because they don't want to really demoralize black, black soldiers.  Nothing, we never heard anything.  The only thing you heard was basically the stars and stripes was how you got your paper, how you got your news, that's military.  So it was always you know there might be a small mention.  I think there was a mention of when--with the Birmingham [Alabama] with the little girls yeah, little girls yeah--
Speaker 1: Birmingham, wow, yeah, yeah.
Speaker 2: --but there was certainly nothing like you got in this country.
Speaker 1: The March on Washington, the Birmingham movement and the--
Speaker 2: Killing of those little girls and the bombing of Birmingham.  No, I don't--I really didn't hear very much about it (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Freedom Rides and all that, yeah?
Speaker 2: No, no, no.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It wasn't until much later that we began to--well but then of course when I came to Howard it was like everything well it was like for me a complete turnaround.
Story_ID: 666681
Speaker 1: Okay, so you're reading and you're still about the only black student (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Black child, yeah.
Speaker 1: --black child there [Kaiserslautern High School, Kaiserslautern, Germany].
Speaker 2: Well, I, there were other black kids but again it wasn't--everyone was in a state of, a kind of a surreal sense when you were in--
Speaker 1: Now was there a particular teacher over there that--
Speaker 2: Yes, there was actually a young professor was Mr. Mortimor [ph.] who was really an English teacher.  Always English teachers, always. And he would encourage me to, to write and I was supposed to--I remember I did a little plagiarism and he caught me.  I was, was supposed to write a short story and I, I just read this story, a writer--because I was too young to understand that he would know every short story.  There's a woman, a very--but I didn't really copy if word for word but I took the essence of the story.  Oh, who was the writer?  And he basically told me he said, "You know I recognize this story."  He said, "Listen, you don't have to do this you're good enough.  Use your own stories." I forget the writer. But I really was just fascinated with this story and its writer is not widely known but I just read her work and--
Speaker 1: Now were you, and is the period time of the year when you were in the mysteries more than?
Speaker 2: No, this had gone on to Hemingway [Ernest Hemingway] and Fitzgerald [F. Scott Fitzgerald] and I was really reading (unclear) then.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, all right. You were you reading the classic books?
Speaker 2: Everything.  Everything I could read.  I was reading a lot of--I was reading James Baldwin.  (Unclear) but I was still just I think growing as a writer--when you write very often roots are planted or seeds are planted very, very young and so that's what I think that was more the seeding of me as a writer.
Speaker 1: So you were reading Baldwin in high school?
Speaker 2: I read Baldwin for the first time when I came back from high school--
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: --and I was, it was given to me---was is it 'The Fire Next Time' [James Baldwin], or--it was 'Notes of a Native Son' [James Baldwin].  It was given to me actually by one of our white neighbors in Ashford [Connecticut] who was a professor.  Said, "You would enjoy this," and but in high school--before I went to Germany, I was--before I went to Spain I was reading I would bid on The New York Times best seller list and I would read like all the books, 'To Kill A Mockingbird' [Harper Lee], all the books that were, you know I didn't fully--'Agony and Ecstasy' [sic. 'The Agony and the Ecstasy: The Biographical Novel of Michelangelo,' Irving Stone] and I was a voracious reader until about eighth grade [at Ashford School, Ashford, Connecticut] I guess. And so I was really reading fairly sophisticated books, but, so you know that was--I bypassed Poe [Edgar Allan Poe] and Agatha Christie was really getting into some really good--. And in high school I continued that with the base [U.S. military base] but the library was not with the base library was as great as it could have been but I did, I did read a lot there too.
Speaker 1: That's remarkable I'm telling you.
Speaker 2: I, you know, you just love--children who love to read just love to read.  They'll read anything.  I'm sure if Harry Potter [J.K. Rowling] had been around I would have gone through that quickly.  So once you can ignite that love of reading in a child that's--it just takes off.  That's the one gift you, parents should give children.
Speaker 1: Now did you have a favorite genre in high school?
Speaker 2: I pretty much read everything.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Like I said I would just go to The New York Times Best Sellers list saw whatever was there, I would read it.  And oh I think about it now.  Some of it I didn't completely fully understand.  Some of the 'Agony and Ecstasy' I didn't and so--
Speaker 1: Now that takes place in Spain, right?
Speaker 2: No that was the one about Michelangelo (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) That was 'For Whom the Bell Tolls' [Ernest Hemingway], 'Agony and the Ecstasy'--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, 'Agony and the Ecstasy,' yeah that's yes (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) But Hemingway, 'For Whom the Bell Tolls.' That takes place in--
Speaker 2: Oh Hemingway was yeah, I would read his, also those were books.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I remember talking those I could connect to, because a lot of his (unclear) was in Spain.  He talked about the sunsets in Europe.  I guess and him and Fitzgerald and 'Moveable Feast' ['A Moveable Feast,' Ernest Hemingway].
Story_ID: 666682
Speaker 1: So all of that so all of that spoke (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So you were, two years in Spain.
Speaker 1: Two and a half.
Speaker 2: Then you go to Germany, right?
Speaker 1: For a year.  I think three years in Spain--
Speaker 2: Okay. Three years okay.
Speaker 1: --and then my senior year I was in Germany and there are more black children in Germany at the base there.  I was at Sembach [Sembach Air Base; Sembach Kaserne, Sembach, Germany] but the base was also near Kaiserslautern [Germany] which was a major German port and so I was there as well in, in (unclear)I went to Kaiserslautern High.
Speaker 2: Now how do you spell that?
Speaker 1: K-A-I-S-E-R-S-L-A-U-T-E-R-N.  Kaiserslautern.
Speaker 2: Kaiserslautern High School [Kaiserslautern, Germany].
Speaker 1: High school.
Speaker 2: All right.
Speaker 1: It's a base [U.S. military base], you know, a base school
Speaker 2: All right.
Speaker 1: And that was important to me because I was among other black children and there were also officer's children there.  It wasn't the same kind of you know divisions in terms of 'cause you weren't supposed--you know the weirdness with, with the officer's stuff but and for the first time we went to parties, where I can dance parties you know I was meeting more boys and you know went to the prom and that kind of stuff which I had never gone.  As a matter of fact the guy who took me to prom, we're still friends.  I met him recently at a fair and he's--we talk about our days at Kaiserslautern High because it's a very unique experience.
Speaker 2: Yeah, okay so this is '64 [1964]. Motown [Motown Records] is big.
Speaker 1: Yeah, all of that.
Speaker 2: The Beatles are emerging.
Speaker 1: I would hear The Beatles for the first time in Spain you know.  But not really knowing who they were.
Speaker 2: So this is, so was there anything special about your graduation from Kaiserslautern?
Speaker 1: Yes, I won a couple of things.  I won an essay contest then but did I, maybe I (mumbles)--oh I had a poetry published in the school magazine and inspired by, I must have been reading James Baldwin then because I was inspired by him and--
Speaker 2: What kinds of things were you saying then?
Speaker 1: It was very political, very racial and the editor of the poetry magazine who we became friends, he was really brilliant, brilliant kid, young white guy, who went on to Antioch [Antioch College, Yellow Springs, Ohio], but I think, but, and we at one point in the midst of the '60s [1960s] got together but I was still you know revolutionary and black, we barely talked.  He mentioned, "Do you remember the time in D.C. [Washington, D.C.]?"  We rarely talk now but years ago we connected on Facebook.  "Do you remember that time in D.C. with me?"  I said, "Oh yeah." We went for lunch but it was, but it was, it was a nice relationship and he actually had given me he but had gotten Coleman Hawkins, an album.  He'd gotten two.  I don't know how he managed to do that but he did and he gave me one and that was really kind of an introduction to Coleman Hawkins you know just jazz.  But daddy [Bertram Wilson] loved jazz, my father loved jazz but that was really that kind Coleman Hawkins was important and music, Bob Dylan, before I left for Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.] I actually listened to Bob Dylan.  But--
Speaker 2: So your friends were on the left end of the wide spectrum you know?
Speaker 1: Oh absolutely well this friend anyway.
Speaker 2: He goes to Antioch?
Speaker 1: He was, he was--the white friends I had were--
Speaker 2: That's Antioch is about the most--
Speaker 1: --he was definitely on the left and the point where he was valedictorian and gave the speech and it was an anti-war speech in the midst of his peace.  My father was (unclear), "He's gonna be in trouble."  But he really did.  He gave an anti-war speech.
Speaker 2: That had to be a shock over there?
Speaker 1: Oh you know it was.  I thought it was cool but he was a nice kid.  We didn't date or anything, but we were friends.
Speaker 2: What did he end up doing? Did he--
Speaker 1: John [ph.]? I don't know.  I think he's--I don't know.  We haven't talked.  I should reach out to him.  You know, we're seventy now--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --old, you know, in our early seventies or late sixties so but he was, he was--I think about John now.  He's was a good guy.
Story_ID: 666683
Speaker 1: So after graduation [from Kaiserslautern High School, Kaiserslautern, Germany] you, did you, did your whole family move back to the U.S.?
Speaker 2: No, I actually wanted to go to a school in Paris [France] for, instead of, but my mother [Mary Spurlock Wilson] insisted that I go to Howard.  Thank god.  I think she must have known, "I think this kids needs to be around black people," because you know it was really she was very really insistent and indeed it was important to have been at Howard at that point.
Speaker 1: Did you have any--okay any counseling about school?
Speaker 2: No, that's, you knew you were going to college--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --but it was--that was I think somebody mentioned Hampton [Hampton Institute; Hampton University, Hampton, Virginia] because family, my father's [Bertram Wilson] family had always been at Hampton.  But Howard was better because it was D.C. [Washington, D.C.] and my mother knew D.C., my mother knew D.C. and, but I was kind of intent on this American college in Paris, which you know I wanted to be in Paris but I'm happy that we didn't decide that.
Speaker 1: Okay, So 1964--
Speaker 2: That's when I went--
Speaker 1: --started Howard University [Washington, D.C.]?  And so what was Howard like, was that a culture shock for you?
Speaker 2: It was, it was you know I was the first person at Howard.  There were two of us who wore--had naturals.  I had a--my first sociology class was with [HistoryMaker] Nathan Hare (laughter).  Kind of.  Sociology I mean he was really radical and he absolutely just it was like a revelation if you can imagine Nathan Hare as your first teacher.
Speaker 1: Let me go back a little bit to the natural 'cause this is something that--
Speaker 2: I went to Howard wearing a wig.  By the end of the first semester I was completely without.
Speaker 1: Okay so you didn't have a natural in Germany?
Speaker 2: No, no not--at Howard.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I had a wig like The Supremes and that's what they were wearing I, and by the freshmen year, I had--by that semester I was like really black, really black in the sense really you know to the point where I didn't even speak to my nearby white neighbors in Ashford [Connecticut].
Speaker 1: Were you kind of hungry for it (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Absolutely, everybody was hungry for it.  Everybody is.  We were completely, we were like really there during the center.  We were the epic center of the black in many ways of the Black Arts Movement, the black culture movement and had been there at that point was a revelation.
Speaker 1: Nathan Hare taught you sociology?
Speaker 2: First semester.
Speaker 1: You said there were two I mean you said something about two people wearing naturals or two--
Speaker 2: Me.  I think there was one other person and me.  I'm not sure I know what her name was but there was talk of putting us out of the dorm because they was that--Howard is very conservative and then, but for me--
Speaker 1: Sixty-four [1964] would have been early for, because I think the country as a whole started getting Afros in '68 [1968], '69 [1969].
Speaker 2: Sixty-eight [1968]. Yeah I was, no I was first semester when I came (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) 'Cause we were, we were still being called Negros--
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.
Speaker 1: --by in large--
Speaker 2: By large.
Speaker 1: --in the black community in '64 [1964].
Speaker 2: It was by maybe it was '65 [1965].  I came back and the summer after Stokely [Stokely Carmichael; Kwame Ture] started black power.
Speaker 1: Black power yeah that was--
Speaker 2: And that was '65 [1965].
Speaker 1: Sixty-five [1965] right.
Speaker 2: And I came back to Howard and everyone was wearing naturals.  But I think it was the semester before that I had started wearing natural hair.
Speaker 1: So you were the pioneer, okay.
Speaker 2: Yea well it was, you know it was, but it was important because I was wearing a wig.
Speaker 1: It was a big deal. The reason why we're talking about it as a big deal because on television I can only remember or in the media, magazine, two people I remember had naturals, Abbey Lincoln--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --and Miri Makeba [Miriam Makeba]--
Speaker 2: Miri Makeba.
Speaker 1: --and in Chicago [Illinois], those who grew up in Chicago know that [HistoryMaker] Margaret Burroughs always had a natural in the 1930s, on.  She always had one but you didn't see it.
Speaker 2: You didn't, no.
Speaker 1: You didn't see it and it's such an indicator how we feel about ourselves.
Speaker 2: What happened with Howard in '65 [1965] before I had it, when I began wearing my natural, a lot of the young, a lot of young brothers were very political.  "Hello sister, you look beautiful."  Very supportive.  And that's why you started wearing because the brothers were like really, I remember going to, just really supportive, really beautiful about it.  And reassuring you, "You look gorgeous sister."  And so that was part of it and it just gave you the sense because God knows many other people were scowling.  "Girl, why don't you straighten your hair?"  And it was a real at that point it was pretty radical.  It was '60 [1960] I think it was yeah it must have semester of (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Sixty-four [1964].
Speaker 2: In '66 [1966] and '67 [1967] yeah--
Speaker 1: After Stokely Carmichael called for black power--
Speaker 2: Black power and then when we came back to Howard that next semester, was it '65 [1965], '66 [1966], there were a lot more people and there was no more talk of putting anyone out the dorm for wearing a natural, and Robin Gregory as a matter of fact was homecoming queen at one point at Howard and that was a big point at Howard and that was a big thing, she had a natural.  But and that was, that was really became political and I had joined SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee] I think was it my soph- end of my soph- after Dr. Hare I think I started going to SNCC meetings.  Go ahead.
Speaker 1: No, it's just--
Speaker 2: I must have had a natural by then.
Story_ID: 666684
Speaker 1: Okay so [HistoryMaker] Nathan Hare's one teacher you encountered, now who, who else was at Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.] that was influencing you (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Influencing.  Oh Eu- Dr. Holmes, Eugene Holmes [Eugene C. Holmes], who was--who actually taught Stokely Carmichael [Kwame Ture] 'cause Stokely was a philosophy major too, at Howard. And when he went down south, but Dr. Holmes would, and he was, 'cause I was (unclear) major while he was there.  He said, "I told Stokely--," he would tell, about his talks with Stokely.  "I told Stokely, I told Stokely to be, you know, not to be going down you know--," but he was, he--Stokely was a very good student, a very good philosophy student but he was, Dr. Holmes was his teacher as well.  So--
Speaker 1: So how did you choose philosophy as a major?
Speaker 2: Well I always loved to read and because I loved to read and it was where you kind of go, I wish--what I wish now, I would loved to have done more with history of course or physics.  I'm fascinated with the idea of physics.  I don't know a lot about it and we just open up, you know but know the history of philosophy.  History--philosophy has gotten very obscured but with me it was just this history of philosophy at that point and really learning more and it just was just the idea of studying thought and studying the nature of being is what was essential because now you, in terms of, I'm drawn more into Buddhism, reading about Buddhism and, and you know the meditation in that way but certainly at that point it was just to understand what is and what's not and the thought of, of what the exist- what it is, what is it to be, to be thought, and what is it to, to be and where, where do things go and what comes after life (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now--
Story_ID: 666685
Speaker 1: Now I didn't ask you but was, was church a big part of growing up, now?
Speaker 2: Well I was raised Baptist but it wasn't, you know, but so much of organized religion is, is not, you know what, what it didn't answer the questions that I had as a child.  Now oddly enough my mother [Mary Spurlock Wilson] worked for the head of the philosophy department.  That was where she was the secretary and so--
Speaker 1: Where at?
Speaker 2: At University of Connecticut [Storrs, Connecticut].
Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Oh--
Speaker 2: She was the secretary at University of Connecticut and so when she worked that's--her department was the philosophy department and so, and I would sometimes ask for her for, her boss, I must have been seventh grade [at Ashford School, Ashford, Connecticut] about philosophy and he would as best he could explain this to a seventh grader and that was in some ways where I, did he give me any--I was fascinated by existen- of all things existentialism and the idea of at that point too, and I was, mine was very active.  I was always trying to find things out.  Also Buddhism, I was fascinated.  I remember reading the book Zen, 'The Way of Zen' [Alan Watts], and I (mumbles).  This was before you know so it's always been a part of me that kind of search for a deeper meaning.  What is meaningful, what's not meaningful and that was I think one reason that I was drawn to philosophy.
Story_ID: 666686
Speaker 1: Okay so you got [HistoryMaker] Nathan Hare.  So Dr.--
Speaker 2: Dr. Eugene Holmes [Eugene C. Holmes] (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Eugene Holmes--
Speaker 2: Holmes.
Speaker 1: Was the--
Speaker 2: Yeah, was the head of the department and there weren't a lot of women in the philosophy department (laughter), which is one reason I guess he was very sweet to me.
Speaker 1: Okay was there any--you said existentialism, was you, that you--?
Speaker 2: Was interesting very curious, interested in that. Interested in the nature of being and, and also another one was I was, it was Sterling Brown [Sterling Allen Brown] was--taught me and I remember him reading to us aloud 'Strong Men,' one of his poems that--it'll come by, ones.  And I just you know those were people who were really influential you know you just in those classes with those people and that was an important part of being at Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.].
Speaker 1: Do you remember [HistoryMaker] Eugenia Collier?  Was she there?
Speaker 2: No.  She, she may have been.  The name is familiar.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: She was, taught English I think?
Speaker 1: Yes, that's right.
Speaker 2: She was--
Speaker 1: And I remember the various times she was at Morgan [Morgan State College; Morgan State University, Baltimore, Maryland], Howard--
Speaker 2: Howard, yeah.
Speaker 1: --and the Prince George [Prince George County, Maryland]--She was all over in that (unclear)--
Speaker 2: All over yeah.  Because I wasn't an English major I was you know I was philosophy.  I think I was sociology but that I must have been sociology just like with Dr. Hale but philosophy was with the two things but they always assumed at Howard when I would go for registration that I was fine arts, I must have struck them as a fine arts student.  They would always have fine arts on my card you know.  But I'm not fine arts; I'm liberal arts.  But I did have friends in the fine arts department so including Richard [HistoryMaker Richard Wesley] who was my friend, my husband, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay. All right so did you meet him at Howard?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, we met at Howard.
Speaker 1: Okay how far along were you when you met him?
Speaker 2: I--he took and introduction to philosophy class.  He had to have one class and that's where we met.
Speaker 1: Okay. So this is in Nathan Hare's--
Speaker 2: Introduction to philoso- no this was Dr. Blumenthal [ph.].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That was sociology, this was philosophy and this was an intro- (unclear), called introduction to philosophy (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay.
Speaker 2: And it was you know with Dr. Blumenthal.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Dr. Blumenthal, another good teacher.  And so he, we were in that class together and we that's where we first met.
Story_ID: 666687
Speaker 1: Howard University [Washington, D.C.] is--so you graduate in 1970--
Speaker 2: Um-hm, that's (unclear).
Speaker 1: Now, and you said, oh you were telling me--you started telling me about organizations you were in at Howard.  You were in SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee].
Speaker 2: I was in, I started to go to that's when [HistoryMaker] Marion Barry was heading it at that point in D.C. [Washington, D.C.], and I didn't go to a lot of the meetings but I went to a couple, but I was always, and then during that whole period there were so many weird little groups that, you know were not weird, a couple of kind of real strict black nationalist groups but I really didn't, but there was a lot of, there was one in particular.  There was a lot of odd stuff going on in D.C. and in terms of the nationalist movement. They were split, there was of course SNCC which was fine but some of the others there was So and So followers you know.  I forget the guy's name.  So in Howard that whole period, that whole era became an--it was a magnet for people.  Richard [Wesley's husband, HistoryMaker Richard Wesley] would know more about it because he was--
Speaker 1: This would have been the era when Congress of Afrikan People I think it was formed in 1970--
Speaker 2: Yes, yes, yes but it wasn't, but it wasn't so much then (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) You had like the Kawaida--
Speaker 2: Yeah, oh lots of different things was going on at Howard.
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, yeah. You had, the African Liberation Support Committee's being formed.
Speaker 2: Yeah and there was at one point the sym- SLAs [Symbionese Liberation Army]--that registered my mind.
Speaker 1: Not the sym- not those people out in California?
Speaker 2: There seemed like there was some people involved with groups.  There were some really radical groups down there.  A couple of students.
Speaker 1: Okay, was RAM [Revolutionary Action Movement]?  You remember RAM.
Speaker 2: RAM, I think RAM was there--
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, yeah, um-hm.
Speaker 2: --but they were just too far you know.  It was a lot of revolutionary groups and some of them weren't that best, some of them were guys who were you know looking, or women--some of them weren't serious about revolutionary purpose and--
Speaker 1: Yes, using they're perpetrating--
Speaker 2: Yeah using their power you know of, of revolution to you know.  The Panthers [Black Panther Party] were down there but that was, that was okay the Panthers.  I didn't become a Panther but I was certainly sympathetic to the Panthers.  Lots of stuff going on.  But there was a period of absolute revelation and you know then of course I was there during the--after Dr. King's [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] assassination during, that was '68 [1968].
Speaker 1: So you were there during the riot? Were you in school?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I was there in the riot.  I remember going and doing you know I remember one you know during that whole period, they had closed down the campus because they you know, they was you know it was the middle of D.C.  So it was a lot of things.
Story_ID: 666688
Speaker 1: Now do, did you have any classes from Toni Morrison?  Was she, she teaching there [Howard University, Washington, D.C.]?
Speaker 2: No, no.  She wasn't, well, she may have--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --been but I didn't have any class with her.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But again I was in, I wasn't really writing then.  I was a philosophy major.
Speaker 1: Yeah, well I was just wondering if you took any literature--
Speaker 2: I don't think so.
Speaker 1: --courses at all?
Speaker 2: I don't think so.  The other was Sterling Brown [Sterling Allen Brown] and that was it.  But I don't think I really took any.  I really don't think I did.
Speaker 1: Well let me say this, whoever is watching this is your, philosophy is writing intensive and if you're--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --gonna, in fact even probably on a higher level, I mean more structure--
Speaker 2: I was a writer but I was even--
Speaker 1: --than even literature courses. You have to really write for philosophy courses.
Speaker 2: You have to write and I would write, you know I could write and I was a good writer but because my interest was more philosophy and sociology and politics I wasn't really into creative writing as such you know.  I may have ended up more journalism.  I was curious about education.  The children that was where I thought I was gonna be.  So I had a lot of different interests.  At one point I was even considering going maybe looking into the Union seminary [Union Theological Seminary, New York, New York] for religion.  I was just fascinated with that.  But you know you, you're made up of so many different parts, make up a person that you just kind of you see what grows and then you go with it for as long as it takes you.
Story_ID: 666689
Speaker 1: Nineteen seventy [1970] did you have any internships?  I guess, yeah that was it, when you were at school? Yeah, yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) One thing I did at Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.].  I did actually, I was at an early childhood--a nursery school in Anacostia [Washington, D.C.] as a teacher's aide too.  All of the work that I did, there were two:  one was in Head Start in Connecticut during the summer when I worked at Head Start, and I worked as a (unclear) which is just coming out, you know, really starting then and I worked in Anacostia, an afterschool program.  And that was really where I first got interested in the idea of teaching young children, which has always been important to me.  So it wasn't you know writing has kind of took a second step backwards but it was just you know that as more of the teaching period and that's when I thought about going to grad school, getting master's in early childhood, which is what I did ultimately at Bank Street which also fulfilled me.  But then I was drawn back to writing because my master's thesis was on using literature to enhance self esteem for black children.  So that was that much I think is still at Bank Street.  That's I do the master's, I keep the master's.  So it was all kind of intertwined in me.  It's always been--
Speaker 1: Okay, so I see the path now.  So you graduated in 1970 right and you're thinking about doing something in terms of children?
Speaker 2: Children.  And I taught for a while at Head Start program.  No actually I went and worked at ABC of all things as a, you know they would come down and try to recruit black students because they had what they call a product scheduler at ABC, which was awful, hated it.  And then I quit that job and became a Head Start teacher and, and in Harlem [New York, New York], and then while I was there I decided to apply to graduate school in early childhood because I really liked teaching children and I thought I'd be good at it.  I was good at it.
Speaker 1: So did you go to school at Howard?
Speaker 2: No, I went to Bank Street College of Education in New York [New York] (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: --and that's where I got the master's is Bank Street. Con- it really recog- considered really a very good school.  Particularly for edu-, very innovative in terms of education (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So were you married by then?
Story_ID: 666690
Speaker 1: In terms of education (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So were you married by then? I'm sorry.
Speaker 1: No.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: I married later.
Speaker 2: Okay, all right.
Speaker 1: I had, still--Richard [HistoryMaker Richard Wesley] and I started dating in '70 [1970] yeah, and then just--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --you know '71 [1971] I think we got married '71 [1971], '72 [1972].
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And then while I was at Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.]--while I was at Bank Street [Bank Street College of Education, New York, New York] I was pregnant with my daughter and--then Thembi [Thembi Wesley] and I went to work after that.  I graduated, but my career was basically homemaking and wife because Richard's career was soaring.  He had done, you know I wait--Richard and I hooked up again when he was at the New Lafayette [The New Lafayette Theatre, New York, New York].  We'd run into each other at a party in Brooklyn [New York], Howard people, then we hooked up and started dating and been together since then.
Speaker 2: So he--
Speaker 1: And our--and my career for him, basically he became my career.  My project.
Speaker 2: Well he, he graduated--I mean did he graduate in '70 [1970]?
Speaker 1: No, he graduated in '68 [1968].
Speaker 2: Sixty-eight [1968], okay.
Speaker 1: And he remembers, this is so funny, he remembers all this stuff about us.  We ran into each other at the airport I think because he was at Newark Airport [Newark Liberty International Airport, Newark, New Jersey] and then ultimately ran into each other again at a party in Brooklyn and we were both dating other people and then we started dating shortly after that and just you know became a couple and from that point on we were together.
Speaker 2: Okay, now he is I know the first play I heard about--
Speaker 1: 'The Black Terror' [Richard Wesley].
Speaker 2: He was included in some anthology (unclear) pulled together and the first one was 'Black Terror,' that I heard about.
Speaker 1: 'Black Terror' yeah, and my father [Bertram Wilson] when Richard and I were dating, 'Black Terror' that was really, just dating at that point.  I think we decided to get married but we were basically dating and I took my parents.  That's where they met Richard, my mother [Mary Spurlock Wilson] and father--
Speaker 2: At the play?
Speaker 1: --at the play.  They were very impressed I was dating this guy who was in public theater.
Speaker 2: So what did your father think about 'Black Terror'?
Speaker 1: I, you know I think he was just more impressed with Richard than he really, because my father always somewhere in his mind despite his, he always wanted to be a writer.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: He always wanted to be a writer.  That was--writers have those very special place in his heart.  Now he'd never seen me as a writer, but because I was married to a writer it was important, so that's how they bonded because he always admired writers but, and I think that was within the movies which Richard's career just kind of took off from there, 'Uptown Saturday Night,'  which is a (unclear).
Speaker 2: Yes. So the first four or five years, he was, I mean he was jumping.
Speaker 1: Yeah he was, oh when we got married I mean suddenly it was like--so basically I was, my, any career I had is completely, I was dealing with children and you know helping him and cooking and doing stuff wives do to and the point where I was just, you know people go to parties and say, "What do you do? Who are you, what do you do?"  And it was just you know, but I still, I was a writer too and in my mind I was like Richard earlier.
Speaker 2: He was known in the black theater world--
Speaker 1: Oh he was great, he was a star.
Speaker 2: --I'm telling you that world is not, well you live on the East Coast so it's bigger for you--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --than it is for most people around the country.  But I'm telling you most people would, in the, most black people in the country still wouldn't know who he is.
Speaker 1: Yeah, except for the movies, except for the movies.
Speaker 2: They would know the movies but they wouldn't know who wrote them.  Black people don't--well most people I would say most people don't think about who wrote a screenplay--
Speaker 1: Who wrote--yeah.
Speaker 2: They really don't.
Speaker 1: Yeah, that's true.
Speaker 2: I mean but there's those who you heard this expression there's so many others that read and write, we all know each other.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: That's the small--
Speaker 1: It's a small world.
Speaker 2: It's a small, yeah.  But it's kind of like he was, he'd be world famous or something like that (unclear)--
Speaker 1: No it's a very, he, but it was a very you know, but it was a really I guess when you talk to him about our marriage he was really, he was the dominant and still--you know, star for me 'cause I was also evolving as a you know I was the beginning of feminism beginning of really seeing women's role in so many ways.
Speaker 2: So but you, you're in this world I guess with him and seeing--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --this, that a writer can be successful, can, and you can make a living with it.
Speaker 1: But he was kind of opposed to me writing at first for some reason you know.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Not really but I remind him occasionally and I don't think he was threatened as much as I don't know what, you have to ask him.  He's probably has forgotten, but has chosen to forget.  He was okay.  He wasn't as supportive as he is now certainly when I first started writing but I think he saw me as a teacher.  He said, "Well I wouldn't mind marrying a teacher."  And that's but when I became, I began to work as a writer and particularly when I decided to go to journalism school [Columbia University Graduate School of Journalism, New York, New York] and then became executive editor of Essence ultimately which was also a big step for me to be at Essence--
Story_ID: 666691
Speaker 1: --and then to be (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well let's not, let's try to backtrack and put these in chronological--
Speaker 1: Chronological order.
Speaker 2: --order here.  Let's see so you're, you're married to a successful playwright and he's writing sc-, I mean the screenplay thing is really--
Speaker 1: Is really a whole different thing.
Speaker 2: --the thing that people would know him the least about--
Speaker 1: Oh absolutely, would know him.
Speaker 2: --they would know the least about him.  They would know the least about him because nobody thinks about who wrote the play--
Speaker 1: That's true the screenplay.
Speaker 2: It's the plays--
Speaker 1: The plays, yeah.
Speaker 2: --with the names attached to every time you see a play you see the author by--
Speaker 1: Author itself.
Speaker 2: --by So and So.
Speaker 1: Yea.
Speaker 2: But, you see 'Uptown Saturday Night' you think Bill Cosby, they wrote it.
Speaker 1: Bill Cosby they wrote it, yeah.
Speaker 2: You know you don't think they wrote it, but they're the--
Speaker 1: The main star, theater.
Speaker 2: --but people don't know.
Speaker 1: Yeah that's very true.  Screenwriting is--
Speaker 2: But you're around all that.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Okay and so, so you're in when did you write your first or what motivated you to write your first piece of fiction?
Speaker 1: Well I joined a writer's group, the Harlem Writers Guild.
Speaker 2: Okay. All right and what year is that?
Speaker 1: Oh gee, Thembi [Thembi Wesley] was, Nandi [Nandi Wesley] was, Thembi was four, Nandi was born in 1970, maybe 1972, no, no '74 [1974], maybe 1974, 1975.  So much of that is a blur when you're dealing with taking care of children--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --so that your whole life is children.
Speaker 2: So '74 [1974], '75 [1975]--
Speaker 1: Five [1975] I began.  I joined the Harlem Writers Guild in 1975 and I would go and it was very important to me.
Speaker 2: Now tell us, those that's gonna be watching this.  You know more about--tell us about the Harlem Writers Guild and why you joined it?
Speaker 1: I joined it because I think if you're a writer at some point you need to write.  And I began to write short stories, just write you know and it's always with you as a writer.  I hadn't written in years.  I was doing, but when you write, you need to critique.  You need to get feedback.  You need to meet other writers and all the writers I knew were Richard's [HistoryMaker Richard Wesley] friends, and Richard's writer in that world, that small world and nobody knew I was Richard's wife for the longest time.  I had to basically establish my own identity as a writer and, which is really important to me which is why I decided to use my maiden name as well in my writing but, and I just found that I was really fascinated by just the interchange of writer, who became a separate life from being--my life as a writer began with the Harlem Writers Guild and because I met other writers and I met (unclear) think your friend, where I think I met her during that period.
Speaker 2: Who else was in Harlem Writers Guild?
Speaker 1: Oh, who would come? [HistoryMaker] Terry McMillan for a short period was there.  Doris Jean Austin was there.  Rosemary Bray [Rosemary Bray McNatt] who is gone into other things now.  My friend Joan Whitlow who wrote with Star-Ledger [The Star-Ledger].  Joan and I would go together.  They were just in and out.  Lots of writers.  It was just a really exciting and important place for me to be at that point.
Speaker 2: So John Killens [John Oliver Killens] was involved---
Speaker 1: John Killens had, was there, but he was a Billy Williams Ford [sic. Bill William Forde] was running it.  John Killens had another workshop [National Black Writers Conference] in Brooklyn [New York].
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And which, who also I never got to Brooklyn, Harlem [New York, New York] was as far as I get.  But it was a very--[HistoryMaker] Ruby Dee would come.  Grace Yearwood [Grace Edwards Yearwood] who is a really lovely woman who is still a friend, who is part of that and you would just go and you would read and everyone would read.  You know you would maybe every,  you know you'd read your stuff and having the feedback from people about your stories was really essential.
Story_ID: 666692
Speaker 1: So how often did the Harlem Writers Guild meet?
Speaker 2: They'd meet once a month.
Speaker 1: Once a month, okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And I would go and it was for me it was just a, to leave my life, my, you know to step out of, not a wife and mother role, particularly married to a very successful writer [HistoryMaker Richard Wesley].
Speaker 1: Now where did the Harlem Writers Guild meet?
Speaker 2: We met at that point in Billy Williams Ford [sic. Bill William Forde] apartment, which was not in Harlem [New York, New York].  It was on the east, West 78th [Street] or something but then we ultimately meet in the Schomburg [Schomburg Center for Research in Black Culture, New York, New York] which was important.
Speaker 1: So you met outside of Harlem (laughter)?
Speaker 2: At that point yeah.  At that point but it was still called the Harlem--
Speaker 1: Billy Williams Ford's apartment?
Speaker 2: Um-hm, it was his and he was the leader at that point.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: He's, I think he's from Canada. But anyway he was a really important to me because he was very encouraging to me and very, "You're right."  I also started taking courses in writing.  I took a course at the new school [The New School for Social Research; The New School, New York, New York] in creative writing, first creative writing course I took and I remember the teacher told me (mumbles) he met with all of the students afterwards, you know the class, you pay him a little money and he take, he is very, very short.  He said, "Mrs. Wesley [HistoryMaker Valerie Wilson Wesley]," he said, "you're a writer.  I can see very clear, you're a very good writer.  The only thing I can say to you is keep writing and not let anyone discourage you," and that was it.  Next he said, "I don't say this often in this class but I'll tell you."  And I ultimately told young people that that kind of writing, that kind of skill but I--the first story I read aloud to the class, everybody was like, wow and really I was amazed at because everyone reads--and my story was just like really, really good and I don't know what happened to that story.  And it was again just reading and writing the input from that.  It was like opening up a new world.  So at that point I was--and once you can write you can write anything.
Story_ID: 666693
Speaker 1: So ultimately I got a job, well I continued with the Harlem Writers Guild.  My friend Joan Whitlow who was at The Star-Ledger, a job came up of all places at the Newark public ed- the Newark school, board of ed [Newark Public Schools Board of Education] and they were looking for like a public relations writer of all things and Joan suggested me because I was a writer and had a degree in education [from Bank Street College of Education, New York, New York] and, you know and so I went there and I worked there for a couple of years.
Speaker 2: Now were you living in Newark [New Jersey]?
Speaker 1: No I was--we were living in East Orange [New Jersey] at that point.
Speaker 2: East Orange, okay.
Speaker 1: At Sunnyside Terrace [East Orange, New Jersey].
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: So, which is where I put my mysteries at.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: In Newark.  That's where I read about East Orange and Newark because we lived in East Orange for ten years and I knew the city.  So and that's how I ultimately loved the journalism so much because while I was at the Harlem Writers Guild, while I was at the Newark board of ed I realized I would like to be a journalist.  So I applied for that and was able to get into Columbia Graduate School of Journalism [Columbia University Graduate School of Journalism, New York, New York].  That is where the journalism courses really at the time was a bit cool you know.
Speaker 2: About what time was this now?
Speaker 1: Oh I would start at Columbia I guess 1980, '81 [1981].  Eighty [1980], '81 [1981].  And that was the year, and at that point my girls [Thembi Wesley and Nandi Wesley] were grown.  Not grown they were--Richard [HistoryMaker Richard Wesley] had kind of fell in, so he was and at that point I think he realized I could write.  I was really a journalist and, and I didn't start writing really fiction and started selling fiction until I was at Essence, much, much I guess, which was, I guess my first book in '85 [1985].
Speaker 2: It's '87 [1987].
Speaker 1: Eighty-seven [1987] that's when it was.
Speaker 2: That yeah, '88 [1988] yeah.
Speaker 1: Eighty-eight [1988] was the first mystery [sic.] but before that I'd written a young adult novel called 'Where Do I Go From Here?' [Valerie Wilson Wesley], which was, it may be on, somewhere on my CV [curriculum vitae].  But--
Speaker 2: Okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) It all, all these days and the older one gets and that was from Scholastic [Scholastic Corporation].
Story_ID: 666694
Speaker 1: Now I had a note here that your first job was with Scholastic [Scholastic Corporation] eventually.
Speaker 2: Oh it was absolutely (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay in 1970 [sic.]?
Speaker 2: After I graduated from, yeah when I graduated from Columbia [Columbia University Graduate School of Journalism, New York, New York] I was a job--I got a job at Scholastic News--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --as a assistant editor.  I guess the old assistant editor that left, I was like in my mid-forties I guess, forties.
Speaker 1: No, 1970?
Speaker 2: How old was I then?
Speaker 1: You would have been right out of Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.] first.
Speaker 2: No, no that was graduate school, journalism.  No my first job with assistant, I graduated, I graduated from Howard in '70 [1970].
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Was home with the kids [Thembi Wesley and Nandi Wesley] until around '75 [1975], went to Columbia, went to Bank Street [Bank Street College of Education, New York, New York] I think in '75 [1975] I think--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --and then went from Bank Street to School of Journalism I guess in '80 [1980] okay.  And then right after I graduated from Bank Street I mean from, from journalism school, I got the job at Scholastic News.
Speaker 1: Oh okay. All right, okay.
Speaker 2: And from there I went to Essence.  So I--the track as me as an editor began then.
Speaker 1: Now, Scholastic publishes a lot of books for young adults.
Speaker 2: Young adults.  I had actually--I came back to Scholastic and did a book for young adults when I was at Essence.  That was my very first book, was a book called 'Where Do I Go From Here?' [Valerie Wilson Wesley] it was for Y.A. [young adults].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It was out of print.
Speaker 1: So, 'Where Do I Go From Here?' Now what was that about?
Speaker 2: It was about a boy who is based loosely on Richard [Wesley's husband, HistoryMaker Richard Wesley], was doing a, a--and that's where I met [HistoryMaker] Walter Dean Myers because he encouraged me to write too because he was in the Harlem--oh he was in the Harlem Writers Guild.
Speaker 1: Oh okay (unclear) (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Walter would come by and, and he had said basically he would try to encourage us.  Really lovely man.  And he told me he said, "You know you're a good writer, send me your proposal and I'll tell my editor to take a look at it."  So I was then at Essence I think but I only been there a couple years.  I left Scholastic News and I go on to Essence as assistant manager.
Speaker 1: Okay let's--
Speaker 2: I know I'm skipping all over the place.
Speaker 1: --let's talk about how you got to Essence now.  That's, I mean you're at Scholastic News which is--that seemed like a pretty important job.
Speaker 2: It was a good job.  It was a job (simultaneous]
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And an important one.
Speaker 2: Assistant editor.  I was, yeah.
Speaker 1: And an assistant editor doing, at Scholastic was I mean, having book fairs and all the schools all over the country.
Speaker 2: Well Scholastic, Scholastic News was basically just a newspaper for kids and as a journalist I could do it and I had a very important influence there.  Carol Drisko who was my boss, who basically helped me learn how to edit because I was still writing but I didn't know how to edit and she taught me how to edit and basically (unclear) editor you're gonna have to quit, 'cause, I, you, you know--but she was really, Carol was important.  She's in her nineties now and we're still in, we're still in touch. Anyway--
Story_ID: 666695
Speaker 1: While I was at Essence, my friend Stephanie Stokes Oliver lived down the hill and they were looking for someone to fill in for a one of the, to do some writing.  No, actually it was, I had done some writing for them, freelance writing on parenting because another friend Rosemary Bray [Rosemary Bray McNatt], this is why writing these writing records are important was at the Harlem Writers Guild and she was at Essence at the point, at the time.
Speaker 2: Are you saying that there's, you make important connections when you're in a writer's group?
Speaker 1: Absolutely.  Absolutely.  Because Rosemary was at the Harlem Writers Guild.  She was just out of Yale [Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut] or somewhere, she was young and I was the only--and my Harlem Writer's Guild I was the only mother who was in there and so she asked me if I would try doing something for Essence.  I said, "Yeah, I'll write what they call the mothering column," which is what I wrote for.  So I started writing for the Essence, but I was at Scholastic [Scholastic Corporation] at the same time.  And then when a position came open at Essence, they wanted because I was writing these nice little columns, they wanted to know if I would try for the position, which I did and it was assistant editor and that's how I got at Essence.  I left Scholastic News to go to Essence and at the time and quickly went because I was so much older and everybody else and knew how to multitask very well and also had a journalism degree [from Columbia University Graduate School of Journalism, New York, New York], and in journalism I was able to rise very quickly and ultimately in my eight, nine years become executive editor is great and then I started really doing the books.  But I was the senior editor I think when I did one of the, was I executive editor? Anyway so it all kind of fell together like that.
Speaker 2: So you're at Essence and you're, okay--
Speaker 1: And of course the greatest influence was [HistoryMaker] Susan Taylor who's a marvelous, lovely woman and who I treasure just an amazing person and just inspiring and very supportive.  [HistoryMaker] Audrey Edwards is another person who remains a friend but Susan I think, Susan L. Taylor is just all of her staff was just a remarkable, absolutely remarkable woman and really kind of encouraged me to write you know to go on and when I needed you know when I said I think I'm gonna, would like to do a couple of hours, a couple of less days a week so I can write, encouraged me to do that.  So it's really again women helping other women.  And Susan's always done that for all of her staff.
Story_ID: 666696
Speaker 1: So you joined Essence in 1988 and in '88 [1988], now also the same year you wrote the AFRO-BETS 'Book of--' (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) 'Book of Black Heroes,' ['Book of Black Heroes from A to Z: An Introduction to Important Black Achievers for Young Readers,' Wade Hudson with Valerie Wilson Wesley], right.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: That was a friend Cheryl, Cheryl Hudson [HistoryMaker Cheryl Willis Hudson].  Cheryl and [HistoryMaker] Wade Hudson had been friends of ours for years and they were starting a publishing company [Just Us Books, Inc.] because they wanted to do a book of black heroes and so Cheryl and Wade asked me if I would, you know publish books for children and we did it and together and it was really a great book.  I'm still very proud of that book.
Speaker 1: Okay.  We used to sell them in the bookstore, years ago.
Speaker 2: I know, with the black heroes.
Speaker 1: So but, and by 1990 you become senior editor of Essence.
Speaker 2: Of Essence yeah.
Speaker 1: Now what does that mean in terms of responsibility?
Speaker 2: It means you have other editors reporting to you basically and it's, but it's, it's, it's, it was a big job and it was exciting.
Speaker 1: So you participated in the tone the magazine would take?
Speaker 2: Yes.  We all did.  We all did.
Speaker 1: What, what--okay.
Speaker 2: And I'm very proud of the magazine during that period when I was senior editor.  We had so many great writers.  [HistoryMaker] Bebe Moore Campbell was--everyone was writing for us.  And Susan [HistoryMaker Susan Taylor] was just like absolutely like and the beacon she was directing it and telling us what to get.  You're making the magazine really matter.  And we did some remarkable stuff.  I looked back at those years and they were really remarkable stories.  We did--we were the first ones to even look at guns and before anybody else was looking at guns and violence, gun violence, mental health things, issues.  It really matt- we did fashion of course but it was really politics and political.  We did a lot of travel--it was a really remarkable magazine.  I think--I haven't you know, I'm not involved in the magazine any, any more now but it was really, we had some remarkable writers.  I mean everybody was writing for Essence.  It was really an extraordinary time to have been.  I was blessed to have been there during that period as I was blessed to have been at Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.] during the '60s [1960s] 'cause it helped me as a writer.  It helped me with context, meeting, meeting not so much meeting people, being influenced by people.
Speaker 1: So what was the--I don't know I just--what was the process of working there?  I mean in terms of, how would your month go I guess in terms of--
Speaker 2: Well people would send ideas for stories and we would have editorial meetings deciding which ones we wanted to work with and then you would develop or would assign the story to a writer, would do the story, and it would come back and that's where as an editor you would look at the story and see where it shored up just want to make sure it was valid, check sources, does it have the right tone, do any editing to it, and then pass it on.  Magazine editing, first of all it's six or seven months in advance so if you have to have a sense for news, what's gonna be big then let's say six months from now, what's the evolving story?  So you have to have that sense of it and that's where I think as a journalist you have that if you really into the news which I still am and that was an important aspect of it.  As executive editor it was similar but only much more detail because you were really dealing with the, you know smaller departments and also it's executive, executive editor, executive, executing things and I was a third in the masthead.  Susan of course was top, the top editor and chief editor, or chief editor.  Stephanie [HistoryMaker Stephanie Mills] was editor in chief and then I was like executive editor which was third, which was good and I loved being executive--.  I loved working at Essence.  It was really the highlight of my career.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I absolutely consider it.
Story_ID: 666697
Speaker 1: Even with a job that, which sounds intense--
Speaker 2: It was intense (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) you had time to, to write? Or--
Speaker 2: Well I had to, like I, often when I talk to people about writing, particularly women; I say you have to, if you really want to write, you have to make time to write.  What I would do and at the time we had like, Thembi [Thembi Wesley] was in college [Howard University, Washington, D.C.] but Nandi [Nandi Wesley] was still home in high school and I--you just learned to there were certain things that were important.  I would come home from work.  I would always use--cook because Richard [HistoryMaker Richard Wesley] was in California.  See during that whole period he wasn't here and I would come home, from, from--it's like being a single parent for four years.  I would come home from work and I always had dinner prepared like in the crockpot or something.  Didn't do any carryout, and you eat.  You make sure the kids, the teenagers are doing stuff and then you write for two hours.  So instead of watching TV you write.  You turn off your television and you write and you have limits to what, what you write.  Not limits but have quotas.  Like I would do let's say make myself do five pages a week or two pages a day and you don't stop until you've got that two pages and then by the end of the week you have and then after a month you have, so it's a gradual thing.  You don't sit down and write the whole book.  You do little by little by little and that when I look back at how 'cause there were a lot of books.  I had eight or nine mysteries.  And I did a book a year for the longest time and then recently I just had two paranormals under a pen name published and--Savanna Welles [HistoryMaker Valerie Wilson Wesley], so it's but it's just about discipline and I think, I guess when I think about my father [Bertram Wilson] and the discipline that it takes, discipline is what you want.  My nephew, who I'm very proud of, is also a writer, Cheo Hodari Coker and he is the young, he is the writer, producer and show runner for 'Luke Cage' on Netflix and he often credits me and Richard and that discipline.  He said, "I would come in, if you ever--," and Richard and Cheo are very, very, very close because he's a writer and a screenwriter and Cheo would say, "My aunt would say, you know, I would see her at that desk--," and actually very touching to hear him say that and how he would write and how he would, I would, you know--"You sit down and you write."  And he'd say, "Aunt Valerie [HistoryMaker Valerie Wilson Wesley]."  I said, "You just have to write.  You just have to sit down and do it."  And that's where you discipline.
Speaker 1: Cheo Hodari Coker.
Speaker 2: Cheo Hodari Coker.
Speaker 1: I know some Cheos, I know some Hodaris.  I grew up during the same period--
Speaker 2: Period, yeah.
Speaker 1: --but that's interesting.  So he's got 'Luke,' he's the writer for 'Luke Cage'?
Speaker 2: 'Luke Cage,' and Cheo was our name for our son if we had a son, it was gonna be Cheo, but my sister [Patricia Wilson-Coker] took the name.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.
Speaker 2: And that is my nephew and he, as my daughters say, they think he was, they were switched at birth.  He's supposed to be my child (laughter).
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: He's a darling.  He's a dear, very dear to me.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: Cheo Hodari Coker, that is his name (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) All right. Okay, good name.
Story_ID: 666698
Speaker 1: So did you envision like the beginning, middle and end of a book before you start writing it?
Speaker 2: It depends on the book.  I envision the, if it's a mystery you have to envision the, who, you'd have to know who did it.  You know half way through the book I envision the end but it, it's just making yourself write it from the beginning.  And sometimes what you think is the beginning is not the beginning of the book and it's, it's envisioning the characters, it's understanding the characters, fully knowing the characters, it's placing them in time and place, it's hearing how they speak.  If you're writing for children it's getting that age which is why we were talking earlier about me trying to do a historical book on the kids and it has to start with the character which I was trying to place, where am I going to have this child to be and so that's what it is.  It's a gradual thing.  But the mysteries is one type of writing because it's, it's a mystery but I've also written other books I what they call standalone books and of course the paranormals.  So it depends on the kind of things.  But once you get the characters and once you know who the characters are then you can go forward and they take you in directions that you often don't think they're gonna take you particularly when they begin to speak but I, I love writing.  I love to write and when I haven't done it in a couple of weeks, which I have not done it because I've been busy researching this part, I feel out of sorts and defensive and mean spirited.  So Richard [Wesley's husband, HistoryMaker Richard Wesley] and I joke about that often and he's, it's funny because he had gone through a period well a couple of months ago, "Oh, you gotta write a new play, you gotta write a new play.  You gotta write a new play," and he did indeed write a new play, (unclear) which is marvelous, marvelous play and so I would tell him stuff I want him to write.  I have a new play that I want him to write but it's really an idea I had (mumbles) you know but it's, I said, "That'll make a play."  It's a good play. So we as a couple we talk a lot about writing which is good.  It's you know I think there are points where at one point my career was sort of really going well and his was not as strong as it before. I think he was a little resentful and then there were times when my heels were high bloom.  He said, "You had a play."  But it's not destructive, it's like (makes sound) what am I gonna write? So we've been together long enough where it's some writing couples they think it's destructive it's not in our case.
Speaker 1: How--
Speaker 2: Not really competitive but it's not because we're like two different genres you know.
Speaker 1: How, how, how important is public claim, I mean aside from the monetary, you know, to you as a writer?
Speaker 2: Not at all.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Like you write, you write for readers who there are certain readers who I get emails from, "When is your next book coming?"  It's me, it's the writing, the process itself is what's important.  It's the only thing.  It's, it's because you don't know what's gonna happen.  With this new mystery which my agent now has I may publish it myself which would be an adventure.  A lot of people are doing that.  (Unclear) I do the children's books, or it may be--you don't know.  It's, it's you can't write just for that.  You just have to write, to, to when you know it's good.  That's how you know.  If you're pleased with it.
Story_ID: 666699
Speaker 1: What's the difference between--or how do you--the difference between your approach to writing a book for a young person, say in middle school or high school, and writing a book for an adult?
Speaker 2: Well you're dealing with--the characters are still whole characters.  You still have to know the characters.  For example, the Willimena series [Willimena Rules!, Valerie Wilson Wesley] for children--
Speaker 1: That's yeah, yeah. With the--
Speaker 2: --which was fun.
Speaker 1: Cute little girl.
Speaker 2: Willimena [Willimena Thomas], named after my grandmother and I, you know I, I love the Willimena series because they're based on my daughters, Thembi [Thembi Wesley] and Nandi [Nandi Wesley], and what's happened to them.  But the funniest thing is you just know Willimena, you know the character and you can hear her voice you know, and you know who she is.  Someone said that Willimena is like a young Tamara [Tamara Hayle] which is a character, something in my mysteries, but she's not.  Willimena is a different kind of, because she lives in basically a love--she's kind of a little, kind of middle class, little black girl and a lot of people said who've read it they said, "You know there were no little, just plain little old middle class black girls with their own little lives and their own little things, not you know with a mother and father and all the things that many children have," and oddly enough little a lot of little kids here, children who aren't necessarily black really like Willimena.  I've had the little girl down the street came and didn't think I'd written it, saw me as my grandson's grandmother and thought Nandi had written the series.  And said, "I just wanna let you know I love Willimena."  I said, "Well that's me.  I'm the one who (unclear)."  "Really?"  And it was interesting that I just got an email from another child who likes Willimena.  So it has a you know but I think at this point I would if I were developing a series for children I'd want to write more I think just for typical black male children because there aren't a lot of books about black male children and because I have a grandson and I'm kind of attuned to that world but or history like I said or writing a history book which is what I'm trying to do now.  But it's finding the character.  It's finding how to connect with the character.  It's finding--it's experiencing the world to the character and that's how you I think you get a book that is meaningful for children or for adults, I mean. A lot of women who read the mysteries really love the mysteries and but I think they're more there are some men that read the mysteries.
Speaker 1: Now your mystery, your mystery centers around a woman whose [Tamara Hayle]--
Speaker 2: A private detective.
Speaker 1: Yea, she's--
Speaker 2: Single mom, private detector, tough, interesting.  Has one guy who she likes he's kind of a little bad guy, another guy who's a private detective.  It's an interesting character and the books actually did very well when they were in Germany and oddly enough in other countries.  The women always like the character.  They love it because they identify with the character and they always like Basil Dupre the bad guy but.
Speaker 1: Just like the bad--
Speaker 2: They liked the bad guy.  But it's a very, it's an interesting series and it was fun to write and as I finished this last one ['Of Blood and Sorrow,' Valerie Wilson Wesley] I was, I was happy to see it finished but it's now I'm in between books and trying to get a new sense of what I want to do next.
Story_ID: 666700
Speaker 1: 'Where Do I Go from Here?' [Valerie Wilson Wesley] came out--was published in '93 [1993] and now, now it won the NABJ [National Association of Black Journalists] Griot Award at some point?
Speaker 2: No, no that was--
Speaker 1: That--
Speaker 2: Well no, that was--I won the NA- for a journalist piece I did--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --about my daughter, as a party.
Speaker 1: Oh, okay.
Speaker 2: That was, yeah that was, that was in, wait, wait, no the NABJ thing was an article thing I wrote in Essence.--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --and that was for a party gone--I think it was called 'Anatomy of a Party Gone Wrong' [Valerie Wilson Wesley].
Speaker 1: Okay that makes more sense to me.  Because I have--it's in here the same year so I thought it may have been for the, but I don't know why they would do that so that answers that.  'Anatomy of a Party Gone Wrong.'  Now what, what is that about, gun violence?
Speaker 2: No, it's about the cops came into our home.  My girls were giving a party and beat up everybody.  And Amiri's kids were here and just it was awful.  I was at Essence at the time and that's why I wrote it and Audrey [HistoryMaker Audrey Edwards]--
Speaker 1: So, well who orchestrated it (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well what happened was the kids were giving a party.  Lucky there were no drugs there.
Speaker 1: Were they in high school?
Speaker 2: No Thembi [Thembi Wesley] was in college [Howard University, Washington, D.C.], first year of college.  Nandi [Nandi Wesley] was in high school, and Richard [HistoryMaker Richard Wesley] and I were up the street and Thembi's eighteen, and somehow, we think now that maybe what happened was they were trying to--, there was a young kid, a young very political young boy in Newark [New Jersey] who was, that we think they may have been following because he was really you know, kind of a revolutionary kid.  Anyway the house was, friends from college, kids they knew.  You know how parties start, with kids like, here.  It's a predominantly white neighborhood [Montclair, New Jersey] and somehow I think they were following this kid.  But they came in.  No one--our neighbors were like really horrified because they don't, I don't care, you know, they were really were protective of the kids and because they know them.  And the cops basically came in and and my daughter wouldn't let them in.  She said, "You have to have--," basically stood up and said, "you have to have a search warrant.  You just can't come in--," and pushed her out of the way and went.  They were just, it was awful and when they did that, the boy saw them.  What happened in these situations, the boys, they pick on the boys first and there was lots--the girls first.  There were lots of siblings at the party so they would start, they would start beating up the girls and you know pushing them around and like you know and anyway they ended up arresting kids and including Thembi and including Amiri Baraka who came when he heard his kids were here and when he heard they were doing that to us, he got in his car and drove down here and came into the party and was angry, and Thembi and Amiri ended up in the same squad car.  It was just a mess.  Anyway, and so and it was just awful, awful and we ended up, ultimately they kind of dropped the charges and expunged Thembi's record which you know it was just you know, it was just terrible and to have your home invaded like that.  And I think if they were looking for something it would have, it would have been of course there was nothing here, including if there'd been would have been mine because the kids, there was not any alcohol.  They were not drinking.  No alcohol.  So that was, and I wrote about it.  You read about it from two perspectives.  One from me and one from a kid who was here who is now a doctor.  Anyway, as it ends it up, as it ends up it was just awful that's all I can say.  Recently, that maybe two years ago I ordered a pizza and the delivery guy came and when he came to the house he said, you, he looked like he had a hard time.  He said, "I know this house," and I said--. "Well you know I remember I was a cop once and we came here."  And he just apologized.  He said, "I'm so sorry that what happened to you.  Will you forgive me for that?"  I said, "Yeah."  I mean, "Is everyone okay?"  And I said, "Yeah."  And they were.  I mean they went through it.  Thembi never again, they were sensitive, they were afterwards, but they all, it was a terrible education for them but it, thank God there was no one was shot.  It would be today, but then they weren't, cops weren't using guns like they do now.  And it was just really not, you know, it was just rousing people you know arresting kids but it was really awful but the kids got, that was their first introduction to you know that kind of, "You ain't white," that's what my uncle told me.  He said, "Didn't you teach those kids they weren't white?"  That was my uncle's--, "Valerie [HistoryMaker Valerie Wilson Welsey], why didn't you, didn't you teach them?"  I said, "I, you know, you yeah." I was young too, then in a sense.  It was awful.  That's all, I kept saying that word again and again.  It was just really frightening (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Hm, yeah okay. That's quite a story, I--yeah.
Speaker 2: It, yeah and that was the 'Anatomy of a Party Gone Wrong.'  It was a look at that.
Story_ID: 666701
Speaker 1: 'Where Do We Go From Here?' [Valerie Wilson Wesley]. Now what was that about?
Speaker 2: That was about, that was a young adult novel.  That was the first after the, in, of the children's the, the AFRO-BETS book of heroes ['Book of Black Heroes from A to Z: An Introduction to Important Black Achievers for Young Readers,' Wade Hudson with Valerie Wilson Wesley] that was about two kids and it was based upon something Richard [Wesley's husband, HistoryMaker Richard Wesley] was writing, and how it got and came into being was [HistoryMaker] Walter Dean Myers had said to send him an--I was working and I'm still working I never sold it on a book about history book for children about the Sea Islands about port--what they call the, port world experiment [sic. Port Royal Experiment] which was when missionaries from the East came down to the Sea Islands.  Anyway I had the three chapters and I sent it to Walter Dean Myers' editor and she said, "We don't want to buy history, but do you have anything contemporary?"  And I said, "Oh yes, of course I do," which I didn't.  You never say you don't.  You always--and I wrote the first three chapters of what I called at the time was 'The Indicot Blues' [ph.] and it was, 'Where Do I Go From---'it was basically about a middle--a kid on scholarship at this exclusive school and he [Marcus] and this little girl in Newark [New Jersey] it's from her perspective, whose at the same school and her fitting into the glorified world of middle--of them both the private schools, he you know he drops out and disappears one night.  He's like the star of the school.  He's very friendly and everyone loves him and he kind of helps her and her name is Nia, kind of helps her be a part of the school only because he's such a you know but he leaves one night and she basically goes in search of him because now she's there by herself and she gets into a fight with a little white girl which also grew up in Newark and was a lot of that tension.  Anyway she finds him and they become friends again and he's fine and it was based upon, Richard was doing a story about at the time called 'Murder Without Motive' ['Murder Without Motive: The Edmund Perry Story'] for, and it was about a kid who went to one of these prep schools [Phillips Exeter Academy, Exeter, New Hampshire] and comes back home and ends up shooting a cop or shooting somebody and ends up dead.  And I, I of course took my story and made it different.  But and that's what it was about and it's about these two kids in this environment, this predominantly white private school.  But it was you know it was pretty good and I, it was--out of print now but I think it would be interesting to, it was Scholastic [Scholastic Corporation] was--
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: And that was the first one (simultaneous).
Story_ID: 666702
Speaker 1: Then comes the first mystery novel 'When Death Comes Stealing' [Valerie Wilson Wesley] (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)(Unclear) 'When Death Comes' yes, 'When Death Comes Stealing.'  That was the first one and then there were--
Speaker 1: So you were telling us a little bit about Tamara Hayle.
Speaker 2: Tamara, Tamara is a single parent and she's a woman who is at that point I don't really say her name but she's struggling with her own demons, which is kind of an abusive mother and a, and a drug (unclear).  She grew, she grew up in the Haye Homes [Reverend William P. Hayes Homes] I think in Newark [New Jersey] in a project and she's kind of scraped--her brother [Johnny Hayle] committed suicide and she's kind of, and now she was at first a cop, but now she's a private investigator and the idea for that became because at the time I was at Essence I was getting--we were doing things on cops, female cops and the discrimination they faced and I get all of these ideas where informed by what you find out and also I made her private investigator and it's basically about her solving crimes and, and in this case it's about someone is murdered, the sons of her, of her ex-husband and they've kind of working down to her son [Jamal Hayle] and she has to find the murderer before it gets to her son, and that's, so that's (mumbles).  And the books basically look at family and they look at the way our society is particularly African American society how it operates, the cultural issues.  The first book did very well and then the rest kind of did pretty well as well.  And so I think (mumbles) maybe it's somewhere in my--but it's on the CV [curriculum vitae] and the latest one ['Of Blood and Sorrow,' Valerie Wilson Wesley] is well, we're trying to publish.  We'll see.  But that's--between those books I also did three other books which were what they call standalone books.  One got--is from the 'Ain't Nobody's Business if I Do' [Valerie Wilson Wesley] which was fun and that was, those were the standalones.
Speaker 1: What was that about? 'Ain't Nobody's Business' (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) 'Ain't Nobody's Business' is about it's kind of it's about a woman [Eva Hutchinson] whose husband [Hutch Hutchinson] leaves her and she takes up with a musician [Isaiah Lonesome].  It's fun.  It's funny. It's my favorite book.  And it's kind of, it's a lovely book and actually got an award for black--I don't know that you have that.  Those are just the mysteries but maybe they're deep.  Did it give you a thing with the other books (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) It's in here.
Speaker 2: Oh it's there somewhere.  'Ain't Nobody's Business.'
Speaker 1: This is 1999.
Speaker 2: Yea, I think so and then after that I wrote one called, 'Always True to You in My Fashion' [Valerie Wilson Wesley] and the other one is called 'Playing My Mother's Blues' [Valerie Wilson Wesley] which came after that.  So there were a whole series of books.  If they gave you a CV, I think most of the books were listed in that.
Speaker 1: Are these all under your name?  All these books?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.  Valerie Wilson [HistoryMaker Valerie Wilson Wesley], yeah under my--
Speaker 1: Okay. All right.
Speaker 2: --except for two which are the most recent, which I wrote under Savanna Welles.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.
Speaker 2: So now of course you can get them on Kindles and--
Speaker 1: Why the pen name Savanna Welles?
Speaker 2: Because I was writing a paranormal romance and the publisher was afraid that people would think that because my name was known as a mystery writer that they would think that I was writing for a mystery and be disappointed.  Now I wish I'd done it under my real name because people would buy the book.  Because I had a fan base that was interested in the books.
Speaker 1: Yeah I thought about, when I was reading about your career.  I thought about Walter Mosley.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Because he has a character Easy Rawlins who is a like an every man--
Speaker 2: Every man's, yeah.
Speaker 1: --private--he's a married man but he's not--
Speaker 2: Yeah just like Tamara.
Speaker 1: --I guess like your--
Speaker 2: Like Tamara right.
Speaker 1: Like Tamara.  She's every person but she's not everybody, she's different, but she's
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: She's every person but she's not every person.  She is different but she--
Speaker 2: Yea she appeals to people yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And she's in these situations yeah.
Speaker 2: And Walter has been a friend my--I know Walter, he's been very in fact he introduced me at a big book signing I had.  He's a lovely man and so I'd see him and whenever I see Walter it's always a thrill to like to see him and it is.  See the reason I think I got the book contract in the first place was because Walter was on the bestseller list and [HistoryMaker] Terry McMillan and Tamara to an extent was a blend of both because she's a private investigator and she solved the crimes but she's also a very popular.  It's a very--her voice if a woman's voice.  It's first person which is always easy to sell.
Speaker 1: Now so how many books have you written about Tamara?
Speaker 2: I should have given you this.  I think about eight or nine I think for a year and then I wrote in between I wrote somewhere in there, I wrote, took a break and then I wrote the two, three what they call standalones and then 'Playing My Mother's Blues' which is actually a very good book I think.  And then I--there was a space of about three or four years and then I wrote the two paranormals.  One in 2013 I think, and the latest one in 2015 ['The Moon Tells Secrets,' Savanna Welles] and that was just paranormals which is basically because they were I had tried to sell my mystery and then they said, "Oh you know we're not buying mysteries anymore?  So do have any para?"  I said, "Oh yeah," the same thing I said initially, you know, "Oh (unclear), oh I have one." And we got actually pretty good reviews, the--
Speaker 1: Okay. All right (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) 'When the Night Whispers' [Savanna Welles] is the first book.
Story_ID: 666703
Speaker 1: So we got, yeah Tamara Hayle has got the 'Devils' Gonna Get Him'?
Speaker 2: Oh let me see, when, 'Where Evil Sleeps' [Valerie Wilson Wesley], 'Easier to Kill' [Valerie Wilson Wesley] I think.  Oh what is another one?
Speaker 1: Now are her adventures set in New Jersey?
Speaker 2: Yes, always in Newark [New Jersey], Newark and East Orange [New Jersey].
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: One I think I set in Atlantic City [New Jersey], basically they're all in East Orange and Newark and they're all dealing with issues, you know it kind of revolving around family and of course Rich [Wesley's husband, HistoryMaker Richard Wesley] is my best source for and the inspiration for her, for her not the bad boy [Basil Dupre], but that nice guy, Jake Richards, which is why I call him Jake Richards because it's Richard, so that's you know you do that with your character sometimes you know and that kind of person who grew up in Newark and is a good guy, and is achieved and so but of course Jake and Tamara can't get together because Tamara, Jake's is--I always get these books wrong, Jake's wife is in a mental hospital, so it's always characters, the plot always thickens with mysteries.  The plot's always thickening and so they're fun to wri-, I find them fun to write and interesting to write, and getting the voices of the character in it's--it's a joy to write.
Story_ID: 666704
Speaker 1: Now have, have today with Amazon.com [Amazon.com, Inc.] and Netflix and all of these other different independent TV producers out here, and I mean I know I just got an Amazon Fire stick [Amazon Fire TV Stick] and I'm a TV watcher.  Actually, maybe that's why I can't write but there's a series like 'Bosch' and different (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) My nephew is--
Speaker 1: --private eyes--
Speaker 2: Yea.
Speaker 1: --that have like a ten episode season.
Speaker 2: When my nephew, bless his heart, promised to do, he has the rights--I gave him the rights to my book--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --because he's such a, he's a big time producer now so we'll see.
Speaker 1: Oh, the one that does 'Luke Cage'?
Speaker 2: Yeah, 'Luke Cage.'
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So he's supposed to do Tamara Hayle, we'll see but you know he's young.  Whatever, whatever happens.  You know because I'm not a big TV--oh but the rights have been sold a couple of times to different people but it never went anywhere.  To sell the rights is one thing for a limited period.  Have it become something is something else.
Speaker 1: Okay so you sell the rights for a limited period of time?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah then they become back to you.
Speaker 1: It's like winning the rights.
Speaker 2: Yeah and then if they--
Speaker 1: And then if they don't produce anything?
Speaker 2: Then it comes back to you, and at this point my nephew has the rights--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --for, I didn't get a limited time on him.  I just, "Oh you better do something with it," because I can't imagine anyone that I would trust with the rights besides my nephew.
Speaker 1: Well 'Luke Cage' is popular now so he may get a chance to do it.
Speaker 2: Yea, he claims, he swears he's gonna do it and I had been--I was approached recently by Lionsgate [Lionsgate Entertainment Corporation].  My producer who wanted to do one of them but then I said, "Well, Cheo [Cheo Hodari Coker] is my--," you know.  I just have no, I just wanna write (laughter), that's all.  I have no interest in that aspect of it.
Story_ID: 666705
Speaker 1: So we were just talking off camera about, you know the time you do have to watch TV is during lunch or something.
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Sure.  I enjoy lunch.  I watch it when, and when I, sometimes when I wash dishes or cleaning up, or--.  I like 'Law and Order' reruns another guilty pleasure.  Not the SUV [sic. 'Law and Order: Special Victims Unit'] it's the straight 'Law and Order' because it's just law and order, 'cause I, you know it's interesting how those shows they're very well written shows.  You write because you as a writer you write--you watch what is well written--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --and you just don't--I just can't bother with stuff that is not intriguing or historical or giving you something back.
Speaker 1: In order to get something right say for, you know in an 'Law and Order' is about court and how the legal--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --justice system--
Speaker 2: System works.
Speaker 1: --works.  You actually go to court and, and--
Speaker 2: I did a lot of research online and I have, I will sometimes go and research places to get a feel for something.  For example with, with the paranormals I just did a tremendous amount of research based on werewolves of all things and it's scary how many sites there about werewolves and because I needed to know how to put the characters in context and it was fascinating just, you know, reading in terms of Navajo history and the you know skin walkers I think that's what they call them.  And for the mystery absolutely I get a whole--this latest mystery ['Of Blood and Sorrow,' Valerie Wilson Wesley] I had to do a whole lot of research on just on what happens in terms of just small things that happen in a book.  Does this, could this really happen in terms of the legal system, occasionally have a lawyer read it through to see if this is really happening?  Is this really okay?  Does this sound right?  And so that's--it's important to get it right.  It's a whole--I have a whole--there's a whole series of books on for example poisons that you you use that I you know all that stuff.  I hate guns but I do have to know something about.  The first book I wrote ['When Death Comes Stealing,' Valerie Wilson Wesley] was because it was the first book by an African American writer featuring an African American private investigator [Tamara Hayle], there was a lot of interest attached to the book, particularly by a collector.  So I would go on, on the book tour, on my first book tour and there'd be all these older white guys buying books, like four or five books, because it was--they were collectors and it was interesting to go and have a room full or old white guys and they were very interested not so much for what was in the book, but the fact that this was historical thing that I had written this first book and that was interesting and they were very nice and very excited and sometimes you and so it would cross over and it still crosses over with mystery writers.  The mystery genre's interesting.  It's like romance.  It's a genre, it's genre so it was just certain things that that they never die in the sense that you can write a romance and it's always a romance and you're always gonna sell it.  Mystery to a certain extent, and like the book, like I said are still on Amazon [Amazon.com, Inc.] or if you, if you do my--if you google me they'll have connections.  But it's in Germany as well.  But it's interesting to and that was an aspect of the collecting, they collector but you had asked me a question and interesting question but I got on my own little tangent.  Have I taken you on the same tangent?
Speaker 1: I got on the tangent, right.  Yeah, it's about process--
Speaker 2: Oh, oh.
Speaker 1: --just about process and I had asked first about the possibility of you know your works being used in the (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well I would only sell more books and with my nephew Cheo Hodari Coker is exactly, I would love, he has the rights now and we'll see what happens with that now.
Speaker 1: Now are all your books available as audio books?
Speaker 2: Most of them, many of them are.  Not all.  I think most of them are at this point.  The first audio book 'When Death Comes Stealing' is actually I think Angela Basset of all people did, read, and that you know and that's probably audio hard to find.  I think and I sometimes was gonna check for the latest for the last (unclear), oh you write so many of these books.  Maybe I'm just getting old, old, old.  I forget the titles after a while but the last mystery ['Dying in the Dark,' Valerie Wilson Wesley] is, was it (mumbles)? Oh anyway it, that I think is an audio book and I sometimes will get you know you know checks for that but mo- many of them are.
Story_ID: 666706
Speaker 1: Are most of your inspirit-, your ideas are they generated by items in the news or (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Newspaper articles.  Often newspaper articles.  This latest one I wrote which I the tentative title is 'When Angels Mourn' [ph.] is about rape and a very violent rape and how the impact of that on a woman and on a family and so that's what this one's about.  And also about sisterhood.  Tamara's sister comes into town and does and it's about the man who, who raped her has been killed.  It's, it's all these different elements to her life that and she's not what--who Tamara [Tamara Hayle] remembers her as being.  And the book is basically about Tamara coming to terms with her memories, and did my sister do this horrible rape--horrible murder and all of the things that are resolved in her own relationship to herself and her family and that's what the book is basically about.  It's always a search for something and, and the mysteries of one question that of course haunts Tamara forever is why her brother [Johnny Hayle] killed himself and that, is anyone who is dealt, or knows anything about suicide for survivors of suicide, that is the always the question.  What could I have done?  How did this happen?  Why didn't I see this coming and that is kind of the ongoing?  There were two questions.  That was the first question.  The second question was what happened to my sister because in the early series her sister disappears and those questions but now her sister is back and to assume what Tamara say, well you know I'm not so sure if it's a good thing but still the brother's death and the, the suicide haunts Tamara and that is the underlying theme of the books and I've gotten letters actually from women who, who--survivors of suicide thanked me for dealing with this and trying to.  It was helpful to them to see Tamara coping.  I get a lot of emails from people who really loved the series for that reason.
Speaker 1: Do they have a--are you concerned about having like topical African American themes in your--?
Speaker 2: They all, they all deal you know--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --with, the one before this latest one ['The Devil Riding,' Valerie Wilson Wesley] deals with the murders, kids getting shot in Newark [New Jersey].  There were four kids who were shot in a park--playground and that is brought up.  So yea absolutely.  And this new book I'm talking about how Newark has changed and how it's grown and how suddenly Starbucks [Starbucks Corporation] is on the corner and all of the and so yeah it's always an up to date kind of thing like that.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right so--
Speaker 2: And that book is not published yet the, we'll see when.  Hopefully I'll find a publisher.  If not well I'll publish it myself probably on Amazon [Amazon.com, Inc.], through Amazon.
Story_ID: 666707
Speaker 1: I asked an author once what their favorite book was and--
Speaker 2: I have so many.  It's like food (laughter).
Speaker 1: Yeah.  And they told me it's the one they just wrote. (Laughter) But is that how you feel (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, no, no, no.
Speaker 1: No.  Okay.
Speaker 2: My favorite book, what am I reading now that I love?  Oh at one point you know I, I of course Toni Morrison books are always (mumbles).  What am I reading now?  I like--I read--it's a very.  I have a real very diverse selection of writers that I read.  I'm trying to think of one that I just finished (unclear).  Including, I read a memoir.  I read different types of books.  I read a memoir ['The Light of the World: A Memoir'] that was amazing by Elizabeth Alexander it's about the death of her husband [Ficre Ghebreyesus] which touched me deeply.  Just oh, you know what I've been reading, Octavia Butler's book, 'Wild Seed' [Octavia E. Butler] which I'm rereading that.  I recently reread, sometimes I'll go back to books that I read. [HistoryMaker] Maya Angelou's book, what's the first one.  Oh (unclear)--
Speaker 1: 'I Know Why the Caged Bird Sings' [Maya Angelou]?
Speaker 2: Yea, 'I Know Why the Caged Bird Sings.'  I was astonished by the beauty of that book.  I had not you know not really I'd forgotten how amazing, what an amazing book it was.  Louise Erdrich 'cause, I think she's a Native American writer, she writes about everything.  But I, I love her books.  I love books about, there is the books about the king oh, what is the name of this, she got the Booker Prize [Man Booker Prize for Fiction] for it.  English writer.  A lot of British writers.  I like P.G. James--P.D. James.  I like her.  Ruth Rendell, an English writer that I--so you really it's a variety of, of people.  Walter Mosley's book.  I like his book about, he wrote a book about Mosley--about Easy Rider, Easy, Easy Rawlins (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Rawlins--
Speaker 2: --and so it's I guess depending what I have.  Now I'm reading a lot of history so again which is fascinating to me.
Speaker 1: You were telling me when we came in you're reading [HistoryMaker] Lerone Bennett, you're rereading--
Speaker 2: I'm rereading 'Before the Mayflower' ['Before the Mayflower: A History of Black America,' Lerone Bennett, Jr.].
Speaker 1: 'Before the Mayflower.'
Speaker 2: Which is a remarkable book too, and informative.  Henry Louis Gates [HistoryMaker Henry Louis "Skip" Gates, Jr.].  [HistoryMaker] Vincent Harding's book I was rereading that.  'There is a River' ['There Is a River: The Black Struggle for Freedom in America,' Vincent Harding].
Speaker 1: 'There is a River.'
Speaker 2: Henry Louis Gates is what is the name of the about African I think that it's about talking about again the historical journey of African Americans ['Life Upon These Shores: Looking at African American History, 1513-2008,' Henry Louis Gates, Jr.].  I just started 'Twelve Years a Slave' [Solomon Northup], which I actually never read at Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.], which is a stunning book.
Speaker 1: Solomon (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Solomon Northup's book.  So always the best book I read this year is one by, which Richard [Wesley's husband, HistoryMaker Richard Wesley] is gonna mention as well, called 'The Half Has Never Been Told' ['The Half Has Never Been Told: Slavery and the Making of American Capitalism,' Edward E. Baptist].  It's by a writer named 'The Half Has Never Been Told,' I oh, oh goodness but it's, it's a book about enslavement, about slavery.
Speaker 1: Yes, from a Bob Marley lyric.
Speaker 2: Really?
Speaker 1: "The half has never been told, and now you see it the light.  You got to stand up for your rights."
Speaker 2: Oh that's, I didn't realize where he'd gotten them.
Speaker 1: 'Get Up, Stand Up,' that's the, you know Bob Marley, yeah.
Speaker 2: Oh I guess that's where he got the title.
Speaker 1: "That half has never been told."
Speaker 2: And I guess that's, it's a good write, he's a professor at, Richard will know his--I knew his name too.
Speaker 1: I know it too, I can't think of it but I know what you're talking about.
Speaker 2: Yeah, 'The Half Has Never Been'--and it's just and it takes a different parts of people--
Speaker 1: 'The Half Has Never Been Told,' yeah.
Speaker 2: --and it's the book.  It's so intense and sometimes reading it that I had to put it on as audio book and just listen to it sometimes.  There's so--it's chalked full of so many facts and there's so much to learn practically and I just you know sometimes you know I am grateful that my mind is still functioning this way but you know and often you know you forget stuff oh I can't remember this man's name.  But you do you just learn the longer you live the more you wanna learn, the more there is to learn.  That's certainly if there's  a theme of my life that would be to learn continually, continually learn.
Story_ID: 666708
Speaker 1: Was it difficult to learn the, well because your, your husband's a writer, and got started first--it probably wasn't as hard to learn the business side of (unclear).
Speaker 2: But it's such a different side of it.
Speaker 1: Is it? Okay.
Speaker 2: Show business is its own demon.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Publishing is its own world.  It's really not nothing very little except if you have an agent.  My agent would never represent him and his would never represent me.  So it's show business is, is theater and even theater and movies he'll talk about that when you interview him.  Absolutely different worlds.  And for me it's a book you know, an author it's a completely different world in publishing.  Now what's interesting though I think intuitively I didn't go into his field, I wrote a short play at one point just for the heck of it and I have to tell you it was just so much fun to hear these people say my words now I get it why he writes it.  It's real, media charges, wow.  And I said this is why Richard [HistoryMaker Richard Wesley]  writes plays and you know to hear people to saying your words you could hear it even when the author or someone reads your books out loud but it was just like, but I never listened why because I've written the book there is no reason to hear it again.  But I just wow this is exciting and I think I must have realized that we did not want to be in the same field as writers you know.  That's his where he can write.  I'm here and he's there.  So we don't share that but we share the process often.  So there's a sympathy for that.  But--
Speaker 1: Now you do have more control when you write a book than when you do a screen play.
Speaker 2: Yeah, in some ways you do.  But it depends on the field and certainly in the theater you have a lot of control playwrights have everything.  They're at the rehearsals, they get the writer, the author, they can control it.  You have no control in the business in the movie business.  It's all the producer, it's all the director and that can be very frustrating.  The first thing with Cheo [Cheo Hodari Coker] the show runner, big time show runner said that if he does one of my books, he wants me to be executive producer so that I would have some power and he was insisted on,  "Aunt Val [HistoryMaker Valerie Wilson Wesley], you gotta be (unclear)."  Said, "Awe I don't wanna be."  "No, you gotta be."  No, there's no power unless you're executive producer or like that.
Speaker 1: Yeah, we talked to [HistoryMaker] Ntozake Shange--
Speaker 2: Ah yes.
Speaker 1: --just a couple of months ago.
Speaker 2: How is she?  Lovely woman.
Speaker 1: And she, she you know has some health challenges but--
Speaker 2: I know:
Speaker 1: --she was discussing Tyler Perry's version of 'For Colored Girls' ['For Colored Girls Who Have Considered Suicide / When the Rainbow is Enuf,' Ntozake Shange]--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --but she was glad it was successful, but she is not what she--
Speaker 2: It wasn't 'For Colored Girls.'
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: We--
Speaker 1: It wasn't her vision of it.
Speaker 2: No, it was not absolutely.
Speaker 1: She was nothing--after she signed the contract there was nothing she could do about it.
Speaker 2: And that's why Cheo always says that's why when you get a producer you wanna make sure who that the producer is and, which is why I went with Cheo, I said I want--I know my nephew.  Hopefully he'll not take it--when I was approached a couple about a couple months ago about selling the rights to this one book, the actress they wanted to do it, lovely woman, but she wasn't Tamara Hayle and I--that was why I turned it down.  And Cheo said, "You know I can basically--," he's so hot now, "I can get anyone to do--," but he's, you know, we'll see what happens.  But you have no control when, when you sell the rights and so it's, it's a very different world.
Story_ID: 666709
Speaker 1: Since writing is kind of like consuming, you think you'll write as long as you can?
Speaker 2: Oh absolutely.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: There's no question.  I--this is why I'm so out of sorts now and I guess.  What am I, I think I'm just gonna start the book, or start the story and find this young character and so I can just learn him and then maybe it'll come to me how I can tell his story.  But no as long as I can see or you know I will always write I mean it's as essential to me as breathing.  I mean it really is essential to me.  Even when I was on a book even on a book tour when I used to tour, I would write, would take my computer on airplanes.  No it's essential to me.  Writing is absolutely essential to me and it puts me in a place that I have to be.  So it's important, it's essential.
Speaker 1: Okay, when you look back on everything you've done to this point--
Speaker 2: Thank you for saying at this point.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Right.
Speaker 2: To this point.
Speaker 1: --do you have a favorite work?
Speaker 2: There are a couple that I do like.  I've always loved 'Ain't Nobody's Business If I Do' [Valerie Wilson Wesley] because I thought it was not a mystery and it really was dealing with, with women at this point in their lives.  Women in their, you know I guess Eva [Eva Hutchinson] was like forty-five.  A lot of people really love it.  And it's also again the main character was loosely based on my husband a little bit, not really, Hutch [Hutch Hutchinson].  And the issues that men are dealing with and of course I didn't have an affair with a musician [Isaiah Lonesome].  So my girls [Thembi Wesley and Nandi Wesley] were like horrified.  They read the book.  I mean really horrified.  I think Richard [Wesley's husband, HistoryMaker Richard Wesley] was too actually, but was surprised.  But you have to ask her about that.  What do you feel when you read the love scenes your wife has written?  But you know that is probably one of my, I really love that book.  It's a delightful book.  This new book, this new mystery I think is pretty good.  I worked hard on it.  In terms of each of the genres 'Ain't Nobody's Business,' I think that for the Tamara and John [Tamara Hayle's brother, Johnny Hayle] were probably the stronger, one of the strongest is 'Easier to Kill' [Valerie Wilson Wesley] is pretty good and that's, that was a good one.  When, 'When Death Comes Stealing' [Valerie Wilson Wesley] was good too.  It was the beginning of the series so I was kind of nervous.  The children's books, all the Willimena books [Willimena Rules!, Valerie Wilson Wesley] you know I particularly I think my favorite Willimena book is again, the one ['Willimena Rules! How to Lose Your Class Pet,' Valerie Wilson Wesley] where they, happened to my daughter Nandi where she loses the guinea pig, the class pet which happened to me as a young teacher and another one is--
Speaker 1: The pig, the guinea pig dies right?
Speaker 2: No, he just runs away.  They take it outside.
Speaker 1: Loses, oh.
Speaker 2: And that happened to me because I took the guinea pig outside and with Willimena [Willimena Thomas] it's like what happened?  And that is funny.  And another one is about Willimena and her sister Tina [Tina Thomas] about being a star ['Willimena Rules! How to (Almost) Ruin Your School Play,' Valerie Wilson Wesley] and Willimena was trying to do--"My sister has a play."  My daughter is also a writer but she's not doing it now.  She's a very good screenwriter, my older daughter, and they're you know in a class play and Willimena ends being the tree and she thinks she's going to be the star but it's her sister, but of course she's not.  And it's all about her taking and it's funny.  The Willimena books are funny.  They're very funny and I think it, it allows you to be there's a lot of levity in the books that, that you can have bits so but it's a real change from the mysteries and the paranormals.  And for the paranormals if I had to choose the strongest one, it would be 'When the Night Whispers' [Savanna Welles] which is really the first one which I think is really, really pretty strong and which I've gotta a lot of people say, "Wow this is much more than a paranormal," so you know it's not just a genre book.  So it's--that was you know if people want to read that, that would be a good one.
Story_ID: 666710
Speaker 1: Now if you could look back again at your career, I mean is there anything that you've done that you wished you could undo, or?
Speaker 2: I wish I had probably done the paranormals under my real name particularly 'When the Night Whispers' [Savanna Welles], 'cause it's a good book and I think a lot of people when they discover I'm Savana Welles, "Why didn't you tell us you had a new book?  We were waiting on a new book."  And I, that was a mistake.  I think I probably should have gone on and just written it as under my name.
Speaker 1: Well can it be corrected and reprinted something--
Speaker 2: No it's when you sell the rights, the rights are sold.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: And it's true you know it's their own you know they are--I have on my website under my name so you know but that would probably be something I would not do again.
Story_ID: 666711
Speaker 1: What are some of your hopes and concerns for the African American community today?
Speaker 2: A couple of things.  I think this whole president is a disaster. I, Trump [President Donald John Trump] is, for all of us as Americans, is an absolute the worst kind of nightmare and to have stolen the election, which he did, I think guns, guns, gun violence.  That's my big fear for my grandson, is being shot by a cop or being shot by another kid that guns, guns I think in a way that have taken over.  I think that we've been through so much as a people and we have to somehow pass on this sense of the strength that we have and to make sure that children understand that.  And that but also to fight against guns.  I was telling my daughter I think she should move to Canada.  As much as I would miss her.  If I were your age and had a little boy, I think I'd find a way to get out of here because I think that things are gonna be very difficult for this country in the next two or three years.  Because even if Trump is impeached we got Mike Pence who's worse or just as bad.  He's not a fool which is in some ways makes him worse but it's--I think it's difficult.  I think we're in very, very difficult times.  We were also, so and Barack Obama [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama] was such a marvelous we were so proud and still proud of him and to be to have this man as president of the United States is the worst thing that has happened to the black people but to everyone.  So I think we're just beginning to see how he's gonna unravel before he's done.  I guess just to black folks, fellow black folk just survive this man.  We'll get through it. I mean, we have seen worse, with slaves you know (laughter), then we fought segregation but guns are altogether different.  Different thing.
Story_ID: 666712
Speaker 1: Well tell us about your family?  You got two daughters right?
Speaker 2: Two daughters, two grown daughters--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --and a grandson.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And--
Speaker 1: And a nephew (laughter).
Speaker 2: And a nephew, right, whom I adore (laughter), who I claim as a son and--
Speaker 1: Okay. So what are your daughter's names?
Speaker 2: Thembi [Thembi Wesley] and Nandi [Nandi Wesley].  They're named Thembi.  We had very close friends who were in South African during the struggle and that was the name they suggested and Nandi of course.
Speaker 1: T-H-E-N-D-E?
Speaker 2: T-H-E-M-B-I, and Nandi of course was Shaka's mother.
Speaker 1: That's right, the mother of Shaka Zulu yep.
Speaker 2: Yep and that was when Nandi was in high school, they, the Shaka Zulu thing was they would always guys would see they were all bare breasted.  I don't remember that particular series everybody yeah, yeah (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Oh yes, right. That one was produced in South Africa?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah and said Nandi and the boys would tease her but Nandi, it's, that's her name, Nandi and actually Nandi had, had a much longer name, Richard [HistoryMaker Richard Wesley] had come up a kind of interesting story of mothers and daughters. Richard had come up, because Nandi was born at dawn I come up with this actually very long name translates into, born at the beginning of dawn.  But it was a little awkward and so my mother [Mary Spurlock Wilson] said, you know, "That's not who this baby is.  Name her something else."  So for by the time the birth certificate was Ofergeri [ph.] I think which was a pretty name but it's not Nandi and so we came up with Nandi and that's her name, is Nandi so she goes by both but Nandi is what we call her.
Speaker 1: There was a Pharoah Sanders album called 'Thembi.'
Speaker 2: 'Thembi,' um-hum and that was another one named, his wife's name was Thembi [Thembi Sanders] to--
Speaker 1: That's right.
Speaker 2: --so that's what and that's what Thembi wanted.  One of Thembi's many songs you know.
Speaker 1: Okay and you talked about your nephew too.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah and he is just dear to me.  I'm very proud of him.  He spent his summers with us because when my sister was working through law school and, and doing all the things that she did, she was a single mother and at some ways Pat [Patricia Wilson-Coker] and Cheo [Cheo Hodari Coker] are my inspiration for, for Tamara [Tamara Hayle] because I can see her fighting for him in a way that Tamara fights for her son and the relationship that they have.  Because I wasn't a single mom with a son, I was able to get that from Pat and Cheo, and Cheo in so many ways was like Jamal [Jamal Hayle] who is a character in the book and they were seen kind of living vicariously through, through them to get this character and to make the character as realistic as people say that she was, and also from working at Essence I would get so many letters from them and you get a sense of women's voices, and to know Tamara because Tamara was really not me because I've never been through the issues that Tamara has had to deal with, but it certainly much more women that I know and certainly Pat and Cheo who were a real inspiration, particularly Cheo for you know, so many things.
Story_ID: 666713
Speaker 1: Is there anything I haven't asked you we need to talk about before I ask my last question?
Speaker 2: Ask your last question (laughter).
Speaker 1: All right, all right. The, it's a compound question.  What today would you consider to be your legacy and how would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: My legacy I guess as with all writers is what you made your books you know.  Hopefully they will people will enjoy them.  I hoped to write books.  I hope to do this history book for children which is always important to me even when I was in graduate school [Bank Street College of Education, New York, New York].  This book would you know and that's what I'm hoping to do and that'll be a legacy I hope to leave.  But all the books.  All the writing that I've done, all the articles I've written, that's a legacy and I guess--what was the last, you said something--
Story_ID: 666714
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) How would you like to be remembered? Yeah.
Speaker 2: As a good writer who took her writing very, very seriously and who always sought no matter what to write the very best book she could write and I have always done that.  I never write frivolously.  I just--when I write, I write very seriously and I try to write the very, I try to make each book better than the last one no matter what genre I'm writing it and I, I respect my readers.  People who read the books I respect them and try to make my books worthy of them.  But that's, that's what I try to do as a writer and hopefully readers will find that to be the case.
Speaker 1: All right.  Well, thank you very much.
Speaker 2: Thank you so much for a really marvelous interview.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Thank you.
Story_ID: 666715
Speaker 1: This is my husband and me, [HistoryMaker] Richard Wesley and me, [HistoryMaker] Valerie Wilson Wesley, and we were maybe in our early forties.  From, there's no gray hair here.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Was it a special occasion?
Speaker 1: Just together.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay.
Speaker 1: This is my daughter Nandi [Nandi Wesley] when she was around seven and this is basically the age of Willimena [Willimena Thomas], seven or eight and Nandi is the inspiration for the Willimena in the Willimena series [Willimena Rules! Valerie Wilson Wesley].
Speaker 2: And this is Thembi [Thembi Wesley] my other daughter around nine and Thembi is the inspiration for Tina [Tina Thomas] in the 'Willimena' series and the series takes place around the same time for both girls.
Speaker 1: This is my mother.  This is my mother and my daughters when they were little girls.  Hard to say the year.
Speaker 2: These are my daughters, Thembi with the rose, Nandi and Mardesa [ph.], our dear friend, and they were I guess maybe around eight and nine.  It doesn't hurt to bend them right?
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION).
Speaker 2: That's my daughter, my daughter, excuse me.  That's my sister Pat [Patricia Wilson-Coker] and my nephew Cheo when he was little.  Very dear to me.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION).
Speaker 2: This is my mother and father, Bertram Wadsworth Wilson [Bertram Wilson] and Mary Spurlock Wilson when they were engaged at a party I think.
Speaker 1: This is me when I first got my first natural probably around nineteen [years old].
Speaker 2: Here I am with my daughters when they were babies, Nandi and Thembi.
Speaker 1: Nandi and Thembi again as little girls.  When I write about them the Willimena, I think of them as little girls and this is around the age which I envision them.
Speaker 2: This is my late father Bertrum Wilson and my nephew Cheo Hodari Coker and he lived with my father and mother for a while and this was taken in Connecticut.
Speaker 1: This is me as a baby around six months old.
Speaker 2: This is an emblem from the, the red tails which was on my father's plane which he flew during the war [World War II, WWII] and they were called the Red Tails.  That was the name of the Tuskegee Airmen.
Speaker 1: And this is the Distinguished Flying--
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION).
Speaker 1: --this is the Distinguished Flying Cross which my father won and it was a medal that he was very proud of and yet never talked too much about it about the winning of it.
Speaker 2: We got to do this one. This is my father when he was I guess around maybe forty and still in the [U.S.] Air Force. (Unclear).
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION).
Speaker 2: This is my mother Mary Spurlock Wilson, Mary Evelyn Spurlock Wilson.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION).
Speaker 2: This is me and Richard and our two daughters.  Thembi was three, Richard was I guess maybe thirty.  I was maybe twenty-eight, twenty-seven.  Nandi was a baby, the youngest member of our family and this was actually taken for a magazine--newspaper.  The only one who's smiling realistically is Nandi.  The rest of us had magazine smiles.
Speaker 1: This is my [paternal] great-great aunt who was one of the first female graduates of Hampton [Hampton Institute; Hampton University, Hampton, Virginia] I understand.  Looks like Nandi actually when you look at her.
Speaker 2: And this is my, this is my [paternal] grandmother Carmen who always signed her name Carmen G. Wilson [ph.], RN [registered nurse], and she was a registered nurse and a lover of good food and perfume and everything sweet.  She was a lovely grandmother to have had.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION).
Speaker 2: This is Richard when he--my husband Richard probably around forty-five or fifty, our daughters Nandi and Thembi at Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.] together.  They went to Howard too.  They're Howard graduates and me around thirty-five I think and it's all Howard folks.
